=== CASE 9737579 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:29:04.833283+00 ===

SHARPNACK, Judge,
dissenting.
I respectfully dissent. I agree with the majority that pursuant to Trial Rule 17(A), Fifth Third Bank, as personal representative of the Estate, must be given a reasonable time to be substituted for the Inlows as plaintiff before the trial court can dismiss the action. However, I do not agree with some of the majority's reasoning, and I believe we must address the trial court's denial of the Inlows' second motion to amend the complaint to allow them to proceed as assignees of the claims of the personal representative against the defendants.
First, I think it is necessary to emphasize that "the Inlows" as referred to in the majority opinion and in this dissent are not all of the heirs of the intestate decedent. Rather, "the Inlows" are the four children of the decedent by his first marriage. His other heirs are his second wife and a child of his second marriage. Pursuant to Ind. Code § 29-1-2-1, the second wife is entitled to one-half of the Estate, while the five children are entitled to share equally the other half of the Estate. Consequent, ly, the Inlows who brought this action collectively are entitled to four-tenths of the decedent's intestate Estate. By their action here, the Inlows seek to recover the entire amount by which the Estate allegedly has been reduced by the failings of the defendants. Any damage to an estate has its effect on all heirs according to their respective shares. Some of them should not be entitled to recover what is due to all of them.
Secondly, I cannot agree with the majority opinion's conclusion that:
The Inlows' status as heirs is evidence of their personal stake in the lawsuit, and the potential devaluation of their shares as a result of the alleged conduct of the accountants places them in immediate danger of sustaining a direct injury. Therefore, we find that the Inlows have standing.
Op. at 1182. I do not see that the Inlows have standing. It is, of course, the case that by virtue of Ind.Code § 29-1-7-23 the real and personal property of the decedent passed to the heirs of the dece*1185dent upon his death.1 However, the property passed to the heirs "subject to the possession of the personal representative and to the election of the surviving spouse and shall be chargeable with the expenses of administering the estate, the payment of other claims and the [allowances] under IC 29-1-4-1, except as otherwise provided in IC 29-1." Ind.Code § 29-1-7-23. In other words, the heirs have no right to the enjoyment or use of any Estate property until the obligations of the Estate have been met and what property remains is distributed to the heirs See Ind.Code § 29-1-14-9 (listing the order in which claims shall be paid if the assets of the estate are insufficient to pay all claims).
The Probate Code imposes upon the personal representative a requirement to take "possession of all the real and personal property other than allowances under IC 29-1-4-1." Ind.Code § 29-1-13-1. The personal representative has a duty to protect those assets for all interested parties, including the heirs, the creditors, and the government. In re Robak, 654 N.E.2d 731, 735 (Ind.1995); Ind. Dep't of State Revenue, Inheritance Tax Div. v. Cohen's Estate, 436 N.E.2d 832, 836 (Ind.Ct.App.1982). Accordingly, the Probate Code gives the personal representative numerous powers over an estate's assets. For example, the Probate Code gives the personal representative "full power" to bring a lawsuit as personal representative of an estate, "for any demand of whatever nature due the decedent or his estate or for the recovery or possession of any property of the estate or for trespass or waste committed on the estate of the decedent in his lifetime, or while in the possession of the personal representative." Ind.Code § 29-1-13-3. The personal representative may continue a business and invest the funds of an estate. Ind.Code §§ 29-1-183-11, 29-1-13-14. The personal representative shall pay taxes, collect rents and earnings, and keep buildings and fixtures in "tenantable repair." IC. § 29-1-18-1. The personal representative may protect buildings by insurance and may maintain a cause of action for possession of or to determine title to real property. Id. The personal representative may deposit an estate's money in a bank account and, under some circumstances, may perform contracts entered into by the decedent. Ind.Code §§ 29-1-13-13, 29-1-13-14. It is clear under the Probate Code that the personal representative is in complete charge of an estate's property until such time as the estate is wound up.
If the personal representative does not meet his obligations, the personal representative can be removed by the court, either on its own motion or upon petition by an interested party. Ind.Code § 29-1-10-6. The personal representative is also subject to suit, along with his bond surety, for damages that. may result from his failure to discharge his duties as personal representative. Ind.Code §§ 29-1-11-10, 29-1-14-11, 29-1-16-1. If interested persons are concerned about the management of an estate, they may petition the court to require the personal representative to file a verified accounting of his administration. Ind.Code § 29-1-16-3. In addition, if interested parties believe that the personal representative is not diligently pursuing a claim that belongs to the estate, those interested parties may petition the court to hold a hearing to determine whether the claim should be pursued and whether a *1186special administrator should be appointed to pursue the claim on behalf of the estate. Ind.Code § 29-1-13-16.
It is inconsistent with the regime established under the Probate Code to give standing to heirs, and most particularly only some heirs, to bring claims for damages to the property of the Estate when there is a personal representative charged with the obligation to bring such claims and subject to removal or liability for not meeting that obligation. See I.C. §§ 29-1-13-3, 29-1-10-6, 29-1-16-1, 29-1-11-10. Consequently, I conclude that the Inlows have no standing to sue the Accountants for any shortcomings in their work for the personal representative of the Estate. See, e.g., McGahan v. Nat'l Bank of Logansport, 151 Ind.App. 658, 670, 281 N.E.2d 522, 530 (1972) (holding that an heir could not sue in her individual capacity to recover assets of a decedent from a third party; rather, the heir had to petition the court to reopen the estate and to appoint the heir administratrix de bonis non to recover the assets still unadminis-tered). Having no standing, the Inlows also are not the real parties in interest under Ind. Trial Rule 17 to bring this lawsuit against the Accountants.
Nevertheless, the standing issue cannot be fully resolved unless we deal with whether the trial court erred by denying the Inlows' motion to allow the second amended complaint. In the second amended complaint, the Inlows asserted that the assignment of rights by the personal representatives, Kindig and Fifth Third Bank, gives them standing to sue the Accountants. If the assignment from the personal representatives is valid, the Inlows have standing on remand of this cause to pursue this claim as assignees of the estate's claim against the Accountants, and the current personal representative would no longer be the real party in interest, having assigned its "interest" to the Inlows. ' If on the other hand, the assignment of rights is invalid, the Inlows remain without standing to pursue the claim against the Accountants, and the current personal representative remains the real party in interest who could proceed upon remand of this cause. The parties and the trial court must know where things stand. Addressing whether the trial court abused its discretion by denying the second amendment to the pleadings allows us to tell the parties and the trial court where things stand. -
Ind. Trial Rule 15(A) controls second amendments to pleadings and provides, in pertinent part, that "a party may amend his pleading [a second time] only by leave of court or by written consent of the adverse party; and leave shall be given when justice so requires." This court has previously set out the law that controls appellate review of the trial court's denial of a motion to amend pleadings:
Trial courts should liberally permit amendments, while considering any prejudice to the non-moving party. A trial court has broad discretion in deciding whether to permit or deny amend'ments to pleadings, because of its strategic advantage in balancing various trial considerations. On review, we generally affirm the trial court's decision regarding a discretionary motion if there is any rational basis for the decision.
An abuse of discretion occurs when there is a conclusion or judgment that is clearly against logic and the natural inferences to be drawn therefrom, or a decision that contravenes reasonable, probable and actual deductions. It is not an abuse of discretion to deny a motion to amend a pleading where such an amendment would be futile.
Strodtman v. Integrity Builders, Inc., 668 N.E.2d 279, 284 (Ind.Ct.App.1996) (cita*1187tions omitted), reh'g granted on other grounds, 668 N.E.2d 285, trans. denied.
Here, the trial court did not abuse its discretion when it denied the Inlows' motion to amend their complaint because the amendment would have been futile. Seq, e.g., id. With the proposed amendment, the Inlows sought to assert that they had standing to bring the lawsuit against the Accountants pursuant to the assignment from Kindig and Fifth Third Bank that allegedly assigned the personal representative's right to sue the Accountants to the Inlows. However, that assignment of rights was not valid.
The personal representative of an estate is a fiduciary. Ind.Code § 29-1-1-3. His fiduciary responsibility "extends to all legatees." Fall v. Miller, 462 N.E.2d 1059, 1063 (Ind.Ct.App.1984). As this court stated in Fall:
There is a thread which runs through the law governing fiduciary relationships which forbids a person standing in a fiduciary capacity to another from profiting by dealing in the property of his beneficiary, and any such profit realized must be disgorged in favor of that beneficiary.
Id. at 1061. Accordingly, a personal representative cannot profit from the use of estate funds. Id. at 1063. A personal representative cannot purchase the legacy of any legatee for his benefit or for the benefit of the other legatees. Id. In addition, the personal representative cannot transfer assets from himself as personal representative of the estate to himself as an individual. Williamson v. Williamson, 714 N.E.2d 1270, 1274 (Ind.Ct.App.1999), reh'g denied, trans. denied.
In the context of whether a personal representative could sell real property to himself from an estate, this court discussed that the policy behind prohibiting a personal representative from dealing assets to himself for his own personal benefit is "to eliminate any hint of impropriety or fraud." Id. We. are not necessarily concerned with whether fraud or injury to the estate actually occurred in a specific case. Id. Rather, the rule is set up to prevent the possibility of fraud. Id. In addition, by prohibiting a fiduciary from retaining "gain or profit from wrongful, speculative, or self-dealing transactions in his beneficiary's propertyl,]" while also holding the fiduciary liable for losses to the estate, we hope to effectively deter fiduciaries from engaging in . inappropriate transactions with estate assets. Fall, 462 N.E.2d at 1063.
Here, any loss or damage to the Estate caused by any acts or omissions of the Accountants was loss or damage to the Estate as a whole, affecting all heirs. Any claim for that loss or damage belonged to the Estate and could be brought by the personal representative. Kindig promised to assign the Estate's right to sue the Accountants to the Inlows upon the Inlows promise not to sue Kindig personally for his failings as personal representative. In essence, Kindig traded an asset belonging to the Estate for his own personal benefit. As discussed above, fiduciaries, including personal representatives, are prohibited from engaging in transactions involving estate property for their own benefit. See also Thomasson v. Brown, 43 Ind. 203, 206 (1873) (holding that when an administrator traded notes belonging to the estate for assets that he was going to keep for himself, the administrator committed a breach of his duty as administrator and wasted and squandered the assets of the estate). Consequently, the agreement between Kindig and the Inlows is void, and the assignment of rights must be set aside. See id. (holding that a third party could not profit by keeping assets of an estate from their rightful owner when that third party knew when he acquired the assets that the administrator was trading the es*1188tate's assets for the administrator's own benefit); see, e.g., Williamson, 714 N.E.2d at 1274 (holding that personal representative's sale of estate's real property to himself as an individual was void and the deed must be set aside). |
Because the agreement between Kindig and the Inlows by which Kindig traded the estate's assets for his own benefit is void, that agreement could not give rise to a valid assignment of rights by which the Inlows would have standing to sue the Accountants. Consequently, as the second amendment was futile, the trial court did not abuse its discretion when it denied the Inlows' second motion to amend their complaint. See Strodtman, 668 N.E.2d at 284.
I recognize that a personal representative could, with court approval, distribute to an heir by assignment an asset of the estate as a partial distribution to be credited against the heir's share of. the total net estate. See Ind.Code § 29-1-17-1. There is nothing in the transaction that led to the assignment and release to suggest it was an approved distribution. In fact, the probate court expressly avoided approving of the assignment.
I would remand this cause either for the personal representative, Fifth Third Bank, to be substituted for the Inlows as plaintiff or for the action to be dismissed.
. Notwithstanding the comment of the Probate Code Study Commission following Ind. Code § 29-1-13-1, I think it is clear that Ind.Code § 29-1-7-23 makes no distinction between the real property and the personal property of the decedent. All property passes upon death. See I.C. § 29-1-7-23 ("When a person dies, his real and personal property passes ... to the persons who succeed to his estate as his heirs. ...").

=== CASE 9737580 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:29:06.801764+00 ===

OPINION
BAKER, Judge.
Appellant-defendant, Matt Wilcher, appeals his conviction for Aggravated Battery,1 a Class B felony, presenting three issues for our review. Concluding that: (1) the trial court properly exeluded certain photographs from being admitted into evidence; (2) the State met its burden of disproving Wilcher's self-defense claim; and (8) the evidence was sufficient to support the Aggravated Battery conviction, we affirm.
FACTS
The facts most favorable to the jury's verdict reveal that in the early hours of November 14, 1999, Bill Frost, Wilcher's friend, and Jeremy Jamison were arguing after Jamison discovered Frost beating on the door of Jamison's apartment. Although there was conflicting evidence as to who took the first swing, Jamison and Frost began to fight. Both men were wrestling on the ground and punching each other about the head. While Frost was on top of Jamison, Denton Winters, Jamison's friend, attempted to break up the fight. At this point, Wilcher approached Winters and stabbed him under the left arm in the chest with a knife that had a four to six-inch blade. Wilcher again approached Winters with the knife, but Winters' girlfriend got between them *115and yelled at Wilcher until he. turned away. Winters fell to the ground and had difficulty breathing. Winters was bleeding from the wound in his side and drifted in and out of consciousness.
When emergency medical personnel arrived, Winters was stabilized and immediately transported to the hospital. (Winters underwent surgery, was connected to a lung machine and remained hospitalized for five days. Marion County Sheriffs deputies apprehended Wileher later that morning and recovered the knife used to stab Winters from Wilcher's vehicle.
Following a jury trial that concluded on June 13, 2001, Wilcher was found guilty. of Aggravated Battery as a class B felony He now appeals.
I. Exclusion of Photographs
Wilcher first claims that the trial court improperly exeluded certain photographs from being entered into evidence. Wilcher argues that three photos graphically depicting injuries he sustained in an unrelated fight that occurred five years earlier were relevant to the cireumstances presented here and should have been admitted. ___
In resolving this issue, we note that the admissibility of evidence is within the sound discretion of the trial court and will be disturbed only upon a showing that the trial court abused that discretion. Johnson v. State, 710 N.E.2d 925, 927 (Ind.Ct.App.1999). Conflicting evidence will be considered in the light most favorable to the trial court's ruling. Id. Upon appeal, we will neither reweigh evidence nor judge witness credibility. Id.
In the instant case, after Wilcher made an offer to prove regarding the admissibility of the photographs, the trial court decided not to allow them into evidence. It determined that the prejudicial effect of the evidence substantially outweighed any probative value the photos had. Wilcher now claims that, by refusing to admit these photographs into evidence, the trial court prevented the jury from "fully and properly viewing his actions from his standpoint and evaluating his self defense claim."2 Appellant's Br. at 17.
When the defendant claims self-defense, evidence of the victim's violent propensities is admissible if they were known to the defendant. Leming v. State, 487 N.E.2d 832, 834 (Ind.Ct.App.1986); see also Ind. Evidence Rule 404(a)(2); Brooks v. State, 683 N.E.2d 574, 576 (Ind.1997). The photographs Wilcher sought to admit, however, were unconnected to Winters, the victim, or Jamison, who was engaged in the fight with Wilcher's friend Frost. Thus, they do not support Wilcher's claim of self-defense. See Leming, 487 N.E.2d at 834 (determining the trial court did not err in excluding evidence of the defendant's prior beating because this prior beating was not connected with current victim). Moreover, Wilcher testified regarding the beating he had received in the past and how it allegedly affected him. As a result, the trial court did not abuse its discretion in excluding Wilcher' s proffered photographs.
II. Self-Defense
Wilcher next contends that the State failed to disprove his claim of self-defense. We note, however, that other than asserting that the trial court erred in excluding the above-mentioned photographs, Wilcher does not separately argue *116how the evidence was insufficient to rebut his self-defense claim.
Even so, we note that Ind.Code § 35-41-3-2(a) provides that one is justified in using reasonable force against another to protect himself or a third person from what he reasonably believes to be the imminent use of unlawful force. A person is justified in using deadly force only if he reasonably believes that that force is necessary to prevent serious bodily injury to himself or a third person or the commission of a forcible felony. Id. For a claim of self-defense to prevail, the defendant must show that he (1) was in a place where he had a right to be; (2) did not provoke, instigate, or participate willingly in the violence; and (8) had a reasonable fear of death or great bodily harm. Rodriguez v. State, 714 N.E.2d 667, 670 (Ind.Ct.App.1999), trans. denied.
Once the defendant asserts a claim of self-defense, the State bears the burden of disproving the existence of one of the elements of the claim. Mariscal v. State, 687 N.E.2d 378, 381 (Ind.Ct.App.1997), trans. denied. The State may rebut a claim of self-defense by affirmatively showing that the defendant did not act to defend himself or another by relying on the evidence elicited in the case-in-chief. Id. The standard of review for a challenge to the sufficiency of evidence to rebut a claim of self-defense is the same as the standard for any sufficiency of the evidence challenge. Rodriguez, 714 N.E.2d at 670. A defendant's conviction will be upheld unless no reasonable person could say that the State negated the self-defense claim beyond a reasonable doubt. Lilly v. State, 506 N.E.2d 23, 24 (Ind.1987); Mariscal, 687 N.E.2d at 381.
Here, the evidence favorable to the jury's verdict reveals that Wilcher stabbed Winters in the chest while Winters was simply attempting to break up a fight between Jamison and Frost. The jury was not required to credit Wileher's testimony that he acted under the belief that he needed to protect Frost from Winters. See Mariscal, 687 N.E.2d at 381 (question of whether State disproved a self-defense claim is a question for the trier of fact). The evidence favoring the verdict was sufficient to rebut Wilcher's claim of self-defense.
III,. Sufficiency of Evidence
Finally, Wilcher contends that the evidence was insufficient to support his conviction for Aggravated Battery. He argues that the State failed to establish that the injury inflicted upon Winters created a substantial risk of death to Winters.3
Upon a challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence, this court will not reweigh evidence or determine the eredi-bility of witnesses. VanMatre v. State, 714 N.E.2d 655, 657-58 (Ind.Ct.App.1999). Instead, we will look only to the evidence favorable to the judgment along with any reasonable inferences to be drawn therefrom. Id. at 657. If there is substantial evidence of probative value from which the jury could find guilt beyond a reasonable *117doubt, we will affirm the conviction.. Id. at 658.
Indiana Code section 35-42-2-1.5 states:
A person who knowingly or intentionally inflicts injury on a person that creates a substantial risk of death or causes:
(1) serious permanent disfigurement;
(2) protracted loss or impairment of the function of a bod_i1y member or organ; or
(8) the loss of a fetus;
commits aggravated battery, a Class B felony.
The charging information against Wil-cher stated, "Matt Wilcher, on or about November 14, 1999, did knowingly inflict injury, that is: laceration to the heart, on another person, namely: Denton Winters, that created a substantial risk of death to Denton Winters, by stabbing with a knife." Appellant's App. p. 21. ‘
Relying upon Valentine v. State, 257 Ind. 197, 273 N.E.2d 548 (1971), the State urges that, from the evidence presented regarding the nature and location of Winters's injuries and the treatment provided to him, the jury could reasonably infer that Wilcher caused a substantial risk of death to Winters. In Valentine, the victim was shot in the left temple with a .88 caliber bullet and hospitalized for one week. On appeal, our Supreme Court held that, contrary to the defendant's claims, expert medical testimony was not required to establish "great bodily harm," which was a material element of the former crime of aggravated assault and battery as codified by Indiana Code section 35-18-8-1 (1971), with which the defendant was charged. 257 Ind. at 201, 273 N.E.2d at 545. The current Aggravated Battery statute, however, requires a showing of "substantial risk of death," not "great bodily harm." See I.C. § 35-42-2-1.5.
Notwithstanding this change in the statute, no expert medical testimony was required to prove this element of the offense. As discussed in the FACTS, the testimony at trial revealed that Winters was stabbed in the upper-left side of his chest at heart level. Tr. p. 57-60, 110. As a result, Winters began to bleed and had breathing difficulties. 'The knife had a blade of four to six inches in length, Winters drifted in and out of consciousness after the stabbing, he underwent surgery, remained hospitalized for five days and was connected to a Iung machine. «Tr. p. 26, 60-62.
In light of the evidence presented with regard to the nature and location of the injury, the jury could have reasonably inferred that Wilcher exposed Winters to a substantial risk of death. Common knowledge bears out the conclusion that an individual is confronted with a substantial risk of death following a stab wound to the chest in cireumstances such as these presented here. See Beanblossom v. State, 530 N.E.2d 741, 742-43 (Ind.1988) (finding that the victim sustained an injury which created a substantial risk of death when he received a blow to the back of the head which was forceful enough to knock him down to his hands and knees and to cause him to remain in a semiconscious state for a short period of time). As a result, the evidence was sufficient to support Wil-cher's conviction for Aggravated Battery as a class B felony. _
CONCLUSION
In light of our resolution of the issues set forth above, we conclude that the trial court did not abuse its discretion in exelud-ing Wilcher's proffered photographs and the evidence was sufficient to rebut Wil-cher's claims of self-defense. Finally, we conclude that the evidence is sufficient to *118support Wilcher's conviction for Aggravated Battery.
Judgment affirmed.
DARDEN, J., concurs.
SULLIVAN, J., dissents with opinion.
. Ind.Code § 35-42-2-1.5.
. Although Wilcher refers to his claim as one of self-defense, he actually claims to have been trying to defend his friend Bill Frost.
. Wilcher also claims, in one sentence, that a lack of evidence regarding whether Winters's heart was lacerated and whether this caused a substantial risk of death created a material variance. A variance is an essential difference between proof and pleading. Allen v. State, 720 N.E.2d 707, 713 (Ind.1999). Here, Wilcher does not argue that there was a difference between the allegations contained in the information and the proof adduced at trial. Instead, his argument is that the proof was insufficient to support the allegations charged in the information. Thus, we address Wilcher's claim, as does he, as one of insufficient evidence.

=== CASE 9737581 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:29:06.80666+00 ===

SULLIVAN, Judge,
dissenting.
I concur with respect to Parts I and II of the majority opinion. I respectfully dissent, however, with respect to Part III.
In Tingle v. State, 632 N.E.2d 345 (Ind.1994), our Supreme Court addressed the issue of the proof required to establish the element of "substantial risk of death." In Tingle, the defendant and an accomplice went to the home of the seventy-two-year-old victim to use the telephone after the stolen car in which they were riding broke down. Eventually, Tingle's accomplice began to beat the victim with a taped-up socket handle. When the victim tried to resist, Tingle restrained the victim while the accomplice continued to beat him about the head. The victim was eventually tied up with a telephone cord. Tingle was convicted of Aggravated Battery and challenged the sufficiency of the evidence upon appeal.
In Tingle, the State's expert medical witness testified that the victim's injuries might have caused a possibility but not a substantial risk of death, that the observable facts and the treatment provided to the victim did not indicate that the victim was at a substantial risk of death, and that his earlier statement opining a substantial risk of death was, at most, mere speculation. The Court held that this evidence was insufficient to establish substantial risk of death.4 Id. at 354.
In the present case, the State failed to offer any opinion, medical or otherwise, indicating that Winters' injuries created a substantial risk of death. Nor did the State introduce into evidence any of Winters' medical records. The testimonial evidence revealed that Winters was stabbed in the upper-left side of his chest and, as a result, began to bleed and have difficulty breathing. Winters also went into and out of consciousness after being stabbed. Winters underwent surgery and remained hospitalized for five days. Winters also testified that, at the hospital, he was connected to a "lung machine." 'Transeript at 60. From this, one could reasonably infer that Winters could have died as a result of the injury he sustained. However, given the holding in Tingle, I am compelled to conclude that the evidence failed to establish that the injuries inflicted upon him by Wilcher resulted in a "substantial" risk of death.5 As noted by Wilcher, the evidence might have established that Winters suffered from serious permanent disfigure*119ment or protracted loss or impairment of the function of a bodily member or organ. Regardless, the State chose to allege that Wilcher injured Winters in a manner creating a substantial risk of death but failed to establish such beyond a reasonable doubt.6 Wilcher's conviction for Aggravated Battery should therefore be vacated.7
Nevertheless, when a conviction is reversed because the evidence is insufficient, we may remand to enter a judgment of conviction upon a lesser-included offense if the evidence is sufficient to support the lesser offense. See Cockrell v. State, 743 N.E.2d 799, 808 (Ind.Ct.App.2001) (reversing conviction of dealing in cocaine as a Class A felony but remanding with instructions to enter a judgment of conviction upon the lesser offense of dealing in cocaine as a Class B felony); Johnson v. State, 594 N.E.2d 817, 820-21 (Ind.Ct.App. 1992) (reversing conviction of dealing in cocaine but remanding with instructions to enter judgment of conviction upon lesser included offense of possession of cocaine); Isom v. State, 589 N.E.2d 245, 248 (Ind.Ct.App.1992) (same), trans. denied.
An offense is factually included in the crime charged if the means used to commit the crime charged as alleged in the charging instrument include all of the elements of the alleged lesser included offense. Wright v. State, 658 N.E.2d 563, 567 (Ind.1995). See also Johnson, 594 N.E.2d at 821.
Here, the charging information alleged that Wilcher "did knowingly inflict injury, that is: laceration to the heart, on another person, namely: Denton Winters, that created a substantial risk of death to Denton Winters,. by stabbing with a knife." App. *120at 21. A person who knowingly or intentionally touches another person in a rude, insolent, or angry manner by means of a deadly weapon8 commits Battery as a Class C felony. Ind.Code § 85-42-2-l(a)(8) (Burns Code Ed. Supp.2001). Therefore, the manner in which the information in the present case alleged Aggravated Battery factually included the offense of Battery as a Class C felony.
The evidence established, and Wilcher does not deny, that he stabbed Winters in the chest with a knife as Winters attempted to break up a fight between Frost and Jamison. Thus, Wilcher touched Winters in a rude, insolent, or angry manner and did so by means of a deadly weapon, the knife. This is sufficient to prove Battery as a Class C felony. See Tingle, 632 N.E.2d at 354 (holding that, although the evidence of victim's injuries was insuffi-client to prove substantial risk of death element of aggravated battery, it did prove battery as a Class C felony). I would instruct the trial court to vacate the conviction for Aggravated Battery and to enter a judgment of conviction for Battery, as a Class C felony, and to resentence accordingly.
. The Tingle court also noted that there was no evidence of serious permanent disfigurement, which was alleged in the charging information in that case. Id. at 354.
. But see Beanblossom v. State, 530 N.E.2d 741, 742-43 (Ind.1988), wherein the victim received a blow to the back of the head which was forceful enough to knock him down to his hands and knees and to cause him to remain in a semiconscious state for a short period. The Court held that this evidence alone was sufficient to support a finding that the victim had sustained an injury which created a substantial risk of death within the purview of Indiana Code § 35-41-1-25, defining serious bodily injury. However, the Beanblossom Court also noted additional injuries suffered by the victim:
"'the bullet fired by appellant which struck [the victim]'s hearing aid and shattered causing laceration wounds to his head, his outer ear, and his inner ear was certainly sufficient to support the jury's finding that [the victim] had sustained an injury which created a substantial risk of death. There is ample evidence in this record to sustain a finding of serious bodily injury in the perpetration of a robbery." 530 N.E.2d at 743.
. The State had every opportunity to acquire and introduce evidence showing a substantial risk of death. It failed to do so.
The deficiencies in the State's proof was even suggested by the trial court:
"THE COURT: Who's THE NEXT [wit ness}? ©
MS. WOLFE: Denton Winters.
MR. BARATZ: The alleged victim in this matter. And what I'm moving to exclude is any testimony from him describing his injuries beyond what he would know of his own personal knowledge. In other words, I believe that when he describes the extent or the seriousness of his injury, he's going to be relating to the jury things that were told to him by someone else, perhaps a doctor or something like that, and I don't think he's the proper person. He certainly can describe his injury, describe his pain, those sorts of things but to go further and describe the internal actually the workings and the damage done, I don't believe that he's the proper witness to do that.
THE COURT: What's the basis of your objection?
MR. BARATZ: that he-what he would say would be based on hearsay and that there are other people who would have personal knowledge who are experts who would be able to describe it.
THE COURT: Ms. Wolfe.
MS. WOLFE: He can certainly tell what-the damage he suffered during his attack, that heart was lacerated. That's part of what he knows, it's his body and he can tell the jury what his injuries [were].
THE COURT: Do you have certified medical records?
MS. WOLFE: I do not.
THE COURT: Why not?
MS. WOLFE: I-
THE COURT: Are you planning on calling a physician?
MS. WOLFE: No." (Emphasis supplied.)
. Because, in my view, there was insufficient evidence to prove, beyond a reasonable doubt, the element of substantial risk of death, it is not necessary to determine whether the evidence did, or was required to, establish, as alleged, a laceration of Winters' heart. It may be noted, however, that as Wilcher observes, there was no evidence as to what internal damage was caused by the knife, the depth of the wound, or whether the wound extended to or lacerated the heart. The State does not dispute this observation but merely contends the "laceration to the heart" language in charging information is merely sur-plusage. Appellee's Brief at 5.
. A "deadly weapon" includes a weapon which, in the manner it is used, could ordinarily be used, or is intended to be used, is readily capable of causing serious bodily injury. Ind.Code § 34-41-1-8 (Burns Code Ed. Supp.2001). "Serious bodily injury" is in turn defined as bodily injury which creates a substantial risk of death, or that causes: (1) serious permanent disfigurement; (2) unconsciousness; (3) extreme pain; (4) permanent or protracted loss or impairment of the function of a bodily member or organ; or (5) loss of a fetus. Ind.Code § 35-41-1-25 (Burns Code Ed. Repl.1998). Here, the evidence indicates that the knife was used in a manner readily capable of causing serious bodily injury as defined by statute.

=== CASE 2211143 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:02.528198+00 ===

11 Mich. App. 703 (1968)
162 N.W.2d 152
PEOPLE
v.
JONES.
Docket No. 4,960.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided June 24, 1968.
Frank J. Kelley, Attorney General, Robert A. Derengoski, Solicitor General, S. Jerome Bronson, Prosecuting Attorney, Dennis Donohue, Chief Appellate Counsel, and Bruce T. Leitman, Assistant Prosecuting Attorney, for the people.
Richard A. Campbell, for defendant on appeal.
PER CURIAM:
Defendant pleaded guilty to a charge of unarmed robbery CL 1948, § 750.530 (Stat Ann 1954 Rev § 28.798), and was sentenced to 10 to 15 years in prison. He was represented by court-appointed counsel. Defendant by affidavit claims that, prior to the taking of the plea, he wrote the court and requested a change of attorneys because he could not communicate or get along with assigned counsel.
The record reveals that the defendant had other appointed counsel prior to the counsel of whom he now complains. Further, it was admitted by counsel on appeal that the first appointed trial counsel was removed for similar reasons, and the second trial counsel was appointed.
The record does not indicate any evidence of defendant's request to the trial court and, further, reveals no objection on the record in open court to proceeding with the last appointed trial counsel. There is no evidence that the defendant requested or sought to enforce his constitutional right to appear in person.
*705 This Court on prior occasions has stated that defendants have a right to appear by counsel or in person. People v. Henley (1965), 2 Mich App 54. This court has also stated, and we so find, that the defendant does not have the right to select the attorney that is to be assigned to represent him. See People v. LaMarr (1965), 1 Mich App 389. Further, the matter was not properly preserved for appeal.
An examination of the record discloses no error in the taking of the plea of guilty.
Further, defendant contends that the minimum sentence imposed is excessive as a matter of law and should be reviewed on appeal.
We find the sentence imposed to be within the limit prescribed by statute for the imposing of indeterminate sentences. A sentence set within the statutory limits precludes an appellate court from altering it. People v. Krum (1965), 374 Mich 356; People v. Pate (1965), 2 Mich App 66; People v. Doran (1967), 6 Mich App 86.
Affirmed.
LESINSKI, C.J., and BURNS and FENLON, JJ., concurred.

=== CASE 9737582 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:29:09.51767+00 ===

FLEMING, J.
Taylor pleaded not guilty when indicted on three counts of burglary (Pen. Code, § 459), one count of attempted burglary (Pen. Code, § 664), two counts of grand theft (Pen. Code, §487), and two counts of possession of a weapon by a felon (Pen. Code, § 12021). Except on the two counts of grand theft he was found guilty as charged. Additionally, the court found he was armed during the commission of the offenses.
One of the burglary victims, Mendelson, testified that a diamond pin and a gold watch belonging to his wife were found missing from his home near the UCLA campus on May 4, 1964. Darlene Grose, originally a codefendant, was granted immunity and testified that between May and August Taylor had given her the pin identified by Mendelson and a watch. In November Taylor told her that he had stolen them, and he took her to view the burglarized homes near UCLA. They discussed which homes would be burglarized that night. At 11 p.m. she drove Taylor to a residential neighborhood near UCLA, where she parked the car and waited while Taylor *13with a gun tucked in his belt went to commit the burglaries. On his return to the ear about 6 a.m. Taylor said he had entered the burglarized homes by prying open doors with a .screwdriver. He showed Darlene a man’s ring initialed “E.I.S.,” a lady’s watch and a lady’s ring. Earl I. Swetow testified that someone had entered his home that night by prying open the door and had taken his ring initialed “E.I.S.” and his wife’s diamond ring and watch.
After her arrest, Darlene took Officer Gravante to an area near UCLA and pointed out homes belonging to Mendelson, Swetow, and Brunswick, which she and Taylor had picked to burglarize. At the time she identified a cap worn by Taylor on the evening of the November burglaries. Mendelson testified he had awakened around 3 a.m. on the night of the burglaries and had seen a man on his balcony wearing the cap identified as Taylor’s.
Taylor appeals from the judgment, claiming (1) admissions he made in the absence of counsel to Officer Gravante following the preliminary hearing should have been excluded from evidence; (2) there was insufficient corroboration to connect him with the November crimes; and (3) there was no evidence to support iihe finding he was armed during the May burglaries.
1. The arresting officer advised Taylor of his right to remain silent, to have an attorney, and that any statement he made could be used against him. Taylor said he understood his rights. When he was later asked by Officer Gravante if he understood his rights Taylor replied that he did, saying that both the arresting officer and his own attorney had advised him of them. Two days after the preliminary hearing at which he had been represented by counsel, Taylor asked to see Gravante. During their conversation, when Gravante refused to do some personal errand for Taylor, the latter made an outburst which contained incriminating statements. These statements were volunteered and not the result of police interrogation. Taylor knew his rights and understood them, having been advised of them by the police as well as his own attorney. When an accused person in custody understands his rights, the decision to exercise these rights is his. Taylor chose to waive his right to remain silent, and the admission in evidence of his volunteered statements was proper. (Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436 [16 L.Ed.2d 694, 86 S.Ct. 1602, 10 A.L.R.3d 974].)
2. Taylor argues there was insufficient evidence eorroborat*14ing the testimony of his accomplice, Darlene, to support his conviction for the November burglaries.  Corroborating evidence need only relate some act or fact of the offense to the defendant so as to reasonably satisfy the trier of fact that his accomplice is telling the truth. (People v. Kutz, 187 Cal.App.2d 431 [9 Cal.Rptr. 626]; Pen. Code, § 1111.)  Circumstantial evidence alone suffices to corroborate an accomplice’s testimony. (People v. Temple, 102 Cal.App.2d 270 [227 P.2d 500].)  Darlene’s testimony was supported by Mendel-son’s testimony, which included identification of Taylor’s cap as the cap worn by the burglar, by Swetow’s testimony that his house was burglarized in November and his ring initialed “E.I.S.” stolen, by the pry marks and method of entry which indicated the same modus operandi for the May and November burglaries. Additionally, the court could take into consideration admissions made by Taylor to Gravante. There was sufficient evidence to corroborate the testimony of Darlene.
3. Taylor contends there was no evidence to support a finding he was armed during the May burglaries. This is correct. Nor was he charged in the information with being armed during the May burglaries. Since neither a charge was made nor evidence offered on this subject we cannot hold that the May burglaries were burglaries of the first degree. (Pen. Code, § 460.)
The judgment is modified to reduce the conviction on counts I and III to second degree burglary, and as modified the judgment is affirmed.
Roth, P. J., and Herndon, J., concurred.
Respondent’s petition for rehearing was denied December 22,1966, and the following opinion was then rendered:

=== CASE 9737583 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:29:09.521707+00 ===

FLEMING, J.
On petition for rehearing, the Attorney General contests the reduction of the judgment on counts I and III from first to second degree burglary, arguing there was sufficient evidence these burglaries were committed in the nighttime to support a conviction for burglary in the first degree.
It might well be that a conviction for first degree burglary could have been supported by some other finding than the one relied on by the court, but our concern on appeal is with the decision of the court and not with what might have *15been. The judgment, the clerk’s minutes, and the reporter’s transcript reflect a decision based on a finding that defendant was armed with a deadly weapon at the time of these offenses, a finding unsupported by evidence on counts I and III.
The weakness in the Attorney General’s assumption that other findings from the evidence would necessarily have been made by the trial court becomes apparent from a casual examination of the present record. Mr. Brunswick, the victim of count III, placed the time of that burglary at 5 :20 on the morning of May 4, 1964. According to the Almanac on that date sunrise at Los Angeles occurred at 5 Pacific Standard Time. Without attempting to analyze the complications of local mean time, daylight saving time, and adjustments for standard meridians and parallels, it is at least arguable that the evidence on that particular count did not support a finding of burglary committed during the nighttime, defined by statute as the period between sunset and sunrise. (Pen. Code, § 463.) It seems reasonably certain the time of sunrise in West Los Angeles was not taken into consideration by the court because of its misapprehension that the defendant had been armed during each of his offenses. We adhere to our view that a judgment of first degree burglary on counts I and III based on a finding that the defendant was armed with a deadly weapon is unsupported by the evidence and must be reduced to second degree burglary.
This case illuminates certain weaknesses in the present method of charging and convicting for degrees of burglary, weaknesses which, if uncorrected, are likely to create future misunderstandings and lead to controversies over due process. Historically, the practice of charging burglary generally, without specifying the elements necessary to make the crime burglary in the first degree, arose from the courts’ difficulties with the niceties of pleading at the time the concept of burglary was expanded to include what had theretofore been known as housebreaking. In 1872 the Supreme Court held that burglary (nighttime) and housebreaking (daytime) were distinct offenses which could not be combined in one charge. (People v. Taggart, 43 Cal. 81.) As the court said in the later case of People v. Jefferson, 52 Cal. 452, 454: “It would be illogical, and not in accord with elementary principles of pleading, to declare that if the indictment charged an entry in the night-time only, the jury or Court could find the defendant guilty of an entry in the day-time. ’ ’ To overcome this difficulty the Penal Code was amended in 1876 to provide *16for degrees of burglary, and the practice developed of charging burglary generally under a pleading which would permit a finding of either first or second degree burglary. (People v. Jefferson, 52 Cal. 452; People v. Smith, 136 Cal. 207 [68 P. 702].)
Since the adoption of degrees of burglary in 1876, there have been a number of significant statutory changes involving the crime of burglary. The types of burglary in the first degree have proliferated. There are now four classifications :
burglary of a habitation in the nighttime,
burglary armed with a deadly weapon,
burglary by one who arms himself during the crime,
burglary accompanied by assault.
Likewise since 1876, the disparity between punishment for first and second degree burglary has widened, and while the maximum penalty for first degree burglary has been increased to life imprisonment (Pen. Code, § 461), the minimum penalty for burglary in the second degree has been reduced to a misdemeanor (Pen. Code, § 461). Additionally, the Legislature in 1935 authorized the pleading of the offense of burglary armed with a deadly weapon by the addition to the general charge of burglary of a separate specification that the defendant was armed at the time. The specification that the defendant was armed with a deadly weapon must now be charged in the pleading (Pen. Code, § 969c), and its truth or falsity returned in the verdict (Pen. Code, § 1158a).
In the light of these changes, it would appear good practice today, wholly consonant with procedural due process of law, for a defendant to be informed by separate specification to the charge which of the elements making an offense burglary in the first degree he will be required to defend against. As a matter of pleading, this can readily be accomplished by adding one or more appropriate specifications to the general charge of burglary, in the manner now required for the specification of burglary while armed with a deadly weapon and for the specification of a former felony conviction. The specification will inform the defendant which, if any, of the four different factual situations comprising first degree burglary he will be required to answer. If proof of the specification fails, the prosecution can still rely on the general charge of burglary to support a conviction for second degree burglary.
We think, too, good practice requires the trier of fact to make a positive finding on the specification in order to sup*17port a verdict of conviction in the first degree. Such specificity in the charge and the verdict will tend to prevent mixups of the kind which took place here by providing a reliable record of the exact offense for which a particular defendant stands convicted, a record which will be continuously useful in Ms later history on such questions as punishment, probation, parole, pardon, and subsequent sentences for other crimes within or without the State of California. The nature of a subsequent sentence elsewhere might well turn on whether the defendant’s first degree burglary here had been accompanied by an assault or had merely taken place between sunset and sunrise. In short, where, as here, there are four different factual bases which go to make up first degree burglary, we think the criminal process should disclose, either in the pleadings or in the verdict, and preferably in both, the exact crime for which a defendant stands charged and convicted.
The order heretofore certifying for nonpublication our earlier opinion in this case is vacated, and both opinions are ordered published.
The petition for rehearing is denied.
Roth, P. J., and Herndon, J., concurred.
Appellant’s petition for a hearing by the Supreme Court was denied January 25, 1967, and respondent’s petition for a hearing by the Supreme Court was denied May 17, 1967.

=== CASE 2211152 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:02.622079+00 ===

247 Cal.App.2d 102 (1966)
PACIFIC EMPLOYERS INSURANCE GROUP, Petitioner,
v.
WORKMEN'S COMPENSATION APPEALS BOARD, P. L. FARRIS et al., Respondents.
Civ. No. 11427.
California Court of Appeals. Third Dist.
Dec. 8, 1966.
Mullen & Filippi, Frank J. Filippi and John A. Thompson for Petitioner.
Everett A. Corten, Sheldon St. Clair, Leep & Saunders and Henry Saunders for Respondents.
REGAN, J.
Applicant, P. L. Farris, applied for workmen's compensation benefits alleging an injury arising out of and in the course of his employment as an employee of Heron Mills, Inc. The Workmen's Compensation Appeals Board in its "Findings and Ward" found: Farris had sustained an industrial injury to his back arising out of his employment by Heron Mills, Inc., causing a total, temporary disability and, in addition, a permanent disability of 26 1/2 percent; and that the injury is not subject to apportionment.
Pacific Employers, having been denied reconsideration, seeks by this writ of review a determination of whether the findings *104 and order awarding disability indemnity to Farris and denying apportionment were proper.
Farris, an employee in the lumber industry for 25 years working at jobs requiring the rolling and turning of boards, was on May 3, 1965, performing such work for Heron Mills, Inc., when he experienced pain in the lower back. Farris, who was employed by Heron Mills, Inc., since September 18, 1963, stated he had no previous back trouble; that no unusual incident had occurred on the job to cause an injury; that the pain persisted and on May 11, 1965, he consulted Thomas R. Fowler, M.D., who referred him to Eugene A. Nutley, M.D., an orthopedic surgeon. While being treated by Dr. Nutley, Farris continued to work until July 11, 1965, when he was hospitalized for a course of bed rest, traction, physical therapy, and had a low back brace fitted, which Farris continued to wear after hospitalization. Dr. Fowler, in his report, asserted Farris stated to him that he had strained his back on the "green chain."
Dr. Nutley, in his first report to petitioner, stated: "I am not too sure as to the exact diagnosis. It is hoped that this is merely a low back strain, which will subside with rest. However, he does seem to localize his distress in an area in his back which seems to have either some degenerative changes or some type of congenital anomaly."
Some four months later, Dr. Nutley, reporting to the Department of Rehabilitation, stated: "Pervie Farris has a markedly degenerated lumbosacral disc and can no longer perform work envolving [sic] heavy lifting and bending. Please evaluate re change of occupation."
In his later report to Pacific Employers, Dr. Nutley stated: "This man presents a clinical picture of degenerative lumbosacral disc disease at this time. This is confirmed by X-rays and the X-rays show fairly far advanced disease. This man feels he is no longer to pursue his prior occupation involving heavy lifting and bending and considering his X-rays, he probably is not able to do this any longer. This man also denies having had any back trouble prior to May of this year. ... In general, I feel this man has reached an essentially stationary state and it is possible he could be rated at this time on the basis of a back impairment preventing repeated heavy lifting and bending. The X-rays show pre-existing disease which I feel would be responsible for 50% of his present impairment." *105
Pursuant to the request of Pacific Employer's claims examiner, Francis J. Cox, M.D., examined Farris and commented as follows: "This man's disability is due to degenerated disc disease and the marked narrowing and osteoarthritic change at the last functioning disc. This condition has been coming on slowly over a long period of time. ... There is no specific history of any specific injury in this picture. I simply think that the man's back became painful at a given point in time, and not the result of any specific injury. The years of work he did in part play some responsibility to the present situation obviously. ... The man's sole disability on apportionment should be attributed to his basic underlying progressive degenerative disc disease."
On February 9, 1966, the referee decided that the applicant had suffered a compensable industrial injury, that the injury caused permanent disability of 26 1/2 percent, and that the injury was not subject to apportionment. In his report to the Workmen's Compensation Appeals Board, the referee commented as follows:
"Applicant testified that on May 3, 1965, he was trimming lumber and the lumber piled up on the roll casing. He was moving and turning boards on the roll casing to get them to the trim saws and at approximately 11:00 a.m. felt discomfort in his low back and left side. He continued working, and continued to work after seeking medical attention, and worked until his back condition was such that he was hospitalized. There was no evidence from the employer that they had not received notice of the injury; in fact, the record indicates the employer was aware of the injury and a back strain was diagnosed and applicant received conservative treatment while he continued to work. The medical reports and applicant's testimony indicate there was a specific incident of trauma on May 3, 1965."
"... The medical reports indicate employee has a fairly advanced lumbosacral disc disease, however, employee had no prior injury and was asymptomatic as far as his back was concerned for many years prior to the injury. He had no back disability for 28 years prior to the traumatic incident herein, and for 12 to 13 years prior to the incident he had been working in a sawmill as an edgerman or trimmerman. The degenerative disc disease was a condition and not a disability and did not impair employee's ability to work, so the award was not apportioned." *106
In denying reconsideration, the appeals board commented as follows:
"The history accepted by the Trial Referee was that there had been no prior symptoms of the back before this industrial trauma on May 3, 1965 and there is no compelling medical evidence that the degenerative disc condition would have progressed to a symptomatic condition by May 3, 1965, or at any ascertainable future date without the industrial injury. Therefore, no apportionment is indicated on this record."
Is There Substantial Evidence to Justify the Finding That Farris Incurred an Industrial Injury?
[1] "When a finding of fact of the Industrial Accident Commission is attacked on the ground that there is not any substantial evidence to sustain it, the power of an appellate court begins and ends with a determination as to whether there is any substantial evidence, contradicted or uncontradicted, which will support the finding of fact." (Douglas Aircraft, Inc. v. Industrial Acc. Com., 47 Cal.2d 903, 905 [306 P.2d 425].) An award will be annulled only in the absence of substantial evidence to support it, and the court will indulge all reasonable inferences which may be drawn from the record to sustain the commission's findings. (Leonard Van Stelle, Inc. v. Industrial Acc. Com., 59 Cal.2d 836, 839 [31 Cal.Rptr. 467, 382 P.2d 587]; Lab. Code,  5952.)
[2] " '... It is only when there is a direct causal connection between the exertion of the employment and the injury that an award of compensation can be made. The substantial question is whether the diseased condition was the cause, or whether the employment was a proximate contributing cause. In the former case, no award can be made; in the latter, it ought to be made.' [Citation.]" (Beveridge v. Industrial Acc. Com., 175 Cal.App.2d 592, 598 [346 P.2d 545].)
[3a] In effect, the fact finder was here confronted with a choice between disease and employment as a proximate contributing cause of back disability. (See Peter Kiewit Sons v. Industrial Acc. Com., 234 Cal.App.2d 831 [44 Cal.Rptr. 813].)
The doctors do not state directly in their reports that Farris suffered an industrial injury while working, but there is an inference that this was the case, for Dr. Fowler states that Farris "strained his back on the green chain." Dr. Nutley ascribes only 50 percent of the impairment to the preexisting disease, and Dr. Cox makes note that the years of such work *107 did in part play some responsibility. The medical testimony thus establishes a causal relationship between the work and disability on the basis of medical evidence. [4] "All reasonable inferences must be indulged to support the findings of the commission; reasonable probability, not absolute certainty, is all that is required. [Citation.] ... Each case must be considered upon its own particular facts. ..." (Pacific Indem. Co. v. Industrial Acc. Com., 28 Cal.2d 329, 339 [170 P.2d 18].)
[5] Moreover, it is the rule in California "that the acceleration, aggravation or 'lighting up' of a preexisting disease is an injury in the occupation causing the same. [Citations.] The underlying theory is that the employer takes the employee subject to his condition when he enters the employment, and that therefore compensation is not to be denied merely because the workman's physical condition was such as to cause him to suffer a disability from an injury which ordinarily, given a stronger and healthier constitution, would have caused little or no inconvenience." (Tanenbaum v. Industrial Acc. Com., 4 Cal.2d 615, 617 [52 P.2d 215].)
Petitioner, however, cites the case of Peter Kiewit Sons v. Industrial Acc. Com., supra, 234 Cal.App.2d 831, decided by this court in 1965, as controlling on the issue in question. In Kiewit this court stated at page 838: "Where an issue is exclusively a matter of scientific medical knowledge, expert evidence is essential to sustain a commission finding; lay testimony or opinion in support of such a finding does not measure up to the standard of substantial evidence. (City & County of San Francisco v. Industrial Acc. Com., supra, 117 Cal.App.2d at pp. 459-460 [256 P.2d 81]; Guarantee Ins. Co. v. Industrial Acc. Com., 88 Cal.App.2d 410, 413 [199 P.2d 12]; Pacific Emp. Ins. Co. v. Industrial Acc. Com., 47 Cal.App.2d 494, 500-501 [118 P.2d 334].)"
This court also notes that "back disabilities in particular shout loudly for expert advice." (At p. 839.) In Kiewit, however, there was no competent medical evidence of work causation. Furthermore, the evidence in that case pointed to four possible sources, which combined or separately, resulted in the employee's inability to work. Thus the instant case is distinguishable on the facts.
[3b] We hold there is substantial evidence to sustain the finding that a compensable industrial injury was incurred by Farris. *108
Was Apportionment Between the Industrial Injury and the Preexisting Disease Properly Denied?
[6a] Having determined that Farris did sustain injury causing permanent disability arising out of and in the course of his employment by Heron Mills, we now turn to petitioner's contention that the facts in this case make it mandatory that the permanent disability be apportioned pursuant to the provisions of section 4663 of the Labor Code.
The Workmen's Compensation Appeals Board in adopting by reference the report of the trial referee, which is supported by substantial evidence, found that Farris had worked in sawmills all of his adult life and had no prior back injuries or disability; that there was a specific incident of trauma on May 3, 1965; that Farris had a fairly advanced lumbosacral disc disease; that he was asymptomatic for many years prior to his injury; that the degenerative disc disease was a condition and not a disability until the event of the injury and did not impair Farris' ability to work. Dr. Nutley, however, ascribed 50 percent of the impairment to the preexisting disease.
[7] We now look to Idaho Maryland etc. Corp. v. Industrial Acc. Com., 104 Cal.App.2d 567, 570 [232 P.2d 11], where the court states: "... [S]ince respondent determined upon conflicting and substantial evidence that the claimant's disability was an industrial injury occasioned by exposure to gas which aggravated a preexisting disease, there is no basis for the application, as petitioner contends, of the apportionment rule as set forth in Labor Code, section 4663. As the Supreme Court stated in Colonial Ins. Co. v. Industrial Acc. Com., 29 Cal.2d 79, 83-84 [172 P.2d 884]: '[T]hat section must be read in light of the rule that an employer takes the employee as he finds him at the time of employment and when subsequent injury lightens up or aggravates a previously existing condition rendering it disabling, liability for the full disability without proration is imposed upon the employer.' "
In Argonaut Ins. Co. v. Industrial Acc. Com., 57 Cal.2d 589, 593 [21 Cal.Rptr. 545, 371 P.2d 281], the court (per Traynor, J.) stated: "Whether a disability results in whole or in part from 'the normal progress of a preexisting disease' [Citation] or represents a fully compensable lighting up or aggravation of a preexisting condition is a question for the commission to determine, and its award will not be annulled if there is substantial evidence to support it. [Citations.] In view of the foregoing testimony the commission could reasonably conclude *109 that the preexisting condition did not call for apportionment."
[6b] In view of the substantial evidence brought forth in this case, the appeals board could and did reasonably conclude that the preexisting condition did not call for apportionment. (See Argonaut Ins. Co. v. Industrial Acc. Com., supra, 57 Cal.2d 589; Idaho Maryland etc. Corp. v. Industrial Acc. Com., supra, 104 Cal.App.2d 567; see also W. P. Fuller & Co. v. Industrial Acc. Com., 211 Cal.App.2d 9 [27 Cal.Rptr. 401]; Industrial Indem. Co. v. Industrial Acc. Com., 95 Cal.App.2d 443, 452 [213 P.2d 11].)
The award is affirmed.
Pierce, P. J., and Friedman, J., concurred.

=== CASE 2211164 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:02.804042+00 ===

12 Mich. App. 404 (1968)
162 N.W.2d 921
HOPE
v.
WEISS.
Docket No. 2,550.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided July 23, 1968.
Nussbaum, Stacey & Munger, for plaintiff.
Victor & Covensky, for defendants.
*405 PER CURIAM:
Plaintiff was evicted from leased premises under a writ of restitution[*] and brought this action against the landlords and the landlords' attorneys on two theories: forcible entry and detainer and conspiracy to deprive him of his leasehold by wrongfully causing the writ of restitution to issue against him. Summary judgment was entered against plaintiff on the first issue only.
After due consideration of the entire record, it is determined that the order appealed is interlocutory, the trial court not having made an "express determination that there is no just reason for delay and upon an express direction for the entry of judgment." GCR 1963, 518.2.
It is ordered that the appeal be, and the same is hereby, dismissed since this Court has not granted leave to appeal and lacks jurisdiction to proceed further in the matter. GCR 1963, 806.1. City of Dearborn v. Pulte-Strang, Inc. (1968), 12 Mich. App. 161.
Appeal dismissed. Costs to appellees.
LESINSKI, C.J., and J.H. GILLIS and LEVIN, JJ., concurred.
NOTES
[*]  See the companion case of Hope v. Victor (1968), 12 Mich. App. 397, ante, in which the events leading to the eviction are more fully set forth.

=== CASE 9737584 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:29:17.305933+00 ===

JUSTICE WELCH delivered the opinion of the court: On December 10, 1999, a motor vehicle accident occurred at the intersection of Route 13 and Route 166 in Williamson County. Eyewitnesses to the accident testified that just before 6 p.m. on that evening a white pickup truck traveling eastbound on Route 13 proceeded to make a left turn (north onto Route 166) in front of a black pickup truck that was traveling westbound on Route 13. The two vehicles collided. The driver of the black pickup truck, Jeremy Hughes, was killed. His wife, Brandy Hughes, a passenger in the vehicle, was seriously injured. The driver of the white pickup truck was also seriously injured. The three eyewitnesses to the accident all testified that immediately after the collision they ran to the white pickup truck and observed a man hanging out of the passenger-side window. They did not get a good look at his face and were unable to identify him. They did not observe any other individual in, or exit, the white pickup truck after the accident. As a result of this accident, Michael D. Bennett (defendant) was charged by information, filed in the circuit court of Williamson County, with (1) reckless homicide in that while under the influence of alcohol and while acting in a reckless manner, he operated a motor vehicle in such a manner as to cause death or great bodily harm to an individual by turning left in front of, and colliding with, a vehicle driven by Jeremy Hughes, thereby causing the death of Jeremy Hughes, and (2) aggravated driving under the influence of alcohol in that he knowingly drove a motor vehicle under the influence of alcohol and was involved in a motor vehicle accident that proximately resulted in great bodily harm to Brandy Hughes, the wife of the decedent, Jeremy Hughes. Following a jury trial, defendant was convicted of both counts. He was sentenced to 12 years in the Department of Corrections on the reckless homicide conviction. No sentence was imposed on the conviction for aggravated driving under the influence of alcohol. Defendant appeals. Defendant raises three issues on appeal: (1) whether the trial court abused its discretion in granting the State’s motion to reopen its case to present additional evidence after defendant had moved for a directed verdict at the close of the State’s case, (2) whether the State failed to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that defendant was the driver of the white pickup truck involved in the motor vehicle accident out of which these charges arose, and (3) whether his conviction for aggravated driving under the influence of alcohol must be vacated because it was based on the same physical act as his conviction for reckless homicide. For the reasons that follow, we affirm defendant’s conviction and sentence for reckless homicide and vacate his conviction for aggravated driving under the influence of alcohol. At the close of the State’s case, defendant moved for a directed verdict based on the fact that the State had failed to prove that defendant had been the driver of the white pickup truck which collided with the vehicle driven by Jeremy Hughes. The State responded that it had presented sufficient circumstantial evidence that defendant had been the driver of the truck; nevertheless, the State sought leave to reopen its case to present additional evidence on this point. The State was not clear on exactly what evidence it might present but indicated that it knew of the owner of the pickup truck, who could testify that he had loaned the truck to defendant, and of ambulance personnel who had removed defendant from the vehicle and had taken him to the hospital. The ambulance personnel had not been disclosed in discovery. Over defendant’s objection, the trial court granted the State leave to reopen its case to present the testimony of Tad Thompson, an ambulance attendant who had responded to the scene of the accident. Defendant was given the opportunity to interview Thompson prior to his testimony. At the trial, Thompson testified that he had responded to the accident scene with the ambulance. He proceeded to the white pickup truck and observed a man hanging out of the passenger-side window. This man was removed from the truck and transported to the hospital. There was no other individual in the truck when Thompson arrived. Thompson identified defendant as the man he had removed from the pickup truck and transported to the hospital. Thompson has a clear memory of this accident and defendant’s identity because of the severity of the accident.  As defendant correctly points out, it is within the sound discretion of the trial court whether a case may be reopened for further evidence, and this discretion will not be interfered with except where it is clearly abused. People v. Cross, 40 Ill. 2d 85, 90 (1968). In Cross, the defendant, charged with burglary, moved for a directed verdict at the close of the State’s case on the ground that the State had failed to prove the corporate ownership of the building. The trial court allowed the State to reopen its case to make this proof, and the supreme court found no abuse of discretion by the trial court. Defendant could not have been surprised by the additional proof and was not prejudiced by the trial court’s ruling permitting the reopening of the case. Although, in Cross, proof of the corporate ownership was merely a formal matter, the State has been allowed to reopen its case not only for the purpose of proving formalities but also to establish the very facts essential for a conviction. See People v. Price, 8 Ill. App. 3d 158, 160 (1972). Thus, in People v. Henderson, 223 Ill. App. 3d 131, 134 (1991), the defendant, charged with criminal damage to state-supported property, moved for a directed verdict at the close of the State’s case on the ground that the State had failed to prove that the damaged property was supported by state funds. The trial judge agreed that the State had failed to establish this essential element of the offense, but the judge allowed the State to reopen its case to make the requisite proof. On review, this court found no abuse of discretion in the trial court’s ruling allowing the State to reopen its case. Contrary to defendant’s assertion, there is no per se rule prohibiting a trial court from permitting the State to reopen its case once the defendant has moved for a directed verdict. See People v. Faulkner, 64 Ill. App. 3d 453, 457 (1978). We do not read section 115 — 4(k) of the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1963 (725 ILCS 5/115 — 4(k) (West 2000)) as establishing such a rule. While that section provides that when, at the close of the State’s evidence, the evidence is insufficient to support a finding of guilty, the court shall, on the motion of the defendant, enter a directed verdict in favor of the defendant, we do not believe that this section precludes the trial court from granting the State’s motion to reopen its case after a motion for directed verdict has been made. The holdings of the cases cited herein lend support. The trial court retains discretion to grant a motion to reopen the evidence even after a motion for directed verdict, and absent an abuse of that discretion, its decision will not be overturned on appeal.  We understand defendant’s assertion that no competent defense attorney would ever move for a directed verdict if he knew that the State would then be allowed to reopen its case to present further evidence to cure the precise deficiency pointed out in the motion for directed verdict. Nevertheless, a criminal trial is not a game to win or lose, but a search for truth and justice. See In re Lamb, 21 Ill. App. 3d 827, 837 (1974), aff’d, 61 Ill. 2d 383 (1975). Every effort should be made to achieve justice, whether that results in the conviction or the acquittal of the defendant. The State’s motion to reopen its case to present the testimony of Thompson as to the identity of the individual removed from the white pickup truck and the trial court’s grant of that motion were good-faith efforts to achieve justice in this case. Defendant has not claimed that he was surprised by the evidence admitted upon the reopening of the State’s case, nor has he claimed any prejudice as a result of the trial court’s ruling. We find no abuse of discretion in the trial court’s ruling.  Defendant next argues that the State failed to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that defendant was the driver of the white pickup truck. In considering a defendant’s challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence, the relevant question is whether, after viewing all the evidence in the light most favorable to the prosécution, any rational trier of fact could have found the essential elements of the crime beyond a reasonable doubt. People v. Oaks, 169 Ill. 2d 409, 457-58 (1996). Defendant argues on appeal that there is no direct evidence that he was the driver of the truck. None of the occurrence witnesses could testify that they saw defendant driving the truck. Even the ambulance attendant, Thompson, could not testify that defendant was the driver of the truck. Thompson could only testify that defendant was the man he found hanging out of the passenger-side window of the truck, whom he removed from the truck and transported to the hospital. Accordingly, defendant argues, “It is therefore possible that someone else drove the truck, and that person left the scene of the accident.” A criminal conviction will not be set aside unless the evidence is so improbable or unsatisfactory that it creates a reasonable doubt of the defendant’s guilt. People v. Collins, 106 Ill. 2d 237, 261 (1985). Proof that the defendant was the driver of the vehicle can be established by circumstantial evidence alone. See People v. Gutierrez, 105 Ill. App. 3d 1059, 1063 (1982). The State has met its burden in this case. Viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the State, a rational jury could have found beyond a reasonable doubt that defendant was the driver of the white pickup truck. Defendant was the only person seen in the vehicle immediately after the accident. No one was observed exiting the vehicle and leaving the scene after the accident. We cannot conclude that the circumstantial evidence that defendant was the driver of the white pickup truck is so improbable or unsatisfactory that it creates a reasonable doubt of defendant’s guilt.  Finally, relying on People v. King, 66 Ill. 2d 551, 566 (1977), defendant argues that his conviction for aggravated driving under the influence of alcohol must be vacated because it is based on the same physical act as his conviction for reckless homicide, that is, driving under the influence of alcohol. The State concedes that the conviction for aggravated driving under the influence of alcohol must be vacated, but on the ground that it is a lesser-included offense of reckless homicide. The one-act, one-crime rule announced in King, 66 Ill. 2d at 566, held that multiple convictions are improper if based upon precisely the same physical act. The two offenses in the case at bair are based on a single physical act of driving a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol and causing a motor vehicle accident. Defendant drove drunk only once and had a single accident. Accordingly, the lesser offense of aggravated driving under the influence of alcohol must be vacated. We note that no sentence was imposed on the conviction for aggravated driving under the influence. Nevertheless, the jury’s verdict of guilt on that charge was accepted by the trial court, and a judgment of guilty was entered thereon. Accordingly, we vacate this judgment of guilty on the charge of aggravated driving under the influence of alcohol. For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the conviction and sentence of defendant on the charge of reckless homicide, and we vacate his conviction for aggravated driving under the influence of alcohol. Affirmed in part and vacated in part. GOLDENHERSH, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9737587 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:29:22.523345+00 ===

Wilkie, J.
(concurring). I agree with the majority that the delay in the prosecution of this case did not amount to a denial of due process. The majority points out that a statute of limitations is not the sole standard by which delay between offense and arrest is to be measured, but in doing so it fails to state any criteria for determining when a delay (less than that permitted by the statute of limitations) in prosecution amounts to a denial of due process.
I would adopt standards similar to those set forth in Bond v. United States.1 In that case the court determined that in deciding whether there has been a denial of due process the court should weigh (1) the amount of delay involved, (2) who caused the delay, (3) whether the delay was purposeful, i.e., did the government make “ ‘a deliberate choice for a proposed advantage, which caused as much oppressive delay and damage to the defendant as it would have caused if it had been made in bad faith/ ” 2 (4) was the defendant prejudiced, and (5) was there a waiver by defendant.
In applying these criteria to the facts before us, I concur in the holding of the majority that there was no denial of due process.
I am authorized to state that Mr. Chief Justice HALLOWS joins in this opinion.
(D. C. Cir. 1967), 233 Atl. 2d 506.
Bond v. United States, supra, footnote 1, at page 512.

=== CASE 9737589 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:29:24.048828+00 ===

JUSTICE STEIGMANN delivered the opinion of the court: In August 1998, plaintiffs, Kathleen and Matthew Maffett, sued defendants, Thurman and James Bliss, for injuries Kathleen sustained when her minivan collided with a bean head attached to James’ combine, which was being driven by Thurman. (A bean head is a 2IV2-foot-wide raised steel platform used to harvest crops.) Following a January 2001 jury trial, the jury returned a verdict in favor of the Blisses and against the Maffetts. The Maffetts appeal, arguing that (1) the trial court erred by (a) excluding the testimony of certain witnesses regarding the fog and visibility near the time of the accident, (b) refusing to allow rebuttal evidence regarding visibility and fog, (c) allowing evidence regarding Kathleen’s prior vision problems, (d) permitting the Blisses to cross-examine one of the Maffetts’ expert witnesses using various journal articles without having timely disclosed those articles during discovery, (e) permitting the Blisses to impeach one of the Maffetts’ expert witnesses with a note the witness had written to himself regarding Kathleen’s symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder, (f) allowing the Blisses to cross-examine one of the Maffetts’ expert witnesses regarding Kathleen’s postaccident alcohol consumption, (g) allowing the Blisses to cross-examine the Maffetts regarding Kathleen’s postaccident legal gambling activities, and (h) denying the Maffetts’ motions for a new trial and for judgment notwithstanding the verdict (judgment n.o.v.); (2) the Blisses’ counsel violated the court’s order barring evidence that police had not ticketed Thurman for a traffic violation as a result of the accident; and (3) James violated the court’s order barring evidence regarding the Blisses’ financial status. We reverse and remand for a new trial. I. BACKGROUND On the morning of October 14, 1996, Kathleen was driving her minivan west on 1600 North Road in McLean County. At the same time, Thurman was driving James’ combine east on 1600 North Road. At around 7:35 a.m., Kathleen’s minivan collided with the combine’s bean head, which was raised between two or four feet off the roadway and hanging over into Kathleen’s lane of traffic. The collision occurred over a culvert with cement side abutments and yellow-and-black-striped obstacle signs marking the sides of the culvert. As a result of the collision, Kathleen sustained very serious injuries. In August 1998, the Maffetts filed a four-count complaint against the Blisses, alleging (1) negligence on the part of both Thurman and James (counts I and II) and (2) loss of consortium (counts III and IV), which they later amended. The evidence at the January 2001 jury trial showed the following. On October 14, 1996, Kathleen woke up at 6:30 a.m. She typically left her house at 7:15 a.m. However, on that morning, she left her house earlier than usual after noticing that it was foggy. Kathleen secured her son in her car, turned on her headlights, and began driving to her baby-sitter’s house. On the way there, the fog got “thicker.” After dropping off her son, Kathleen put her seat belt back on, backed out of the baby-sitter’s driveway, and drove west on 1600 North Road toward the site of the accident. Due to head trauma sustained in the accident, Kathleen did not recall anything that happened after backing out of the baby-sitter’s driveway. As a result of the accident, Kathleen sustained fractures of her forehead, nose, jaw, left hand, wrist, and forearm; severe facial lacerations, a concussion, and damage to her femoral nerve. She has permanent facial scarring, was unable to bend her left wrist, and lost her senses of taste and smell. Kathleen also stated that since the accident, she had experienced episodes of confusion and panic, and she had been diagnosed with post-traumatic stress disorder. She further stated that because of her injuries, she was unable to enjoy certain hobbies and ordinary activities. On cross-examination, Kathleen acknowledged that she had encountered combines over culverts on previous occasions. In those situations, either she or the farmer stopped before the culvert and allowed the other person to pass. She also acknowledged that a reasonable person would reduce her speed where visibility was “somewhat reduced” on a country road during harvest season. Kathleen further stated that she had prior vision problems. Louis Saunier, a volunteer firefighter, testified that at around 7:45 a.m. on October 14, 1996, he was working at his body shop in Cooks-ville when he received an emergency call regarding the accident. He drove about four minutes to the accident scene and tried to stabilize Kathleen until other emergency workers arrived. Royce Kraft, a volunteer firefighter and farmer, received a page at 7:58 a.m. that morning regarding the accident. He arrived at the scene around 8:11 a.m. and observed that the combine’s bean head was resting on the minivan and Kathleen was pinned in the van. Paula Hammond, a volunteer emergency medical technician, was at her home in Anchor sometime before 8 a.m. when she received an emergency call regarding the accident. She drove to the fire station in Colfax and then rode in an ambulance to the accident scene. Hammond stated that it took her a little longer than usual to get to the fire station that morning because of the fog, and when she arrived at the accident scene, it was “very foggy.” Upon arriving on the scene, Hammond helped stabilize Kathleen until emergency workers extricated her from the minivan. Kathleen was then transported by helicopter to the hospital. Robert Brown, a sergeant with the McLean County sheriffs department, received a call sometime between 8:30 a.m. and 9 a.m. on October 14, 1996, to go to the accident scene and reconstruct the accident. When he arrived at the scene about 30 minutes later, he noted that it was “very foggy.” After discussing the accident investigation with other police officers, Brown formulated the opinion that based on the fog and the location of the accident, “the head on the combine was protruding into the van’s lane.” He also stated as follows: “I knew it was very foggy on my way [to the accident scene] and just in my mind, I kind of thought fog might have something to do with this accident.” Brown acknowledged that he did not know what the visibility conditions were like when the collision occurred. He also stated that if a witness testified that visibility at the time of the accident was one-quarter mile (1,320 feet), he would have no reason to dispute the witness. Brown did not have an opinion regarding what the weather conditions were at Thurman’s house when Thurman left on the morning of the accident. Carl Boyd, a sergeant with the McLean County sheriffs department, was called to the accident scene from Bloomington. Although he did not recall what time he arrived, he remembered that he was delayed because it was very foggy. When he arrived at the scene, it was “very thick with fog.” Boyd noticed that the minivan was facing west and was far over to the right side of its lane. The combine was facing east and the bean head was across the entire width of the roadway. According to Boyd, Thurman told him that the fog was patchy and appeared to get worse when Thurman turned onto 1600 North Road on the morning of the accident. Boyd acknowledged that he was not near the scene of the accident when it occurred, and he did not know what the weather conditions were at that time. He also stated that if Thurman testified that visibility at the time of the accident was one-quarter mile, Boyd would have no reason to dispute that testimony. William Kinsella testified that on the day of the accident, he lived approximately 870 feet from the accident site. He stated that 1600 North Road was a blacktop, rural road that was busy from around 6:30 a.m. until 8:30 a.m. Soon after the accident, Thurman knocked on Kinsella’s door and told him about the accident. Kinsella telephoned 9-1-1, and then he and Thurman drove to the accident scene, which was about two or three minutes away. Kinsella stated that it was foggy as they drove to the scene. After they arrived at the scene, emergency workers began arriving within about two minutes. Thurman told Kinsella that weather conditions were clear when Thurman left his house that morning. Peggy Bliss, who was married to Thurman in October 1996 (they had since divorced), testified that between 5:30 a.m. and 6 a.m. on October 14, 1996, James called Thurman and asked him to drive the combine from Peggy and Thurman’s house in rural Towanda to one of James’ fields. Peggy was concerned about the “patchy fog” and asked Thurman to wait until the fog lifted. James called about 45 or 50 minutes later and asked Thurman why he had not left. When Thurman left shortly thereafter, Peggy noticed that it was still “foggy, patchy.” Peggy acknowledged that on the morning of the accident, she could “kind of see” her neighbor’s house, which was about one-quarter mile away from her house. She also acknowledged that she was six miles from the accident scene at the time the accident occurred, and she did not know what the weather conditions were like when the collision occurred. Dr. Robert Aherin, a farm safety expert at the University of Illinois, testified as the Maffetis’ expert that an operator of a combine has the right to transport his equipment on public roadways. Combine operators also have a responsibility to assure that (1) the combine is readily recognized as a piece of farm equipment through lighting, markings, and visibility; and (2) other vehicle operators are allowed to use their traffic lane free from obstruction. Aherin stated that it is not reasonable to expect farmers to move equipment during the harvest season when it is foggy. He opined that if a careful and prudent combine operator encounters fog where visibility is not good (that is, less than 1,000 feet), he should move off the roadway if the combine is protruding into the oncoming traffic lane. Aherin also stated that even though no state law or regulation requires lighting on the bean head itself, safety experts have long recommended that when someone is moving equipment that is wider than the main transporting unit, fights should be placed on the extremities of the unit, particularly on the far left. The fighting should be adequate enough to allow approaching drivers to determine the width of the equipment. Aherin also testified that the portion of 1600 North Road near the accident site was a fairly level roadway with a wide shoulder on most portions of the road. He stated that there were adequate places to pull over a combine along the roadway. Aherin acknowledged that if visibility were at least 1,000 feet, it is within regulation and appropriate for a farmer to move his combine from one field to another on a country roadway without removing the bean head. He also acknowledged that if visibility were at least 1,000 feet, an approaching driver would have sufficient time to see and react to a combine. Dr. Ronald Ruhl, a professional engineer and an accident reconstruction expert, testified as the Maffetts’ expert that 1600 North Road is a secondary road that is 16 feet wide. (A normal two-lane road is 24 feet wide.) He stated that there are two creeks near the portion of the road at the accident site, which makes the area conducive to fog formation. Ruhl also stated that the combine had fights on the cab but no fights or reflectors on the bean head. He estimated that prior to the accident, Kathleen was traveling between 40 and 50 miles per hour. He further estimated that at the time of the collision, her speed was less than 10 miles per hour, if not zero, and her minivan was near the other side of the culvert. Upon impact, the combine was just starting to cross the culvert, and the force of the impact pushed Kathleen’s minivan back five or six feet. Ruhl opined that the cause of the accident was the “ambushing” of Kathleen’s minivan by the combine, which had moved into the center of the roadway within about four seconds and blocked the entire roadway with the bean head. Ruhl explained that the term “ambush” means that the combine had an unfit bean head and headlights on the cab that were spaced laterally at approximately the same distance as a truck’s headlights. This configuration resulted in confusion to approaching drivers, who would perceive a normal width vehicle in the oncoming lane. Ruhl opined that Kathleen did not do anything that caused the accident. Ruhl acknowledged that it would have been acceptable for Thurman to operate the combine on the roadway if visibility was 1,000 feet. He also acknowledged that if visibility was 1,000 feet at the time of the accident, Kathleen could have seen the combine’s headlights. Several physicians, including Dr. Stephen Sabol, an oral and maxillofacial surgeon, Dr. Herman Dick, a neurologist, and Dr. Chris Dangles, an orthopedist, testified about Kathleen’s various injuries and their treatment of her following the accident. Dr. Douglas Bey, Kathleen’s treating psychiatrist, testified that on June 22, 2000, he sent Kathleen a letter setting out what she had told him during their first session. That letter stated, in part, that Kathleen had told Bey that she lost her peripheral vision and had a blind spot in her left eye. Bey further stated that his review of Dick’s reports and deposition indicated that “there was no restriction on [Kathleen’s] driving.” Thurman testified that he left his home sometime before 7 a.m. on October 14, 1996. He intended to drive the combine to James’ field near Cooksville. Thurman turned on the combine’s fights, including two flashing amber fights. When he left his house, visibility was about one mile. When he was about two miles away from the accident site, it became foggy. When he turned onto 1600 North Road, it was still foggy, with visibility more than one-quarter of a mile. Thurman stated that he met two cars on the roadway and pulled off to let them go by without any problems. When Thurman first saw Kathleen’s minivan, he was two or three seconds, or about 50 feet, away from the culvert. He kept his eyes on Kathleen’s headlights, slowed down, and got in the middle of the road to cross the culvert. As he approached the culvert, he slowed down to four or five miles per hour and calculated that he could get across the culvert and out of the way before Kathleen’s vehicle reached the culvert. When he realized the oncoming vehicle was not going to stop in time, he stopped the combine and was trying to shift it into reverse when the collision occurred. Thurman expected the oncoming vehicle to slow down because that was what usually happened when a vehicle approached his combine. He assumed that if he saw approaching vehicles, the drivers of those vehicles also saw the combine. Thurman did not notice the oncoming vehicle slowing down and did not realize until after the accident that Kathleen left skid marks measuring 137 feet. Thurman acknowledged that the bean head stuck out into the oncoming traffic lane and did not have any lights on it. He also acknowledged that when he encountered fog on the morning of the accident, he decided to continue because he “could see fine.” Just prior to the accident, he saw headlights coming over a hill that was one-quarter mile away from the culvert. Although he did not know how fast Kathleen was traveling, he believed that she was “going at a high rate of speed.” Thurman further acknowledged that he was not sure whether the combine was stopped, barely moving forward, or barely moving backward at the moment of impact. He denied having pulled off the roadway earlier that morning because of the foggy conditions. Dr. Daniel Metz, a professional engineer in vehicle dynamics and accident reconstruction, testified for the Blisses that (1) there was not enough physical evidence to conduct “any kind of a serious [accident] reconstruction;” and (2) based on his review of the physical evidence, no one was at fault in this accident. Metz opined that no one could “actually reconstruct the events of that morning [of the accident] in terms of fog density to perfection.” He also opined that it was appropriate for Thurman to have the combine on the roadway at the time of the accident. Metz based that opinion on Thurman’s testimony that visibility was one-quarter mile at the time of the accident. Metz also stated that the flashing amber lights on the cab of the combine made the combine more conspicuous. Metz stated that he did not agree or disagree with Ruhl’s opinion that the combine ambushed Kathleen’s minivan. Metz acknowledged that the configuration of lights on the front of a combine could fool oncoming drivers regarding the width of the vehicle they were approaching. On this evidence, the jury returned a verdict in favor of the Blisses and against the Maffetts. This appeal followed. II. ANALYSIS A. The Maffetts’ Claim That the Trial Court Erred by Refusing To Allow the Testimony of Saunier, Kraft, and Hammond Regarding Their Observations of the Fog and Visibility The Maffetts first argue that the trial court erred by refusing to allow the testimony of Saunier, Kraft, and Hammond regarding their observations of the fog and visibility near the time of the accident, both as they approached the accident scene and at the scene. In response, the Blisses argue that the proffered testimony was cumulative and not relevant. We agree with the Maffetts. 1. The Proffered Testimony The Blisses filed a motion in limine seeking to exclude “any and all testimony regarding visibility immediately before and at the time of the accident, except testimony from the parties *** [and] any testimony regarding the visibility that existed at any time subsequent to the accident.” The trial court reserved its ruling on the motion until the Maffetts proffered their witnesses. At trial, the trial court refused to admit the testimony of Saunier, Hammond, and Kraft regarding their observations of the fog and visibility near the time of the accident, as they approached the accident scene, and at the scene. The court determined that this testimony was not relevant because the proffered witnesses (1) were not present at the scene at the exact time of the accident to observe the fog and visibility, and (2) did not observe the fog and visibility along the specific route Thurman traveled on the morning of the accident. (During Brown’s testimony, the trial court stated that it had reconsidered its ruling and allowed Brown to testify regarding visibility and fog at the accident scene upon Brown’s arrival. The court later allowed Boyd and Kinsella to testify as to their observations of the fog and visibility at the accident site.) Saunier testified in an offer of proof that he was the first emergency worker to arrive on the scene several minutes after the collision. He was in Cooksville, which was four minutes north of the accident site, when he received the emergency call. He testified that visibility en route to the scene was between 100 and 120 feet because the roads south of Cooksville were “shrouded with fog.” When he turned onto 1600 North Road, he found that it also was “fogged in.” His top speed driving to the scene was 45 miles per hour. The poor visibility did not improve and was consistent as he drove to the accident site. Hammond, an emergency medical technician, testified in an offer of proof that as she approached the accident site from the west, the fog “closed in” on her. She arrived on the scene a couple of minutes before she first took Kathleen’s vital signs at 8:10 a.m. Hammond stated that a helicopter out of Peoria would not fly to the accident scene because of the fog and lack of visibility. A helicopter flown in from Champaign had trouble locating the accident site and had to be guided in by voice because of the limited visibility. Hammond could not recall when that helicopter arrived. Kraft testified in an offer of proof that just before 8 a.m. on the morning of the accident, he left his house in Normal and traveled to the accident site. As he got closer to the scene, the fog became “thicker.” As he got nearer to the accident site, there were spots where visibility was 100 feet or less. When he arrived at the scene at 8:11 a.m., visibility was one-eighth of a mile. He also stated that a helicopter had a difficult time landing because of the fog. Kraft, who is a farmer, would not have taken his combine out on the road “probably” because of the poor visibility. 2. Analysis  Generally, each party is entitled to present evidence that is relevant to its theory of the case. Koonce v. Pacilio, 307 Ill. App. 3d 449, 463, 718 N.E.2d 628, 639 (1999). “Evidence is relevant if it tends to either prove a fact in controversy or render a matter in issue more or less probable ***.” Galowich v. Beech Aircraft Corp., 209 Ill. App. 3d 128, 135, 568 N.E.2d 46, 50 (1991). Further, negligence may be established by using either direct or circumstantial evidence. Circumstantial evidence is the proof of facts and circumstances from which a jury may infer other connected facts that usually and reasonably follow, according to their common experience. Barker v. Eagle Food Centers, Inc., 261 Ill. App. 3d 1068, 1072, 634 N.E.2d 1276, 1279 (1994). The admission of evidence lies within the trial court’s discretion, and a reviewing court will not disturb the trial court’s ruling absent an abuse of discretion. Koonce, 307 Ill. App. 3d at 463, 718 N.E.2d at 639.  Weather reports and observations are generally held to be admissible in most jurisdictions. See generally D. Feld, Weather Reports and Records as Evidence, 57 A.L.R.3d 713, § 3 (1974). This rule is followed in Illinois. See Loughnane v. City of Chicago, 188 Ill. App. 3d 1078, 1081, 545 N.E.2d 150, 152 (1989). Weather reports and observations have been held to be admissible where they had a tendency to refute testimony of the weather conditions on a particular date, even though readings or observations were not made at the exact moment of the accident. See Chicago & Northwestern Ry. Co. v. Trayes, 17 Ill. App. 136, 140-41 (1885) (holding that because the weather conditions on the night of accident were “material as bearing upon the question of *** negligence,” weather observations taken at intervals during the day and night, both before and after the accident, should have been admitted). In addition, the distance from the location of the weather observations to the accident scene affects only the weight, not the admissibility, of the weather reports and observations. Loughnane, 188 Ill. App. 3d at 1081, 545 N.E.2d at 152; see Celanese Corp. v. Vandalia Warehouse Corp., 424 F.2d 1176, 1180 n.2 (7th Cir. 1970) (citing cases). Moreover, lay witnesses’ observations of weather conditions, including fog and visibility, have been held to be admissible. See 1 R. Steigmann, Illinois Evidence Manual § 7:03, at 360 (3d ed. .1995) (“Opinions of ordinary witnesses have been received about *** the state of the weather and like facts ***”); D. Feld, Admissibility of Nonexpert Opinion Testimony as to Weather Conditions, 56 A.L.R.3d 575 §§ 2, 3 (1974); see also Williams v. Graber, 485 N.E.2d 1369, 1375 (Ind. App. 1985) (in which the Indiana Appellate Court held that the fact that a police officer described weather and road conditions 25 minutes after the accident went to the weight to be accorded the testimony and not to its admissibility). The issues of visibility and fog were of critical importance and highly disputed in this case. We agree with the Maffetts that the jury could have reasonably inferred from the testimony of Saunier, Hammond, and Kraft (regarding their observations of the visibility and fog near the time of the accident, both as they approached the accident scene and at the scene) that Thurman’s assessment of the fog and visibility before and at the time of the collision was improbable. We recognize that the record shows that Saunier arrived on the scene approximately 15 minutes after the accident, and Hammond and Kraft arrived within about 35 or 40 minutes of the accident. However, the mere fact that the witnesses were not present at the exact moment the accident occurred does not require exclusion of their testimony.  We conclude that this evidence was sufficiently relevant under the facts of this case that it should have been admitted. The weight and value to be given this evidence should have been left to the trier of fact. See Hiscott v. Peters, 324 Ill. App. 3d 114, 125, 754 N.E.2d 839, 849 (2001). Accordingly, we hold that the trial court abused its discretion by refusing to allow the testimony of Saunier, Hammond, and Kraft regarding their observations of the fog and visibility near the time of the accident, as they approached the accident scene, and at the scene. However, we cannot conclude that the trial court abused its discretion by refusing to admit Hammond’s and Kraft’s testimony regarding the difficulty that one of the helicopters had in landing. Neither Hammond nor Kraft testified in the offer of proof as to when that incident occurred. In so holding, we reject the Blisses’ contention that the proffered testimony of Saunier, Hammond, and Kraft regarding the fog and visibility was merely cumulative of the testimony of Brown, Boyd, and Kinsella, which the trial court allowed after reconsidering its ruling. The proffered testimony was sufficiently different in terms of the time and place of their observations, as well as their descriptions of the fog and visibility, as not to be repetitive. Further, a claim that evidence was cumulative is less persuasive in a case like this, in which the plaintiff is unable to remember the events leading up to the accident. See generally Ostendorf v. International Harvester Co., 89 Ill. 2d 273, 284, 433 N.E.2d 253, 258 (1982) (determining whether evidence is cumulative of other evidence involves a determination whether the “new” evidence adds anything to what was already before the jury). Because the issues of visibility and fog were of such critical importance in this case, we conclude that the trial court’s refusal to admit the testimony of Saunier, Hammond, and Kraft regarding their observations of the visibility and fog near the time of the accident, both as they approached the accident scene and at the scene, prejudiced the Maffetts. This prejudice was demonstrated during closing argument, when the Blisses’ attorney commented that there was “no evidence that the [Maffetts] ha[d] presented that [Thurman’s] assessment of the situation was wrong.” The Blisses’ attorney also argued repeatedly that the Maffetts had offered no explanation as to why Kathleen had not seen the combine. We further conclude that the prejudice to the Maffetts was exacerbated by the trial court’s refusal to allow Saunier, Hammond, and Kraft to testify on rebuttal regarding their observations of the visibility and fog near the time of the accident, as they approached the accident scene, and at the scene. Such testimony would have directly contradicted the testimony of Thurman and Metz regarding visibility at the time of the collision. See People ex rel. Mendez v. Villa, 260 Ill. App. 3d 866, 870, 632 N.E.2d 322, 324 (1994) (rebuttal evidence is admissible “if it tends to explain, repel, contradict or disprove the testimony of a witness”). B. The Maffetts’ Claim That the Trial Court Erred by Admitting Evidence Regarding Kathleen’s Prior Vision Problems The Maffetts also argue that the trial court erred by admitting evidence regarding Kathleen’s prior vision problems. We agree.  Initially, we reject the Blisses’ claim that the Maffetts have forfeited this issue on appeal by failing to object to Bey’s testimony regarding Kathleen’s prior vision problems. Although the Maffetts did not object to Bey’s testimony, they objected to Kathleen’s testimony regarding her prior vision problems. In addition, the forfeiture doctrine is an admonition to the litigant, not a limitation on the authority of the reviewing court. Harris v. Cropmate Co., 302 Ill. App. 3d 364, 367, 706 N.E.2d 55, 59 (1999). We thus address the Maffetts’ argument on the merits.  Irrelevant evidence is not admissible. Clemons v. Mechanical Devices Co., 292 Ill. App. 3d 242, 251, 684 N.E.2d 1344, 1350 (1997), aff’d, 184 Ill. 2d 328, 704 N.E.2d 403 (1998); M. Graham, Cleary & Graham’s Handbook of Illinois Evidence § 402.1, at 188 (7th ed. 1999) (hereinafter Handbook of Illinois Evidence). Even relevant evidence may contain drawbacks of sufficient importance to call for its exclusion, including unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, and misleading the jury. Handbook of Illinois Evidence § 403.1, at 189; see Gill v. Foster, 157 Ill. 2d 304, 313, 626 N.E.2d 190, 194 (1993) (“Even relevant evidence may be excluded if its probative value is substantially outweighed by such factors as prejudice, confusion, or potential to mislead the jury”). Thus, if a piece of evidence has slight probative value, any prejudicial effect on the jury may require exclusion. “Moreover, if the evidence is merely confusing and creates uncertainty, that alone may suffice to tip the balance in favor of exclusion when the information sought to be presented contains negligible probative value.” First Midwest Trust Co. v. Rogers, 296 Ill. App. 3d 416, 430, 701 N.E.2d 1107, 1116 (1998); see also Demos v. Ferris-Shell Oil Co., 317 Ill. App. 3d 41, 53, 740 N.E.2d 9, 18 (2000) (“even if the evidence is arguably relevant it may still be excluded if it would confuse the issues or tend to mislead the jury”). Further, as this court stated in First Midwest Trust, 296 Ill. App. 3d at 430, 701 N.E.2d at 1116: “One of the tests that a trial court may use when evaluating relevance is to ask how it would view this evidence if it were the trier of fact. Would the proposed evidence assist the trial court in resolving questions of fact? See Yamnitz v. William J. Diestelhorst Co., 251 Ill. App. 3d 244, 250, 621 N.E.2d 1046, 1050 (1993) (offered evidence is relevant if it renders a matter in issue more or less probable in light of logic and experience). If not, then the evidence should be excluded.”  Judged in accordance with this test, we conclude that the trial court should have excluded the evidence of Kathleen’s prior vision problems. Kathleen testified that (1) she had seen a physician for a “vision problem” in her left eye and that three physicians had noted the problem but could do nothing for it; and (2) in 1993, she had blurry vision in her left eye, which cleared up in three or four months and never returned. Bey testified that in June 2000, Kathleen had reported to him that she had lost peripheral vision and had a blind spot in her left eye. In light of the fact that (1) the evidence of Kathleen’s “vision problem” did not demonstrate what the problem actually was; (2) the evidence of her loss of peripheral vision and a blind spot in her left eye did not demonstrate (a) when she suffered those problems, (b) the exact nature and extent of those problems, or (c) how those problems affected her vision; (3) the evidence of blurry vision in her left eye did not recur after 1993 (three years before the accident); (4) Kathleen was a licensed driver; and (5) the only evidence before the trial court (from Dick’s evidence deposition) demonstrated that Kathleen’s prior vision problems were not severe enough to restrict either her driving or her ability to see the combine on the morning of the accident, we conclude that the evidence of Kathleen’s prior vision problems contained negligible probative value. This evidence would have assisted the jury only marginally — if at all — in resolving the issues in this case. We further conclude that the negligible relevant import of the evidence was substantially outweighed by its prejudicial impact on the jury. We agree with the Maffetts that the evidence of Kathleen’s prior vision problems was likely to confuse and mislead the jury or result in speculation on the jury’s part. Indeed, the trial court itself recognized that the prejudicial effect of this evidence was “pretty significant.” Accordingly, we hold that the trial court erred by admitting evidence regarding Kathleen’s prior vision problems. We find support for our holding in Voykin v. Estate of DeBoer, 192 Ill. 2d 49, 57, 733 N.E.2d 1275, 1279 (2000), in which the supreme court rejected the “same part of the body rule,” describing it as “nothing more than a bright-line relevancy standard” that improperly presumes that a previous injury is automatically relevant to the present injury simply because it affects the same part of the body. The court held that such evidence was admissible only if it was shown to be relevant, a requirement that would usually require expert testimony: “In most cases, the connection between the parts of the body and past and current injuries is a subject that is beyond the ken of the average layperson. Because of this complexity, we do not believe that, in normal circumstances, a lay juror can effectively or accurately assess the relationship between a prior injury and a current injury without expert assistance. Consequently, we conclude that, if a defendant wishes to introduce evidence that the plaintiff has suffered a prior injury, whether to the ‘same part of the body’ or not, the defendant must introduce expert evidence demonstrating why the prior injury is relevant to causation, damages, or some other issue of consequence. This rule applies unless the trial court, in its discretion, determines that the natures of the prior and current injuries are such that a lay person can readily appraise the relationship, if any, between those injuries without expert assistance.” Voykin, 192 Ill. 2d at 59, 733 N.E.2d at 1280. The Voykin court concluded that evidence that the plaintiff had complained of “ ‘neck problems’ ” “ ‘secondary to playing hockey since he was 6’ ” should have been excluded because (1) the evidence did not demonstrate what the plaintiffs “ ‘neck problems’ ” were or when he suffered from them; and (2) nothing about the evidence had “any tendency to make it less likely that defendant caused plaintiffs neck injury or that defendant caused plaintiff to suffer damages.” Voykin, 192 Ill. 2d at 60, 733 N.E.2d at 1281. The court further noted that without expert testimony establishing both the nature of the plaintiffs “ ‘neck problems’ ” and the relationship between those prior problems and the plaintiffs current claim, an average juror could not readily appraise the effect of the prior problems upon the plaintiffs current claim. Voykin, 192 Ill. 2d at 60, 733 N.E.2d at 1281. Similarly, in this case, (1) the evidence of Kathleen’s “vision problem” did not demonstrate what the problem actually was; and (2) the evidence of her loss of peripheral vision and a blind spot in her left eye did not demonstrate (a) when she suffered those problems, (b) the exact nature and extent of those problems, or (c) how those problems affected her vision. Moreover, the only evidence before the trial court demonstrated that Kathleen’s prior vision problems were not severe enough to restrict either her driving or her ability to see the combine on the morning of the accident. Like the issues of fog and visibility, Kathleen’s ability to see the combine on the morning of the accident was a crucial and greatly disputed issue in this case. We thus conclude that the trial court’s erroneous admission of evidence regarding Kathleen’s prior vision problems prejudiced the Maffetts and denied them a fair trial. The following comments of the Blisses’ attorney during closing argument simply heightened that prejudice: “I mentioned earlier that the [Maffetts] haven’t told you anything or given you a reason why [Kathleen] didn’t see the combine. Dr. Bey in his note, his letter to [Kathleen] did. [Kathleen] told Dr. Bey that she had no peripheral vision and he wrote that down twice in his report. He told — she told us on the stand that she has a blind spot in her left eye. Ask yourself ladies and gentlemen, is it reasonable conduct? Is it reasonable for a person with no peripheral vision, with a blind spot in their [sic] left eye, to be traveling down a road at fifty miles an hour during harvest when she acknowledges there are combines and implements on the road? Given those circumstances, ask yourself, has the plaintiff proven a case against [the Blisses] that [Thurman] is at fault for the fact that he is traveling four miles an hour and she is traveling at least fifty miles an hour down a country road with that type of vision problem?” Accordingly, we reverse and remand for a new trial. III. ISSUES ON REMAND Although we have determined that this case must be remanded for a new trial, the Maffetts raise other issues that may arise on remand. We address those issues separately. The Maffetts’ Claim That the Trial Court Erred by Permitting the Blisses To Cross-Examine Bey Using Various Journal Articles  Thé Maffetts also argue that the trial court erred by permitting the Blisses to cross-examine Bey using various journal articles without having timely disclosed those articles during discovery. We disagree. Contrary to the Maffetts’ contention, Supreme Court Rule 213(g) does not require that a party disclose journal articles that the party intends to use in cross-examining the opposing party’s opinion witness. Indeed, none of Rule 213’s disclosure requirements applies to cross-examining an opposing party’s opinion witness. See 177 Ill. 2d R. 213(g). The Maffetts cite no case law holding that a party must disclose articles to be used solely during cross-examination. In this regard, we agree with what the appellate court wrote in Southern Illinois Airport Authority v. Smith, 267 Ill. App. 3d 201, 206, 641 N.E.2d 1240, 1244 (1994): “If the cross-examiner, to use a cliché, must telegraph his punch, cross-examination would lose its effectiveness. If complete disclosure is the optimum, would it not be more in the spirit of full disclosure to require the ‘cross-examiner’ to submit his questions to the opponent’s witnesses prior to trial? By eliminating the spontaneity, we would certainly avoid surprises. We may also be limiting the ability to ascertain the truth.” The case upon which the Maffetts rely, Iser v. Copley Memorial Hospital, 288 Ill. App. 3d 408, 680 N.E.2d 747 (1997), is inapposite. During direct examination of the plaintiff’s expert in that case, the plaintiffs attempted to elicit testimony concerning the authoritative nature of certain journal articles. Iser, 288 Ill. App. 3d at 409-10, 680 N.E.2d at 748. The appellate court held that the plaintiffs expert witness could not give a new opinion that was contrary to his deposition testimony. Iser, 288 Ill. App. 3d at 412, 680 N.E.2d at 750. The Iser court did not address the use of journal articles for purposes of cross-examination. IV CONCLUSION For the reasons stated, we reverse the trial court’s judgment and remand for a new trial consistent with the views expressed herein. Reversed and remanded. KNECHT, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9737590 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:29:24.054292+00 ===

JUSTICE COOK, specially concurring: I disagree with the majority’s statement that “none of Rule 213’s disclosure requirements applies to cross-examining an opposing party’s opinion witness.” 329 Ill. App. 3d at 577. Rule 213, as amended March 28, 2002, effective July 1, 2002, specifically recognizes that freedom to cross-examine is subject to a restriction that in multiple-party cases a cross-examiner may not elicit undisclosed information from the witness of a party with which he is aligned. Official Reports Advance Sheet No. 8 (April 17, 2002), R. 213(g), eff. July 1, 2002. I believe amended Rule 213 clarifies the existing rule and does not change it. Other situations may also present problems. If plaintiff decides on the day of trial not to call a witness he has previously disclosed, and defendant calls the witness instead, is plaintiff freed from compliance with Rule 213 during his cross-examination? If defendant calls a treating physician whom he has previously disclosed, and the court eventually determines that the witness is hostile and may be examined “as if under cross-examination” (188 Ill. 2d R. 238(b)), may the defendant continue his questioning, his “cross-examination,” free of the restrictions imposed by Rule 213? Consider another hypothetical situation closer to the facts of this case: defendant has a theory that he would like to introduce by way of an expert treatise; defendant chooses not to use his own expert to discuss the treatise because he would then have to disclose the treatise under Rule 213; instead, defendant introduces the treatise by cross-examining plaintiffs treating physician. (Amended Rule 213 recognizes that treating physicians may be independent, not strongly aligned with the plaintiff who calls them.) The focus of amended Rule 213 is away from bright-line rules and toward doing substantial justice between the parties, with trials decided on the merits. I suggest that, in the examples given, the trial court has discretion not to allow the testimony. There is a tension in these cases between providing full and fair discovery and exclusion of evidence simply to enforce meaningless technicalities. The solution is not bright-line rules but a trial court which understands the objectives of Rule 213 and is able to apply them to the unique facts before it.

=== CASE 2211213 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:03.627973+00 ===

210 Cal. App. 2d 879 (1962)
CARL L. HOFFMAN, Plaintiff and Appellant,
v.
PEDLEY SCHOOL DISTRICT, Defendant and Respondent.
Civ. No. 6893.
California Court of Appeals. Fourth Dist.
Nov. 21, 1962.
Richman, Garrett & Ansell, Lewis Garrett and Lionel Richman for Plaintiff and Appellant.
Ray T. Sullivan, Jr., County Counsel, James H. Angell, Assistant County Counsel, and John Woodhead, Deputy County Counsel, for Defendant and Respondent.
Memorandum
SHEPARD, J.
This is an appeal from a judgment of dismissal after demurrer sustained.
Facts
This cause comes to us as one of four appeals respecting which the parties have stated by stipulation in writing filed with this court that "the matters of law and fact are similar in all four cases" and that therefore the four cases may be consolidated for purposes of appeal and for briefs.
In this case a demurrer was sustained to plaintiff's first amended complaint and upon plaintiff's statement that he did not desire to amend, judgment of dismissal was entered. This is the same case as that spoken of in Hoffman v. Pedley School District, No. 6872, ante, p. 72 [26 Cal. Rptr. 109], filed this day. The facts are the same except that the amended complaint, herein considered, added in its first paragraph a *880 full description of plaintiff's representative capacity on behalf of the Building Construction Trades Council and various affiliate and member unions and dropped the defendant trustees as parties defendant.
No effort was made to allege that the administrative processes provided by Labor Code section 1773.4 had been complied with and plaintiff concedes that no effort was, in fact, made to take that procedure.
For the reasons set forth in Hoffman v. Pedley School District, No. 6872, ante, p. 72 [26 Cal. Rptr. 109], filed this day, the judgment is affirmed.
Griffin, P. J., and Coughlin, J., concurred.

=== CASE 2211215 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:03.660264+00 ===

162 N.W.2d 243 (1968)
Louis SACHS, Appellant,
v.
Harvey CHIAT and McNulty Construction Company, Defendants and Third-Party Plaintiffs, Respondents,
v.
ROBERT J. McNULTY COMPANY et al., Third-Party Defendants,
v.
TALBERG BROS. LANDSCAPING CO., Third-Party Defendant and Fourth-Party Plaintiff,
v.
MUTUAL SERVICE CASUALTY INSURANCE CO., Fourth-Party Defendant.
No. 40817.
Supreme Court of Minnesota.
October 25, 1968.
*244 Sachs, Latz & Kirshbaum, Minneapolis, for appellant.
Robins, Davis & Lyons, and John Chapman, Minneapolis, for Chiat.
Cragg, Bailly & Herzog, Minneapolis, for Robert J. McNulty Co.
Heard before KNUTSON, C.J., and NELSON, SHERAN, PETERSON, and FRANK T. GALLAGHER, JJ.
OPINION
PETERSON, Justice.
Defendant McNulty Construction Company constructed a home for defendant Harvey Chiat at 3812 Drew Avenue South, Minneapolis, adjacent to the home of plaintiff, Louis Sachs, at 3816 Drew Avenue South. Plaintiff sued these defendants for damages to his property alleged to have resulted from the concussion and vibrations of pile-driving operations employed in constructing the foundation for the Chiat home and from the drainage of surface water onto plaintiff's lot because of the elevated grade established for the Chiat lot; plaintiff additionally applied for an injunction requiring defendants to take measures which would prevent the continuance of such water drainage.[1]
The issues concerning the drainage of surface waters were submitted to the jury, except that the determination of whether an injunction should be granted was reserved to the court. The jury returned a verdict for defendants, and the trial court denied plaintiff an injunction. The issue of liability for damages caused by defendants' pile-driving operation was decided by a directed verdict for defendants. Plaintiff appeals from the order denying his post-trial blended motion for judgment n.o.v. or for a new trial and from the order denying his application for injunction.
1. The principal issue presented is whether one who authorizes or engages in pile driving may be liable to an adjoining landowner for property damage resulting from the concussion or vibrations from *245 such operations even though the pile-driving operations were conducted in the customary and workmanlike manner and without negligence. The question, at least in this specific context, is one of first impression in this state.[2] Although similar questions have been raised in other jurisdictions, the legal principles applied and the results reached have varied. We do not undertake to frame a general rule for application to all situations in which concussion and vibration damage may result from the use of the widely varied mechanical instruments common in our industrialized society.
The homesites of plaintiff and defendant Chiat, like others in their immediate residential area, are situated in a peat bog. Because of these peculiar soil conditions, houses could not be erected on these lots without special foundation support. Plaintiff himself found it necessary to undergird the foundations of both his house and detached garage with driven piles when he constructed them in 1958; and other lot owners in the same block likewise used foundation pilings. It is undoubted, therefore, that it was necessary for defendant Chiat similarly to support the foundation for his house in 1962. The record is silent concerning the availability of an alternative method for supporting a residential structure.
The competing interests of the parties are obvious: Plaintiff, who has built his home in the peat bog, wishes to be protected from damage to his property and wants to be compensated if such damage occurs; defendant Chiat wishes to build his home in the same locale and does not want imposed upon him any greater burden than had confronted his neighbor. The accommodation of these competing social interests involves, at the same time, a regard for the interests of the community in the maximum utilization of limited urban land.
Defendants, it must be acknowledged, were not engaged in blameworthy and wrongful activity, but were making a natural and not unreasonable use of land. The trial court, in directing a verdict for defendants, doubtless based its decision upon that premise, for it reasoned that defendants had employed the necessary and usual means to adapt the Chiat lot to its lawful and appropriate use and that plaintiff, as the first occupant of a lot in this tract, should not be able to control Chiat's use of his adjoining property by imposing a penalty for using it in precisely the same manner as plaintiff had. This rationale is supported by such cases as Booth v. Rome, W. & O.T.R. Co., 140 N.Y. 267, 35 N.E. 592, 24 L.R.A. 105; Trull v. Carolina-Virginia Well Co., 264 N.C. 687, 142 S.E.2d 622; and Ted's Master Service, Inc. v. Farina Brothers Co., Inc., 343 Mass. 307, 178 N.E.2d 268. We are not persuaded, however, that this view achieves the soundest adjustment of these competing social interests. It occurs to us that there may well be no person who would be willing to be first to utilize a tract of urban land if the price of priority were exposure to unrecoverable damage at the hands of whoever chooses to be second. The most that should follow from that premise is that the subsequent property owner should not be liable in damages to the established property owner unless it can be clearly proved that the damages are substantial and result actually and solely from the concussion and vibration of the pile-driving operations.
*246 Pile driving, as the directed verdict in this case assumes, did transmit concussion and vibration to the immediately adjacent land and caused substantial property damage.[3] To the extent that it might be assumed that pile driving would inevitably transmit concussion and vibration to adjacent areas and result in serious harm to adjacent landowners, regardless of the reasonable precaution with which it is conducted, we think it may be classed as an inherently dangerous or ultrahazardous activity. Even though it is not conduct which is so hazardous or lacking in social utility that it should be prohibited, we conclude that it is the kind of activity that should not be permitted without liability for substantial damage to property actually resulting from its performance. As the New Jersey Supreme Court said in Berg v. Reaction Motors Division, 37 N.J. 396, 405, 181 A.2d 487, 492, a case in which property damage was caused to homeowners as a result of the testing of a rocket engine for a supersonic airplane:
"* * * We are here primarily concerned with the underlying considerations of reasonableness, fairness and morality rather than with the formulary labels to be attached to the plaintiffs' causes of action or the legalistic classifications in which they are to be placed. * * *
"* * * It may be assumed, for present purposes, that the defendant's activities were conducted with great care and had great public utility and that a court would hesitate to enjoin them notwithstanding the resulting structural damage to the neighboring property. But the issue before us is not whether there should be an injunction but whether the defendant may reasonably be expected to make monetary payment. On that issue there would appear to be little room for difference of opinion every consideration of fairness and justness dictates that the defendant at least make its neighbors whole for the structural damage it caused."
See, also, Selle v. Kleamenakis (La.App.) 142 So. 2d 50, where the issue was decided on the basis of statutory policy, and Caporale v. C. W. Blakeslee & Sons, Inc., 149 Conn. 79, 175 A.2d 561.
We conclude, therefore, that the court erred in directing a verdict for defendants. We accordingly reverse and remand for a determination of whether substantial damages were actually caused to plaintiff's property and solely as a direct result of defendants' pile-driving operations.
2-3. The issues presented by plaintiff's action for property damage resulting from the drainage of surface water from defendant Chiat's land onto his are governed by the well-settled rule of reasonable use. As this court stated in Collins v. Wickland, 251 Minn. 419, 425, 88 N.W.2d 83, 87:
"* * * Since Sheehan v. Flynn, 59 Minn. 436, 61 N.W. 462, 26 L.R.A. 632, Minnesota has adhered to the reasonable-use rule. Under this rule
"`* * * Each possessor [of land] is legally privileged to make a reasonable use of his land, even though the flow of surface waters is altered thereby and causes some harm to others. He incurs liability only when his harmful interference with the flow of surface water is unreasonable. The issue of reasonableness or unreasonableness is a question of fact to be determined in each case upon *247 a consideration of all the relevant circumstances, including such factors as the amount of harm caused, the foreseeability of the harm on the part of the possessor making the alteration in the flow, the purpose or motive with which he acted, and others.' Kinyon & McClure, Interferences with Surface Waters, 24 Minn.L.Rev. 891, 904.
* * * * * *
"Any determination of whether a possessor has made a reasonable use of his land requires a consideration of the normal use and development of land in the immediate area or locality. * * * Common experience and knowledge have demonstrated that in order to prepare urban property for its customary use and enjoyment, it is frequently necessary to level, raise, lower, or otherwise alter the ground surface."
This settled principle is fully applicable to the situation in this case. The general trend of the lots in the 3800 block of Drew Avenue South, where plaintiff and defendant Chiat reside, is downhill from north to south. The Chiat lot, which is situated to the north of plaintiff's lot, was apparently higher than plaintiff's in its unimproved state; in any event it was not of lower grade. Defendants, by filling and grading, altered the contour and raised the grade level of Chiat's lot from 10 to 12 inches above that of plaintiff's lot. Plaintiff, however, had originally raised the level of his own lot during the construction of his home. Defendant Chiat, moreover, had elevated his lot to that level in the not unfounded expectation that the level would thereafter sink, and both the level of his lot and the walks in that vicinity did in fact subside. The jury could find that defendants had not acted unreasonably in establishing the finished grade of Chiat's lot, considering both the past and present character of the land and the amount of property damage, if any, occurring as a result of the water drainage during the various periods subsequent to construction.[4] The concept of "reasonable use" is a flexible one and presents a question of fact to be resolved according to the peculiar facts in each case. Enderson v. Kelehan, 226 Minn. 163, 168, 32 N.W.2d 286, 289. We cannot hold that the jury's findings are palpably contrary to the evidence, and accordingly affirm.
The trial court concluded, in the exercise of its sound discretion, that plaintiff was not entitled to an injunction directing defendant Chiat to take measures to avoid the flow of water onto plaintiff's lot. Defendant Chiat had, sometime subsequent to the construction of his home, constructed a swale and installed a drainpipe on his side of the common boundary to drain surface water from his land toward Drew Avenue which, as the trial court found, substantially prevented the flow of water onto plaintiff's lot except in periods of abnormal accumulation of moisture. Because we cannot hold that the court abused its discretion in denying the injunction, we affirm.
Reversed in part and affirmed in part. Costs and disbursements will not be allowed to either party.
NOTES
[1]  Each of these defendants made cross-claims against each other and third-party complaints against defendant L. H. Bolduc Company, Inc., which performed the pile-driving operations, and defendant Talberg Bros. Landscaping Company, which performed the grading work (and which in turn made third-party complaint against its own insurer, Mutual Service Casualty Insurance Company). The trial court ordered the original action tried separately, and only those issues are before us on appeal.
[2]  We note without extended discussion the general relevance of the historic principles established in Rylands v. Fletcher, L.R. 1 Ex. 265, affirmed, L.R. 3 H.L. 330, and applied in our own decisions: Cahill v. Eastman, 18 Minn. 324 (Gil. 292); Berger v. Minneapolis Gaslight Co., 60 Minn. 296, 62 N.W. 336; Wiltse v. City of Red Wing, 99 Minn. 255, 109 N.W. 114; Bridgeman-Russell Co. v. City of Duluth, 158 Minn. 509, 197 N.W. 971. The subsequent development of this doctrine has been extensively considered in Prosser, Nuisance Without Fault, 20 Tex.L.Rev. 399, and Prosser, Torts (3 ed.) c. 14. See, also, Restatement, Torts, §§ 519, 520; Keeton, Trespass, Nuisance and Strict Liability, 59 Col.L.Rev. 457; Harper, Torts,§ 203.
[3]  The nature and extent of the damage attributable to the acts of defendants has, of course, not been determined. Plaintiff undertook to prove cracking of the exterior brick and interior plaster and mouldings of his house and cracking of the concrete floor of his garage. Although some of these cracks had appeared prior to the construction of the Chiat house, there is evidence from which a jury might find that either new cracks appeared or old cracks were enlarged. Proof of causation was mainly that their occurrence was coincidental with the construction of the Chiat house.
[4]  Any water that collected was apparently in the vicinity of plaintiff's detached garage at the rear of his lot. Although plaintiff claimed that water from rains and melting snow had on occasion leaked into the basement of his house at the front of the lot, the jury doubtless did not ignore plaintiff's admission that his basement water existed even before the construction of the Chiat house.

=== CASE 9737591 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:29:33.676685+00 ===

SHOEMAKER, J.—
Defendant Charles Mercer appeals from a conviction of murder in the second degree.
Early in the morning of May 9, 1961, defendant Mercer, an ex-Marine employed as a Puller Brush salesman, walked into the sheriff’s office in Salinas, California, and stated that he had killed a man. He told where the body was located and accompanied several officers to the scene. At the site, the officers found an expended bullet in the center of a large *155bloodstain on the nearby roadway. A trail of blood, bent grass and weeds led to a point about 29 feet north of the bloodstain, where lay the body of a man subsequently identified as Frank Barrios, who had been shot once in the heart and once in the head. Laboratory examination developed the deceased had a blood-alcohol level of .240, which is ordinarily indicative of a high state of intoxication. Death was caused by the bullet which passed through his heart.
While still at the scene (the intersection of the Bor onda and Oastroville highways) defendant Mercer gave the sheriff’s officers a statement, which was tape-recorded and subsequently played at the trial. The defendant stated that at 7 or 8 p. m. on the preceding evening, he had stopped at a tavern in Oastroville and there struck up a conversation with two men seated near him at the bar. The defendant stated that one of the men was a sergeant first class and that they began discussing their military experiences. The sergeant subsequently left the bar, and Barrios came over and stated that he had overheard the conversation, and that he had been in the paratroopers.
According to the defendant, the three men continued conversing at the bar until shortly before 12, when the proprietor closed the tavern. At that time, Barrios and the defendant decided to go to a bar in Salinas. Although Barrios said that he had a ear, the defendant suggested that they go in his car because he was concerned about safeguarding certain Fuller Brush merchandise which he kept there. The two men then drove to Salinas in the defendant’s ear and visited several bars. During the course of the evening, the defendant talked about the collections he had made for the Fuller Brush Company in the past two days. Pie stretched the amount a bit in talking and informed Barrios that he had collected an amount equal to all of the merchandise he had sold during the past week. He also told Barrios that he would have to go down to the bank and open a business account in which to deposit his collections.
Thereafter, at approximately 2 a. m., the two men got into the defendant’s car and headed back toward Oastroville. When they reached a point on the highway near the intersection with Boronda Road, Barrios asked the defendant to 'pull over to the side so that he could get out and urinate. When the defendant stopped the car, Barrios got out and informed the defendant that he had a “weapon” and that he *156was going to get the defendant’s money. When the defendant asked Barrios what he wanted him to do, Barrios told him to get out and give him his money. The defendant kept a gun in the glove compartment of his ear because it made him feel safer when he or his wife were out collecting for the Puller Brush Company. When Barrios told him to get out of the car, the defendant began sliding across the seat and reached up and opened the glove compartment. Barrios then jumped a little bit and asked the defendant what he was doing. The defendant replied that he was getting what Barrios was after. He then reached into the glove compartment with both hands and pulled at random. He grasped an envelope containing his automobile instruction manual in his left hand, pulled it out, and told Barrios, “I got it here. Move, so I can get out.” Defendant’s right hand was on the gun. As Barrios half-turned to let him out, the defendant dropped the envelope in his left hand, jacked a shell into the chamber of the gun, pointed it in Barrios’ direction, and pulled the trigger. Barrios fell down on his stomach and then raised up again on his elbows, yelling something indistinguishable. The defendant, upon seeing this movement, believed that Barrios was not disabled and was still able to harm him. He therefore fired again from his position halfway across the seat. He then found his flashlight and got out of the car. He searched Barrios but was unable to find a weapon. In his statement to the sheriff’s officers, the defendant said: “In my mind all this time he had a gun because he said a weapon. That’s what entered my mind. He said a weapon and that scared me. If he’d had a gun, in my mind it would’ve been self defense, if he’d had a gun, I’d have turned around and I’d went in to the police department and brought them out and it would’ve been settled. But he didn’t have a gun and I was seared. I’d shot a man that didn’t have anything.” The defendant then became frightened, dragged Barrios’ body off the road, drove home, and told his wife what he had done. After calling his brother in Martinez, he drove to the Salinas sheriff’s office.
In addition to the May 9 statement summarized above, the defendant gave the sheriff’s officers an additional tape statement on the morning of May 10. At that time, the highway patrol had just discovered Barrios’ wallet alongside the Castroville Road roughly one mile north of the Boronda intersection. Upon being questioned about the wallet, the defendant at first stated that he had found it on the seat of the *157car as he was driving home and that he had thrown it out of the car window. He stated that he did not know how it got on the seat unless it fell out of Barrios’ pocket sometime during the evening. Upon further questioning, however, the defendant admitted that he had removed the wallet from Barrios’ body after discovering that he had no weapon. He stated that he removed nothing from the wallet, but that he threw it from the car window to prevent anyone from connecting him with Barrios.
The defendant’s testimony at the trial was entirely in accord with his out-of-court statements. He consistently maintained that Barrios had said he had a weapon. He stated that he believed Barrios was holding a gun outside the ear door and that he fired out of fear and in order to protect himself.
The evidence produced by the prosecution consisted of the defendant's two tape-recorded statements and the testimony of witnesses who had seen the defendant and Barrios in various Salinas bars on the night of May 8. There was also evidence that defendant’s wife had told a sheriff’s officer that her husband was despondent over sales in his Fuller Brush territory and was thinking of seeking other employment.
At the conclusion of the trial, the jury found the defendant guilty of second degree murder. Judgment was entered accordingly.
Appellant now contends that the evidence is insufficient as a matter of law to support his conviction. Appellant asserts that the prosecution produced no direct evidence as to the manner in which the killing occurred other than his two out-of-court statements. It is his position that the prosecution, having introduced these statements into evidence, was bound by his version of the killing in the absence of circumstantial evidence showing that it could not have occurred in the manner described by him.
Penal Code, section 1105, provides as follows: “Upon a trial for murder, the commission of the homicide by the defendant being proved, the burden of proving circumstances of mitigation, or that justify or excuse it, devolves upon him, unless the proof on the part of the prosecution tends to show that the crime committed only amounts to manslaughter, or that the defendant was justifiable or excusable.” (Emphasis added.)  Appellant contends that, in the instant case, the proof on the part of the prosecution, since consisting largely of his own statements to the sheriff’s officers, tended *158to show that the homicide was justifiable or, at most, manslaughter. Under such circumstances, the prosecution retained the burden of showing that appellant acted with the malice essential for a conviction of second degree murder.' Appellant asserts that the prosecution produced ño such evidence.
In People v. Griego (1955) 136 Cal.App.2d 51, 55-56 [288 P.2d 175], the court stated the ride as follows: “. . . if the prosecution presents as a part of its case a statement of the defendant evidencing justification for the alleged crime, the prosecution is bound by that evidence in the absence of proof to the contrary.”
In People v. Toledo (1948) 85 Cal.App.2d 577 [193 P.2d 953], the defendant hád asserted, both in his testimony at the trial and in an out-of-court statement to the police, that he’ had killed the deceased in self-defense. He admitted that he had struck the deceased twice with a piece of pipe, but maintained that he had done so to ward off a knife attack by the deceased. On appeal from a manslaughter conviction, the defendant contended that the prosecution’s evidence, which included his statement to the police, tended to show that the homicide was justifiable. He therefore urged that there was no necessity, under Penal Code, section 1105, for him to produce any evidence on his own behalf. The appellate court accepted this argument and reversed the manslaughter conviction, stating: “In the instant case, as appellant’s brief asserts, ‘the record is silent of any evidence to bring home to the defendant any violent act committed by him toward the deceased, ’ other than that done in repelling the knife assault of the deceased. ‘Unless,’ as appellant says, ‘we arbitrarily see fit to believe only those words of the defendant’s statement and testimony wherein he acknowledges striking the decedent and disbelieve all the rest of his statement and testimony and further disbelieve the testimony of other witnesses as to the circumstances leading up to the blows being struck by Toledo, it cannot be determined that a criminal homicide was committed. The prosecution having presented as a part of its ease the statement of the defendant which justified the homicide is bound by that evidence in the absence of proof to the contrary. ’ ” (P. 581.)
In People v. Salaz (1924) 66 Cal.App. 173 [225 P. 777], the People’s.evidence included a statement by the defendant that the deceased had attacked him with a club and he had fired five shots in self-defense. In reversing a manslaughter conviction, the court stated: ‘ ‘ The jury could not have found, *159from the evidence for the people, that the killing was done by appellant except upon the latter’s admissions, which carried, in close and immediate connection with proof of the killing, circumstances of necessary self-defense. Since, therefore, the proof on the part of the prosecution tends to show that the act of appellant was justifiable, there was, at the close of the people’s case, no presumption against the accused that he had committed an unlawful homicide. No presumption of guilt weighed against the presumption of innocence.” (P. 181.)
Again, in the recent case of People v. Collins (1961) 189 Cal. App.2d 575 [11 Cal.Rptr. 504], the court reversed a manslaughter conviction based on evidence very similar to that in the instant case. In reversing the conviction for manslaughter, the court held that the defendant’s out-of-court statement, which was presented as part of the prosecution’s case, showed only that the defendant had acted in self-defense. The court pointed out that justification does not depend on the existence of actual danger but on appearances. (See People v. Miles (1880) 55 Cal. 207, 209-210.)  “Where from
the nature of the attack a person, as a reasonable man, is justified in believing that his assailant intends to commit a felony upon him, he has a right in defense of his person to use all force necessary to repel the assault. ...” (P.588.)
■ The court went on to state that the prosecution had introduced no evidence that the killing had occurred in any other manner than that described in the defendant’s statement. There was no evidence of any motive other than self-defense and no evidence that the defendant had ever been the instigator of any difficulty with the deceased.  The court stated: “The prosecution, having presented as a part of its ease the statement of defendant as to how the killing occurred, is bound by that evidence in the absence of proof to the contrary. (People v. Coppla, 100 Cal.App.2d 766, 769 [224 P.2d 828].)  If there be any well-established circumstance
which may be reasonably regarded as incompatible with the theory that the killing was justifiable, the trier of fact, from a consideration of all the evidence, is warranted in finding that the act amounted to an unlawful homicide. (People v. Acosta, 45 Cal.2d 538, 541 [290 P.2d 1].) We find nothing in defendant’s statement or in the other evidence which may be reasonably regarded as incompatible with the theory that the killing was justifiable. [P. 591.]
*160“Under the evidence, the acts of Whiteside gave defendant reasonable grounds to believe that Whiteside was about to commit a felony (Pen. Code, § 286), and that there was imminent danger of its being accomplished. We hold the evidence establishes as a matter of law that the homicide was justifiable. [Pp. 592-593.] ”
In the present ease, appellant’s version of the homicide was not inherently improbable. Indeed, we cannot perceive any motive for the killing other than self-defense. Appellant’s statement that he had never met the deceased until the evening of May 8 was not contradicted; that he and the deceased had visited several bars in Salinas was corroborated by the People’s own witnesses; and there was no evidence or intimation of any quarrel or altercation between appellant and the deceased.
Although it is arguable that some evidence of motive was provided by the testimony indicating that appellant was despondent over his job and was contemplating a change of employment, it must be noted that the defendant in the Collins case, supra, was unemployed and without sufficient funds to buy food. Yet the court there stated that there was no evidence of any motive other than self-defense.
On argument, respondent admits that the only ground that exists for a first degree murder conviction is to be found in the contention that the homicide resulted while appellant was committing the felony of robbery and that the evidence in support thereof is very weak; and, that there is no evidence that would support a finding of express malice on appellant’s part.
Respondent also agrees that the court completely and correctly instructed the jury as to first degree murder, second degree murder, and manslaughter. These instructions included the statutory definition of malice aforethought, and spelled out for the jury that murder which is perpetrated by any kind of wilful, deliberate and premeditated killing was murder of the first degree; that the killing must be accompanied and must be preceded by a clear, deliberate intent to take life, an intent to kill which must be the result of deliberation and premeditation; that if the unlawful killing is done with malice aforethought and is committed in the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate robbery, it is also murder of the first degree ; that if the unlawful killing is done with malice aforethought but without deliberation and premeditation and is not committed in the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate robbery, then the offense is murder in the second degree.
*161After being so instructed, the jury returned its verdict, finding appellant guilty of second degree murder, thus impliedly finding that the killing did not take place during the perpetration of a robbery by the appellant of the decedent. The result of this implied finding was to acquit the appellant of the charge of first degree murder, thus precluding any subsequent trial of appellant on such charge. (Gomez v. Superior Court (1958) 50 Cal.2d 640 [328 P.2d 976], and eases therein cited.)
Respondent, in urging that the judgment be affirmed, contends that appellant’s alleged fears did not justify his course of action, and that appellant is guilty of using excess and unreasonable force in defending his person and property. Such argument fails to find any support in the record.
Although it is true that appellant fired two shots at the deceased, the rule is well established that one who, without fault, is placed under circumstances sufficient to excite the fears of a reasonable man that another designs to commit a felony or some great bodily injury and to afford grounds for a reasonable belief of imminent danger, may act upon those fears alone and may slay his assailant and be justified by appearances. (People v. Hecker (1895) 109 Cal. 451, 462-463 [42 P. 307, 30 L.R.A. 403]; People v. Dawson (1948) 88 Cal. App.2d 85, 96 [199 P.2d 338]; People v. Ranson (1953) 119 Cal.App.2d 380, 387-388 [259 P.2d 910].)  “Where the peril is swift and imminent and the necessity for action immediate, the law does not weigh in too nice scales the conduct of the assailed and say he shall not be justified in killing because he might have resorted to other means to secure his safety. ’ ’ (People v. Collins, supra, at p. 589; People v. Hecker, supra, at p. 467.) Furthermore, it must be remembered that the defendant in the Toledo case, supra, struck the deceased twice. In the Salaz case, supra, the defendant fired five shots at the deceased. In the Collins case, the deceased was struck repeatedly by the defendant. Yet all three decisions resulted in the reversal of a manslaughter conviction.  In the instant ease, appellant was convicted of second degree murder, a crime requiring malice aforethought. (Pen. Code, §§ 187, 189; People v. McAuliffe (1957) 154 Cal.App.2d 332, 338 [316 P.2d 381]; People v. Todd (1957) 154 Cal.App.2d 601, 608 [317 P.2d 40] ; People v. Wallace (1934) 2 Cal.App.2d 238, 240 [37 P.2d 1053].) Appellant’s statement, which was presented as part of the case for the prosecution, showed that he killed the deceased in order to prevent the commission of a felony *162(Pen. Code, § 211) and in order to avoid serious bodily injury. We are satisfied that the prosecution produced no evidence which can reasonably be viewed as incompatible with appellant’s version of the killing.
The argument that appellant showed a “consciousness of guilt” by moving the body and disposing of the deceased’s wallet is tenuous. In People v. Toledo, supra, the defendant had buried the body and fled to King City. When apprehended by the police more than two months later, he at first denied knowing the deceased and stated that he had been out of town when the homicide occurred. The court stated: “While doubtless, circumstances of flight, etc., may, in a proper case, furnish some evidence of guilt, particularly where the defendant’s identity is in question, in the instant case and as bearing on the issue of self-defense, such facts cannot be deemed indicative of guilt.” (P. 582.) Appellant’s statement and testimony constituted the only direct evidence of how the killing occurred. It is our opinion that the circumstantial evidence produced by the prosecution cannot be deemed inconsistent with his version of the homicide. In People v. Hatchett (1944) 63 Cal.App.2d 144, 155 [146 P.2d 469], the court held that the defendant has a right to have the jury instructed that “where circumstantial evidence is relied upon by the People it must be irreconcilable with the theory of innocence in order to furnish a sound basis for conviction. ’ ’ (Emphasis added.)
In view of the above, it becomes unnecessary to discuss appellant’s other assignments of error, and the judgment of conviction must be and is reversed, with directions to the trial court to discharge appellant.
Agee, J., concurred.

=== CASE 2211622 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:09.420145+00 ===

183 Cal. App. 2d 519 (1960)
VIRGINIA H. HENLEY, Appellant,
v.
JAMES R. HENLEY, Respondent.
Civ. No. 19094.
California Court of Appeals. First Dist., Div. Two.
Aug. 4, 1960.
Volney J. Tidball for Appellant.
No appearance for Respondent.
STONE, J. pro tem.  [fn. *]
Plaintiff filed an action for divorce upon the ground of defendant's extreme cruelty. The complaint alleged that the parties owned no community property and that plaintiff had "not sufficient money or means of her own with which to maintain and support herself ...; that *521 defendant is well able to maintain and support plaintiff, and is well able to pay plaintiff the sum of $50.00 per month for her support and maintenance." The defendant in propria persona answered by general denial and stipulated that findings of fact and conclusions of law, as well as notice of time and place of trial, were waived. The defendant did not appear at the trial and the hearing was in effect a default proceeding. At the trial plaintiff introduced a letter addressed to defendant, c/o Arnold J. Isbell, DD 869, c/o Fleet Post Office, San Francisco, California. This letter was in the nature of a proposed property settlement agreement in which the plaintiff and defendant agreed to each assume certain of the community debts, there being no community property to divide. The letter provides in part, "She is willing to assume all the rest of the obligations, provided that you continue the allotment until the divorce is final, when she would expect to begin receiving the $50.00 per month."
"... Instead of preparing a lengthy property settlement agreement, I have had a duplicate of this letter enclosed. There is no property that is community property since it was owned by each of you prior to your marriage. If you are in agreement with the provisions of this letter, please sign the original on the bottom, keeping the copy for yourself and returning the original to me with the other papers in the enclosed envelope."
The defendant signed the letter and it was introduced as an exhibit on behalf of the plaintiff. The court then asked the plaintiff whether she had been married before and she replied that she had. The court asked her whether she was receiving support from her former husband and the plaintiff replied she was receiving $50 a month child support, and the court advised her that she could have the amount increased. No other or additional evidence was introduced concerning the plaintiff's circumstances. The court ordered the matter submitted and nine days later entered an interlocutory decree of divorce. In the form of decree which had been prepared and presented by counsel for plaintiff, the court struck out the provision for the allotment payment until the divorce became final and inserted in lieu thereof $1.00, and struck out the provision for payment of $50 per month support subsequent to the entry of final decree and inserted in lieu thereof $1.00. The plaintiff has appealed from the provisions of the interlocutory decree fixing the amount of alimony and support payments.
[1] Property settlement agreements are favored in the *522 law (Hill v. Hill, 23 Cal. 2d 82, 89 [142 P.2d 417]) and in the absence of a showing of fraud, undue influence or violation of the confidential relationship of the parties, they are binding upon the court. (Adams v. Adams, 29 Cal. 2d 621, 624 [177 P.2d 265] and cases cited therein.) [2] However, if the provisions of the property settlement agreement for support and maintenance are separable from the provisions dividing the property and are unrelated thereto, the court has the power to modify the alimony provisions. (Civ. Code,  139; Hough v. Hough, 26 Cal. 2d 605, 612 [160 P.2d 15]; Adams v. Adams, supra.)
[3] An order modifying an agreement for alimony is entered pursuant to the same procedure as is the granting or denying of alimony in the absence of an agreement, and the amount awarded is within the discretion of the trial judge. (Hall v. Superior Court, 45 Cal. 2d 377, 385 [289 P.2d 431]; Kopasz v. Kopasz, 107 Cal. App. 2d 308, 311 [237 P.2d 284]; Kalmus v. Kalmus, 103 Cal. App. 2d 405, 422 [230 P.2d 57].) [4] An appellate court will not interfere with the alimony provisions as fixed by the trial judge unless it appears on the face of the record that the discretion has been abused. (Baldwin v. Baldwin, 28 Cal. 2d 406, 413 [170 P.2d 670].)
[5] The court's authority to award alimony and support payments is statutory and is contained in Civil Code, section 139, which insofar as is here pertinent, provides "to make such suitable allowance for support and maintenance of the other party for his or her life, or for such shorter period as the court may deem just, having regard for the circumstances of the respective parties. ..." (Hall v. Superior Court, supra, p. 384; Bowman v. Bowman, 29 Cal. 2d 808, 811 [178 P.2d 751, 170 A.L.R. 246].) [6] Plaintiff introduced the property settlement agreement in evidence and asked the court to approve it. She introduced no other evidence in support of her request for alimony. The court questioned her about her former marriage and child support in the sum of $50 which she was receiving from the father of her child by a former marriage, but asked no questions concerning her present circumstances or needs, nor about the defendant's circumstances or ability to pay as provided for in Civil Code, section 139. The court simply took the matter under submission and later struck from the proposed interlocutory decree the provisions for support, inserting in lieu thereof $1.00 per month. This constituted an abuse of discretion as there was no evidence before the court upon which its alimony decree was predicated. *523 Under the conditions prevailing, plaintiff's failure to introduce evidence of the circumstances of the parties could not be held prejudicial nor a waiver of her right to support. In good faith she offered an agreement between her and the defendant which was reasonable on its face and no contrary evidence was elicited. Had the court rejected the agreement when offered, or even at the conclusion of plaintiff's case, she would have been put on notice to present additional evidence in support of her request for alimony. As it was, she had the right to rely upon the agreement which had been received in evidence. The defendant was satisfied with the agreement to pay the standard military service allotment until the entry of the final decree, and then $50 per month. That he is still satisfied is apparent from his failure to oppose plaintiff's contention on this appeal.
That portion of the decree fixing alimony is reversed.
Kaufman, P. J., and Draper, J., concurred.
NOTES
[fn. *]  *. Assigned by Chairman of Judicial Council.

=== CASE 9737676 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:32:02.862971+00 ===

ANN WALSH BRADLEY, J.
¶ 1. Petitioners, retired employees of the City of Glendale, seek review of a published decision of the court of appeals that affirmed the circuit court order of summary judgment in favor of the City.1 The retirees contend that the court of appeals erred in determining that they did not have a vested right to fully-paid health insurance benefits under a series of limited-term collective bargaining agreements. We conclude that a vesting presumption applies to these agreements in the absence of contrac*176tual language or extrinsic evidence indicating otherwise. Because the record here is undeveloped, we reverse and remand to the circuit court to determine whether health benefits vested under the retirees' collective bargaining agreements.
¶ 2. Petitioners are 26 former employees of the City of Glendale who retired at different times between 1972 and 1996. All but four of the retirees had been members of a collective bargaining unit represented by Local 1261, affiliated with District Council 48, AFSCME, AFL-CIO. The parties agree that the four retirees who did not belong to the union received the same benefits and were treated no differently than the retirees who had been union members.
¶ 3. The terms of the employment relationship were embodied in a series of collective bargaining agreements. As customary in this context, each agreement had a specified term of one to three years, expired, and then was re-negotiated by the parties.
¶ 4. Between 1972 and 1996, there were 12 successive collective bargaining agreements. Initially, the agreements provided health insurance benefits at no cost to City employees and retirees. From 1972 until 1995, the agreements stated the following regarding retiree health insurance benefits:
Any employee who retires from the City, shall be eligible for Blue Cross-Blue Shield Medicare Extended — 365 days, when such retiree attains age sixty-five (65), with the City paying the entire premium for single or family coverage where applicable.2
*177¶ 5. Over the years, the City and the Union negotiated a number of changes to the health insurance provisions of the collective bargaining agreements. Beginning in 1977 the agreements included a provision that stated that the health insurance provisions could be changed by mutual consent of the parties. The 1979-80 agreement added a clause stating that "[t]he employee contribution remains a negotiable item upon the expiration of this two-year agreement."
¶ 6. In the 1981-82 agreement, the parties eliminated the need for mutual consent to change insurance providers. According to this new provision, the City could unilaterally change the insurance provider as long as the change did not increase the cost to the individual group member and the coverages and benefits of the new program were equal to or greater than the coverages and benefits provided by Blue Cross-Blue Shield.
¶ 7. The 1989-91 agreement modified the length of service requirement regarding retirees' eligibility for health insurance benefits. Under previous agreements, retirees qualified for health insurance benefits after ten years of service to the City. Under the new terms, employees needed 15 years of service to qualify for retirement health insurance benefits. It is undisputed that all the retirees in this case had at least 15 years of creditable service to the City.
¶ 8. Another change in retiree health benefits was instituted in the 1992-94 collective bargaining agreement. Although under the earlier agreements the City paid the entire cost of the retirees’ health insur-*178anee premiums, the new agreement required certain retirees to pay a portion of the premium themselves:
Upon retirement, the City agrees to pay up to 105% of the lowest cost health insurance plan available in the City's service area (Milwaukee County) under the State Health Plan for family or single coverage, whichever is applicable until the employee reaches age 65. The retired employee shall pay the difference, if any, between the actual cost of the insurance coverage and the amount paid by the City.
The 1992-94 agreement, however, maintained the fully-paid health insurance premiums for retirees 65 years and older. Finally, in the 1995-97 agreement, the City and the Union negotiated a requirement that all retirees (not just those who retire before age 65) pay a portion of their health insurance premiums:
Upon retirement, the City agrees to pay up to 105% of the lowest cost health insurance plan available in the City's service area (Milwaukee County) under the State Health Plan for family or single coverage, whichever is applicable. The retired employee shall pay the difference, if any, between the actual cost of the insurance coverage and the amount paid by the City.
The retirees were notified of the new terms by letter.
¶ 9. The retirees sued the City for breach of contract. They claimed a vested right to fully-paid health insurance benefits pursuant to the terms of the collective bargaining agreements in force at the time of their respective retirements. They sought an order that the City pay their entire health insurance premiums as provided by the earlier collective bargaining agreements. Additionally, the retirees sought damages for *179the contributions they paid toward their premiums in the interim.
¶ 10. Subsequently, the retirees moved for summary judgment. The circuit court denied their motion and instead awarded summary judgment to the City.3 The court distinguished Schlosser v. Allis-Chalmers Corp., 86 Wis. 2d 226, 271 N.W.2d 879 (1978), the lynchpin of the retirees' argument. Schlosser held that retirement benefits — in that case, company-paid life insurance premiums — vest as to those employees who retire while the agreement providing the benefits is in effect, even when the agreement reserves to the employer the right to modify or terminate the benefits. The circuit court noted a key factual difference that it believed made Schlosser inapplicable to the Glendale retirees' claims: the benefits in Schlosser were conferred in connection with an open-ended employment agreement that never expired and was never modified. The Glendale agreements, by contrast, were of limited duration, expired, and were then renegotiated with different terms.
¶ 11. The circuit court instead applied Senn v. United Dominion Industries, 951 F.2d 806, 814-16 (7th Cir. 1992), because, as in this case, Senn addressed the question of whether retirement health benefits contained in a series of limited-term collective bargaining agreements vested upon retirement. The court found that, similar to the agreements in Senn, the Glendale collective bargaining agreements were silent about the vesting of retirement health benefits. The circuit court *180also concluded that other provisions in some of the agreements, including the language permitting the parties to change the insurance carrier by mutual consent and the section stating that the employee's contribution remained a negotiable item upon expiration of the agreement, demonstrated unambiguously that the parties did not intend the benefits to vest.
¶ 12. The court of appeals affirmed, agreeing with the circuit court that because the case involved a limited-term collective bargaining agreement, Schlosser was distinguishable and Senn should be applied. Roth v. City of Glendale, 224 Wis. 2d 800, 807-09, 593 N.W.2d 62 (Ct. App. 1999). Since the agreements did not specifically mention vesting or explicitly state that the benefits were granted for life, the court of appeals held that the retirees had no vested right to fully-paid health insurance. Id. The dissent rejected Senn s precedential value4 and concluded instead that Schlosser was the proper precedent for this case. Id. at 811 n.1 (Fine, J., dissenting). The retirees sought review.
¶ 13. On a review of a grant of summary judgment we apply the same standard as does the circuit court. Green Spring Farms v. Kersten, 136 Wis. 2d 304, 315, 401 N.W.2d 816 (1987). Summary judgment is appropriate if the record reveals no genuine issue of material fact and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Id.; Wis. Stat. §802.08(2) (1995-96).
*181¶ 14. Although this case was not before the circuit court on cross-motions for summary judgment, neither the retirees nor the City raise any factual dispute. In addition, both parties argue that the contracts are unambiguous, and each claims entitlement to judgment as a matter of law.
¶ 15. This dispute centers on the proper interpretation of the collective bargaining agreements and whether they vest a legal right of the retirees to fully-paid lifetime health benefits.5 Interpretation of a collective bargaining agreement, as with other contracts, presents a question of law that we review independently of the determinations rendered by the circuit court and the court of appeals. See Wisconsin Label Corp. v. Northbrook Property & Cas. Ins. Co., 2000 WI 26, ¶ 22, 233 Wis. 2d 314, 327, 607 N.W.2d 276. In interpreting a contract, the objective is to ascertain the intent of the contracting parties. Maas by Grant v. Ziegler, 172 Wis. 2d 70, 79, 492 N.W.2d 621 (1992).
¶ 16. The retirees assert that the collective bargaining agreements unambiguously express the intent to vest fully-paid lifetime health benefits. A finding to the contrary unfairly dismisses the employees' compliance with their "end of the bargain," at least 15 years of service to the City of Glendale. According to the retirees, a determination that their benefits vested upon retirement enforces their legitimate expectations as *182employees and most accurately reflects the bargaining process for retirement benefits. Criticizing both the circuit court and the majority of the court of appeals for relying on the Seventh Circuit's decision in Senn, the retirees maintain that this court's decision in Schlosser controls the outcome of this case.
¶ 17. In Senn, a class of retirees sued their employer after the employer terminated life and health insurance benefits arising under a series of limited-term collective bargaining agreements in effect when the employees retired. The district court found the contracts ambiguous and admitted extrinsic evidence, eventually upholding the jury verdict that the parties intended the vesting of lifetime benefits. Reversing the district court, the Seventh Circuit concluded that the agreements were unambiguous and thus a resort to extrinsic evidence was unwarranted. Senn, 951 F.2d at 807, 816.
¶ 18. The court adopted a "default rule" that "entitlements established by collective bargaining agreements do not survive their expiration or modification." Id. at 816 (quoting Merk v. Jewel Cos., 848 F.2d 761, 763 (7th Cir. 1988)). Applying this rule, it determined that the silence of the contracts as to the vesting of benefits did not render the agreements ambiguous, but rather demonstrated that the parties did not intend these benefits to survive the term of the agreements. Id. Thus, Senn required explicit language or other affirmative indication in the contract to rebut the default rule that benefits generally do not continue beyond the life of the agreement.
¶ 19. In this case, neither the circuit court nor the court of appeals noted that the Seventh Circuit revisited Senn the following year in Bidlack v. Wheelabrator Corp., 993 F.2d 603 (7th Cir. 1993) (en banc). *183Bidlack presented similar facts to this case and also involved the issue of whether retirement benefits vested under the retirees' collective bargaining agreements.
¶ 20. These collective bargaining agreements provided fully-paid health benefits for employees after they attained 65 years of age. Id. at 605. In addition, the agreements stated that the benefits would continue for spouses after the retirees' death. Id. Because the agreements lacked explicit language vesting benefits, the circuit court granted summary judgment to the employer.
¶ 21. The Seventh Circuit reversed and remanded. The Bidlack majority maintained adherence to the general presumption, or default rule, set forth in Senn that employee welfare benefits established by collective bargaining agreements lapse with the expiration of those agreements. Id. at 607. However, the majority recognized that the presumption was rebuttable and discussed how the presumption could be overcome. Id.
¶ 22. Employing a general contract analysis, the court noted that the words of the contract form the initial focus of the vesting analysis. Only if the language is ambiguous may extrinsic evidence be considered. In the absence of contract language or extrinsic evidence indicating an intent to vest benefits, thereby rebutting the presumption, the majority concluded that the no-vest presumption governs.
¶ 23. Thus, the Bidlack majority rejected as formalistic the rigid Senn approach to contractual language because that approach required explicit vesting language to be set forth in the contract. Id. at 607. Likewise, it rejected the other extreme approach that *184parties may freely consult extrinsic evidence to demonstrate the intent to vest benefits. Id.
¶ 24. The Bidlack concurrence agreed with the majority that the first step in any vesting analysis centers on the language of the collective bargaining agreement. See id. at 611 (Cudahy, J., concurring). If the language is ambiguous, then consideration of extrinsic evidence is permitted. Id. However, the concurrence advocated a presumption in favor of vesting.
¶ 25. The vesting presumption articulated by the concurrence differs from the majority's approach to the language of the agreement and to the extrinsic evidence. It presumes that benefits will vest unless the language of the agreement suggests otherwise. Id. When the agreement is ambiguous, extrinsic evidence may be consulted to rebut the presumption and to demonstrate that the parties did not intend the benefits to vest. Id.
¶ 26. We adopt the vesting presumption, alternatively characterized as a default rule, advocated by the Bidlack concurrence. This presumption comports with "a more far-reaching understanding of the context in which retiree benefits arise" and serves to fulfill the legitimate expectations of employees who have bargained for these benefits. Keffer v. H.K. Porter Co., Inc., 872 F.2d 60, 64 (4th Cir. 1989).
¶ 27. Employment benefits represent a critical bargaining tool for employers in attracting and maintaining personnel. The employer's promise of such benefits is an inducement to provide services for that particular employer to the exclusion of other employment opportunities. See Lovett v. Mt. Senario College, Inc., 154 Wis. 2d 831, 837, 454 N.W.2d 356 (Ct. App. 1990) ("[T]he inducement of a retirement program pro*185vides a reciprocal benefit to employer in terms of employee retention.").
¶ 28. Bargained for benefits are not gratuities handed to the employee, but rather deferred compensation for past services rendered. If employees trade off present wages for benefits upon retirement, they expect assurance that these benefits will continue into the future. International Union, United Auto., Aerospace & Agric. Implement Workers v. Yard-Man, Inc., 716 F.2d 1476, 1482 (6th Cir. 1983). They do not expect their earned benefits to be whittled away, subject to the contingencies of future negotiations. Id. Indeed, a no-vest presumption carries the danger of transforming services into a gratuity for the employer.
¶ 29. Retirement benefits are essentially "status" benefits that carry with them an inference that they continue as long as the prerequisite status is maintained and the beneficiary remains a retiree. Maurer v. Joy Technologies, Inc., 212 F.3d 907 (6th Cir. 2000) (quotations omitted). The right to receive health and welfare benefits arises from the retiree's status as a past employee and is not dependent on a continued or current relationship with the employer. Local Union No. 150-A v. Dubuque Packing Co., 756 F.2d 66, 70 (8th Cir. 1985).
¶ 30. In Schlosser v. Allis-Chalmers Corp., this court recognized the inequity underlying any subsequent chipping away of retirement benefits:
Clearly, under our present economic system, an employer cannot offer a retirement system as an inducement to employment and, after an employee has accepted employment under such circumstances, withdraw or terminate the program after an employee has complied with all the conditions entitling him to retirement rights thereunder.
*18686 Wis. 2d 226, 247, 271 N.W.2d 879 (1978) (quoting Cantor v. Berkshire Life Ins. Co., 171 N.E.2d 518, 522 (1960)).
¶ 31. Although Schlosser presents slightly varied facts, we disagree with the circuit court and the court of appeals that the case provides no guidance in our analysis. The type of contracts at issue in both cases may differ in form but the employers' actions had the same legal effect of denying the employees retirement benefits. Schlosser was not decided on the singularity of the facts but rather on general equitable principles underlying the employer-employee bargaining process.
¶ 32. Thus, the principles espoused by the Schlosser court do not ring hollow in this particular context of retiree health benefits. Allowing employers to modify past contractual obligations, when there is no indication that benefits are for a fixed term only, renders the promise of retirement benefits illusory and defies these equitable principles.
¶ 33. An economic consideration that cannot be swept under the rug is that many retirees live solely on their retirement benefits. Retirees with fixed incomes are generally ill-prepared to meet additional financial obligations that were unanticipated and that may be incrementally modified without notice.
¶ 34. A presumption in favor of vesting that may be rebutted only by contrary indication in the language of the agreement or extrinsic evidence safeguards retirees from potential economic devastation. Other jurisdictions have recognized this inference of vesting. See, e.g., International Union, United Auto., Aerospace, and Agric. Implement Workers of Am. v. BVR Liquidating, Inc., 190 F.3d 768, 772 (6th Cir. 1999); Jansen v. Greyhound Corp., 692 F. Supp. 1029, 1034 (N.D. Iowa 1987); Schultz v. Teledyne, Inc., 657 F. Supp. 289, *187292-93 (W.D.Pa. 1987); United Steelworkers of Am. v. Newman-Crosby Steel, Inc., 822 F. Supp. 862, 866 (D.R.I. 1993). Any other presumption fails to afford commensurate protection to retirees and does not recognize the import of the bargaining process for retirement benefits.
¶ 35. Indeed, retirees are presumably aware that the union is not obligated to represent their interests for the purposes of bargaining for continued benefits. See Allied Chem. & Alkali Workers of Am. v. Pittsburgh Plate Glass Co., 404 U.S. 157, 181 n.20 (1971); Dubuque Packing Co., 756 F.2d at 70; Bence v. City of Milwaukee, 107 Wis. 2d 469, 490, 320 N.W.2d 199 (1982). This bargaining may create conflicts of interests between the retirees and the current union employees. As recognized by the United States Supreme Court in Allied Chemical, 404 U.S. at 173:
Pensioners' interests extend only to retirement benefits, to the exclusion of wage rates, hours, working conditions, and all other terms of active employment. Incorporation of such a limited-purpose constituency in the bargaining unit would create the potential for severe internal conflicts that would impair the unit's ability to function and would disrupt the processes of collective bargaining. Moreover, the risk cannot be overlooked that union representatives on occasion might see fit to bargain for improved wages or other conditions favoring active employees at the expense of retirees' benefits.
¶ 36. A presumption in favor of vesting retirement benefits absent contrary indication serves to protect the voiceless in the subsequent negotiating process. Otherwise, unions that are negotiating on behalf of current employees may unilaterally bargain away contractual promises made to retirees, thereby frus*188trating the expectations of employees who have earned retirement benefits by providing past services.
¶ 37. We reject the court of appeals' adoption of an implied consent theory that allows unions to bargain away retirement benefits without an affirmative consent to representation by the retirees. The court offered no authority for this leap away from precedent to promote a theory that all of the parties — the retirees, the union, and the City — disavowed at oral argument.
¶ 38. The notion of implied consent is also inconsistent with precedent recognizing the conflict in simultaneously representing retirees and current employees for collective bargaining purposes. Allied Chemical, 404 U.S. at 173. Finally, this theory is at odds with the legal effect of vesting. If the retirement benefits vest under the collective bargaining agreements, they cannot be whittled away by future negotiations.
¶ 39. Because the court of appeals erroneously relied on Senn's rigid no-vest presumption, we reverse its decision. However, the record before this court is sparse and undeveloped. It does not contain the complete collective bargaining agreements and thereby precludes us from applying a vesting presumption to the language of the contracts and to related provisions. Therefore, we remand the cause to the circuit court for a determination of whether the collective bargaining agreements vested health benefits for the retirees.
¶ 40. In sum, we determine that a vesting presumption applies under the collective bargaining agreements in the absence of contract language or extrinsic evidence indicating an intent against the vesting of retiree health benefits. A vesting presumption comports with the realities of the bargaining *189process for retirement benefits and the equitable principles underlying that process. Because the record before us is incomplete and precludes an application of the vesting presumption, we reverse and remand the cause to the circuit court.
By the Court. — The decision of the court of appeals is reversed and the cause is remanded to the circuit court.
Roth v. City of Glendale, 224 Wis. 2d 800, 807-809, 593 N.W.2d 62 (Ct. App. 1999) (affirming order of summary judgment of the circuit court for Milwaukee County, Jacqueline D. Schellinger, J.).
In the 1973-74 agreement, the wording of this clause was slightly different, although its substance was the same:
*177Any employee who retires at age sixty-five (65) shall be covered under Blue Cross-Blue Shield Medicare Extended — 365 days, with the City paying the entire premium for single or family coverage where applicable.
Wisconsin Stat. § 802.08(6) (1995-96) states: "If it shall appear to the court that the party against whom a motion for summary judgment is asserted is entitled to summary judgment, the summary judgment may be awarded to such party even though the party has not moved therefor."
The majority of the court of appeals recognized it was not bound by federal case law on this issue but found Senn v. United Dominion Industries, 951 F.2d 806 (7th Cir. 1992), to be persuasive and adopted its reasoning. Roth v. City of Glendale, 224 Wis. 2d 800, 809, 593 N.W.2d 62 (Ct. App. 1999).
ERISA requires vesting of pension benefits; it does not require vesting of health or other retirement "welfare" benefits. Metropolitan Life Ins. Co. v. Massachusetts, 471 U.S. 724, 732 (1985); Shaw v. Delta Air Lines, Inc., 463 U.S. 85, 91 (1983); Ryan v. Chromalloy American Corp., 877 F.2d 598, 603 (7th Cir. 1989). Retirement welfare benefits, and the question of whether they vest, are matters left to contract.

=== CASE 9737677 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:32:02.869139+00 ===

DIANE S. SYKES, J.
¶ 41. (concurring). The majority adopts the approach of the concurring opinion in Bidlack v. Wheelabrator Corp., 993 F.2d 603, 611 (7th Cir. 1993)(en banc)(Cudahy, J., concurring) as the analytical framework for determining whether retirement welfare benefits in collective bargaining agreements are vested. I would adopt the approach of the lead opinion in Bidlack, and therefore concur.
¶ 42. As the majority notes, the lead opinion in Bidlack retreated from Senn s1 bright-line approach regarding vesting language in collective bargaining agreements, establishing instead an analytical approach to the question that focuses on traditional rules of contract interpretation while maintaining an initial presumption that rights and obligations cease upon the expiration of the contract. Id. at 607. The concurrence applauded the retreat, but would have gone further to apply a different initial presumption: that benefits vest and therefore continue beyond the expiration of the contract, unless otherwise specifically stated. Id. at 613 (Cudahy, J., concurring). Apparently, the concurrence would have overruled Senn, and in fact went so far as to say that"Senn and its default rule now *190do seem. . .to be a dead letter." Id. at 610 (Cudahy, J., concurring).
¶ 43. Bidlack involved a class action suit filed by retired employees of the Wheelabrator Corporation. The lead opinion, by Chief Judge Richard Posner, framed the question presented by the case in this way:
[W]hether the absence from the collective bargaining agreements of any provision that explicitly vests the health benefits of retired employees defeats those employees' claims even though some contractual language and a great deal of 'extrinsic' evidence — evidence apart from the language of the agreements — suggest that the parties may have intended to confer vested rights on the retired employees, that is, rights that would outlast the expiration of the last collective bargaining agreement.
Id. at 605.
¶ 44. The Wheelabrator collective bargaining agreements stated that "those employees who have retired since September 22,1959, will have the full cost of their Blue Cross-Blue Shield coverage paid by the Company after they attain sixty-five (65) years of age," and that the benefits "shall be continued for the spouse after the death of the retiree." Id. at 605. As in this case, the district court in Bidlack concluded that the employer was entitled to summary judgment because the language of the agreements did not explicitly state that the benefits vested at retirement. Arndt v. Wheelabrator Corp., 763 F. Supp. 396, 404, 406 (N.D. Ind. 1991). The en banc Seventh Circuit reversed.
¶ 45. Judge Posner began his analysis with the following general observation: "[OJrdinarily when a contract expires, it — expires. It is at an end. The parties have no more rights or duties under it. Sometimes, *191however, a contract creates entitlements that outlast it." Bidlack, 993 F.2d at 606. The trick, of course, is determining which are the determinate rights or obligations and which are the indeterminate ones.
¶ 46. The starting point is the presumption, deriving from the foregoing basic principle, that because it has a fixed term, "a collective bargaining agreement ceases to obligate the employer when the agreement's term.. .is up." Id. at 607. The lead opinion in Bidlack, therefore, left Senn s basic presumption in place. But the court went on to note that "it is not an irrebuttable presumption. 'Rights which accrued or vested under the [collective bargaining] agreement will, as a general rule, survive termination of the agreement.' The question is what it takes to rebut the presumption." Id. (citation omitted).
¶ 47. The Bidlack court then rejected two interpretive extremes: 1) that to rebut the presumption that benefits expire when the agreement expires (in other words, do not vest), the contract must either use the word "vest" or other similarly unequivocal language; and 2) that to rebut the presumption the parties can freely substitute testimony regarding the parties' intentions for contractual language indicative of intent. Id. The court said the former approach would institute excessive formalism and the latter would deprive parties of the protection of a written contract. Id.
¶ 48. The Bidlack court concluded, and I agree, that in this context, as in all contract cases, the court should look first to the four corners of the contract itself for evidence to rebut the initial presumption that the obligation expires when the contract does. If the contract language unambiguously confirms the presumption — or overcomes it — the analysis is over, *192and the court must apply the contract as written. To overcome the presumption, however, the word "vest" (or similar equivalent) need not necessarily appear, if the intent to establish a right which survives the expiration of the agreement is otherwise clear from the language used and the overall language and logic of the contract. Id. ("[W]e do not think that a court should refuse to enforce a contract merely because the parties have failed to use a prescribed formula").
¶ 49. If, however, the contract is ambiguous, the court may look to extrinsic evidence to attempt to determine the parties' intent. The Bidlack court cautioned, and I would too, that ambiguity cannot be created by extrinsic evidence:
[T]he use of extrinsic evidence to create such obligations [to pay lifetime medical benefits] nowhere alluded to in the contract would unjustifiably deprive the parties of the limitation of liabilities that is implicit in the negotiation of a written contract having a definite expiration date. Subject only to the limited protection against unforeseeable contractual obligations that is conferred by the doctrine of impossibility, a party might find itself saddled with obligations for the next twenty or thirty years (or even more, in the case of a surviving spouse's benefits) even though it had reasonably believed that all its obligations would end in three years, when the contract expired by its own terms. Although extrinsic evidence is admissible to show that a written contract which looks clear is actually ambiguous, perhaps because the parties were using words in a special sense, there must be either contractual language on which to hang the label of ambiguous or some yawning void. . .that cries out for an implied term. Extrinsic evidence should not *193be used to add terms to a contract that is plausibly complete without them."
Id. at 608 (citations omitted)(emphasis supplied). The parol evidence rule also provides a limitation on the use of extrinsic evidence. Id. (["T]he parol evidence rule.. .enforces integration clauses by barring evidence of side agreements, [although it] does not bar the use of extrinsic evidence to clarify the meaning of an ambiguous text"). Finally, if the agreement is completely silent about the duration of the benefits, and there is nothing in the logic, structure or other provisions of the contract that suggests that the benefits were meant to survive the expiration date, resort to extrinsic evidence is improper. Id.
¶ 50. Ultimately, if an examination of relevant and admissible extrinsic evidence fails to clarify the contractual ambiguity, the court may resort to the application of a default rule of contract interpretation. Id. at 609. Judge Posner clarified what is meant by "default rule," and when it is appropriate to invoke one:
The contract, even when its logic and its other provisions as well as just the provision in issue are considered, is inconclusive on the question whether it confers an entitlement to health benefits that outlasts the contract's expiration date. A completely intractable issue of contract interpretation can be resolved only by the application of some default rule — a burden of persuasion, a clear-meaning rule, a presumption based on the authorship of the contract. But the time to throw up one's hands and apply such a rule is after extrinsic evidence has been considered. For until then, we do not know whether we have an intractable interpretive issue or merely an issue that cannot be resolved without *194testimony or other evidence besides the language and logic.. .of the contract.
Only a posture, not easy to reconcile with the Seventh Amendment, of extreme mistrust of juries would entitle us to pretermit a factual inquiry and apply an interpretive canon or other tie-breaker before we know that the sides are actually tied.
Id.
¶ 51. Senn and the concurrence in Bidlack had referred to the initial presumption as a "default rule," which, as this passage of the lead opinion in Bidlack makes clear, is technically incorrect. The initial "no-vest" presumption is a creature of the contract itself, because it has a limited term, and applies at the beginning of the interpretive process. It may be overcome by other contract language indicative of an intent to grant a lifetime benefit, or extrinsic evidence (if the contract language is vague) or both. A "default rule," properly understood, is a judicial canon of contract construction (such as the rule that we construe contracts against the drafter) that applies only in the event of an unresolvable ambiguity — a tie — and only at the end of the process after extrinsic evidence has failed to clear up the question.
¶ 52. The initial presumption of vesting proposed by the Bidlack concurrence and adopted by the majority in this case represents a policy preference that I share but am constrained by the law of contracts from imposing upon the parties to a written, limited-term collective bargaining agreement. The contract sets the rights and liabilities of the parties, not the policy preferences of this court.
¶ 53. The majority relies in part on the policy articulated in Schlosser v. Allis-Chalmers Corp., 86 Wis. 2d 226, 271 N.W.2d 879 (1978). However, as both *195lower courts concluded, Schlosser is fundamentally factually distinguishable. There, the retirees had been salaried, nonunion employees whose employment arrangement with Allis-Chalmers was ongoing, open-ended and had no fixed expiration date. The court essentially construed the insurance benefits at issue in that case as a part of the open-ended employment agreement when it held that the benefit level at the time of retirement vested and could not be unilaterally modified later. Here we have a series of fixed-term collective bargaining agreements that were continually renegotiated upon expiration.
¶ 54. It is one thing to find that a continuing obligation of indefinite duration (free life insurance for life in Schlosser) vests upon retirement under a continuing, open-ended contract which is itself of indefinite duration. It is another thing to find that an indefinite, continuing obligation (free health insurance for life in this case) vests upon retirement and therefore survives the expiration of a fixed-term collective bargaining agreement, the obligations of which otherwise terminated when the contract did. Schlosser's rationale of retirement welfare benefit vesting cannot be readily transplanted into the collective bargaining context.
¶ 55. Accordingly, I would adopt the analysis of the lead opinion in Bidlack and remand to the circuit court to apply it.2 Therefore, I respectfully concur.
*196¶ 56. I am authorized to state that Justices JON P. WILCOX and DAVID T. PROSSER join this concurring opinion.
Senn v. United Dominion Industries, 951 F.2d 806, 814-16 (7th Cir. 1992).
For examples of post-Bidlack cases applying its analysis, see Pabst Brewing Company, Inc. v. Corrao, 161 F.3d 434 (7th Cir. 1998); Diehl v. Twin Disc, Inc., 102 F.3d 301 (7th Cir. 1996); Murphy v. Keystone Steel & Wire Co., 61 F.3d 560 (7th Cir. 1995); Rossetto v. Pabst Brewing Company, Inc., 71 F.Supp.2d 913 (E.D. Wis. 1999).

=== CASE 9737678 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:32:03.200568+00 ===

PRESIDING JUSTICE STEIGMANN delivered the opinion of the court: In January 1990, plaintiff, Thomas Watson, slipped and fell on some ice as he exited the rear entrance of the J.C. Penney store in Lincoln. As a result, plaintiff brought this personal injury action against defendant, J.C. Penney Company, alleging that defendant negligently failed to remove ice and snow present at that entrance. Defendant made a motion for summary judgment, arguing that plaintiff slipped on a natural accumulation of snow and ice that it owed plaintiff no duty to remove. In April 1992, the trial court granted this motion. Plaintiff appeals, arguing that (1) we should overrule the long-standing natural accumulation rule in Illinois, and (2) the trial court erred in finding that no genuine issue of material fact existed. We affirm. . I. Facts An icy snow fell late in the night on January 25 and in the early morning on January 26, 1990, in Lincoln, Illinois. The snow stopped that morning, but started again later during the day. This snow and ice caused slippery conditions on streets throughout the town. At about 9 a.m. that morning, Donald Jordan, the maintenance manager at the J.C. Penney store in Lincoln, shoveled snow away from the store’s rear entrance. After removing all the snow and ice, Jordan decided to not sprinkle salt because the snow had stopped and no ice remained on the entranceway. Later that day, plaintiff and his wife went shopping at that J.C. Penney store. In her deposition, plaintiff’s wife testified that the snow had again started falling several hours before they went shopping. On their way out of the store, while plaintiff opened the door for his wife, plaintiff slipped and fell on some ice on the metal frame of the door opening. As a result, plaintiff broke his left clavicle and seriously injured his right knee. During plaintiff’s deposition, he was questioned about the nature and source of the ice. He testified that ice was everywhere at the rear entrance to the store as he exited. In her deposition, plaintiff’s wife similarly described the rear entrance. Plaintiff also said that the entranceway appeared as if someone had shoveled it earlier in the day. He explained that he saw piles of snow on the side of the entrance-way and it appeared cleaner than the rest of the parking lot. He also said that “it appeared to me that somebody had taken a shovel or some other instrument and made an attempt to clean [the entrance-way] and the temperature had dropped again and that froze.” However, he admitted that he did not know whether the temperature had risen above freezing. He also testified that he had “no idea” how the ice had gotten there. He merely speculated that the ice resulted from thawing and freezing after shoveling. Plaintiff described several patches of ice, which were in the form of footprints, as looking like they resulted from the customer traffic into the store. When specifically asked if the particular patch of ice on which he slipped appeared to be a refrozen film of ice, plaintiff replied that it did not, and instead looked like a footprint. Finally, when asked to clarify from where he thought the rest of the ice came, he said, “I would assume it came from the good [L]ord.” II. Analysis A. The Natural Accumulation Rule  The natural accumulation rule states that a business owner owes no duly to business invitees to remove natural accumulations of snow and ice; however, where the business owner does attempt to remove snow, he owes a duty not to leave or cause unnatural accumulations. (Wilson v. Gorski’s Food Fair (1990), 196 Ill. App. 3d 612, 615, 554 N.E.2d 412, 414; Kalata v. Anheuser-Busch Cos. (1990), 204 Ill. App. 3d 351, 354, 562 N.E.2d 320, 322-23.) Even when a person voluntarily removes snow, he does not owe a duty to remove natural accumulations of ice underneath the snow; the plaintiff must show that defendant created the unnatural accumulation of exposed ice. (Eichler v. Plitt Theatres, Inc. (1988), 167 Ill. App. 3d 685, 692, 521 N.E.2d 1196, 1201.) In Illinois, this rule dates back to 1931, and Illinois courts of review have consistently reaffirmed it. See Graham v. City of Chicago (1931), 346 Ill. 638, 643, 178 N.E. 911, 913; Strappelli v. City of Chicago (1939), 371 Ill. 72, 74-75, 20 N.E.2d 43, 44-45; Lansing v. County of McLean (1978), 69 Ill. 2d 562, 571, 372 N.E.2d 822, 826; Wilson, 196 Ill. App. 3d at 615, 554 N.E.2d at 414.  Plaintiff considers this rule antiquated and urges this court to overrule it, as the courts in several other States have done. (See Quinlivan v. Great Atlantic & Pacific Tea Co. (1975), 395 Mich. 244, 235 N.W.2d 732; Isaacson v. Husson College (Me. 1972), 297 A.2d 98; Kremer v. Carr’s Food Center, Inc. (Alaska 1969), 462 P.2d 747.) Put simply, plaintiff makes this request in the wrong forum. (See Melton v. Central Illinois Public Service Co. (1991), 220 Ill. App. 3d 1052, 1057, 581 N.E.2d 423, 426.) Plaintiff should address this matter to the legislature, which formulates the public policy of this State and which could change this “antiquated rule” if it wished. As one court recently noted in a different context: “ ‘A change in the law which has the power to so deeply affect social and business relationships should only be made after a thorough analysis of all the relevant considerations. *** The type of analysis required is best conducted by the legislature using all of the methods it has available to it to invite public participation.’ ” Estate of Ritchie v. Farrell (1991), 213 Ill. App. 3d 846, 849-50, 572 N.E.2d 367, 369, quoting Olsen v. Copeland (1979), 90 Wis. 2d 483, 491, 280 N.W.2d 178, 181. Indeed, 13 years ago, the legislature enacted the Snow and Ice Removal Act to grant immunity to residential owners or occupants from liability (absent willful or wanton misconduct) for injuries suffered as a result of snowy or icy conditions after the residential owner or occupant has removed or attempted to remove snow and ice from the sidewalk. (See Ill. Rev. Stat. 1991, ch. 70, pars. 200 through 202.) Further, six years ago, the legislature amended section 3—105(a) of the Local Governmental and Governmental Employees Tort Immunity Act to broaden the immunity that act provides to specifically include injuries caused “by the effect of weather conditions.” (Emphasis added.) Ill. Rev. Stat. 1991, ch. 85; par. 3—105(a), as amended by Pub. Act 84-1431, art. 1, §2, eff. Nov. 25, 1986 (1986 Ill. Laws 3740, 3744). This recent legislative action regarding weather-related issues of tort law demonstrates that the legislature pays attention to this area of the law and does not hesitate to change or refine preexisting legal doctrine when the legislature deems such a change appropriate. Thus, we conclude that the legislature, by not amending the 60-year-old natural accumulation rule, has indicated its present satisfaction with that rule. This conclusion provides an additional reason for this court to be very hesitant before dabbling in matters involving such fundamental policy questions. We also note that the Illinois Supreme Court created the natural accumulation rule as a matter of tort common law in this State (Graham, 346 Ill. at 643, 178 N.E. at 913), and, as noted, the supreme court has often reaffirmed that rule. In the absence of legislative action, any judicial modification of it should be made by the Illinois Supreme Court, not this court. Plaintiff argues that the supreme court’s decision in Ward v. K mart Corp. (1990), 136 Ill. 2d 132, 554 N.E.2d 223, indicates that the Illinois Supreme Court no longer would abide by the natural accumulation rule. In Ward, the supreme court adopted section 343 of the Restatement (Second) of Torts (see Restatement (Second) of Torts §343 (1965)), which adopts a general principle for a business owner’s duty toward business invitees. (Ward, 136 Ill. 2d at 145-46, 554 N.E.2d at 229.) Plaintiff argues that Ward tacitly rejects the natural accumulation rule in favor of this more general standard of liability, and that Ward thus implicitly authorizes us to abolish the natural accumulation rule. We disagree that Ward had any impact on the natural accumulation rule. First, Ward did not address or even allude to the natural accumulation rule. Second, Ward merely restated that the supreme court had already adopted section 343 as standard of care for business owners in Genaust. v. Illinois Power Co. (1976), 62 Ill. 2d 456, 468, 343 N.E.2d 465, 472. (See Ward, 136 Ill. 2d at 145, 554 N.E.2d at 229.) Indeed, in Genaust, the supreme court pointed out that section 343 “correctly states the settled law regarding the liability of possessors of land to invitees,” and cited its prior cases from 1955, 19.73, and 1975. (Emphasis added.) (Genaust, 62 Ill. 2d at 468, 343 N.E.2d at 472, citing Geraghty v. Burr Oak Lanes, Inc. (1955), 5 Ill. 2d 153, 157, 125 N.E.2d 47, 50; Blue v. St. Clair Country Club (1955), 7 Ill. 2d 359, 363, 131 N.E.2d 31, 33; Nowicki v. Union Starch & Refining Co. (1973), 54 Ill. 2d 93, 98, 296 N.E.2d 321, 323; Fancil v. Q.S.E. Foods, Inc. (1975), 60 Ill. 2d 552, 557, 328 N.E.2d 538, 541.) Thus, section 343 of the Restatement (Second) of Torts is no stranger to Illinois law and has coexisted with the natural accumulation rule for many years. Finally, plaintiff requests that if we choose to follow the natural accumulation rule, we should at least certify this question pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 316 (134 Ill. 2d R. 316) so that the Illinois Supreme Court can again address the issue. Although this case does raise a significant issue that the supreme court has not recently revisited, we believe that appellate courts should use Rule 316 very sparingly. We conclude that this case is not one in which our use of a certificate of importance would be appropriate. B. Summary Judgment Plaintiff next argues that the trial court erred by granting defendant’s motion for summary judgment because (1) the jury should decide whether defendant should be held liable for any natural accumulation of snow and ice, and (2) a genuine issue of material fact existed regarding whether the ice on which defendant slipped was a natural or unnatural accumulation. We disagree. A trial court should grant a motion for summary judgment only when no genuine issue of material fact exists. (Wright v. St. John’s Hospital of the Hospital Sisters of the Third Order of St. Francis (1992), 229 Ill. App. 3d 680, 682, 593 N.E.2d 1070, 1072.) Whether a duty exists presents a question of law for the court to decide. (Brown v. Kidd (1991), 217 Ill. App. 3d 860, 867, 578 N.E.2d 224, 230.) “If no duty exists, no recovery is possible as a matter of law and summary judgment in favor of the defendant is proper.” (Brown, 217 Ill. App. 3d at 868, 578 N.E.2d at 230.) The Illinois Supreme Court recently wrote the following regarding summary judgment: “Although the use of a summary judgment procedure is encouraged as an aid in expeditious disposition of a lawsuit, it is a drastic means of disposing of litigation and should only be allowed when the right of the moving party is clear and free of doubt. [Citation.] ‘In determining whether the moving party is entitled to summary judgment, the court must construe the pleadings, depositions, admissions and affidavits strictly against the movant and liberally in favor of the opponent.’ (In re Estate of Whittington (1985), 107 Ill. 2d 169, 177[, 483 N.E.2d 210, 215]; [see also] Tersavich v. First National Bank & Trust (1991), 143 Ill. 2d 71, 80-81[, 571 N.E.2d 733, 735-36].)” Loyola Academy v. S & S Roof Maintenance, Inc. (1992), 146 Ill. 2d 263, 271-72, 586 N.E.2d 1211, 1215.  In his deposition, plaintiff did not testify that the ice resulted from thawed and refrozen puddles of water or from anything that would imply that defendant’s employee had left a dangerous condition when he shoveled the snow. Instead, plaintiff first testified that he did not know how the ice formed, then clarified that the ice on which he slipped resulted from customer traffic, and then testified that he assumed that the ice came from “the good [L]ord.” None of these assertions create a genuine issue of material fact upon which a jury could conclude that the ice resulted from an unnatural accumulation created by defendant. Instead, these statements indicate that the ice resulted from the natural accumulation and footprints from customer traffic from which defendant had no duty to protect plaintiff. See Stypinski v. First Chicago Building Corp. (1991), 214 Ill. App. 3d 714, 716, 574 N.E.2d 717, 718 (a landowner does not have a duty to remove tracks left by customers who have walked through natural accumulations of snow, slush and water). III. Conclusion Plaintiff’s complaint alleges that J.C. Penney negligently failed to remove these natural accumulations of ice. However, defendant owed no duty to do so, and the trial court properly granted summary judgment for defendant. For the reasons stated, we affirm the trial court. Affirmed. GREEN, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9737805 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:34:45.834061+00 ===

HABHAB, Judge.
In 1986 Corporate Center Associates (CCA) leased office space to Total Group Services of Iowa (Total Group) pursuant to a written lease with a five-year term. Total Group took possession of the premises in October 1986. Total Group then obtained office furniture from Office Outfitters pursuant to a signed “payment plan” agreement. This agreement also included *714a clause which provided the furniture could be purchased at the end of the lease term for $1.00. In the summer of 1987 Total Group defaulted on its lease with CCA, and abandoned the premises leaving the furniture.
CCA sued Total Group for unpaid rent. CCA also named Office Outfitters as a party requesting the court to determine that CCA’s landlord’s lien was superior to any right Office Outfitters might have to the furniture. CCA and Office Outfitters filed motions to adjudicate law points. The district court ruled that the agreement between Total Group and Office Outfitters was a true lease and that title to the furniture remained with Office Outfitters. Therefore, the court concluded CCA could not attach a lien to the furniture. CCA subsequently obtained a $60,034 money judgment against Total Group pursuant to a consent decree.
CCA appeals the district court’s ruling on the motions to adjudicate law points. CCA contends the agreement between Total Group and Office Outfitters was a lease intended for security and title passed to Total Group. According to CCA, its landlord’s lien attached to the furniture and is superior to any right of Office Outfitters for Office Outfitters failed to perfect its security interest. Office Outfitters asserts that if the district court incorrectly ruled on the motions for adjudication of law points, the case should be remanded for further proceedings.
The code section at issue is Iowa Code section 554.1201(37)(b) which states:
Whether a lease is intended as security is to be determined by the facts of each case; however, (a) the inclusion of an option to purchase does not in and of itself make the lease one intended for security, and (b) an agreement that upon compliance with the terms of the lease the lessee shall become or has the option to become the owner of the property for no additional consideration or for a nominal consideration does make the lease one intended for security, (emphasis added).
The agreement in dispute provided for payments by the “lessee” Total Group, for a period of 60 months. It further provided that at the end of 60 months Total Group had the option to purchase the furniture for the sum of $1. The Iowa Supreme Court has held that such a provision causes the agreement to be subject to a security interest. C & J Leasing II Ltd. v. Swanson, 439 N.W.2d 210, 211 (Iowa 1989).
The trial judge found the lease agreement between Total Group and Office Outfitters was a true lease and therefore no security interest would attach. We disagree, based on a reading of Iowa Code section 554.1201(37) and the instructional language provided by the Iowa Supreme Court in C & J Leasing.
It is clear from the reading of both of the above that when a lease agreement provides an opportunity to purchase the leased items for a nominal value, the agreement will be viewed as a security agreement. In this case, Total Group and Office Outfitters had an agreement for a term of five years during which time Total Group would pay for the use of the furniture. The agreement further provided that Total Group could purchase the furniture at the end of the term for $1.00. Because the buyout clause was of such a nominal nature, we believe it falls within the type of clause contemplated by the Supreme Court in C & J Leasing.
There are a variety of other cases which have considered an option to buy under UCC 1-201(37), and have determined that a nominal option to purchase at the close of a lease agreement does constitute a security interest. The supreme court of Minnesota determined that a $1.00 option to purchase computer equipment at the end of a lease constituted a security interest. Chemlease Worldwide Inc. v. Brace, Inc., 338 N.W.2d 428, 432 (Minn.1983). The court did not discuss the option in great detail, however it addressed the issue of the option and stated that under 1-201(37) the interest maintained by Chemlease was a security interest. Id.
The Tenth Circuit also addressed this issue and found that when equipment was *715to be owned by the “lessee” at the termination of a lease for nominal consideration it is a lease intended as security. United States v. Federal Insurance Co., 634 F.2d 1050, 1052 (10th Cir.1980). The court discussed the situation further stating:
where the terms of the lease and option to purchase are such that the only sensible course of action for the lessee at the end of the term is to exercise that option and become owner of the goods, then the lease becomes one intended to create a security interest.
Id. See also, Meyer v. World Concrete, Inc., 431 P.2d 403 (Okl.1967).; Annot. Equipment Leases as Security Interest Within Uniform Commercial Code § 1-201(37), 76 A.L.R.3d 11 (1977).
Based upon our reading of C & J Leasing, as well as the consistent interpretation of this same section in other jurisdictions, we find that this lease is not a true lease but rather a lease intended as a secured interest. We remand this case to the trial court to determine the priority of each parties interest in the office furniture. REVERSED AND REMANDED.
HAYDEN, P.J., concurs.
SACKETT, J., dissents.

=== CASE 2212039 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:14.907738+00 ===

413 N.E.2d 969 (1980)
Helen Anna MELNIK, Appellant (Petitioner below),
v.
George Wesley MELNIK, Appellee (Respondent below).
No. 2-280A35.
Court of Appeals of Indiana, Fourth District.
December 24, 1980.
*970 Mary Beth Ramey, Indianapolis, Mary Louise Baker, Muncie, for appellant.
Marion W. Withers and Michael R. Withers, Anderson, for appellee.
MILLER, Judge.
The instant litigation involves an appeal from a property distribution and maintenance determination pursuant to a dissolution of the marriage of petitioner-appellant Helen Anna Melnik and her former husband, respondent-appellee George Wesley Melnik. In this action, the wife contends the trial court improperly refused to award her maintenance, as permitted by Ind. Code 31-1-11.5-9(c), that it erred in charging $25,879.90 against her share of the parties' assets, and that certain shares of stock should have been included in the marital assets. We affirm.
Taken in the light most favorable to the judgment below, the facts are as follows: The parties' 39-year marriage commenced on June 28, 1940 at which time George Melnik operated an unclaimed freight business. Although Helen Melnik initially worked full-time in that business she later discontinued such employment (except for "fill in" work) to raise the two children born to the marriage, both of whom were emancipated prior to the final dissolution. Acting as a partnership, the Melniks later acquired, in 1950, an upholstering repair business, which enterprise was later sold for $10,000, although they apparently retained the building in which it was housed and leased it to the new proprietor. Thereafter, in 1964, the freight business burned, and from the insurance proceeds the Melniks acquired numerous stocks and bonds. As is evident from the trial court's findings, summarized in part below, the parties also acquired additional property during their marriage, including two pieces of real estate valued at some $45,000 and $38,000, which were divided between the litigants. The total of their assets was in excess of $400,000.
There was further evidence at the hearing, relating to the issue of a requested maintenance award, that Helen Melnik, who was then 64, had had two operations during the marriage to remove spinal disks, and that she had developed osteoarthritis of the spine, a degenerative joint disease resulting in frequent and considerable pain. Her physician, who stated she also was afflicted with a hiatal hernia, stenosis of the urethra, abnormal glucose metabolism, and elevated blood pressure, concluded her physical condition would not permit consistent employment, and that "I wouldn't want a person with her problems working for me because of possible absenteeism."
In addition, there was also evidence, in the form of George Melnik's testimony, that he once had infantile paralysis, that he could not stand on his feet for long periods of time, and that such condition had contributed to his inability to obtain employment during the two years prior to the *971 hearing.[1] At that time, his age was 68. He also testified he was nearly deaf in one ear and nearly blind in one eye.
The parties to this action were separated on April 4, 1978. Sometime after that date, Helen Milnik withdrew a Certificate of Deposit in the amount of $40,000 and made gifts of over $25,000 to the parties' grandchildren, the children of their daughter, Barbara Weil. Such gift, as noted hereafter, was apparently regarded by the trial court as part of Helen Melnik's share of the marital assets.
Significant to this appeal, the court-after noting assets consisting of stocks, bonds, life insurance policies and the like totalling over $400,000-determined in its findings that "[t]he assets of the parties should be equally divided between them," and that "[b]ecause of the age and physical condition of the respondent [George], respondent should not be obligated to pay any future maintenance payments to petitioner." Accordingly, the judgment of the lower court awarded Helen Melnik property valued at some $203,000, and awarded to George Melnik a like amount, plus approximately $10,000 for payment of both parties' attorney fees.
ISSUE I
Helen Melnik first contends the trial court, in refusing to order maintenance payments on her behalf, acted contrary to law by basing its decision on the health of the spouse who is to pay, rather than the recipient spouse. She further asserts that the failure to award maintenance was contrary to the evidence.
Our analysis begins with the relevant language of IC 31-1-11.5-9(c), which states as follows:
"The court may make no provision for maintenance except that when the court finds a spouse to be physically or mentally incapacitated to the extent that the ability of such incapacitated spouse to support himself or herself is materially affected, the court may make provision for the maintenance of said spouse during any such incapacity, subject to further order of the court."
Helen Melnik, in contending the trial court acted contrary to law when it denied maintenance to her because of her husband's age and physical condition, argues at the outset that the trial court should have made an "initial determination" whether or not her ability to support herself was impaired. In this regard, she quotes Temple v. Temple, (1975) 164 Ind. App. 215, 219-220, 328 N.E.2d 227, 229-230, where the Court stated:
"We determine that the statute calls for an initial factual determination whether a spouse's self-supportive ability is materially affected by physical or mental incapacity. If the spouse's self-supportive ability is materially impaired, the propriety of a maintenance award and the amount thereof should then be determined after considering such factors as the financial resources of the party seeking maintenance (including matrimonial property apportioned to her), the standard of living established in the marriage, duration of the marriage, and the ability of the spouse from whom maintenance is sought to meet his needs while meeting those of the spouse seeking maintenance." (Emphasis added.)
While Helen Melnik does not specifically argue the court should have made a special finding regarding her ability to support herself, as opposed to merely "deciding" or "determining" such question, we note various decisions of this Court have at least suggested such a finding may be essential to the proper award of payments which are arguably (or conceivably) intended to serve as maintenance, although not clearly identified as such. E.g., Savage v. Savage, (1978) Ind. App., 374 N.E.2d 536; and In re Marriage of Lewis, (1977) Ind. *972 App., 360 N.E.2d 855.[2] It is also clear, however, that even when maintenance is awarded, no such finding is required under either the statute or by case law so long as the court expressly addresses the question and designates its award as maintenance, since "[t]he `finding' required by the statute is implicit in the grant or denial of maintenance and need only be supported by sufficient evidence." Farthing v. Farthing, (1978) Ind. App., 382 N.E.2d 941, 944. In the instant case involving substantial evidence of Helen Melnik's incapacity and an express denial of maintenance for the sole reason that her husband, the paying spouse, was himself old and infirm, we believe it also may reasonably be implied, based on similar reasoning, that the trial court appropriately determined there was some material impairment of her ability to support herself, but that George Melnik should nevertheless be relieved of the obligation of making maintenance payments.
Moreover, we are aware of no compelling authority, including the language of the statute itself, which has expressly required such special findings (in the absence of a proper motion) in a case where a request for maintenance was denied. As noted above, the discretionary statute permitting such awards states merely that a court may not provide for maintenance payments unless it first "finds" a spouse to be physically or mentally incapacitated. In this regard, we note the opinion in Temple v. Temple, supra, which did not reveal whether the lower court had made special findings on the issue of maintenance,[3] simply concluded the trial judge did not abuse his discretion in denying the relief requested, and that "[t]here appears to be no sound reason why the traditional discretionary power of the trial court should not be exercised when determining whether an award of maintenance is proper under IC 31-1-11.5-9(c)." Id. at 220, 328 N.E.2d at 230.
Nor was it error, as Helen Melnik contends, for the trial court to base the ultimate determination it did make on the age and physical capacity of George Melnik, rather than giving sole consideration to the health of his wife. As noted above, the appropriate statute merely provides the court "may" make provision for maintenance when it finds a spouse has been mentally and physically incapacitated, and in Temple v. Temple, supra at 220, 328 N.E.2d at 230, such language was interpreted by the Court to permit consideration of "the ability of the spouse from whom maintenance is sought to meet his needs while meeting those of the spouse seeking maintenance." Clearly, there was evidence concerning the age and physical capacities of George Melnik from which the court could reasonably have concluded it was inappropriate, under the circumstances, to make a maintenance award to Mrs. Melnik in addition to the approximately $203,000 which she received as part of the property settlement. Accordingly, we find no error in the court's decision concerning maintenance.
ISSUE II
A second contention advanced by Helen Melnik is that the trial court improperly charged against her share of the marital property a gift of over $25,000 which she made for the benefit of the parties' grandchildren after she and her husband were separated.[4] In particular, she contends that in light of the trial court's "finding" that "[t]he assets of the parties should be equally divided between them," it acted contrary to the evidence by further ordering she should have as her "sole and separate property" some $25,879.90 sent to Barbara Weil *973 for the parties' grandchildren, since Helen Melnik did not possess those assets when the decree of dissolution was entered. She further suggests there was no evidence she had expended any more than $25,600 in gifts for her grandchildren.
In responding to these arguments, we first state the obvious: namely, that the trial court's findings and conclusions should be construed, so far as it is reasonably possible, in an harmonious manner, rather than discordantly. Thus, we believe the trial court's decision to "equally" divide the assets must be viewed in light of its further, specific determination that Helen Melnik should be charged the sum sent to her daughter on behalf of the parties' grandchildren. It may reasonably be presumed, we think, that it would not have made its "equal" distributions if it were viewing the parties' assets sometime after the gift had been made.
Additionally, we do not believe it was error for the court to distribute the parties' assets which were acquired before their separation (as it apparently did) giving due consideration to their individual acts of dissipation occurring after such separation. See IC 31-1-11.5-11 (pertaining to disposition of property)[5]and see, e.g., In re Marriage of McManama, (1980) Ind., 399 N.E.2d 371; and see generally Eppley v. Eppley, (1976) 168 Ind. App. 59, 67, 341 N.E.2d 212, 218, where the Court concluded marital property need not be valued at the time of a final hearing, rather than as of the date of separation, since "such an inflexible rule might have drawbacks in that it could encourage parties to secrete, conceal or otherwise divest themselves of certain properties during the period between separation and divorce so as to distort the true nature and value of marital property." Helen Melnik cites no decision requiring a different result in the instant case, and indeed presents no authority at all supporting her argument regarding the division of marital property, in contravention of Ind. Rules of Procedure, Appellate Rule 8.3(A)(7) requiring a cogent argument on all points raised.
She also contends on appeal that even if the court could consider gifts made to the grandchildren as part of her half of the marital assets, there was no evidence those gifts exceeded $25,600 as opposed to the approximately $25,900 found by the lower court.[6] We must conclude, however, that this argument was waived, since it was not properly brought to the trial court's attention (and thus preserved for our review) by the mere assertion in her Motion to Correct Errors that "[t]he judgment is contrary to the evidence, in that ... [t]he evidence was uncontroverted that petitioner did not have $25,879.90." See A.P. 8.3(A)(7). As acknowledged by Helen Melnik in this argument, the trial court's judgment looked beyond those assets which she actually had at the time of the final decree to those which she had disposed of after the separation, which apparently included the proceeds of a $40,000 Certificate of Deposit. If, in computing the amount of the specific gifts which Helen Melnik made to her daughter for the benefit of the grandchildren, the trial court made an error of some $300, we believe such error should have been directly challenged in the Motion, in contrast to a general assertion that Helen Melnik did not "have" the money when the dissolution decree was entered. Accordingly, we find no error which has properly been raised in this Court.
ISSUE III
As her final argument, Helen Melnik contends the trial court should have included 123 shares of common stock of the Irving Trust Company (valued at nearly $4,000) in its computation of the parties' marital assets, apparently because she views the evidence as uncontroverted that such stock *974 was owned by the parties. While it is true, as she contends, that George Melnik stated in his answers to interrogatories that he owned such stock, we note that at trial he suggested an error had been made because Irving Trust was "probably a paying agent for Wisconsin Gas"[7] and that he had never in fact owned any shares of Irving Trust. Under these circumstances, where the only testimony relating to the purported marital property was conflicting, we conclude the trial court did not abuse its discretion as fact-finder in failing to include such shares of stock as part of the parties' estate.
The judgment of the trial court is affirmed.
YOUNG, P.J., and CHIPMAN, J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  Neither party was employed on the date of the hearing, although George Melnik received social security benefits.
[2]  See generally Farthing v. Farthing, (1978) Ind. App., 382 N.E.2d 941, 944 n. 2, where the Court states, "[w]hen the award is designated other than maintenance by the trial court, case law apparently requires that petitioner have shown and the trial court have specifically found sufficient incapacity and material effect on self-supportive ability."
[3]  Perhaps significantly, the appellant in that case argued merely that the decree was not supported by sufficient evidence and thus was contrary to law, and that the trial court abused its discretion by choosing to "ignore" uncontroverted medical testimony.
[4]  She explained such gift was made because "I've never had any money to give."
[5]  That statute provides, in part, in subsection (a) that a court should distinguish between property acquired before and after a final separation, and further directs, in subsection (b)(4), such court to consider "the conduct of the parties during the marriage as related to the disposition or dissipation of their property; ... ."
[6]  As noted above, that court "awarded" her $25,879.90 as "[m]onies paid to Barbara Weil."
[7]  In this regard, we observe the court's judgment recites that 123 shares of stock of the Wisconsin Gas Company were awarded to George Melnik as part of the property settlement.

=== CASE 9737807 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:34:46.437332+00 ===

GARRARD, Presiding Judge.
Johnson waived jury trial. The court convicted her of theft and carrying a handgun without a license. We affirm as to theft and reverse as to the handgun count.
The state’s evidence revealed that Johnson and another woman entered the Foxy Lady Boutique about 3:00 p. m. on October 5,1979. Johnson went to the dressing room to try on some clothing while her companion engaged the sales person in conversation. The sales person, Ms. Ponczak, testified that she turned and observed Johnson grab additional clothing and take it into the dressing room. She then saw Johnson’s companion take an item off a hanger and stuff it into her purse. When Johnson came out of the dressing room Ms. Ponczak confronted her and retrieved several items belonging to the boutique from a brown tote bag that Johnson was carrying.
Ms. Ponczak did not attempt to stop the women from leaving the store. However, she immediately called the police and gave *336a description of the women and their automobile. Shortly thereafter the police located, pursued and stopped the vehicle and Johnson was arrested.
Johnson first argues error in admitting the tote bag and a photograph of it into evidence without adequately establishing a chain of custody. The argument is ill founded since the bag was positively identified and not subject to tampering or substitution. See, e. g., Bruce v. State (1978), Ind., 375 N.E.2d 1042. Nor do we find harmful error in the fact that the photograph also showed Johnson’s purse and gun, although these items were not identified until the later testimony of the police officers. No specific objection was made addressing these items which were also depicted. Moreover, the case was tried by the court and we may presume the judge properly considered the evidence.
Contrary to Johnson’s assertion, we also find that the evidence was ample to support the conclusion that Johnson intended to deprive the boutique of the items of clothing. Johnson’s citation to IC 35-43 — 4-4(c) is inapposite. That an inference might be drawn if Johnson had passed the cash register does not operate to preclude an inference of intent because she was stopped before she reached it. Here the evidence was ample to provide a reasonable inference that she intended to deprive the boutique of items placed in the tote bag. Cf. IC 35—43-4-4(b).
However, a different question is presented concerning the firearm charge. The evidence was undisputed that when Johnson was stopped by the police she got out of the car and upon police command dropped the bag and purse on the ground. The officer placed the purse and bag on the trunk of the police car and searched them, but found nothing. He placed Johnson under arrest, handcuffed her and placed her in the police car. Some ten or fifteen minutes later he again searched the purse and discovered the handgun which formed the basis for the charge. At trial Johnson objected to the evidence concerning the handgun on the basis that the second warrantless search was in violation of her constitutional rights against unreasonable searches and seizures.
The authorities sustain this position. It must be remembered that the general rule is that police must obtain a warrant. Search without a warrant based upon exigent circumstances is the exception. Thus, both our court and the United States Supreme Court have held that where items such as a purse or suitcase (items in which a citizen has a considerable expectation of privacy) are seized and secured by the police, a warrant to search them is necessary. Arkansas v. Sanders (1979), 442 U.S. 753, 99 S.Ct. 2586, 61 L.Ed.2d 235; Bradford v. State (1980), Ind.App., 401 N.E.2d 77. It was thus error to permit the evidence derived from the second search to be admitted over Johnson’s timely objection.
We therefore affirm the conviction for theft and reverse and remand the conviction for carrying a handgun without a license.
HOFFMAN, J., concurs.
STATON, J., concurs and files separate opinion.

=== CASE 2212182 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:16.734387+00 ===

462 N.W.2d 599 (1990)
In re Petition for DISCIPLINARY ACTION AGAINST F. Patrick McGRATH, an Attorney at Law of the State of Minnesota.
No. C4-90-178.
Supreme Court of Minnesota.
November 16, 1990.
*600 William J. Wernz, Director, Office of Lawyers Professional Responsibility, St. Paul, for appellant.
John J. Scanlon, Hinckley, for respondent.
Heard, considered and decided by the court en banc.
PER CURIAM.
The Director of the Office of Lawyers Professional Responsibility (the Director) alleged respondent engaged in professional misconduct involving neglect of client matters, failure to communicate with clients, intentional misrepresentation, and failure to cooperate with disciplinary investigations. The referee appointed by this court found the Director's allegations were supported by clear and convincing evidence and recommended six months' suspension followed by two years' supervised probation. Respondent contended the referee's findings were not supported by the evidence and that, therefore, the recommended discipline was inappropriate.
Allegations of professional misconduct must be proven by "`full, clear and convincing evidence.'" In re Ruhland, 442 N.W.2d 783, 785 (Minn.1989) (quoting In re Gillard, 271 N.W.2d 785, 805 n. 3 (Minn.1978)). On review, a "referee's findings of fact will not be set aside unless clearly erroneous." Id. (citing In re Pyles, 421 N.W.2d 321, 325 (1988)). A referee's findings as to disputed fact questions are given great deference, particularly "when the dispute is presented by conflicting testimony." Id. at 786 (citing In re Daffer, 344 N.W.2d 382, 386 (Minn.1984)). We conclude the referee's findings of fact are indeed supported by clear and convincing evidence and find no ground upon which to alter them.
As alleged by the Director and found by the referee, respondent undertook representation of a client against a misdemeanor charge. After agreeing to waive trial, stipulate the facts, and permit the case to be decided on briefs, respondent failed to timely file a brief with the trial court. Following an adverse judgment, he then indicated to his client that he would file an appeal, but failed to do so. Throughout the period he represented this client, respondent failed to communicate with him regarding the status of his case and regarding the dates of scheduled court appearances despite the client's repeated requests for that information.
In a separate incident, respondent agreed to prepare a civil suit for a client he understood to suffer manic depression. Despite the client's urgings that the case be prepared for trial as soon as possible, respondent unreasonably delayed discovery and failed to take appropriate steps toward completing his preparation and setting a trial date.
With respect to a third client, respondent successfully argued a motion to suppress evidence discovered by police during an airport stop, but failed to file a brief in the court of appeals when the state subsequently appealed the suppression order. As a result, respondent was precluded from oral argument. The court of appeals reversed the trial court's suppression order and remanded the case for trial. Respondent failed to inform his client that he did not file a brief; instead, he falsely represented that he had indeed appeared at oral argument and subsequently billed the *601 client for preparation and service of an appellate brief. Further, he failed to inform the client of the court of appeals' decision, despite representing him against subsequent, unrelated charges to which the client agreed to plead guilty.
Respondent consistently failed to supply the Director with information related to these three incidents and repeatedly failed to appear at scheduled meetings with the Director. Respondent offered no credible explanation for his noncooperation and refused to acknowledge his misconduct with respect to the Director's investigations.
We agree with the referee's conclusion that respondent's neglect of client matters and failure to respond to his clients' requests for information violated Rules 1.3 and 1.4(a) of the Minnesota Rules of Professional Conduct (MRPC).[1] Respondent's failure to file a brief in the court of appeals, misrepresentations to his client respecting that brief, and failure to refund the client all fees paid for preparation and service of that brief violated MRPC 1.16(d), 3.4(c), and 8.4(c) and (d).[2] Furthermore, respondent's noncooperation in the Director's investigation of his conduct violated MRPC 8.1(a)(3) as well as Rule 25 of the Rules on Lawyers Professional Responsibility.[3]
"While the referee's recommendation is entitled to great weight * * * final responsibility for determining the appropriate discipline rests solely with this court." In re Peterson, 456 N.W.2d 89, 93 (Minn. 1990) (citing In re Franke, 345 N.W.2d 224, 228 (Minn.1984)). In determining appropriate discipline for professional misconduct, this court considers the nature of the misconduct, the cumulative weight of the violations, and the consequences of that misconduct, both real and potential, for the public and for the legal profession. Id. Although prior decisions may be helpful in arriving at appropriate discipline, each case must be evaluated in light of its individual characteristics and "unusual or special circumstances may justify some deviation from [prior holdings]." In re Pyles, 421 N.W.2d 321, 325 (Minn.1988). See also In re Isaacs, 451 N.W.2d 209, 211 (Minn.1990) (discipline depends on specific facts together with any aggravating or mitigating circumstances).
We agree with the referee that respondent's persistent neglect of client matters and failure to communicate with clients warrants supervised probation. In imposing probation, we have often required initiation of office practices and procedures designed to facilitate timely handling of legal matters. See In re McCoy, 375 *602 N.W.2d 471 (Minn.1985) (two years' supervised probation conditioned in part on initiation of office systems and procedures for responding to clients in a reasonable time). We further agree with the referee that respondent's misconduct demands a period of suspension from the practice of law in addition to supervised probation. Respondent's neglect and failure to communicate were coupled with intentional misrepresentations to clients and numerous instances of noncooperation with the Director's investigations. Suspension is therefore appropriate. See In re Peck, 302 N.W.2d 356, 360 (Minn.1981) (neglect of legal matters added to misrepresentations to clients justifies suspension); In re Gorgos, 382 N.W.2d 857 (Minn.1986) (unreasonable delay in civil matters, misrepresentations to client, and noncooperation with Director's investigation justifies six months' suspension followed by three years' supervised probation); In re Moore, 387 N.W.2d 435 (Minn. 1986) (failure to respond to client inquiries coupled with failure to respond to Director's requests for information and to appear at scheduled meetings merits six-month suspension followed by two-year probation).
In imposing discipline on respondent, we have noted his near-complete lack of remorse or contrition and his adamant refusal to acknowledge and accept responsibility for his misconduct. See In re Pokorny, 453 N.W.2d 345 (Minn.1990) (attorney's lack of remorse, contrition, and willingness to make amends justifies indefinite suspension rather than admonition); In re Weiblen, 439 N.W.2d 7, 12 (Minn.1989) (adamant refusal to acknowledge wrongdoing considered aggravating factor); In re Daffer, 344 N.W.2d 382, 385 (Minn.1984) (admission of and remorse for wrongdoing mitigates against disbarment).
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED:
1. Respondent, F. Patrick McGrath, is suspended from the practice of law for a period of 90 days effective 5 days from the date this order is released.
2. Respondent may apply for reinstatement pursuant to Rule 18, Rules on Lawyers Professional Responsibility (RLPR), after 90 days from the date this order is released on the following conditions:
a. Pursuant to RLPR 18(e), respondent must successfully complete the written examination on the subject of Professional Responsibility required by the State Board of Law Examiners;
b. Respondent must demonstrate to the Director his compliance with RLPR 26;
c. Respondent must pay $750 in costs to the Office of Lawyers Professional Responsibility as required by RLPR 24;
d. Respondent must, at the time he applies for reinstatement, nominate an attorney acceptable to the Director who will monitor his compliance with the terms of his probation. If respondent does not name a supervisor acceptable to the Director, the Director may appoint a licensed Minnesota lawyer to supervise his probation.
3. If reinstated, respondent will remain on supervised probation for two years pursuant to RLPR 15(a)(4). As a condition of probation, respondent must fully cooperate with his supervisor's monitoring of his probation.
4. As a condition of his probation, respondent must demonstrate to the Director that he has initiated office procedures to ensure prompt responses to communications from clients and courts and to facilitate timely review and completion of legal matters.
5. As a condition of probation, respondent must provide his supervisor a monthly inventory and status report of all open files by the tenth day of each month.
6. Respondent's probation is conditioned upon payment of $4,500 to Kevin Weniger as reimbursement for overpaid legal fees within nine months from the date of his reinstatement. Respondent must provide the Director proof that this payment was timely made.
NOTES
[1]  Rule 1.3 states: "[a] lawyer shall act with reasonable diligence and promptness in representing a client." MRPC 1.3. Rule 1.4(a) states: "[a] lawyer shall keep a client reasonably informed about the status of a matter and promptly comply with reasonable requests for information." MRPC 1.4(a).
[2]  Rule 1.16(d) states: "[u]pon termination of representation, a lawyer shall take steps to the extent reasonably practicable to protect a client's interests, such as * * * refunding any advance payment of fee that has not been earned." MRPC 1.16(d).
Rule 3.4 states: "[a] lawyer shall not: * * * (c) knowingly disobey an obligation under the rules of a tribunal except for an open refusal based on an assertion that no valid obligation exists." MRPC 3.4(c).
Rule 8.4 states: "[i]t is professional misconduct for a lawyer to: * * * (c) engage in conduct involving dishonesty, * * * or misrepresentation; (d) engage in conduct that is prejudicial to the administration of justice." MRPC 8.4(c), (d).
[3]  Rule 8.1(a)(3) states:
[A] lawyer * * * in connection with a disciplinary matter shall not:
* * * * * *
(3) knowingly fail to respond to an admission or discipline authority's lawfully authorized demand for information by either providing the information sought or making a good faith challenge to the demand.
MRPC 8.1(a)(3).
Rule 25 states:
(a) Lawyer's Duty. It shall be the duty of any lawyer who is the subject of an investigation * * * to cooperate with the District Committee, the Director, or the Director's staff, the Board, or a Panel, by complying with reasonable requests, including requests to:
* * * * * *
(2) Furnish in writing a full and complete explanation covering the matter under consideration[.]
RLPR 25(a)(2) (Supp.1989).

=== CASE 2211226 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:03.842491+00 ===

40 Wis. 2d 591 (1968)
162 N.W.2d 581
COXE and wife, Respondents,
v.
MID-AMERICA RANCH & RECREATION CORPORATION, Appellant:
PRODUCTION CREDIT ASSOCIATION, Defendant.
No. 30.
Supreme Court of Wisconsin.
Argued October 28, 1968.
Decided November 26, 1968.
*594 For the appellant there was a brief by John G. Barsness, attorney, and Roger G. Schnitzler of counsel, both of Madison, and oral argument by Mr. Schnitzler.
For the respondents there was a brief by Roberts, Boardman, Suhr & Curry, and oral argument by Thomas J. Sobota, all of Madison.
HANLEY, J.
The following issues are raised on this appeal:
(1) Was the failure to carry proper insurance immaterial to the land contract as a matter of law;
(2) Does the trial court have the discretion to refuse strict foreclosure on a land contract when the alleged breach of the contract is immaterial; and
(3) Is the continuance of a vendee's default for sixty days a condition precedent to the vendor's remedy of strict foreclosure?
The first two issues are raised by the appellant and the last issue is presented by the respondents.
Immateriality of Insurance.
Mid-America agrees that a vendor has a right to rescind for nonperformance of a contract where there has been a material breach, but suggests that not every breach of contract is material. Thus the appellant would have this court hold that this vendee has substantially *595 complied with the contract, that the vendor has not been injured by reason of any breach, and that the failure to carry insurance as required by the contract was immaterial as a matter of law.
The problem with the appellant's contention is that this is an appeal from an order overruling a demurrer.
"... It is an established rule of pleading in this state ... that in an attack by general demurrer, if a complaint states any cause of action, the demurrer must be overruled." Singer v. Singer (1944), 245 Wis. 191, 196, 14 N.W.2d 43.
"The plaintiff is entitled to all the reasonable inferences which can be drawn from the facts pleaded.... A complaint must be liberally construed in favor of the pleader...." Jezo v. Jezo (1963), 19 Wis. 2d 78, 82, 119 N.W.2d 471.
"The demurrer admits the material facts alleged in the complaint...." Jolliffe v. East Troy (1963), 20 Wis. 2d 653, 655, 123 N.W.2d 567.
This complaint alleges the existence of a contract, a copy of which is made a part of the complaint. The contract specifically states that:
"The Purchaser covenants and agrees ...
". . .
"2. To keep said premises insured for fire and extended coverage for at least the sum of $48,000.00 ...."
The complaint states further that the insurance was not kept in effect and that the property remained uninsured from February 20, 1967, except for $12,000 of insurance obtained by the plaintiffs. Under the terms of the contract, this default, if it existed for sixty days, made the entire amount of principal and interest due immediately.
Unless this court is willing to hold as a matter of law, from the face of this complaint, that the failure to obtain insurance was immaterial to the contract, a good cause of action for strict foreclosure has been alleged.
*596 Whether or not a provision in a given contract is material to the contract would ordinarily be a question of fact. Each case would turn on its own particular circumstances. However, the limited information which is available to the court on a demurrer makes such a factual ruling impossible in most instances. The facts of this case correspond to the theoretical situation. It could conceivably be true that the failure of the vendee to carry the insurance was not a substantial breach of the land contract. Without receiving further information, however, no court could properly rule on the question.[3]
Discretion as to Strict Foreclosure.
Since there is no way to determine at this point in the case whether or not the insurance provision was material to the contract, we need not determine whether the trial judge may refuse to order strict foreclosure when the alleged breach of the contract is not substantial. We prefer to determine that issue in a case where there has been a complete factual determination at the trial court level.
Default Must Exist for Sixty Days.
The respondents argue that the continuance of a default for sixty days is not a condition precedent to an action for strict foreclosure of the land contract. A portion of the applicable provision was set out previously in this opinion. In order to more fully appreciate the respondents' argument, however, the whole provision follows:
*597 "The Purchaser hereby covenants and agrees that time shall be deemed to be of the essence of this contract and in case of default in the payment of any principal or interest when the same shall become due, or in the performance of any of the conditions, covenants, or promises by the Purchaser herein to be kept or performed, and such default shall continue for a period of sixty (60) days, then the Vendor may, at his option, declare the contract at an end, all rights of the Purchaser under this agreement cancelled, and the amounts paid by the Purchaser hereunder forfeited, the same to remain the Vendor's property as rental of said premises and as liquidated damages for the failure completely to fulfill this agreement; and the Vendor shall forthwith and without notice have the right of re-entry; or, at the option of the Vendor and without notice to the Purchaser, notice being hereby expressly waived, the whole amount of unpaid principal shall be deemed to have become due and payable; in case such option shall be exercised, the unpaid principal and interest together with all sums which may be or have been paid by the Vendor as herein authorized with interest on such disbursements at the rate aforesaid shall be collectible in a suit at law, or by foreclosure of this contract in the same manner as if the whole of said unpaid principal had been due at the time when any such default occurred, and the indebtedness shall embrace, with said unpaid principal and interest, all the sums so disbursed with interest as aforesaid."
The respondents argue that the quoted provision does not discuss the vendor's remedy of strict foreclosure and conclude that the sixty-day provision is only applicable to the specific remedies discussed in the contractual provision. However, respondents concede that the vendor in the land contract has a strict foreclosure remedy upon the buyer's default.
This court discussed the remedy of strict foreclosure in Kallenbach v. Lake Publications, Inc. (1966), 30 Wis. 2d 647, 652, 142 N.W.2d 212:
"... the Wisconsin cases and writers generally explain strict foreclosure as a rescission, voiding or ending or `calling off' of the contract by the vendor.... New *598 real-estate form 36 uses the terminology that the vendor can declare `the contract at an end' when a default occurs. ..."
Clearly, it is the position of this court that real-estate form 36 does contemplate a strict foreclosure in the following language:
"... then the Vendor may, at his option, declare the contract at an end, all rights of the Purchaser under this agreement cancelled, and the amounts paid by the Purchaser hereunder forfeited...."
This is an exact explanation of what occurs when the vendor elects strict foreclosure as his remedy. However, a vendee's rights are forfeited subject to the court of equity's approval.
We conclude that the trial court was correct in holding that the continuance of a default for sixty days was a condition precedent to the commencement of an action for strict foreclosure.
By the Court.Order affirmed.
NOTES
[3]  It seems that a proper decision on the materiality of the insurance would depend upon the value of the improvements on the land, the amount still due on the contract, the importance placed on the provision by the contracting parties, etc.

=== CASE 9737599 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:29:41.286766+00 ===

The following memorandum was filed February 4, 1969.
Per Curiam
(on motion for rehearing). On rehearing respondent-wife argues that if the court considered equitable offsets for the appellant-husband in the contempt proceedings, it was also proper for the trial court in those proceedings to consider equitable debits in the form of increased support provisions.
The matter of contempt goes to the narrow question of appellant’s compliance with the provisions of the divorce judgment. The trial court properly ruled that in deter*649mining this question it could consider whether the judgment was duplicitous and, if it was, that appellant would be credited with equitable offsets for such amounts.
The question of whether there had been a change of circumstances from the wife’s standpoint which would justify a support increase does not relate to the question of whether the appellant complied with the support provisions of the divorce judgment and, therefore, is beyond the scope of the contempt proceeding. Such a matter must be raised in a petition to the trial court as provided in sec. 247.25, Stats. This the respondent did not do. Even if she had, the trial court would have been without jurisdiction under sec. 247.25, to order a retroactive increase in the support provision of the judgment.
The motion for rehearing is denied without costs.

=== CASE 2211251 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:04.137717+00 ===

771 N.E.2d 609 (2002)
331 Ill. App.3d 504
264 Ill.Dec. 905
The PEOPLE of the State of Illinois, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
Wayne M. DORETHY, Jr., Defendant-Appellant.
No. 3-01-0537.
Appellate Court of Illinois, Third District.
June 11, 2002.
Kerry J. Bryson, Office of the State Appellate Defender, Ottawa, for Wayne Dorethy, Jr.
*610 John X. Breslin, Deputy Director, State's Attorneys Appellate Prosecutor, Ottawa, William Poncin, State's Attorney, Macomb, for the People.
Justice HOLDRIDGE delivered the opinion of the court:
The defendant, Wayne M. Dorethy, Jr., pled guilty to criminal sexual assault (720 ILCS 5/12-13 (West 2000)). In another case that is not the subject of this appeal, he pled guilty to aggravated robbery (720 ILCS 5/18-5 (West 2000)). Both pleas were fully negotiated. The defendant was admonished that he could be ordered to serve his sentences for these offenses either consecutively or concurrently. The defendant was sentenced to concurrent terms of six and four years' imprisonment, respectively, for these offenses. His motion to withdraw his guilty plea was denied.
For the first time on appeal, the defendant argues that his sentence is void because consecutive sentences were mandatory under the applicable sentencing statute (730 ILCS 5/5-8-4(b) (West 2000)). He contends that because his sentence is void, we may consider this argument for the first time on appeal. The defendant further submits that his plea was not given knowingly and voluntarily because he was not admonished that consecutive sentences were mandatory rather than discretionary. He argues, therefore, that he should be allowed to withdraw his guilty plea. He also contends that his attorney failed to comply with the certificate requirements of Supreme Court Rule 604(d) (188 Ill.2d R. 604(d)). We reverse and remand.
BACKGROUND
The defendant was charged with having committed armed robbery on January 5, 2000, in case No. AO-CF-95. In case No. AO-CF-61, he was charged with having committed criminal sexual assault on January 10, 2000. After negotiating with the prosecutor, the defendant agreed to plead guilty to aggravated robbery rather than armed robbery in case No. AO-CF-95 and to plead guilty to criminal sexual assault in case No. AO-CF-61. In exchange for the defendant's guilty pleas, the State would (1) dismiss a charge for driving while license revoked or suspended in case No. AO-TR-3536; (2) recommend a six-year sentence for aggravated robbery; (3) recommend a four-year sentence for criminal sexual assault; and (4) recommend that the sentences be served, concurrently rather than consecutively.
At the plea hearing held on February 5, 2001, the judge admonished the defendant that his sentences "could run consecutively, one after the other; or concurrently, at the same time." The judge concurred in the terms of the plea agreement. The defendant was sentenced consistently with this agreement at the conclusion of the hearing.
On March 7, 2001, the defendant filed a pro se motion to withdraw his guilty pleas in both cases. In his motion, he argued that (1) he was not guilty, and (2) he had entered his plea without fully understanding the nature of the agreement and the consequences of his plea. He contended that he had not been informed that he would serve 85% of his sentence under the truth-in-sentencing statute. The court denied the defendant's motion to withdraw. The defendant appealed.
ANALYSIS
I. Consecutive Sentencing
For the first time on appeal, the defendant contends that the court's sentencing order is void because consecutive sentences were mandatory.
*611 When multiple sentences are imposed, and one of the offenses for which the defendant was convicted was section 12-13 of the Criminal Code of 1961 (720 ILCS 5/12-13 (West 2000)), the court shall enter sentences to run consecutively. 730 ILCS 5/5-8-4(a, b) (West 2000).
The State relies upon People v. Maxwell, 264 Ill.App.3d 323, 201 Ill.Dec. 548, 636 N.E.2d 980 (1994), and People v. Caruth, 322 Ill.App.3d 226, 256 Ill.Dec. 323, 751 N.E.2d 1160 (2001), for the proposition that consecutive sentences were discretionary rather than mandatory in this case. Maxwell concerned the 1987 version of section 5-8-4(a) of the Unified Code of Corrections (Ill.Rev.Stat.1987, ch. 38, par. 1005-8-4(a)), which was substantially different from the statute under which the defendant was sentenced. We find Maxwell to be inapposite to the present case.
In Caruth, the defendant pled guilty to home invasion in one case, and he was found guilty of residential burglary and aggravated criminal sexual assault in another case. At a joint sentencing hearing, the trial court imposed consecutive sentences for all three offenses. This court stated in Caruth that "consecutive sentencing is mandatory for certain triggering offenses" under section 5-8-4(a), (b). Caruth, 322 Ill.App.3d at 230, 256 Ill.Dec. 323, 751 N.E.2d at 1163. The triggering offense in Caruth was aggravated criminal sexual assault (720 ILCS 5/12-14 (West 1998)).
In the present case, Caruth is helpful to the defendant, but not to the State. This defendant was convicted of criminal sexual assault (section 12-13), which is listed as a triggering offense in section 5-8-4(b) just before aggravated criminal sexual assault (section 12-14). Under Caruth, we agree with the defendant that consecutive sentences were mandatory in this case.
The State contends that the defendant's argument is waived because he failed to raise it in his motion to withdraw the guilty plea. Supreme Court Rule 604(d) states that on appeal, any issue not raised in a defendant's motion to withdraw shall be deemed waived. 188 Ill.2d R. 604(d). Therefore, we agree with the State that the defendant's argument was waived. The defendant's rejoinder is that we may consider his argument regardless of waiver because his sentencing order is void.
A sentence that does not conform to statutory requirements is void. People v. Arna, 168 Ill.2d 107, 212 Ill.Dec. 963, 658 N.E.2d 445 (1995). A void sentence may be challenged at any time. People v. Ortiz, 321 Ill.App.3d 920, 255 Ill.Dec. 89, 748 N.E.2d 793 (2001).
In this case, the defendant's sentences are void because they do not conform to the statutory requirement making consecutive sentences mandatory under these circumstances. Because his sentences are void, we may consider his argument regardless of waiver.
II. Admonishments
The defendant further submits that he was not properly admonished that consecutive sentences were mandatory rather than discretionary.
At the guilty plea hearing, the trial court must substantially comply with admonishing the defendant by informing him of the minimum and maximum sentences prescribed by law, including consecutive sentencing. 177 Ill.2d R. 402(a). Informing a defendant of the possibility of consecutive sentences when consecutive sentences are mandatory is an inadequate admonishment under Rule 402. Under such circumstances, the defendant should be allowed to withdraw his guilty plea and plead anew. People v. Hampton, 249 Ill. *612 App.3d 873, 189 Ill.Dec. 344, 620 N.E.2d 3 (1993).
In this case, the defendant was improperly admonished that consecutive sentences were discretionary rather than mandatory. Therefore, we rule that he should be permitted to withdraw his guilty plea and plead anew. Because of this ruling, we need not address the defendant's argument concerning his attorney's Rule 604(d) certificate.
CONCLUSION
For the foregoing reasons, we reverse the judgment of the McDonough County circuit court and remand for further proceedings.
Reversed and remanded.
LYTTON, P.J., and McDADE, J., concur.

=== CASE 2211258 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:04.22962+00 ===

210 Cal.App.2d 825 (1962)
ASSOCIATED VENDORS, INC., Plaintiff and Appellant,
v.
OAKLAND MEAT CO., INC. et al., Defendants and Respondents.
Civ. No. 20302.
California Court of Appeals. First Dist., Div. One.
Dec. 17, 1962.
Robert C. Burnstein and Sandra J. Shapiro for Plaintiff and Appellant.
Connella, Sherburne & Myers and E. Conrad Connella for Defendants and Respondents.
MOLINARI, J.
Appellant, Associated Vendors, Inc., brought this action against respondents Oakland Meat Co., Inc., (hereinafter referred to as Meat Co.) Oakland Meat & Packing Co., (hereinafter referred to as Packing Co.), and several individuals, to collect unpaid rental on property leased by appellant to respondent Packing Co., and to recover the difference between the rental provided in the lease with Packing Co. and the rental now being paid by a new tenant. Appellant alleged that, upon Packing Co.'s default in payment of rent and vacation of the premises, appellant relet the premises to one Frank H. Black, on Packing Co.'s behalf, at a monthly rental which was less than the rental Packing Co. was obligated to pay under the terms of the lease. Appellant sought to impose liability upon the Meat Co. and the individuals on the theory that Packing Co., the lessee under the lease, was the alter ego of the other respondents. Appellant also sought attorney's fees and an injunction against respondents restraining them from selling or otherwise transferring certain obligations incurred by Frank H. Black.
Following a trial on the merits, the court found in favor of appellant as against Packing Co., and in favor of the other defendants to the action. Appellant appeals from the judgment. *828
The sole issue on appeal is whether the trial court erred in holding that Packing Co. was not the alter ego of respondents.
Statement of Facts
The appellant, as lessor, leases market space in the Housewives Market in Oakland. In November 1956, one of the appellant's tenants, Clarence Klieman, went into bankruptcy. The appellant thereupon entered into the negotiations hereinafter set forth for a lease of the premises formerly occupied by Klieman. At the time of said negotiations Meat Co. was an established meat wholesaler. The directors and officers of Meat Co. were Zaharis, Lafayette, White and Frueh. Zaharis was its president and the owner of 26 per cent of its stock. He had been an officer, director and shareholder since it was formed. Lafayette owned 26 per cent of the stock, while White and Frueh owned 24 per cent each. The preliminary negotiations for said lease were held at a meeting in November of 1956.
Allan Schulman, president of the appellant corporation, testified concerning said meeting as follows: that he, in his then capacity as secretary-treasurer of appellant, and Phil Davidson, one of its directors, met with respondents, Zaharis and Lafayette, at the office of Meat Co. to discuss the possible lease to Meat Co. of the meat department premises formerly occupied by Klieman; that Zaharis and Lafayette stated to him that "they" wanted to lease said department in order to recoup certain losses which they had sustained in sales of meat to Klieman; that he (Schulman) stated the rent would be $3,000 for the first month, and $1,500 every month thereafter, for a term of eight years; that he further stated that $4,500 was to be paid in advance, $1,500 thereof being lease security; and that no mention was made of the name of the person who would appear as lessee on the lease. Davidson's testimony regarding this meeting was substantially the same as Schulman's. He testified that at said meeting there was no mention of a lease to anyone other than Meat Co., and that he was of the opinion, then, that Associated Vendors was dealing with Meat Co.
Zaharis testified as follows with reference to the said meeting: That it was held on November 20, 1956, in Davidson's office, and not at that of the Meat Co.; that present, besides himself, were Davidson, Klieman, and Arthur Weikert. (Weikert was General Manager of the market.) That there never was any meeting between Schulman, Davidson, Lafayette *829 and himself; that at said meeting he (Zaharis) stated that he was interested in purchasing the fixtures which were being foreclosed, running the retail business, and signing a lease, providing the officers of Meat Co., who were meeting the next day, were interested; that he "was not interested in personal liability" and that he asked Weikert and Davidson if he "could use the name Housewives Meat Company for the new business as a new corporation"; that they said "no, it was too similar to the Housewives Market," and that then he (Zaharis) stated: " 'If you are interested in me signing a lease it will have to be a separate corporation.' " Zaharis testified further as to the terms of the proposed lease. (These were the same as those specified above by Schulman.) Lafayette denied being present at any such meeting.
Klieman testified that such a meeting was held, and that present were the same persons mentioned by Zaharis. Klieman testified further that at this meeting Zaharis stated that "he would have to have a new corporation because he wanted no personal liability on himself" or the Meat Co. Weikert denied being present at the meeting and stated that he did not meet Zaharis until 1959.
The evidence discloses that contemporaneously with these negotiations Zaharis had been in contact with a Mr. Stanley Whitney concerning the acquisition of a corporation known as Town & Country Farms, which was organized for the purpose of developing real estate, had not issued any stock and had never commenced doing any business. Whitney was the attorney for said corporation and pursuant to negotiations with Zaharis undertook to amend the articles and certificate of said corporation by changing its name to Oakland Meat & Packing Company (referred to herein as Packing Co.).
Zaharis testified, further, that the day after the aforesaid meeting, Weikert phoned him for "his answer"; that he told Weikert he "personally was interested in it" and that he "told them that if they wanted me to form a new corporation, sign the lease, that I wanted no personal liability, I would be glad to do it"; that Weikert said he would discuss it with the officials of appellant, and that if they agreed that they would make a lease and bring it to him; that a "day or two after the market was opened" he received another telephone call from Weikert wherein Weikert stated that "the officials of the corporation at the Housewives Market was interested in getting the lease signed because we were operating without *830 a lease"; that he replied that he "couldn't sign the lease until the corporation papers were back from Sacramento"; that a similar conversation was had one or two days later; and that the day following the last conversation the papers were obtained. Zaharis also testified that "we were operating for two or three days before there was a lease signed."
Copies of the lease in question had, in the meantime, been prepared by Robert C. Burnstein, attorney for appellant, who forwarded them to Whitney with a letter of transmittal specifically requesting that the lease be signed by an authorized officer of Packing Co. and that the seal of said corporation be impressed upon it. Whitney had continued to act as attorney for Packing Co., and upon the change of name becoming effective, proceeded to make application for a permit to issue stock under the new name. Both copies of the lease were subsequently signed in Whitney's office by Zaharis and White as president and secretary-treasurer, respectively, of Packing Co. and its seal was affixed thereto. Whitney then brought both copies of the lease, together with Packing Co.'s check for $4,500 representing the first month's rent and the security deposit, to the appellant's premises where they were signed by two officers of the appellant. The said lease designates the appellant as lessor and Packing Co. as lessee, and bears an execution date of December 3, 1956.
Whitney testified that he never represented Meat Co. and did not know of its existence until the time he was engaged to effect the said change of name. After the lease was signed, Whitney negotiated on behalf of Packing Co. for the purchase of certain fixtures from a certain Al Weikert (brother of the Weikert hereinbefore referred to). A conditional sales contract was entered into between said Al Weikert, as seller, and Packing Co., as purchaser. This contract was signed by Zaharis and White in their capacities as officers of Packing Co. Whitney testified that when he delivered the contract to Al Weikert it bore these signatures and Packing Co.'s seal. The terms of said contract provided for a down payment of $1,032.89, and a time balance of $14,787.08.
Pursuant to a permit for the issuance of stock, Zaharis became the sole shareholder of Packing Co. by the acquisition of 80 shares of its stock for which he paid $8,000. A certificate for said stock to Zaharis was issued on April 24, 1957. The officers and directors of Packing Co. were Zaharis, White and Frueh. Zaharis was elected its president. According *831 to the testimony of both Zaharis and Lafayette the latter was not in any way affiliated with Packing Co.
Schulman testified, further, that at the time said lease was being negotiated he was familiar with Meat Co.; that it had a good reputation and credit; and that he had not heard that a new company was being organized. He testified that he first heard of Packing Co. in November of 1958, and that prior to that time he did not know that there was a difference between Meat Co. and Packing Co., and that although he knew the lease was in Packing Co.'s name he did not know that this identified an organization separate from Meat Co. He also testified that he never saw a Packing Co. sign on the market premises.
Zaharis' total investment in Packing Co. was the $8,000 which he paid for the corporate stock. He withdrew $6,000 to $7,000 from Meat Co. These were personal funds and not company funds. Of the said sum of $8,000, the sum of $4,500 was used to pay the first month's rent and the lease deposit to appellant, the sum of $1,032.89 was used as a down payment on the fixtures, and the sum of $700 was paid as the first installment under the fixture conditional sale contract. When Packing Co. began business operations it had about $1,500 in cash. It had acquired on credit an opening inventory valued at between $2,000 and 3,000. The monthly rental was $1,500, the installment payment on the fixtures $700, and the weekly payroll was $893.67. The equipment in the shop belonged to the Trustee in Bankruptcy who permitted Packing Co. to use it pending the bankruptcy sale. The fixtures which were purchased for approximately $16,000 were valued by Zaharis at $60,000 in place, less than $50,000 if not installed. They were subsequently sold for $9,000.
About three months after the commencement of business Packing Co. was in need of funds. The sum of $3,500 was required to purchase the equipment from the trustee. Zaharis loaned $5,000 to the Packing Co. There are no minutes and no vote evidencing the transaction. A year later Zaharis needed the $5,000 for another venture. Packing Co. did not have the money to repay the loan, so a loan of $5,000 was made by Meat Co. to Packing Co. in order to repay Zaharis. This was the only loan ever made by Meat Co. to Packing Co. A chattel mortgage upon Packing Co.'s equity in the fixtures was executed on May 26, 1958, but was not recorded until December 17, 1958. This loan has not been repaid, nor has *832 Meat Co. made a demand for its payment. Zaharis did not make any other loans to Packing Co., nor did he pay any of its bills.
During Packing Co.'s business operations, Meat Co. advanced credit to Packing Co. Meat Co., however, was only one of several suppliers who continued to supply on credit. Packing Co.'s purchases amounted to approximately $25,000 per month. From 60 per cent to 70 per cent of such merchandise was procured from suppliers other than Meat Co. No price advantage was given or received by Meat Co. When Packing Co. vacated the leased premises it still owed Meat Co. about $15,000. This debt has not been paid nor have any arrangements been made for repayment. Zaharis testified: that this bill was not paid because the other creditors were paid in preference to Meat Co.; that he had guaranteed all other companies that there was no connection between the two companies; that he did not want to be responsible for owing any creditor any money; that he wanted to take the loss if any should arise; and that he wanted to protect his reputation. Lafayette testified: that Meat Co. did not intend to sue Packing Co. for this indebtedness because Packing Co. has no assets; that a suit would be worthless; and that the obligation would be merely written off. Packing Co. has paid all of its other obligations, bills and all of the rent up to the time it ceased doing business in January 1959.
Zaharis, White and Frueh rendered services to Packing Co. without compensation. They did, however, continue to receive their regular compensation from Meat Co. Zaharis testified that he devoted all of his time to Meat Co., and that his participation in the management of Packing Co. consisted of telephoning the manager of the market two or three times a day. Lafayette acted gratuitously as a business advisor and on occasion examined Packing Co.'s books. Lafayette testified, however, that he did not do any work on Packing Co.'s books, nor did he sign any of its checks. On occasion Lafayette would pick up the cash from the retail market.
Other than its retail activities in the Housewives Market, Packing Co. did not maintain an office. Its books were kept at the Meat Co.'s address, and its bookkeeper worked on Packing Co.'s books at the Meat Co.'s office. Most of Packing Co.'s mail was addressed to the retail premises, but on occasion some of it was addressed to the Meat Co.'s office. *833 On one occasion a letter was addressed to Meat Co., "attention Mr. Lafayette," concerning an employee of Packing Co. There was testimony that certain bills were addressed to Meat Co. for items properly concerning Packing Co. The Packing Co. had a separate telephone at the retail outlet but did not have a phone at the Meat Co. office. Mail arriving at the Meat Co.'s office would be opened by the same person, a Miss Duarte, whether addressed to Meat Co. or to Packing Co. Miss Duarte acted as bookkeeper for Packing Co. part of the time and for Meat Co. the rest of the time. There was testimony concerning the approval of bills received through the mail at Meat Co.'s office. Because some of the officers acted in an official capacity for both companies the persons who would approve paying the bills were often the same regardless of which company paid the bill. Packing Co.'s bills were mailed from Meat Co.'s office, and all of said company's bills were paid from that office by said bookkeeper. All payments and all disbursements of Packing Co., including rent to appellant, were made upon its own checks and from its own bank accounts.
The licenses and permits permitting Packing Co. to operate a retail meat business bore the name "Oakland Meat Company." These licenses and permits were posted in a conspicuous place by the manager. City license notices were sent to "Oakland Meat Company, Housewives Market." The fees, however, were paid for by Packing Co. Zaharis testified that he had not seen the licenses and permits, and that the name "Oakland Meat" was put thereon without his permission. He also stated that this name was an abbreviation of Packing Co.'s name. The union contract covering Packing Co.'s retail employees only showed the name "Oakland Meat" as employer and was signed by Crowell, the manager of the retail department. Zaharis testified he had never seen a copy of this contract and that it should have shown Packing Co.'s name as the employer. A union representative testified that retail butcher complaints and wage claims were taken up with Lafayette. Separate workmen's compensation and fire policies were carried by Packing Co. in its own name, but the public liability and property damage insurance coverage for Packing Co. was added to Meat Co.'s policy. The insurance broker testified that this was done at the suggestion of the insurance company because the identity of the individuals exposed to liability, with the exception of Lafayette, *834 was the same; that it was more expedient to have the coverage with one company, and also that there would be a saving in premiums. On occasion Meat Co.'s automobiles were used by Packing Co. Zaharis stated that this was done as a favor.
Zaharis also testified as to his credit, stating he could get several thousand dollars worth of meat on the signature of an employee in the market. He stated further that the sum of $1,000 to $1,500 together with the cash intake of $25,000 per month was adequate to operate the market for a month. It was his testimony that the market had brought in about $25,000 per month prior to Packing Co. taking over, and that while Packing Co. was operating the retail market it brought in from $6,000 to $7,000 per week. Several wholesalers' representatives testified that credit was extended to Packing Co. because they relied on Zaharis' personal credit and integrity and upon the standing of Meat Co. in the meat industry.
A Mr. Pitcher testified that he sold and serviced equipment at the retail premises from time to time; that he billed Meat Co.; and was never informed that the bill was directed to the wrong company. He testified further that he was told by a butcher at the retail market to deliver the merchandise there, but to send the bill to the Meat Co. Pitcher stated that he didn't know there was any difference between Meat Co. and Packing Co., and that he didn't realize that they were two different companies. He stated further that he did work for both the Meat Co. and Packing Co. and testified that certain invoices for merchandise delivered to and work done at the retail market were paid for by Packing Co. checks.
Other testimony was adduced from several persons who dealt with Packing Co. showing that some confused the names of the two corporations. A Mr. Pariani testified that he charged meat delivered to the retail store to Packing Co. but invoiced it to "Oakland Meat." Pariani, however, testified that he knew of the existence of the two companies; that he dealt with both of them; and that each had a separate account number. Mr. Egland, a representative of Swift & Company, stated that meat delivered to Packing Co. was billed to "Oakland Meat Company," but he also testified Swift sold meat to both companies; that he was aware of the existence of the two companies at the different addresses, and the different nature of the two companies. A Joseph Thelen testified that the records of his company (Lewis & *835 McDermott, Inc.) listed the name of "Oakland Meat Co." rather than Oakland Meat & Packing Co., but that it was a result of laxity or brevity, stating: "We knew it wasn't the same company." Thelen testified further that his company dealt with both corporations; that he knew they were separate corporations; and that separate ledger sheets were kept for each. A Mr. Vignaux of Victor Meat Corporation dealt with both companies and maintained separate accounts, listing each company by its proper name. There was also testimony to the effect that when a Pierce Packing Company billed Meat Co. for Packing Co.'s meat, Meat Co. (through Mr. Frueh) objected to this procedure to Guidoni, the manager of the retail outlet. The record contains further evidence, mostly repetitious, which gives conflicting impressions on the unity or separateness of the two corporations. There was also evidence of billings properly made, and testimony that, irrespective of the manner of billing, the disbursements for Packing Co.'s bills were on Packing Co's checks.
There was also evidence presented that Packing Co. and Meat Co. kept separate bank accounts, separate sets of accounts, made separate disbursements, using checks bearing the individual company name; maintained separate payrolls; that the companies used different fiscal years for tax purposes; that they were represented by different counsel; and that they maintained separate minutes.
The Trial Court's Findings
[1a] There is substantial evidence contained in the record to uphold the findings of the trial court under the time honored rule that on appeal all conflicts in the evidence must be resolved in favor of the respondent, and that all legitimate and reasonable inferences will be indulged in to uphold the findings of the trial court. [2] It is an elementary principle of law that the power of the appellate court begins and ends with a determination as to whether there is any substantial evidence, contradicted or uncontradicted, which will support the conclusion reached by the trial judge. (Thayer v. Pacific Elec. Ry. Co., 55 Cal.2d 430, 438 [11 Cal.Rptr. 560, 360 P.2d 56]; Crawford v. Southern Pacific Co., 3 Cal.2d 427, 429 [45 P.2d 183]; Wade v. Campbell, 200 Cal.App.2d 54, 63 [19 Cal.Rptr. 173].) The appellant, in its briefs, acknowledges that any conflicts in the evidence must be resolved in favor of respondents and therefore states that it *836 sets forth only the undisputed testimony in its statement of facts because it feels that this undisputed testimony alone is sufficient to compel reversal of the judgment below. [3] What the appellant overlooks is that this "undisputed testimony" may not be considered to the utter disregard of disputed testimony which favors respondents. The appellant's statement of facts presents a case upon which a trial court might decide to pierce the corporate veil, but looking to all of the facts, which we have narrated above, it is another matter to say that under these facts the corporate veil must be pierced.
[1b] The essence of the trial court's findings is that Packing Co. is a separate and distinct entity from Meat Co.; that it was not organized by any of the respondents; that it has never been the alter ego of any of the respondents or used by them to operate any of their businesses under other than their own names; that there was no confusion between the two corporations and their affairs were conducted separately; that there was no commingling of Packing Co.'s funds with those of Meat Co. or the individual respondents; and that Packing Co. was adequately capitalized in relation to the reasonable requirements of its business and corporate purposes.
The appellant does not attack any specific finding of the trial court but contends not only that the uncontroverted evidence discloses factors which require that the corporate entity be disregarded, but that the two elements of unity of ownership and inequity are so conclusively present as to compel the disregard of such entity. The appellant further asserts that Packing Co. was under-capitalized as a matter of law and that this factor is sufficient in itself to warrant a disregard of the corporate entity. In attempting to sustain its position the appellant relies, generally, upon appellate decisions which have upheld judgments disregarding the corporate entity where the factual situation presented supplied factors which allowed the trial court to arrive at that conclusion.
Did the Trial Court Err in Refusing to Disregard the Corporate Entity?
[4] It is a fundamental rule that "[t]he conditions under which the corporate entity may be disregarded, or the corporation be regarded as the alter ego of the stockholders, *837 necessarily vary according to the circumstances in each case inasmuch as the doctrine is essentially an equitable one and for that reason is particularly within the province of the trial court. Only general rules may be laid down for guidance." (Stark v. Coker, 20 Cal.2d 839, 846 [129 P.2d 390]; H.A.S. Loan Service, Inc. v. McColgan, 21 Cal.2d 518, 523 [133 P.2d 391, 145 A.L.R. 349]; Automotriz etc. De California v. Resnick, 47 Cal.2d 792, 796 [306 P.2d 1].) [5] The basic rule stated by our Supreme Court as a guide in the application of this doctrine is as follows: The two requirements are (1) that there be such unity of interest and ownership that the separate personalities of the corporation and the individual no longer exist, and (2) that, if the acts are treated as those of the corporation alone, an inequitable result will follow. (Automotriz etc. De California v. Resnick, supra, 47 Cal.2d 792, 796; Stark v. Coker, supra, 20 Cal.2d 839, 846; Watson v. Commonwealth Ins. Co., 8 Cal.2d 61, 68 [63 P.2d 295]; Minifie v. Rowley, 187 Cal. 481, 487 [202 P. 673].) With respect to the second requirement, it is sufficient that it appear that recognition of the acts as those of a corporation only will produce inequitable results. (Stark v. Coker, supra, p. 846; Watson v. Commonwealth Ins. Co., supra, p. 68.) [6] The general rule is thus stated as follows: " 'Before a corporation's acts and obligations can be legally recognized as those of a particular person, and vice versa, it must be made to appear that the corporation is not only influenced and governed by that person, but that there is such a unity of interest and ownership that the individuality, or separateness, of such person and corporation has ceased, and that the facts are such that an adherence to the fiction of the separate existence of the corporation would, under the particular circumstances, sanction a fraud or promote injustice.' " (Talbot v. Fresno-Pacific Corp., 181 Cal.App.2d 425, 431 [5 Cal.Rptr. 361]; Temple v. Bodega Bay Fisheries, Inc., 180 Cal.App.2d 279, 283 [4 Cal.Rptr. 300].)
The gist of the cases which have considered the doctrine is that both of these requirements must be found to exist before the corporate existence will be disregarded; that such determination is primarily one for the trial court and is not a question of law; and that the conclusion of the trier of fact will not be disturbed if it be supported by substantial evidence. (See also H.A.S. Loan Service, Inc. v. McColgan, supra, 21 Cal.2d 518, 524; Kasutoff v. Wahlstrom, 196 Cal.App.2d 65, 69 *838 [16 Cal.Rptr. 207]; Talbot v. Fresno-Pacific Corp., supra, 181 Cal.App.2d 425, 432; Carlesimo v. Schwebel, 87 Cal.App.2d 482, 492 [197 P.2d 167].) [7] It should also be noted that, while the doctrine does not depend on the presence of actual fraud, it is designed to prevent what would be fraud or injustice, if accomplished. Accordingly, bad faith in one form or another is an underlying consideration and will be found in some form or another in those cases wherein the trial court was justified in disregarding the corporate entity. (See Talbot v. Fresno-Pacific Corp., supra, 181 Cal.App.2d 425, 431; Hollywood Cleaning & Pressing Co. v. Hollywood Laundry Service, Inc., 217 Cal. 124, 129 [17 P.2d 709]; Carlesimo v. Schwebel, supra, 87 Cal.App.2d 482, 491; Erkenbrecher v. Grant, 187 Cal. 7 [200 P. 641].)
A review of the cases which have discussed the problem discloses the consideration of a variety of factors which were pertinent to the trial court's determination under the particular circumstances of each case. Among these are the following: Commingling of funds and other assets, failure to segregate funds of the separate entities, and the unauthorized diversion of corporate funds or assets to other than corporate uses (Riddle v. Leuschner, 51 Cal.2d 574 [335 P.2d 107]; Talbot v. Fresno-Pacific Corp., supra, p. 431; Thomson v. L. C. Roney & Co., 112 Cal.App.2d 420 [246 P.2d 1017]; Asamen v. Thompson, 55 Cal.App.2d 661 [131 P.2d 841]; Goldberg v. Engelberg, 34 Cal.App.2d 10 [92 P.2d 935]; Sweet v. Watson's Nursery, 33 Cal.App.2d 699 [92 P.2d 812]); the treatment by an individual of the assets of the corporation as his own (Minton v. Cavaney, 56 Cal.2d 576 [15 Cal.Rptr. 641, 364 P.2d 473]; Thomson v. L. C. Roney & Co., supra; Riddle v. Leuschner, supra); the failure to obtain authority to issue stock or to subscribe to or issue the same (Automotriz etc. De California v. Resnick, supra, 47 Cal.2d 792; Wheeler v. Superior Mortgage Co., 196 Cal.App.2d 822 [17 Cal.Rptr. 291]; Marr v. Postal Union Life Ins. Co., 40 Cal.App.2d 673 [105 P.2d 649]; Claremont Press Pub. Co. v. Barksdale, 187 Cal.App.2d 813 [10 Cal.Rptr. 214]; Engineering etc. Corp. v. Longridge Inv Co., 153 Cal.App.2d 404 [314 P.2d 563]; Shafford v. Otto Sales Co., Inc., 149 Cal.App.2d 428 [308 P.2d 428]); the holding out by an individual that he is personally liable for the debts of the corporation (Stark v. Coker, supra, 20 Cal.2d 839; Shafford v. Otto Sales Co., Inc., supra); the failure to maintain minutes or adequate corporate records, and the confusion of the records of the separate entities *839 (Riddle v. Leuschner, supra, 51 Cal.2d 574; Stark v. Coker, supra; Temple v. Bodega Bay Fisheries, Inc., supra, 180 Cal.App.2d 279; Shafford v. Otto Sales Co., Inc., supra); the identical equitable ownership in the two entities; the identification of the equitable owners thereof with the domination and control of the two entities; identification of the directors and officers of the two entities in the responsible supervision and management; sole ownership of all of the stock in a corporation by one individual or the members of a family (Riddle v. Leuschner, supra; Stark v. Coker, supra; McCombs v. Rudman, 197 Cal.App.2d 46 [17 Cal.Rptr. 351]; Talbot v. Fresno-Pacific Corp., supra, 181 Cal.App.2d 425; Claremont Press Pub. Co. v. Barksdale, supra, 187 Cal.App.2d 813; Thomson v. L. C. Roney Co., supra, 112 Cal.App.2d 420; Asamen v. Thompson, supra, 55 Cal.App.2d 661; Sweet v. Watson's Nursery, supra, 33 Cal.App.2d 699; Goldberg v. Engleberg, supra, 34 Cal.App.2d 10; Gordon v. Aztec Brewing Co., 33 Cal.2d 514 [203 P.2d 522]; Pan Pacific Sash & Door Co. v. Greendale Park, Inc., 166 Cal.App.2d 652 [333 P.2d 802]; Shea v. Leonis, 14 Cal.2d 666 [96 P.2d 332]); the use of the same office or business location; the employment of the same employees and/or attorney (McCombs v. Rudman, supra; Talbot v. Fresno-Pacific Corp., supra; Thomson v. L. C. Roney Co., supra; Pan Pacific Sash & Door Co. v. Greendale Park, Inc., supra); the failure to adequately capitalize a corporation; the total absence of corporate assets, and undercapitalization (Minton v. Cavaney, supra, 56 Cal.2d 576; Automotriz etc. De California v. Resnick, supra, 47 Cal.2d 792; Stark v. Coker, supra, 20 Cal.2d 839; Talbot v. Fresno-Pacific Corp., supra, 181 Cal.App.2d 425; Temple v. Bodega Bay Fisheries, Inc., supra, 180 Cal.App.2d 279; Wheeler v. Superior Mortgage Co., supra, 196 Cal.App.2d 822; Claremont Press Pub. Co. v. Barksdale, supra, 187 Cal.App.2d 813; Engineering etc. Corp. v. Longridge Inv. Co., supra, 153 Cal.App.2d 404; Shafford v. Otto Sales Co., Inc., supra, 149 Cal.App.2d 428; Shea v. Leonis, supra, 14 Cal.2d 666; Pan Pacific Sash & Door Co. v. Greendale Park, Inc., supra, 166 Cal.App.2d 652); the use of a corporation as a mere shell, instrumentality or conduit for a single venture or the business of an individual or another corporation (McCombs v. Rudman, supra, 197 Cal.App.2d 46; Asamen v. Thompson, supra, 55 Cal.App.2d 661; Engineering etc. Corp. v. Longridge Inv. Co., supra; Pan Pacific Sash & Door Co. v. Greendale Park, Inc., supra); the concealment and *840 misrepresentation of the identity of the responsible ownership, management and financial interest, or concealment of personal business activities (Riddle v. Leuschner, supra, 51 Cal.2d 574; Shafford v. Otto Sales Co., Inc., supra); the disregard of legal formalities and the failure to maintain arm's length relationships among related entities (Riddle v. Leuschner, supra, 51 Cal.2d 574; McCombs v. Rudman, supra; Wheeler v. Superior Mortgage Co., supra; Pan Pacific Sash & Door Co. v. Greendale Park, Inc., supra); the use of the corporate entity to procure labor, services or merchandise for another person or entity (Temple v. Bodega Bay Fisheries, Inc., supra; Pan Pacific Sash & Door Co. v. Greendale Park, Inc., supra; Engineering etc. Corp. v. Longridge Inv. Co., supra); the diversion of assets from a corporation by or to a stockholder or other person or entity, to the detriment of creditors, or the manipulation of assets and liabilities between entities so as to concentrate the assets in one and the liabilities in another (Riddle v. Leuschner, supra, 51 Cal.2d 574; Thomson v. L. C. Roney Co., supra, 112 Cal.App.2d 420; Sweet v. Watson's Nursery, supra, 33 Cal.App.2d 699; Talbot v. Fresno-Pacific Corp., supra, 181 Cal.App.2d 425); the contracting with another with intent to avoid performance by use of a corporate entity as a shield against personal liability, or the use of a corporation as a subterfuge of illegal transactions (Wheeler v. Superior Mortgage Co., supra, 196 Cal.App.2d 822; Claremont Press Pub. Co. v. Barksdale, supra, 187 Cal.App.2d 813; Shafford v. Otto Sales Co., Inc., supra, 149 Cal.App.2d 428; Asamen v. Thompson, supra, 55 Cal.App.2d 661); and the formation and use of a corporation to transfer to it the existing liability of another person or entity (Shea v. Leonis, supra, 14 Cal.2d 666; Engineering etc. Corp. v. Longridge Inv. Co., supra, 153 Cal.App.2d 404). A perusal of these cases reveals that in all instances several of the factors mentioned were present. It is particularly significant that while it was held, in each instance, that the trial court was warranted in disregarding the corporate entity, the factors considered by it were not deemed to be conclusive upon the trier of fact but were found to be supported by substantial evidence.
In the instant case the presence or absence of any of these factors, as well as the consideration of any other circumstances which would have warranted the trier of fact to disregard the corporate entity, were within the province of the trial court. [1c] There was ample evidence to support the inferences drawn by the lower court that there was not such a *841 unity of interest and ownership as between Packing Co. and Meat Co., or as between Packing Co. and the individual respondents, as to destroy the individuality of such corporations and the owner or owners of their stock. We need not repeat the evidence in detail, but a reiteration of the following facts supports the sufficiency of the trial court's findings, to wit: Zaharis' ownership of 26 per cent of Meat Co.'s stock and his ownership of 100 per cent of Packing Co.'s stock; the ownership by Lafayette of 26 per cent of Meat Co.'s stock and the fact that he was not a director or officer of Packing Co.; the ownership by White and Frueh of 24 per cent of Meat Co.'s stock each and their nonownership of Packing Co.'s stock; the separate incorporation of two corporations at different times; the employment of separate counsel by each corporation and the fact that the attorney for Packing Co. was not the attorney for any of the respondents; the issuance of stock by Packing Co. pursuant to permit and its compliance with the formalities required by the Division of Corporations; the keeping of separate minutes by Packing Co. and its holding of a number of meetings; the maintenance of separate records and bank accounts by Packing Co.; the fact that Packing Co. had its own employees and a separate payroll; the extent of the participation of Zaharis and the other individual respondents in the daily business affairs of Packing Co.; the making of disbursements by Packing Co. through its own checks; the absence of the commingling of funds; the fact that Meat Co. supplied Packing Co. from 30 per cent to 45 per cent of the meat sold by the latter, the remainder coming from other suppliers; the preparation of the lease by appellant's own attorney and the naming of Packing Co. as the lessee therein; and Zaharis' statement that he did not want any personal liability and that he would form a new corporation. Any conflict in the evidence with respect to any of these matters was, of course, for the trier of fact to resolve.
Considerable stress is laid by the appellant upon the claim of undercapitalization and its assertion that such appears in the instant case as a matter of law. Appellant has not cited any case in which an appellate court has held that a business was undercapitalized when the court made a contrary finding. In almost every instance where the trial court has found inadequate capitalization there are other factors present. (See cases above cited with reference to capitalization.) In some cases there were no assets or capitalization at all. [8] Evidence of inadequate capitalization is, at best, merely a factor to be *842 considered by the trial court in deciding whether or not to pierce the corporate veil. To be sure, it is an important factor, but no case has been cited, nor have any been found, where it has been held that this factor alone requires invoking the equitable doctrine prayed for in the instant case. In Carlesimo v. Schwebel, supra, 87 Cal.App.2d 482, a total capitalization of $1,221.82 was held not to be insufficient, as a matter of law, to operate a business engaged in the buying and selling of groceries. [9] Furthermore, we have testimony in the instant case, to the effect that the operating capital was adequate; that Packing Co. paid all of its bills for two years except for the money owed to Meat Co.; that the bills were paid promptly; and that the rent was paid until Packing Co. vacated the premises. There is also testimony by Zaharis that appellant's officer, Davidson, assured him that the capitalization would be adequate. This evidence, if believed by the trial court, would support its finding of adequate capitalization.
The appellant's assertion of inequitable result is predicated upon the argument that the respondents intentionally created a corporation without sufficient assets to meet daily business requirements. The thrust of this argument is the claim of undercapitalization and the contention that a creditor will remain unsatisfied if the corporate veil is not pierced. As we have pointed out above, the prerequisite of "inequitable result" must coexist with the other requirement of unity of interest and ownership, which the trial court has found not to exist in this case. Moreover, we have also indicated that the trial court was justified in its finding of adequate capitalization. [10] Certainly, it is not sufficient to merely show that a creditor will remain unsatisfied if the corporate veil is not pierced, and thus set up such an unhappy circumstance as proof of an "inequitable result." In almost every instance where a plaintiff has attempted to invoke the doctrine he is an unsatisfied creditor. [11] The purpose of the doctrine is not to protect every unsatisfied creditor, but rather to afford him protection, where some conduct amounting to bad faith makes it inequitable, under the applicable rule above cited, for the equitable owner of a corporation to hide behind its corporate veil.
The judgment is affirmed.
Bray, P. J., and Sullivan, J., concurred.

=== CASE 9737600 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:29:44.999029+00 ===

OPINION
HOFFMAN, Senior Judge.
Plaintiffs-Appellants Vron Mishler and Dianne Mishler (collectively, "the Mishlers") appeal the trial court's grant of a preliminary injunction requested by Defendant-Appellee MAC Systems, Ine. *94("MAC"). We reverse and remand.1
The following issue is dispositive: whether the trial court's preliminary injunction is improper because it violates the prohibition against restriction of speech under Article I, Section 9 of the Indiana Constitution.
The Mishlers hired MAC to render certain fire restoration and construction services upon a building owned by the Mish-lers in Marion, Indiana. After a dispute arose between the parties, and a stop-work order had been entered by the County Building Department of Grant County, the Mishlers posted messages at the job site that referred to their concerns about the quality of MAC's services. Included as part of these posted messages was an eight foot by eight foot sign on the building. The stop-work order was attached to the sign and circled in red paint. Further, the sign stated:
PUBLIC SERVICE NOTICE
MAC SYSTEMS, INC. STOP WORK ORDER
CODE VIOLATIONS SEPT. 12, O1
1 2X8S SPANS 158" MAX SPAN 135"
2 RAFTERS 19 NEED PORTED SHOULD BE 18'9" SUP-
3 HEADERS HAVE NO SUPPORTS
4 PIER LOCATIONS [SIC] . IN QUESTION
5 SECOND FLOOR DESIGNED INCORRECTLY
6 NAILS HOLDING UP SECOND FLOOR
7 SECOND FLOOR SHOULD BE REMOVED AND REBUILT TO CODE > THEIR CONTRACT STATES QUALITY WORK TO U.S. AND MANY OTHERS[] THIS IS NOTL] CLAIMED TO BE A MEMBER OF B.B.B.2 NOT.
Appellants' Appendix at 11; Appellants' "Exhibit Volume" at 1.
The Mishlers filed a suit for damages against MAC. MAC answered and raised counterclaims on the basis of breach of contract and libel/slander. MAC also petitioned the court to issue an injunction enjoining the Mishlers from "[mJaking verbal or written statements to members of the public regarding the character, qualifications, workmanship or reputation of MAC" and "[dlisplaying signs referring, in any way, to MAC, its character, qualifications, workmanship or reputation, or to this case." Appellants' Appendix at 8. The trial court held a hearing on the petition and subsequently issued an injunction. The trial court's order did not prohibit the Mishlers from making verbal comments about MAC, but it did direct the Mishlers to remove the sign and to refrain from putting up any other sign referring to MAC.
The Misbhlers contend that the trial court's injunction operates as an unconstitutional prior restraint on speech in violation of Article I, Section 9 of the Indiana Constitution and the First Amendment of the United States Constitution. We limit *95our focus to the Mishlers' contention as it pertains to the Indiana Constitution.3 For purposes of providing a context for our discussion of free speech under the Indiana Constitution, however, we will first discuss the effect of a prior restraint upon free speech. We will then, for the same purpose, look at two recent Indiana cases that discuss the propriety of an injunction against speech under the First Amendment of the United States Constitution. After establishing the context, we will address the state constitutional issue.
The term "prior restraint" is used to describe "administrative and judicial orders forbidding certain communications when issued in advance of the time that such communications are to occur." Alexander v. United States, 509 U.S. 544, 550, 113 S.Ct. 2766, 2771, 125 L.Ed.2d 441 (1998). Restraining orders and injunctions that forbid future speech activities are classic examples of prior restraints. Id. The special vice of a prior restraint is that "communication will be suppressed, either directly or by inducing excessive caution in the speaker, before an adequate determination that it is unprotected by the First Amendment." Pittsburgh Press Co. v. Pittsburgh Commission on Human Relations, 413 U.S. 376, 93 S.Ct. 2553, 2561, 37 L.Ed.2d 669 (1973). The thread running through free speech cases is that prior restraints on speech and publication are the most serious and the least tolerable infringement on free speech rights. Nebraska Press Association v. Stuart, 427 U.S. 539, 96 S.Ct. 2791, 2803, 49 L.Ed.2d 683 (1976). "A eriminal penalty or a judgment in a defamation case is subject to the whole panoply of protections afforded by deferring the impact of the judgment until all avenues of appellate review have been exhausted. Only after judgment has become final, correct or otherwise, does the law's sanction become fully operative." Id. A prior restraint, by contrast, and by definition, "has an immediate and irreversible sanction. If it can be said that a threat of criminal or civil sanctions after publication 'chills' speech, prior restraint 'freezes' it at least for a time." Id. Although a prior restraint is not per se unconstitutional, Southeastern Promotions, Ltd. v. Conrad, 420 U.S. 546, 95 S.Ct. 1239, 1246, 43 L.Ed.2d 448 (1975), it comes to an appellate court with a "heavy presumption" against its constitutional validity. Organization for a Better Austin v. Keefe, 402 U.S. 415, 91 S.Ct. 1575, 1578, 29 L.Ed.2d 1 (1971).
In the recent case of St. Margaret Mercy Healthcare Centers, Inc. v. Ho, 663 N.E.2d 1220 (Ind.Ct.App.1996), this court held that a preliminary injunction was an unconstitutional prior restraint under the First Amendment. In the case, St. Margaret Mercy Healthcare Centers, Inc. (the "Hospital") decided to suspend the privileges of the cardiovascular surgeons on its staff and enter into an exelusive contract with an outside group of surgeons to perform open-heart bypass and valve surgery at the Hospital. In an effort to publicize the contract, the Hospital issued a news release which stated that "(tlhe change is expected to improve outcomes, lower mortality rates and reduce costs for coronary artery bypass surgery, the most common and most studied open heart surgery procedure." Id. at 1222. The news release further stated that "[closts and quality benchmarks in Northwest Indiana [the Hospital's locale] have been significantly higher than national averages." Id. The issuance of the news release was followed *96by two articles in local newspapers. The first article was entitled "Death Rate Spurs Doctor Swap," and the second specifically named the staff surgeons whose privileges had been revoked. The Hospital then issued an advertisement stating its goal of improving surgical outcomes by employing the services of the outside surgical group.
The staff surgeons filed a complaint for defamation. The staff surgeons also sought a preliminary injunction that would prohibit the Hospital from issuing any more news releases or advertisements referring to the new contract or mentioning the pre-contract high mortality rate at the Hospital. The trial court issued the injunction.
On appeal, the Hospital asserted that the preliminary injunction acted as a prohibited prior restraint under the First Amendment. After pointing out the particularly pernicious effect of a prior restraint upon free speech, we held that the potential damage to the staff surgeons' reputation did not justify a prior restraint on speech. Id. at 1224. In so holding, we alluded to Better Austin, wherein the United States Supreme Court opined that an injunction prohibiting a group from distributing peaceful literature against a businessman was unconstitutional as the group's free speech rights outweighed the businessman's interest in being free from public criticism of his business practices. Id. We also held that the staff surgeons' remedy for any wrongful conduct was a suit for damages. Id. As an additional ground for setting aside the injunction, we noted that the Hospital's news releases and advertisements were statements of "public interest" and "legitimate public concern." Id. (citing Gilbert v. Medical Economics Co., 665 F.2d 305, 309 (10th Cir.1981); American Broadcasting Companies, Inc. v. Smith Cabinet Manufacturing Co., 160 Ind.App. 367, 312 N.E.2d 85 (1974)).
In a second recent case, Barlow v. Sipes, 744 N.E.2d 1 (Ind.Ct.App.2001), trans. de-mied, a two-judge panel of this court upheld a trial court's injunction against speech pending resolution of tort claims.4 In the case, the owner of an automobile body shop brought an action against an insurance agent and his assistant for intentional interference with a business relationship and defamation, alleging that the insurance agent and his assistant had repeatedly made derogatory comments about the body shop to policy holders and had steered policy holders to another local body shop. The owner requested a preliminary injunction to prevent further harm pending resolution of his action. The trial court issued the injunction, which ordered that the insurance agent and his assistant, among other things, "refrain from making false, negative or disparaging statements about the [body shop]." Id. at 5.
On appeal, the panel analyzed federal cases pertaining to the propriety of damage awards in defamation and/or libel actions. The panel applied these cases in its analysis of the prior restraint case before it, and concluded "that the speech enjoined by the preliminary injunction is of little constitutional import and that the injunction primarily operates to address alleged private wrongs committed by [the agent and his assistant] against [the owner], imputing dishonest business practices and discouraging individuals from patronizing the automobile repair business." Id. at 10.
*97The panel held that the preliminary injunetion "passes constitutional muster under the First Amendment." Id.
We now turn our attention to the issue raised by the Mishlers, ie. whether the trial court's injunction violates the prohibition against restriction of free speech under Article I, Section 9 of the Indiana Constitution. Article I, Section 9 states that "[nlo law shall be passed, restraining the free interchange of thought and opinion, or restricting the right to speak, write, or print, freely, on any subject whatever." A corresponding clause stipulates that "but for the abuse of that right, every person shall be responsible." Interpretation of the Indiana Constitution is controlled by. the text itself, illuminated by history and by the purpose and structure of our constitution and the case law surrounding it. Price v. State, 622 N.E.2d 954, 957 (Ind.1993). One contemporary writer has observed that the language of Article I, Seetion 9 "affirms the rights of expression in language much more comprehensive than the first amendment." Randal T. Shepard, Second Wind for the Indiana Bill of Rights, 22 Ind.L.Rev. 575, 581 n. 89 (1989). This court has held that our constitution "more jealously protects freedom of speech guarantees than does the United States Constitution." Lach v. Lake County, 621 N.E.2d 357, 862 n. 1 (Ind.Ct.App.1993), trans. denied.
One question that becomes immediately apparent is whether Article I, Section 9, which expressly refers to the passage of a law restricting free speech, also prohibits courts from accomplishing the same restriction through the issuance of an injunction. No Indiana case has directly addressed this issue under Article I, Section 9; however, the issue has been addressed under Article I, Section 23 of our constitution. Although Article I, Section 23, the Indiana Equal Privileges and Immunities Clause, expressly applies only to acts of the General Assembly, it has been interpreted to apply where the State is "sufficiently involved to treat decisive conduct as state action." See Palin v. Indiana State Personnel Department, 698 N.E.2d 347, 353-54 (Ind.Ct.App.1998).5 This is consistent with the Supreme Court of New Mexico's statement concerning the free speech provisions of the Federal and New Mexico constitutions that "it should be borne in mind that the protection afforded by the Federal and State Constitutions was from restrictions that might be imposed by Congress and the Legislature. If the Congress and the Legislature are prohibited from' abridging the freedom there is no reason why the courts be given greater power." Blount v. TD Publishing Corp., 77 N.M. 384, 423 P.2d 421, 424 (1966).6 We hold that Article I, Section 9 of the Indiana Constitution is intended to prohibit Indiana courts, as well as the General Assembly, from abridging the free speech rights of Indiana citizens.
Our supreme court has observed that the corresponding clauses of Article I, Section 9 are common in state *98constitutions and are referred to as an explication of the "freedom-and-responsibility standard." Price 622 N.E.2d at 958. Under this standard, a State "may not impair the flow of ideas; instead, its sole authority over expression is to sanction individuals who commit abuse." Id. Furthermore, a State may not choose the means by which a person decides to speak; a person must have an opportunity to speak his mind "in whatever manner the speaker deems most appropriate." Whittington, 669 N.E.2d at 1368. The freedom-and-responsibility standard was explained in the following way by the Supreme Court of Texas:
The purpose of the [Texas Free Speech Provision] is to preserve what we call liberty of speech' and 'the freedom of the press, and at the same time hold all persons accountable to the law for the misuse of that liberty or freedom. Responsibility for abuse of the privilege is as fully emphasized by its language as that the privilege itself shall be free from all species of restraint. But the abuse of the privilege, the provision commands, shall be dealt with in no other way. It is not to be remedied by a denial of the right to speak, but only by appropriate penalties for what is wrongfully spoken. Punishment for abuse of the right, not prevention of its exercise, is what the provision contemplates. There can be no liberty in the individual to speak, without the unhindered right to speak. It cannot co-exist with the power to compel his silence or, fashion the form of his speech. Responsibility 'for the abuse of the right, in its nature pre-supposes freedom in the' exercise of the right. It is a denial of the authority, anywhere, to prevent its exercise.
Ex parte Tucker, 110 Tex. 335, 220 S.W. 75, 76 (1920).7
In the present case, the Mishlers chose to express their displeasure with MAC through the medium of a sign. The Mishlers' expression, while not political speech, was arguably speech expressing a public concern, and was certainly within the broad category of speech "on any subject whatever" that is protected by Article I, Section 9. A hearing was held to determine whether a preliminary injunction should be issued to prevent the Mishlers from continuing to voice their dissatisfaction with MAC's services. Rather than a determination on the merits, the trial court's injunction was, at most, a determination that MAC could make a prima facie case against the Mishlers. See Indiana Trial Rule 65; Boatwright v. Celebration Fireworks, Inc., 677 N.E.2d 1094 (Ind.Ct.App.1997). Thus, upon a preliminary determination of a prima facie nature, the Mishlers were prevented from expressing their opinion through the sign at issue or any sign like it. If the Mishlers chose to ignore the injunction and express their opinion in this manner, they were subject to punishment for contempt. See Davis v. Sponhauer, 574 N.E.2d 292, 302 (Ind.Ct.App.1991).
The upshot is that the Mishlers have been prevented from exercising their state constitutional right to speak "on any subject whatever" by the means they deemed most appropriate, and the restriction on their right to expression comes after only the most preliminary of determinations by the trial court. Our constitution does not give the trial court the power to force one person to speak well of another. The *99Mishlers are free to speak well or ill of MAC and if they have wronged MAC by abusing this freedom, they will be held responsible upon a final determination by the trial court. MAC's remedy lies in a suit for damages for any wrong against them, not in prior restraint of speech. The trial court erred in issuing the injunetion.8 Accordingly, we reverse the trial court and remand with instructions that it dissolve the injunction.9
SHARPNACK, J., concurs.
ROBB, J., concurring in result with separate opinion.
. We note that MAC did not file a brief in this appeal. Where the appellee fails to file a brief, it is within our discretion to reverse the trial court's decision if the appellant makes a prima facie showing of reversible error. Harris v. Delaware County Division of Family and Children Services, 732 N.E.2d 248, 249 (Ind.Ct.App.2000). This rule is not for the benefit of the appellant. Rather, it was established for the protection of the Court to relieve us of the burden of controverting the arguments advanced for a reversal when this burden rests with the appellees. Id.
. The "B.B.B." is the Better Business Bureau.
. The posture of this case renders review upon non-constitutional grounds unworkable. Because we are reviewing a trial court's order, not a statute or order from a different branch of government, we will decide this case on constitutional grounds.
. The dissent stated that the injunction should have been overturned on non-constitutional grounds. Accordingly, the dissent did not address the free speech issue. See 744 N.E.2d at 11-13.
. While our supreme court was very careful in Price to refer to the limitations placed upon the General Assembly by Article I, Section 9, it spoke in terms of the limitations placed upon "state action'" in the later case of Whittington v. State, 669 N.E.2d 1363 (Ind.1996). Although both cases dealt with the issue of the General Assembly's power to limit speech through content-neutral statutes, and thus the issue before us was not before the court in Price and Whittington, we do not think that use of the term "state action'" in Whittington was an oversight.
. The New Mexico Constitution provides in pertinent part that "no law shall be passed to restrain or abridge the liberty of speech or of the press." N.M. Const. Article II, Section 17.
. The Texas Constitution provides in pertinent part that "(every person shall be at liberty to speak, write or publish his opinions on any subject, being responsible for the abuse of that privilege; and no law shall ever be passed curtailing the liberty of speech or the press." Tex. Const. Article I, Section 8.
. We note that our decision is consistent with decisions from other jurisdictions with similar constitutional provisions. See e.g., Willing v. Mazzocone, 482 Pa. 377, 393 A.2d 1155, 1158 (1978) (holding that injunction preventing Willing from carrying a "sandwich-board" sign denouncing her former lawyers, while ringing a cowbell and blowing a whistle, was an impermissible prior restraint under the state constitution as Willing had a right "to freely speak her opinion regardless of whether that opinion is based on fact or fantasy."); Hajek v. Bill Mowbray Motors, Inc., 647 S.W.2d 253, 255 (Tex.1983) (holding that injunction preventing Hajek from driving a vehicle with defamatory message on all four sides that Mowbray Motors sold him a "lemon"" was an improper prior restraint as "[dlef-amation alone is not a sufficient justification for restraining an individual's right to speak freely"). ~
. Having found that the injunction constitutes an impermissible prior restraint under our state constitution, we need not consider whether the federal constitution also applies to prevent the injunction. See Mountain States Telephone and Telegraph Co. v. Arizona Corporation Commission, 160 Ariz. 350, 773 P.2d 455, 461 (1989).

=== CASE 9737601 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:29:45.0061+00 ===

ROBB, Judge,
concurring in result with separate opinion.
I respectfully concur in the result reached by the majority. The doctrine of Judmlal restraint precludes gratuitous judicial review of constitutional questions. Daugherty v. Allen, 729 N.E.2d 228, 233 (Ind.Ct.App.2000), trans. dismissed. Pursuant to this doctrine, we should not make a constitutional determination if the case can be disposed of justly on non-constitutional grounds. Id. (citing Passwater v. Winn, 248 Ind. 404, 229 N.E.2d 622, 623 (1967)). I therefore believe that we should determine whether the Mishlers are entitled to injunctive relief before we address their constitutional claim that the injuncetion is an impermissible prior restraint.
The grant or denial of an injunction rests within the equitable discretion of the trial court and will be reversed only upon a showing of abuse of discretion. Indiana Port Comm'n v. Consolidated Grain and Barge, 701 N.E.2d 882, 886 (Ind.Ct.App.1998), trans. denied. Nevertheless, the power to issue an injunction should be used sparingly, and such relief should not be granted except in rare instances in which the law and the facts are clearly in the movmg party's favor. Id.
The trial court's discretion to grant or deny a preliminary injunction is measured by several factors: 1) whether the mov-ant's remedies at law are inadequate, causing irreparable harm pending resolution of the substantive action; 2) whether the movant has demonstrated at least a reasonable likelihood of success at trial by establishing a prima facie case; 3) whether the threatened injury to the movant outweighs the potential harm the grant of the injunction would occasion upon the non-movant; and 4) whether the public interest would be disserved. Id. at 887. If the movant fails to prove any one or more of these requirements, the trial court's grant of an injunction is an abuse of discretion. Id.
*100The law is well settled that a party which suffers "mere economic injury" is not entitled to injunctive relief because an award of post-trial damages is sufficient to make the party whole. Id. The ability to obtain damages in the form of a money judgment for economic injury represents an adequate legal remedy. Daugherty, 729 N.E.2d at 235. Here, if MAC proceeded to trial with a suit alleging that the Mishlers's statements were falsehoods, it would invariably seek compensation for damages sustained to ' its reputation. Damages as a result of injury to reputation are properly recoverable in a tort action. Id. Because MAC has the availability of a tort suit to remedy the damages incurred to its reputation as a result of the Mish-lers' statements, injunctive relief. is not warranted. Further, because reversal is called for under state law, I believe that we need not address the Mishlers' constitutional claim that the injunction is an impermissible prior restraint under the Indiana Constitution.

=== CASE 9737602 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:29:49.606544+00 ===

JUSTICE HOLDRIDGE delivered the opinion of the court: Paul E. Botruff pled guilty to a charge of criminal sexual assault and was sentenced to four years in prison. At the end of his imprisonment term, he was further committed to the Department of Human Services (the Department) under the Sexually Violent Persons Commitment Act (the Act) (725 ILCS 207/1 et seq. (West 2000)). Subsequently, in connection with a mandatory reexamination under the Act, the circuit court conducted a probable cause hearing that Botruff was statutorily prohibited from attending. An attorney appeared for him and requested appointment of an independent evaluator. The judge denied the request, and Botruff filed this appeal challenging the denial. He also challenges the constitutionality of the statute that prohibited him from attending the probable cause hearing. For the following reasons, we reverse and remand for further proceedings. BACKGROUND The Act authorizes civil commitment of a person who is deemed sexually violent upon release from imprisonment for a sexually violent offense. The State initiates the commitment process by filing a petition in the circuit court. 725 ILCS 207/15 (West 2000). The court then conducts a hearing “to determine whether there is probable cause to believe that the [respondent] is a sexually violent person.” 725 ILCS 207/30(b) (West 2000). If the court finds probable cause, the respondent is taken into custody and transferred to an “appropriate facility” for an evaluation regarding whether he is sexually violent. 725 ILCS 207/30(c) (West 2000). Then the issue is adjudicated at a trial. 725 ILCS 207/35 (West 2000). If the court or a jury finds that the respondent is sexually violent, he is committed to the Department “until such time as [he] is no longer a sexually violent person.” 725 ILCS 207/40(a) (West 2000): The Department must conduct a reexamination of the respondent’s mental condition within six months, and additional reexaminations must occur in at least 12-month intervals. 725 ILCS 207/55(a) (West 2000). The purpose of these reexaminations is to determine whether the respondent has progressed enough to be conditionally released or discharged. 725 ILCS 207/55(a) (West 2000). At the time of each reexamination, the respondent receives written notice of his right to petition the court for discharge. The notice must contain a waiver of rights. 725 ILCS 207/65(b)(l) (West 2000). If the respondent does not waive his right to petition for discharge, the court conducts a probable cause hearing to determine if facts exist that warrant a hearing on the issue of whether he remains a sexually violent person. 725 ILCS 207/ 65(b)(1) (West 2000). “The committed person has a right to have an attorney represent him or her at the probable cause hearing, but the person is not entitled to be present at the probable cause hearing.” 725 ILCS 207/65(b)(l) (West 2000). Botruff s initial reexamination occurred in August of 1999. Based on the examining doctor’s report, the State moved for a directed finding against Botruff on the issue of probable cause. Botruff then moved for appointment of an independent evaluator, which motion was granted.-He ultimately stipulated to the examining doctor’s report and the independent evaluator’s report. Based on those reports, the judge granted the State’s motion for a directed finding. The next reexamination occurred in September of 2000. Botruff did not waive his right to petition for discharge, and the court thus conducted a probable cause hearing. Botruff was indigent and did not attend the hearing because his attendance was statutorily prohibited. An attorney appeared for him and requested appointment of an independent evaluator. The judge denied the request, stating: “I think in order for Mr. Botruff to be independently [evaluated] there must be at least some basis for the Court to order such an independent [evaluation] other than just that he would like to be [evaluated] by another party; that there is something in the report of the [examiner] that indicates to me he is perhaps somehow biased or skewed or not accurately reporting the results of the examination, or that there are some other factors that the [examiner] has not considered in the report.” Based on the examining doctor’s report, the judge found that Botruff remained a sexually violent person and that no probable cause existed to warrant a hearing on the issue. The judge thus ordered continued commitment of Botruff under the Act. This appeal followed. ANALYSIS I. Appointment of Independent Evaluator  Botruff first claims the judge erred in denying his request for appointment of an independent evaluator during his reexamination proceedings. This claim turns on construction of two provisions in the Act — subsections 25(e) and 55(a). Subsection 25(e) reads: “Whenever the person who is the subject of the petition is required to submit to an examination under this Act, he or she may retain experts or professional persons to perform an examination. *** If the person is indigent, the court shall, upon the person’s request, appoint a qualified and available expert or professional person to perform an examination.” (Emphasis added.) 725 ILCS 207725(e) (West 2000). Subsection 55(a), which deals with postcommitment examinations, reads: “At the time of a reexamination under this Section, the person who has been committed may retain or, if he or she is indigent and so requests, the court may appoint a qualified expert or a professional person to examine him or her.” (Emphasis added.) 725 ILCS 207755(a) (West 2000). Under subsection 25(e), the word “shall” requires appointment of an independent expert if an indigent respondent requests one. Under subsection 55(a), however, the word “may” places such appointment within the court’s discretion despite a request from an indigent respondent. See Anderson v. Financial Matters, Inc., 285 Ill. App. 3d 123 (1996) (noting that the word “may” signals discretional rather than mandatory action). Botruff argues that these provisions conflict and that we should interpret subsection 55(a) as subject to the rights conferred in subsection 25(e). The State argues that no conflict exists because subsection 25(e) applies only to precommitment examinations, thus excluding it from the postcommitment realm of subsection 55(a).  The fundamental cannon of statutory construction is to ascertain and effectuate the legislature’s intent. Nottage v. Jeka, 172 Ill. 2d 386 (1996). The best indicator of such intent is the language the legislature used in the statute. Nottage, 172 Ill. 2d 386. Courts cannot use construction as a guise for supplying omissions, remedying defects, adding limitations, or otherwise departing from the plain meaning of a statute’s language. Toys “R” Us, Inc. v. Adelman, 215 Ill. App. 3d 561 (1991). Questions of statutory construction invoke de novo review. In re Application for Tax Deed, 285 Ill. App. 3d 930 (1997).  We cannot adopt the State’s view that subsection 25(e) applies only to precommitment examinations. First, we note that section 25 as a whole is not limited to such application. For example, one provision of the section enumerates certain rights that apply “at any hearing conducted under [the] Act” with only two exceptions. 725 ILCS 207/25(c) (West 2000). Although both exceptions involve postcommitment hearings, the Act provides for several other postcommitment hearings that are not excepted. See 725 ILCS 207/60(d), 65(a)(2), (b)(2), 90(b) (West 2000). Such hearings clearly qualify as “any hearing conduced under [the] Act” and thus invoke rights contained in section 25. We also note that subsection 25(e) itself contravenes the State’s asserted limitation. According to the plain language of that subsection, it applies “[wjhenever the person who is the subject of the petition is required to submit to an examination under [the] Act.” (Emphasis added.) 725 ILCS 207/25(e) (West 2000). The word “whenever” indicates comprehensiveness rather than limitation. Furthermore, the phrase “an examination under [the] Act” describes post-commitment examinations just as well as it describes precommitment examinations. We will not add a limitation that the legislature did not place in the statute. We thus conclude that subsection 25(e) requires a court to grant an indigent respondent’s request for appointment of an independent evaluator during postcommitment proceedings. In denying Botruff s request, the judge stated that the request was insufficient without additional grounds for appointing an independent evaluator (e.g., evidence that the State examiner was skewed or biased). However, the State has not cited any authority showing that an “additional grounds” requirement exists under the Act. Neither are we aware of any such authority. Regarding the discretional “may” in subsection 55(a), we note our obligation to construe statutes in a manner that avoids constitutional difficulties, injustice, and inconsistencies in application of the law. People v. Berg, 277 Ill. App. 3d 549 (1996). Under the construction the State urges, a respondent with money could freely obtain an independent evaluation during reexamination proceedings, but an indigent respondent could only request such an evaluation and hope the court obliged. These circumstances would raise equal protection concerns and, in our view, create an injustice by inconsistently applying the law between indigent respondents and those who can afford to retain an independent evaluator.1 We thus construe subsection 55(a) as subject to the rights conferred in subsection 25(e). II. Constitutionality of Statute Prohibiting Respondent From Attending Probable Cause Hearing Botruff next claims the provision in subsection 65(b)(1) of the Act (725 ILCS 207/65(b)(l) (West 2000)) that prohibited him from attending his probable cause hearing is unconstitutional. He bases this claim on the due process clause of the United States Constitution. U.S. Const., amend. XIV The State contends that Botruff s claim lacks merit, citing In re Detention of Samuelson, 189 Ill. 2d 548 (2000) (upholding the Act against several constitutional claims). However, in Samuelson our supreme court did not issue a blanket pronouncement that the Act’s postcommitment discharge procedures are free from due process problems. The court simply held that Samuelson, who did not challenge the provision at issue here, personally failed to identify an unconstitutional procedure. See Samuelson, 189 Ill. 2d at 565. Botruff has not failed in this manner. We are convinced that he has identified a due process problem in the Act’s postcommitment discharge procedures.  The due process clause imposes constraints on governmental decisions that deprive persons of liberty or property interests. Mathews v. Eldridge, 424 U.S. 319, 47 L. Ed. 2d 18, 96 S. Ct. 893 (1976). The clause is flexible and requires “such procedural protections as the particular situation demands.” Morrissey v. Brewer, 408 U.S. 471, 481, 33 L. Ed. 2d 484, 494, 92 S. Ct. 2593, 2600 (1972). “The fundamental requirement of due process is the opportunity to be heard ‘at a meaningful time and in a meaningful manner.’ ” Mathews, 424 U.S. at 333, 47 L. Ed. 2d at 32, 96 S. Ct. at 902, quoting Armstrong v. Manzo, 380 U.S. 545, 552, 14 L. Ed. 2d 62, 66, 85 S. Ct. 1187, 1191 (1965).  In Mathews, the United States Supreme Court established three factors to consider when identifying the dictates of due process in a given case. Those factors are: (1) the private interest that will be affected by the questioned procedure; (2) the risk of the private interest being erroneously deprived through the questioned procedure, and the probable value of additional or substitute procedural safeguards; and (3) the government’s interest, including the function involved and the fiscal and administrative burdens that would stem from “the additional or substitute procedural requirement.” Mathews, 424 U.S. at 335, 47 L. Ed. 2d at 33, 96 S. Ct. at 903.  Applying the first factor, we note that Botruffs claim involves a private liberty interest. A committed person under the Act is confined in a “secure facility” (725 ILCS 207/40(b)(2) (West 2000)) and cannot obtain a discharge without a favorable hearing in the committing court. There is no question that these circumstances invoke due process protection. The only question involves the extent of the process that is due. Regarding the second factor, a committed person faces a considerable risk of his liberty being erroneously deprived when the court conducts his probable cause hearing in his absence. For example, he cannot consult with his counsel on matters that arise pertaining to probable cause. Neither can the judge assess his demeanor and credibility through contemporaneous observation. More importantly, a committed person cannot offer correction if false or misleading statements are made regarding his reexamination. Instead he is limited to representation by a proxy who did not attend the reexamination and thus may not realize the need for correction. These concerns are significant because a committed person must prevail at the probable cause hearing or his discharge efforts will terminate unsuccessfully. The dissent dismisses these concerns by characterizing the probable cause hearing as a “limited review” where the meaningful events have already occurred and the respondent’s presence would add nothing. How could a judge’s firsthand observation of the person whose liberty is at stake add nothing? We realize that no testimony is offered at a probable cause hearing. As noted above, however, that fact limits commentary on the reexamination to statements from persons who were not present when it occurred. Such circumstances present a heightened possibility of misleading or erroneous statements about the reexamination. Although the respondent can discuss the reexamination report with his attorney before the hearing, he cannot predict what the State’s Attorney will say about the reexamination at the hearing. Only by attending the hearing could he meaningfully address such matters with his attorney. On the matter of additional or substitute safeguards, the Act does provide two other avenues for pursuing a discharge. Under subsection 65(a)(1), if the Secretary of Human Services (the Secretary) determines at any time that a committed person is no longer sexually violent, the Secretary must authorize the person to file a discharge petition in the committing court. 725 ILCS 207/65(a)(l) (West 2000). The petition is then adjudicated at a hearing. 725 ILCS 207/65(a)(l), (a)(2) (West 2000). Also under section 70, a committed person may file a discharge petition at any time, and the matter will be set for a probable cause hearing. 725 ILCS 207/70 (West 2000). “[H] owe ver, if a person has previously filed a petition for discharge without the Secretary’s approval and the court determined, either upon review of the petition or following a hearing, that the person’s petition was frivolous or that the person was still a sexually violent person, then the court shall deny any subsequent petition under this Section without a hearing unless the petition contains facts upon which a court could find that the condition of the person had so changed that a hearing was warranted.” 725 ILCS 207/70 (West 2000). The State contends that these additional procedures provide adequate safeguards against improper commitment. We agree that the procedures provide added protection; however, we do not share the State’s view regarding the value of that protection. Although subsection 65(a)(1) requires the Secretary to authorize a discharge petition upon determining that a committed person is no longer sexually violent, that subsection contains no provisions requiring investigation of the person’s condition to make such a determination. The person simply has no guidance regarding when (if ever) and how the Secretary will act.2 Additionally, the full benefit of the lenient language in section 70 really only applies to first-time petitioners. If a committed person has already filed an unsuccessful discharge petition without the Secretary’s approval, section 70 requires summary dismissal of any subsequent petitions unless a heightened pleading burden is met. Furthermore, all petitioners under section 70 must still survive a probable cause hearing where their statutory right to attend is unclear.3  The third Mathews factor requires consideration of the government’s interest, including the fiscal and administrative burdens that would stem from allowing a committed person to attend his probable cause hearing. The State cites In re Detention of Varner, 315 Ill. App. 3d 626 (2000), where the Appellate Court, Second District, upheld the Act against a different due process challenge. We note that when the court addressed the third Mathews factor, it was concerned with the financial and administrative burdens of “requiring an evidentiary hearing in every instance when a committed person files a petition for discharge.” Varner, 315 Ill. App. 3d at 636. This concern clearly does not exist in the instant case. Botruff is not asking for a hearing the court would, or may, not otherwise conduct. He simply wants to attend a hearing the court is required to conduct anyway. The State has not shown that an undue burden would stem from allowing a committed person in Botruff s situation to attend his probable cause hearing. Neither do we believe such a procedure would be unduly burdensome. We repeat that due process requires an opportunity to be heard “at a meaningful time and in a meaningful manner.” Armstrong, 380 U.S. at 552, 14 L. Ed. 2d at 66, 85 S. Ct. at 1191. For a committed person under the Act, the probable cause hearing is certainly a “meaningful time.” In light of the concerns discussed above, we are convinced that conducting the hearing in absentia is not a “meaningful manner” for due process purposes. We thus hold that the provision in subsection 65(b)(1) prohibiting a committed person from attending his probable cause hearing is unconstitutional. CONCLUSION The judgment of the Warren County circuit court is reversed, and the cause is remanded for further proceedings consistent with this disposition. Reversed and remanded. SLATER, J., concurs.  The dissent shares our concern over unequal treatment but asserts that People v. Finkle, 214 Ill. App. 3d 290 (1991), cures the problem. Finkle, however, is a due process case where the court did not even address an equality problem. Unlike the statute in the instant case, the statute in Finkle (section 9 of the Sexually Dangerous Persons Act (725 ILCS 205/9 (West 2000))) prescribed a uniform evaluation procedure for all respondents regardless of their financial ability. We fail to see how Finkle could be controlling here.   Contrast this scenario with subsection 55(a) (725 ILCS 207/55(a) (West 2000)), which mandates postcommitment reexaminations of a committed person’s mental condition at specified intervals.   Seetion 70 does not clarify whether such hearings equate with probable cause hearings under subsection 65(b)(1), which expressly prohibits respondents from attending. Section 70 does incorporate subsection 65(b)(2), which cannot operate without application of subsection 65(b)(1).

=== CASE 9737603 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:29:49.610959+00 ===

PRESIDING JUSTICE LYTTON, dissenting: I respectfully dissent. The majority finds that section 25 hearings are essentially the same as section 55 hearings and makes them indistinguishable, thus concluding that the trial judge was required to provide Botruff with an independent evaluator. The majority also believes that Botruff s exclusion from this limited hearing was unconstitutional. I disagree with both premises. Section 25 of the Sexually Violent Persons Commitment Act (the Act) discusses the rights of a person subject to a State’s petition for commitment under the Act. 725 ILCS 207/25 (West 2000). Section 25(e) requires the trial court to appoint an independent evaluator “[wjhenever the person who is the subject of the petition is required to submit to an examination under [the] Act.” (Emphasis added.) 725 ILCS 207/25(e) (West 2000). Section 55 of the Act provides for a periodic reexamination of a “person who has been committed” under the Act. (Emphasis added.) 725 ILCS 207/55 (West 2000). Section 55(a) grants the court discretion to appoint an independent evaluator at the time of the reexamination of a “person who has been committed.” (Emphasis added.) 725 ILCS 207/55(a) (West 2000). A The majority interprets section 25 of the Act to mandate the appointment of an independent evaluator at hearings following reexamination under section 55 of the Act. In reaching this conclusion, the majority treats a “person who is the subject of the petition” and a “person who has been committed” identically. This is an error. Section 25 is concerned with the respondent’s rights at the time of the original petition alleging that the respondent is a sexually violent person. 725 ILCS 207/25(a) (West 2000). Section 55 is concerned with the respondent’s rights upon reexamination, after the petition has been adjudicated and the court has determined that the respondent should be committed. 725 ILCS 207/55(a) (West 2000). Each section applies to a different proceeding and a different examination with a different purpose under the Act. We should not lump the same rights granted for precommitment proceedings under section 25 into the postcommitment proceedings of section 55. Moreover, the cardinal rule of statutory construction is to ascertain and effectuate the intent of the legislature. Zunamon v. Zehnder, 308 Ill. App. 3d 69, 75 (1999). We should always interpret a statute, if possible, so that no clause or term is rendered superfluous. Zunamon, 308 Ill. App. 3d at 75. The majority’s interpretation fails in this regard. Section 55(a) grants discretionary authority to appoint an independent evaluator; section 25 mandates one. The majority renders this distinction meaningless since there would be no need for a discretionary appointment of an independent evaluator if section 25 already required one. Again, the majority lumps section 25 rights into section 55 without regard to the differing purposes and intent of the two statutory provisions. B The majority rationalizes that its construction of the statute is necessary to avoid an equal protection violation because a respondent with sufficient funds can always obtain an independent evaluator while indigent respondents must rely on the court’s discretion. The United States Supreme Court has held that equal protection “ ‘does not require absolute equality or precisely equal advantages,’ [citation]” but “[i]t does require *** that indigents have an adequate opportunity to present their claims fairly within the adversary system.” Ross v. Moffitt, 417 U.S. 600, 612, 41 L. Ed. 2d 341, 352, 94 S. Ct. 2437, 2444-45 (1974). The majority’s justifiable fear concerning unequal representation for indigents has also been stated more starkly as a due process issue. “[W]hen a State brings its judicial power to bear on an indigent defendant in a criminal proceeding, it must take steps to assure that the defendant has a fair opportunity to present his defense. This elementary principle, grounded in significant part on the fourteenth amendment’s due process guarantee of fundamental fairness, derives from the belief that justice cannot be equal where, simply as a result of his poverty, a defendant is denied the opportunity to participate meaningfully in a judicial proceeding in which his liberty is at stake.” Ake v. Oklahoma, 470 U.S. 68, 76, 84 L. Ed. 2d 53, 61, 105 S. Ct. 1087, 1092 (1985). While I am greatly troubled by the potential for unequal treatment of indigent committed persons, I am not ultimately convinced that the statute must fall because of this objection. The court in People v. Finkle, 214 Ill. App. 3d 290 (1991),4 found that the failure of the Sexually Dangerous Persons Act (725 ILCS 205/0.01 et seq. (West 2000)) to require the appointment of independent evaluators for indigents in postcommitment proceedings did not violate the constitution. Finkle, 214 Ill. App. 3d at 296. The court noted that the State must only identify and supply indigent defendants with the “ ‘ “basic tools of an adequate defense or appeal.” ’ ” Finkle, 214 Ill. App. 3d at 294, quoting Ake v. Oklahoma, 470 U.S. 68, 77, 84 L. Ed. 2d 53, 62, 105 S. Ct. 1087, 1093 (1985), quoting Britt v. North Carolina, 404 U.S. 226, 227, 30 L. Ed. 2d 400, 403, 92 S. Ct. 431, 433 (1971). The court determined that treating doctors at a confined individual’s institution are adequate experts for postcommitment proceedings, unless that individual presents particular facts which indicate that those doctors would not fairly and objectively render assistance. Finkle, 214 Ill. App. 3d at 295-96. Therefore, allowing the trial court discretion to deny an independent evaluator in the absence of such facts is not unconstitutional. See Finkle, 214 Ill. App. 3d at 296. Finkle requires that we find that this provision of the statute is not constitutionally deficient. We must hold this provision of the statute constitutional, though it may fall short of the laudatory and preferred goal of absolute equality for all committed persons. C The majority also concludes that the provision barring Botruff s attendance at his probable cause hearing violated his due process rights. After his yearly reexamination, Botruff had three options. He could have waived his right to a hearing, essentially assenting to further commitment. See 725 ILCS 207/65(b)(l) (West 2000). He could also have petitioned for release and would have received a full probable cause hearing. See 725 ILCS 207/65(b)(l) (West 2000). His third option was to do nothing, that is, neither waive the right to petition nor petition for discharge. Botruff chose this third option. Because of his inaction, the court was required to conduct a limited probable cause hearing, consisting only of a review of the reexamination reports and arguments by counsel, a hearing at which his attendance was prohibited. No testimony is heard at this type of hearing. 725 ILCS 207/65(b)(l) (West 2000). In such a limited review, the majority’s concerns regarding Botruff s absence are unfounded. Botruff had ample opportunity to communicate to his counsel any concerns he had regarding the reexamination report or other matters pertaining to probable cause. Even if he had attended the hearing, the judge would have had no occasion to assess his credibility, since he would not have had an opportunity to testify. Finally, there was no other testimony regarding his reexamination that he could have “corrected.” His presence at such a limited review would have added nothing. Had Botruff petitioned for discharge under section 60 or section 65 of the Act, the case might be different. If he were barred from a hearing under those sections, or denied the right to testify or confront witnesses, his exclusion might well implicate constitutional problems. However, in this very limited hearing his absence causes little risk of error. In this context, I would find this provision constitutional. For the above stated reasons, I would affirm the trial court’s decision.  While the Finkle decision was couched in due process terms, its rationale deals with an issue at the heart of equal protection, i.e., whether an indigent defendant has an adequate opportunity to present his claim. Compare Finkle, 214 Ill. App. 3d at 294 (due process requires that indigent defendants be given the “ ‘ “basic tools of an adequate defense or appeal” ’ [Citations.]”), with Ross, 417 U.S. at 612, 41 L. Ed. 2d at 352, 94 S. Ct. at 2444-45 (equal protection requires provision of the advantages necessary to ensure that indigent defendants have “an adequate opportunity to present their claims fairly within the adversary system”). The concern in Finkle was identical to ours, that is, a committed person with adequate funds can always obtain an independent evaluator, while an indigent person who wants one is subject to the judge’s discretion. See Finkle, 214 Ill. App. 3d at 292. Thus, I find Finkle instructive in this case.

=== CASE 9737604 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:29:50.744036+00 ===

Heffernan, J.
Was the statement following the morgue visit admissible
The evidence indicated that the defendant was brought to the Safety Building at approximately 2:45 in the morning of July 4th. He was advised of his constitutional right to counsel and his right to remain silent. *541Shortly thereafter he was taken to the morgue to view the body of his wife. He was in the morgue for less than five minutes. He was then brought back to the consultation room, and he forthwith made a statement that denied any knowledge of, or connection with, the shooting of his wife. The statement given at that time appears in the following excerpt of the trial transcript:
“. . . he said T left my house on July the 3rd about 10:00 A. M., that morning. I went to a tavern on West Yliet Street, had a few drinks. I then went to a friends’ house on North 15th Street. I stayed there at this home during all the day and when I left this house, my friends’ house, I went home and it was dark at this time.’ He didn’t know what time it was, he said, Tt was dark.’
“And when he got to his home at 1810 West McKinley he saw or met his mother and sister, or sister-in-law, and his niece on the front porch. He talked to them for several minutes.
“He then walked around to the rear of the house at 1810 W. McKinley, where he had his car parked. He got into his car, in the front seat, and fell asleep, and he didn’t know anything else until after the police woke him up.”
The trial court found that the statement quoted above was voluntary and that:
“. . . none of the responses he made or statements he made were induced by any promises or threats or force or duress of any kind, either physical or psychological; that the statements and his responses were, from the totality of all the circumstances, applying 14th Amendment due process standards, were his deliberate choice; that he made them understandingly, with full knowledge of his rights to remain silent and to have an attorney and that, factually from the evidence adduced, the Court is satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that there were no circumstances which indicated any Constitutional contamination or any involuntariness involved in any of the statements . . . and that any and all of such statements were the deliberate, free choice of the defendant.”
The court therefore concluded, after holding a hearing out of the presence of the jury and following a procedure *542substantially in conformance with State ex rel. Goodchild v. Burke (1965), 27 Wis. 2d 244, 133 N. W. 2d 753, that the statements properly were admissible into evidence.
As we have stated in State v. Carter (1966), 33 Wis. 2d 80, 90, 91, 146 N. W. 2d 466, these findings and conclusions will not be upset unless they are contrary to the great weight and clear preponderance of the evidence. The trial court’s decision, however, antedated the admonitions of this court in Bradley v. State (1967), 36 Wis. 2d 345, 153 N. W. 2d 38, 155 N. W. 2d 564, wherein we characterized the practice of morgue viewing as “reprehensible” when there was no clear evidence that such a viewing by an accused was necessary to make an identification of the deceased. It also preceded the adoption in McKinley v. State (1967), 37 Wis. 2d 26, 154 N. W. 2d 344, of an exclusionary rule barring the use of a confession made by an accused within a short time after being taken to the morgue to view the corpse of a person he was suspected of having murdered. In the instant case the statement of the defendant was given to the police officers within a few minutes after his return from the morgue. The record indicates that he was taken to the morgue at 3:05 a. m. and, between that time and 3:45, when, interrogation ceased, the visit to the morgue was made and the statement taken. Were this a confession, we would be compelled to find that the circumstances under which the statement was taken falls squarely within the proscription of the McKinley Case. In McKinley we stated:
“In situations such as we have here, where a confession is made within an hour and one half or an hour and forty minutes after the police have taken the accused into the morgue to view the body of the deceased, the issue of the voluntariness of a confession should not be permitted to turn on a finding of the trial judge that such morgue viewing had no psychological effect in inducing the questioned confession. Rather, we deem that where the confession follows the morgue viewing as *543closely in time as occurred here it should be held as a matter of law that the confession is the result of such psychological pressure as to render the same involuntary.”
In the instant case, however, the McKinley rule is not applicable. It applies only to confessions, and, as a consequence, the exculpatory statement is not barred by the exclusionary rule adopted by this court. In this respect the McKinley rule differs from the rule of Miranda, which excludes all statements given in violation of the standards therein, whether the statements are exculpatory or inculpatory. Miranda v. Arizona (1966), 384 U. S. 436, 86 Sup. Ct. 1602, 16 L. Ed. 2d 694.
If the statement is involuntary it is, of course, inadmissible. The only question, therefore, is whether the court’s finding that the statement was voluntary is contrary to the great weight and clear preponderance of the evidence. The trial court determined that Harrell was advised at length of his right to remain silent. He was warned that any statements given could be used against him, that he had the right to have his attorney present during the questioning, and that if he were indigent such attorney would be compensated by the state. He also was advised that in the event he waived his right to be silent and commenced to give a statement that he could at any time refuse to give further information and insist upon the presence of an attorney. It is uncontradict-ed that all of these precautionary warnings were given, and there is no evidence whatsoever that the defendant was left ignorant of his constitutional rights. Moreover, immediately after the giving of his initial statement he asked for an attorney, and the attorney was promptly called by the police. The fact that he requested counsel at this point is indicative of the fact that he was not so intoxicated as to not understand the warnings that had been given him and tends to prove that he intelligently waived his rights. Moreover, there was evidence, despite *544the fact that he smelled of alcohol, that he was alert and not “groggy.” The visit to the morgue was most perfunctory, and the entire time that elapsed between taking him to the morgue and returning him to the interrogation room was less than five minutes. There was no evidence that the morgue visit in any way impelled him to give the exculpatory statement that the defendant objects to. The record is devoid of a showing of any practices that would tend to overbear the free will of the defendant. In view of these circumstances, which are uncontradicted, the finding of the trial court that the statement was voluntary is not contrary to the great weight and clear preponderance of the evidence.
The mere fact that the statement by its inconsistency with the later statement affected the credibility of the defendant does not thereby place it within the ambit of the McKinley exclusionary rule. Although it proved to be an inculpatory statement when viewed in the setting of the trial, because it cast doubt upon the witness’ credibility, it was not a confession subject to the rule of McKinley. It must be treated as an ordinary statement ; and since it was voluntary, as viewed in the totality of the circumstances, it was properly admissible.
Was the evidence sufficient for the fury to find the defendant guilty beyond a reasonable doubt
The question on review is whether the evidence adduced, believed, and rationally considered by the jury was sufficient to prove the defendant’s guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. Payne v. State (1967), 36 Wis. 2d 307, 310, 152 N. W. 2d 903; Lock v. State (1966), 31 Wis. 2d 110, 114, 142 N. W. 2d 183; State v. Johnson (1960), 11 Wis. 2d 130, 137, 104 N. W. 2d 379. However, it is not this court that is to be convinced that the defendant was guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. That determination is to be made by the jury, and our determination is mere*545ly whether a jury acting reasonably could have been so convinced. We stated in Lock v. State, supra, page 114:
“Invariably the briefs and arguments on this issue point to what the trier of the facts could have found or what this court should determine. The test is not whether this court is convinced of the guilt of the defendant beyond a reasonable doubt but whether this court can conclude the trier of the facts could, acting reasonably, be convinced to the required degree of certitude by the evidence which it had a right to believe and accept as true.”
Thus, viewing the evidence of record, was the evidence sufficient to find Acklee Harrell guilty beyond a reasonable doubt of the murder of his wife Mary?
The facts of this case must be established in part by circumstantial evidence. No one other than the alleged murderer was in a position to say what happened at and just prior to the time that Mary Harrell was shot. Ack-lee Harrell gave two statements, and they are conflicting in all important respects.
The first statement given shortly after his being taken into custody denied any knowledge of the crime, and he stated that he had not gone to the apartment at all after his return from a tavern but went to sleep in his parked car.
The second statement, given after conferring with counsel, and which was reiterated by Harrell at trial, recounts Harrell’s assertion that he entered the apartment at approximately 8 p. m., that he was so drunk that he was unable to unlock the door, and that he was assisted by his sister. He testified that, after he entered the apartment, he went to sleep and sometime later he observed his wife standing over him with a butcher knife, and she stated, “I’m going to kill you.” He attempted to defend himself and a scuffle developed. He said he was able to knock the knife from her hand and kicked it under a sofa. His wife then ran into an adjoining bedroom and returned with his revolver, which *546he kept on a shelf in the bedroom. He tried to take the gun away from her, and the ensuing scuffle took them from the bedroom, through the kitchen, and into the bathroom. He stated that, while he was trying to get the gun from her, the gun went off and she fell to the bathroom floor. He said that he was frightened and that he took the gun and threw it under the front porch. He then told his sister, who was sitting on the front porch, his wife was “sick.” He testified that he then went to a tavern, where he drank until approximately midnight, and that he then returned and fell asleep in his automobile at the rear of his home.
In addition to the voluntary statements given by the accused to the police and his testimony at trial, the jury had before it the testimony of the medical examiner and of the police officers who investigated the shooting in the Harrell apartment. The deceased was described as lying on her left side, partially behind the toilet bowl, against the bathroom wall. Her dress was pulled up and her underpants were rolled down between her knees and her hips. At the time of the initial investigation the police officer observed what appeared to be urine in the toilet bowl. The medical examiner stated that the deceased’s bladder was empty and this, he said, was consistent with her just having voided her bladder. Contrary to the assertion of the defendant that he had kicked the butcher knife under the sofa, the butcher knife was found on the top of the toilet tank. There were powder marks on the defendant’s hands, but none on the clothing of the deceased. Expert opinion was introduced which concluded that, therefore, the shot was fired at a distance more than 18 inches from the person of Mary Harrell. This, of course, is inconsistent with Acklee Harrell’s assertion that the gun went off while the parties were in close contact and scuffling. It was undisputed that the bullet which killed Mary Harrell was fired by the gun which Acklee Harrell admitted was his.
*547There was evidence that the defendant and his wife had frequent arguments in the past and that the police had been called in to settle their disputes. One police officer testified that on an earlier occasion when he arrived at the Harrell apartment he saw the defendant’s wife on the floor with the defendant’s hands around her throat. The officers separated the pair, but when they released their grip on Harrell, he again assaulted his wife, grabbed her by the throat, and yelled that he was going to kill her.
There was also evidence that the two had been in an altercation on the morning of the day of the death. There is no contention that any third party was in any way involved in the death of Mary Harrell, and, from the evidence, the jury could reasonably find that the defendant killed his wife and intended to do so. The position of Mary on the bathroom floor, together with the concomitant facts that she had just urinated and that there were no powder burns on the clothing, could lead the jury to reasonably conclude that Acklee Harrell’s story was false. The evidence was consistent with a conclusion that she had been shot by Acklee from some distance while she was sitting on the toilet.
Essentially, Acklee Harrell’s defense, in light of the circumstantial evidence pointing the finger of guilt toward him, was dependent upon the jury’s belief in his credibility. However, Acklee Harrell gave inconsistent statements. His first statement, which was properly admissible into evidence, would have led the jury to believe that he knew nothing of the incident, while the second statement, at trial, contradicted the first statement and was introduced for the purpose of having the jury believe that he acted in self defense and that the shot itself was fired by accident. His trial testimony also differed from the first statement given to the police. It is universally recognized that when a witness gives in*548consistent statements his credibility is, as a consequence, impaired. It is apparent that one of the statements must have been false. The trial judge properly recognized this when he gave the falsus in uno instruction, which permitted the jury to disbelieve any of the testimony of a witness who has testified falsely about any material fact. The jury under these circumstances had every right to disbelieve the explanations of Acklee Harrell. The circumstances of the occurrence could reasonably lead them to conclude that Harrell’s statements were false and that he shot his wife with the intent to kill her. Considering all of the facts of record, the trial judge properly denied the motion for a new trial, and the judgment must be affirmed.
Inadequacy of statement of facts
In Welsher v. State (1965), 28 Wis. 2d 160, 170, 135 N. W. 2d 849, we said:
“The statement of facts. Sec. (Rule) 251.44, Stats., permits the parties in a criminal case to stipulate to dispense with an appendix. This saves printing expense for a defendant appellant who pays his own expenses, and for the state if the defendant appellant is indigent. We must point out, however, that unless the statement of facts is prepared in sufficient detail to serve as a reasonably helpful summary of or guide to the transcript of testimony, our burden is very considerably increased. For example the present record has 1,939 pages, 1,500 of which constitute the transcript of the trial, yet the statement of facts is most meager in both briefs, and it has been necessary to assemble many of the facts summarized in this opinion directly from the record.”
In the instant case the record was considerably shorter than that in Welsher. Nevertheless, it amounted to almost 400 pages. The factual statements in both briefs were grossly inadequate and the briefs proper failed to *549tie facts set forth therein with the relevant portions of the record. We consider this particularly deplorable in a case of first-degree murder, where meticulous exposition of the facts should be made by both sides. In order to make criminal appeals inexpensive we have permitted the omission of an appendix, but in no case should the appendix be omitted if the factual situation is such that a fair presentation cannot be made in a brief statement of facts.
By the Court. — The judgment of conviction and the order denying a new trial are affirmed.

=== CASE 2211279 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:04.509525+00 ===

162 N.W.2d 499 (1968)
STATE of North Dakota, Plaintiff and Appellant,
v.
R. M. HART, President of the First American Bank and Trust Company, Bismarck, North Dakota, Defendant and Respondent.
Cr. 366.
Supreme Court of North Dakota.
November 15, 1968.
Gerald W. VandeWalle, Asst. Atty. Gen., Dale Jensen, State's Atty., and William Heigaard, Asst. State's Atty., Bismarck, for plaintiff-appellant.
Conmy, Conmy, Rosenberg & Lucas, Bismarck, for defendant-respondent.
DOUGLAS B. HEEN, District Judge.
The State of North Dakota appeals from an order of the Burleigh County Court of Increased Jurisdiction quashing an amended criminal complaint which charged the defendant with paying interest at a greater rate than authorized by the State Banking Board. N.D.C.C. § 6-03-63.
At the outset of proceedings in this court the defendant moved for dismissal of the State's appeal on the ground that the *500 county court's order quashing the criminal complaint is not appealable. As supportive authority he relies on N.D.C.C. § 29-28-07, which reads:
29-28-07. From what the state may appeal.An appeal may be taken by the state from:
1. An order quashing an information or indictment or any count thereof;
2. An order granting a new trial;
3. An order arresting judgment; or
4. An order made after judgment affecting any substantial right of the state.
North Dakota Century Code.
Under this statute, so the defendant argues, the State has no right of appeal in this case, because the order appealed from is one quashing an amended complaint charging the defendant with a misdemeanor, rather than an information or indictment alleging commission of a public offense. Cited in support of this argument is State v. Bauer, 153 N.W.2d 895 (N.D.1967), which holds that the State has no appeal from a justice court order dismissing a criminal complaint, because such an appeal is not expressly enumerated by N.D.C.C. § 29-28-07, only an order quashing an information or an indictment being appealable by the State under the express terms of that statute.
N.D.C.C. § 27-08-20 confers upon county courts of increased jurisdiction those powers formerly vested in the justices of the peace. The defendant accords recognition to this statute, as he does to N.D.C.C. § 33-12-40, which sets out that the sole method of attacking a criminal complaint in justice court is by motion to dismiss. See State v. Bauer, supra.
However, he maintains that a motion to quash the complaint is also available in county court because of the holding of State v. Buehler, 125 N.W.2d 155 (N.D.1963), that a criminal complaint, when viewed in constitutional context, is equivalent to a criminal information, thus satisfying the requirement of the North Dakota Constitution that all criminal prosecutions be by information or indictment. The net effect, the defendant argues, is that procedures by statute expressly applicable only to criminal informations, including motions to quash, also may be employed to attack a complaint.
Finally, the defendant, despite successful resort in county court to just such a motion to quash the amended criminal complaint, now argues paradoxically that no appeal lies from the county court's order quashing, since it quashed a complaint rather than its formal equivalent, an information.
By statute, the rules of practice and procedure in criminal actions in district courts and in county courts of increased jurisdiction are similar. N.D.C.C. § 27-08-24. Because of this intended uniformity of practice and procedure and because, as previously pointed out, there is no real distinction between a criminal information and a criminal complaint under our law, a motion to quash, based upon the enumerated grounds of N.D.C.C. § 29-14-04 having reference to criminal informations, is available and may be employed in a county court of increased jurisdiction to test the jurisdictional and legal sufficiency of a criminal complaint. Accordingly, in the instant case the defendant was entitled to so test the vulnerability of the amended criminal complaint in the county court. It follows that the order granting the motion to quash the complaint is appealable, just as is an order granting a motion to quash an information.
Comment should be made that N.D.C.C. § 33-12-40, which details justice court practice and procedure, and, more particularly, motions to dismiss criminal complaints in that court, is definitive of and restricted to justice court practice and procedure and has no application to county courts of increased jurisdiction.
*501 Turning to the merits of the order of the county court quashing the amended criminal complaint, we hold that order to be in error and by this decision reversed.
The defendant is accused of having violated N.D.C.C. § 6-03-63, which reads:
6-03-63. Interest on depositsRate payableMisdemeanor.No state banking association shall pay interest on deposits, directly or indirectly, at a greater rate than four per cent per annum unless authorized by the state banking board to pay a greater rate, which in no case shall exceed six per cent per annum. * * Any officer, director, or employee of any association violating the provisions of this section, directly or indirectly, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
North Dakota Century Code.
In quashing the amended criminal complaint, the county court ruled that the trust company of which the defendant allegedly is an officer was organized under the provisions of N.D.C.C. ch. 6-05; that N.D.C.C. § 6-03-63 is limited by its terms to banking associations; that the charging statute could not be enlarged to include banking institutions; and that the defendant, being an officer of a banking institution as defined by N.D.C.C. § 6-01-02(3) and not an officer of a banking association, was entitled to an order quashing the amended complaint.
N.D.C.C. § 6-05-34 expressly provides that N.D.C.C. § 6-03-63, the statute which it is alleged that the defendant trust company officer violated, shall be applicable to and shall be observed by all trust companies organized under N.D.C.C. ch. 6-05. The county court having found that the trust company here involved is of this classification, that is, organized under N.D.C.C. ch. 6-05, a finding not disputed by the defendant, it follows that the defendant is a corporate officer against whom the offense in question could be instituted.
The order of the Burleigh County Court of Increased Jurisdiction quashing the amended criminal complaint in this case is reversed, and this cause is remanded to that court for arraignment and appropriate proceedings upon the plea to be entered.
TEIGEN, C.J., and PAULSON, ERICKSTAD and KNUDSON, JJ., concur.
STRUTZ, J., deeming himself disqualified, did not participate; Honorable DOUGLAS B. HEEN, one of the judges of the Second Judicial District, sitting in his stead.

=== CASE 2211287 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:04.646816+00 ===

11 Mich. App. 602 (1968)
162 N.W.2d 110
PEOPLE
v.
COOLEY.
Docket No. 2,388.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided June 3, 1968.
Frank J. Kelley, Attorney General, Robert A. Derengoski, Solicitor General, Robert F. Leonard, Prosecuting Attorney, and Donald A. Kuebler and Paul G. Miller, Jr., Assistant Prosecuting Attorneys, for the people.
William O. Kelly, Jr., for defendant on appeal.
CANHAM, J.
Defendant appeals from his conviction and sentence on the charges of the sale of narcotics[1] and possession of narcotics[2] on October 25, 1965.
The record shows that before trial the defendant, in two letters addressed to the trial court, indicated dissatisfaction with his court-appointed attorney. In the last letter the defendant stated, "Thus I'm asking or should I say submitting a motion of dismissal of the following court-appointed attorney." The record shows that the trial court did not act on these letters and that defendant went to trial represented by the court-appointed attorney he sought to discharge.
The trial record indicates that the issue of representation was not raised again until just prior to sentence.
The Constitution of 1963 provides in art 1, § 13, as follows:
*604 "A suitor in any court of this state has the right to prosecute or defend his suit, either in his own proper person or by an attorney."
The trial court, in failing to act on the request of the defendant, denied him his constitutionally guaranteed right to represent himself at trial. See People v. Henley (1965), 2 Mich App 54.
Reversed and remanded for a new trial.
LESINSKI, C.J., and McGREGOR, J., concurred.
NOTES
[1]  CLS 1961, § 335.152 (Stat Ann 1957 Rev § 18.1122).
[2]  CLS 1961, § 335.153 (Stat Ann 1957 Rev § 18.1123).

=== CASE 2211293 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:04.768853+00 ===

210 Cal.App.2d 451 (1962)
ELIZABETH WILSON, Plaintiff and Appellant,
v.
LOCKHEED AIRCRAFT CORPORATION, Defendant and Respondent.
Civ. No. 26264.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. Two.
Dec. 3, 1962.
Virgil V. Becker for Plaintiff and Appellant.
Kirtland & Packard and Judith O. Hollinger for Defendant and Respondent.
FOX, P. J.
This is an action by plaintiff in her individual capacity against defendants Lockheed Aircraft Corporation and Braniff Airways Incorporated for the wrongful death of her son, Vernon Olson. The trial court granted Lockheed's *452 motion for judgment on the pleadings and a judgment of dismissal was entered in due course. She has appealed.
On September 29, 1959, Vernon Olson was a passenger aboard a Braniff Airways plane, a Lockheed Electra, on a flight from Houston to Dallas, Texas. The airplane crashed and caused the death of Olson. Decedent left surviving his widow, Dorothy, and a minor child, Linda; also, his mother, the plaintiff. The mother filed this action on April 14, 1960.  [fn. 1]
In deciding whether this action may be maintained by the mother, a preliminary inquiry must be made: Does California or Texas law apply in ascertaining her rights? In this connection it is conceded by counsel for plaintiff that had the accident and death occurred in California, plaintiff would have no cause of action under the laws of this state. In the agreed statement on appeal plaintiff states "she is relying exclusively upon the laws" of Texas as the basis for her right to recover. [1] In this position she is correct for it is the general rule that in an action for wrongful death, the law which governs is the law of the jurisdiction where the action for wrongful death arose, i.e. the place where the tort was committed, unless it is contrary to the public policy of this state.  [fn. 2] (McManus v. Red Salmon Canning Co., 37 Cal.App. 133, 136 [173 P. 1112]; Loranger v. Nadeau, 215 Cal. 362, 366 [10 P.2d 63, 84 A.L.R. 1264]; Victor v. Sperry, 163 Cal.App.2d 518, 523 [329 P.2d 728]; Grant v. McAuliffe, 41 Cal.2d 859, 862 [264 P.2d 944, 42 A.L.R.2d 1162]; Rest., Conflict of Laws,  391-397.) She is "more particularly" relying on "the wrongful death statute of the State of Texas as set forth in articles 4671, et seq., Title 77, Vernon's Texas Statutes 1948."
We shall now examine the pertinent provisions of the Texas wrongful death statute (Title 77, art. 4671-4678). Article 4671 creates the action for wrongful death. Article 4675 goes to the very heart of plaintiff's right to maintain this action. It provides: "Actions for damage arising from death shall be for the sole and exclusive benefit of and may be brought by the surviving husband, wife, children, and parents of the person whose death has been caused or by either of them for *453 the benefit of all. If none of said parties commence such action within three calendar months after the death of the deceased, the executor or administrator of the deceased shall commence and prosecute the action unless requested by all of such parties not to prosecute the same. ..." Article 4677 reads: "The jury may give such damages as they think proportionate to the injury resulting from such death. The amount so recovered shall be divided among the persons entitled to the benefit of the action, or such of them as shall then be alive, in such shares as the jury shall find by their verdict."
It is apparent from article 4675 that either the surviving spouse, the children or parents may bring such an action upon the conditions therein specified, viz., (1) that it shall be for the benefit of all parties there enumerated, and (2) that it is brought within three months after the death of the deceased, but if not brought within that time then the executor or administrator shall commence and prosecute the action unless all the parties who come within the article request such personal representative not to prosecute the action. The articles contemplate that all of the parties beneficially interested should be represented in the action. This is indicated by article 4677 which provides that the jury shall divide the recovery among the persons entitled thereto in such shares as the jury may determine. In order to simplify and expedite matters, the statute gives those beneficially interested three months to settle their claims or bring an action by some or all of them but "for the benefit of all." This analysis finds support in Dallas & Wichita R.R. Co. v. Spiker, 59 Tex. 435, where the court held that an "[a]ction by wife alone cannot be maintained where mother survives and her interest in the damages has not been adjusted."
In this connection it is important to note that the conditions upon which the persons beneficially interested may bring such action is contained in the very article which confers the right. In fact, the requirement that the action must be "for the benefit of all" is at the end of the sentence that gives the right of action. The right to bring the suit within three months, else the personal representative steps in, appears in the very next sentence. It is thus apparent that these are conditions, upon the right to maintain the action for wrongful death, that the statute has created. That the time within which parties beneficially interested may bring the action is to be regarded as a condition is indicated by the fact that the right of action for wrongful death is not lost on the expiration of three *454 months. And to be entitled to file and prosecute such an action the plaintiff must bring herself within these conditions. [2] Apposite here are sections 605 and 397, Restatement--Conflict of Laws. Section 605 states: "If by the law of the state which has created a right of action, it is made a condition of the right that it shall expire after a certain period of limitation has elapsed, no action begun after the period has elapsed can be maintained in any state." [3] Section 397 provides: "A recovery under a death statute of the place of wrong cannot be had in any state after the time fixed in the statute for bringing an action has elapsed." Comment (a) under section 397 states: "The limit of time is regarded as a condition of the right, and no suit can be brought in any state after the right has ceased to exist." (See also 11 Cal.Jur.2d, Conflict of Laws, p. 194,  93; Engel v. Davenport, 194 Cal. 344, 351 [228 P. 710].)
Applying these principles to the facts of the instant case it is clear that plaintiff is not entitled to maintain this action. Her son died on September 29, 1959; her complaint was not filed until April 14, 1960. This was far beyond the three months' period within which she was privileged to bring the action under the express provisions of the statute which created the right of action and gave her a beneficial interest in any recovery. (Title 77, art. 4671 and 4675, Vernon's Texas Statutes.)
Furthermore, at the time Lockheed made its motion for judgment on the pleadings, plaintiff was not seeking to recover damages "for the benefit of all" who had a beneficial interest therein. She was no longer guardian ad litem of her granddaughter Linda and had no authority to represent her. Plaintiff was simply attempting to maintain this action in her individual capacity. This plainly she was not entitled to do under the statute creating the right. She is bound by the conditions specified in the statute and has failed to comply with them.
The case of Colgate-Palmolive-Peet Co. v. Perkins (Tex. Civ.App.) 48 S.W.2d 1007, relied on heavily by plaintiff does not, in fact, support her position because there one of the parties in the designated class did commence an action within the three months period prescribed by the statute.
Although plaintiff says in the stipulated statement on appeal that she is relying "particularly" on the wrongful death statute embodied in articles 4671, et seq., Title 77, Vernon's Statutes, 1948, she attempts, in her reply brief, to *455 extend the rights there created by invoking the Texas general statutes of limitation as embodied in articles 5525, 5526 and 5538, Title 91 of Vernon's Statutes. These general statutes are of no assistance to plaintiff for the conditions which plaintiff failed to comply with are a part of the statute creating the right which she seeks to enforce. These general statutes cannot excuse her from complying with these conditions nor extend her time for such compliance.
Affirmed.
Ashburn, J., and Herndon, J., concurred.
NOTES
[fn. 1]  1. Initially Mrs. Wilson had herself appointed guardian ad litem of Linda, and brought this action in her own behalf and as guardian ad litem of Linda. Mrs. Wilson's appointment as guardian of Linda was later vacated upon motion of her mother, Dorothy. So at the time Lockheed filed its notice of motion for judgment on the pleading, Mrs. Wilson, in her individual capacity, was the sole plaintiff.
[fn. 2]  2. We find nothing in the wrongful death statute of Texas that is contrary to the public policy of this state.

=== CASE 2211294 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:04.783997+00 ===

12 Mich. App. 161 (1968)
162 N.W.2d 489
CITY OF DEARBORN
v.
PULTE-STRANG, INC.
Docket No. 3,270.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided June 27, 1968.
Rehearing denied August 15, 1968.
*162 Ralph B. Guy, Jr., Corporation Counsel and Gerald E. McNally and Joseph J. Burtell, Assistant Corporation Counsel, for plaintiff.
Cross, Wrock, Miller, Vieson & Kelley, for de-defendant Pulte-Strang, Inc.
Reid & Gilmore, for defendant Bailey-Zummo Waterproofing Company.
Travis, Warren Nayer & Burgoyne (Richard A. Cogan, of counsel), for third-party defendants.
J.H. GILLIS, P.J.
Cross defendant-appellee, Bailey-Zummo Waterproofing Company, moved for summary judgment in the trial court pursuant to GCR 1963, 117.2(1) against the original defendant-third party plaintiff, and cross plaintiff Pulte-Strang Inc. The trial court granted the motion and Pulte-Strang, Inc. filed a claim of appeal in this Court.
In accordance with the provisions of GCR 1963, 518.2[1] the issue here presented must come to this *163 Court by application for leave to appeal since the trial court's order was interlocutory[2] and did not fully adjudicate the rights of any of the litigants in this lawsuit. Pursuant to GCR 1963, 806.1[3] this Court is without jurisdiction to hear the matter by claim of appeal as of right.
Lacking jurisdiction, this Court must dismiss the appeal. Fox v. Board of Regents of the University of Michigan (1965), 375 Mich 238; Standard Building Products Company v. Woodland Building Company (1965), 1 Mich App 434, 437.
FITZGERALD and McGREGOR, JJ., concurred.
NOTES
[1]  "When more than one claim for relief is presented in an action whether as a claim, counterclaim, cross-claim, or third-party claim, or when multiple parties are involved, the court may direct the entry of a final judgment as to one or more but fewer than all of the claims or parties only upon an express determination that there is no just reason for delay and upon an express direction for the entry of judgment. In the absence of such determination and direction, any order or other form of decision, however designated, which adjudicates fewer than all the claims or the rights and liabilities of fewer than all the parties shall not terminate the action as to any of the claims or parties, and the order or other form of decision is subject to revision at any time before the entry of judgment adjudicating all the claims and the rights and liabilities of all the parties."
[2]  The order granting summary judgment provided, inter alia, "and it being shown to the court that no prejudice would result to any party if the motion were to be granted, inasmuch as the said Bailey-Zummo Waterproofing Company has been named a cross-defendant by the remaining third party defendants."
[3]  "In all * * * civil matters, an aggrieved party shall have a right to appeal from all final judgments from the circuit courts."

=== CASE 9737606 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:29:56.647447+00 ===

JUSTICE COOK delivered the opinion of the court: Plaintiff, Brenda Brandt, appeals the June 21, 2001, order of the Coles County circuit court granting defendant Sarah Bush Lincoln Health Center’s motion pursuant to sections 2 — 615 and 2 — 619 of the Code of Civil Procedure to dismiss plaintiffs amended complaint. 735 ILCS 5/2—615, 2—619 (West 2000). We affirm. I. BACKGROUND In December 1998, plaintiff purchased a ProteGen Sling (sling) from defendant to treat her incontinence. The sling was surgically implanted in plaintiff at defendant’s health center. In January 1999, the company that manufactured the sling, defendant Boston Scientific Corporation (Boston Scientific), issued a voluntary recall of the sling. (Boston Scientific is not party to this appeal.) The recall stated that “upon review of medical literature and clinical experience with synthetic slings *** [Boston Scientific] ha[s] determined that the use of ProteGen in the treatment of female incontinence does not produce outcomes that are consistent with [Boston Scientific’s] standard of performance for [its] products or customer expectations.” The recall further stated that during follow-up and care of existing ProteGen patients, particular care should be given to the detection and treatment of vaginal erosion and dehiscence. (Dehiscence is the tearing apart or reopening of the surgical wound from the implant, which could result in the dislocation of the sling.) Following implantation of the sling, plaintiff alleges she experienced serious medical complications, including inflammation, pain, bleeding, infection, and erosion of the tissue of her vaginal wall. As a result of these complications, the sling was surgically removed in November 1999. In July 2000, plaintiff filed a six-count complaint against defendants Sarah Bush Lincoln Health Center and Boston Scientific, alleging the torts of negligence and strict liability, and alleging breach of implied warranty of merchantability under the Uniform Commercial Code (UCC) (810 ILCS 5/1—101 et seq. (West 1998)). Defendant Sarah Bush Lincoln Health Center filed a motion to dismiss the three counts against it arguing, in part, that the complaint was defective due to plaintiffs failure to attach a section 2 — 622 physician’s affidavit to the complaint. 735 ILCS 5/2—622 (West 2000). In January 2001, the trial court granted defendant’s motion to dismiss, finding that the alleged actions of defendant were related to plaintiffs medical condition and treatment, and therefore, a physician’s affidavit was required. Plaintiff was given leave to file an amended complaint to include a section 2 — 622 physician’s affidavit. In May 2001, plaintiff filed her amended complaint alleging the same three counts as the original complaint of negligence, strict liability, and breach of implied warranty of merchantability against Boston Scientific, and one count of breach of implied warranty of merchantability against defendant. Plaintiff did not attach a section 2 — 622 physician’s affidavit to the amended complaint. Defendant filed a motion to dismiss count IV of the amended complaint. Defendant argued that plaintiff had failed to correct the deficiencies in accordance with the trial court’s order in that count IV was a variation of healing art malpractice and therefore required a section 2 — 622 affidavit. Defendant further argued that it was not a “merchant” with respect to the sale of the medical sling as required for liability under the UCC, and that the interaction between the plaintiff and defendant was predominantly to obtain services while liability under the UCC only applies to the sale of goods. The trial court granted defendant’s motion to dismiss count IV of the amended complaint for failure to meet the pleading requirements of section 2 — 622 of the Code of Civil Procedure (735 ILCS 5/2—622 (West 1998)) with prejudice. This appeal followed. II. ANALYSIS The issues in this appeal are whether the sale of the pubovaginal sling sold by defendant to plaintiff was a sale of goods under article 2 of the UCC (810 ILCS 5/2—101 through 2—725 (West 1998)), and whether the allegation of breach of implied warranty of merchantability based upon defendant’s sale and distribution of the sling involved “healing art malpractice,” thereby requiring the attachment of a section 2 — 622 physician’s affidavit to the amended complaint. A. Standard of Review  Our review of the trial court’s order granting defendant’s motion to dismiss is de nova. Neppl v. Murphy, 316 Ill. App. 3d 581, 583-84, 736 N.E.2d 1174, 1178 (2000). We may affirm the trial court’s ruling on any basis supported by the record. Messenger v. Edgar, 157 Ill. 2d 162, 177, 623 N.E.2d 310, 317 (1993). B. Claim for Breach of Implied Warranty of Merchantability Under the UCC  Plaintiffs amended complaint alleged one count of breach of implied warranty of merchantability under section 2 — 314 of the UCC against the defendant based upon its sale and distribution of the sling. 810 ILCS 5/2—314 (West 1998). Section 2—314 of the UCC states: “(1) Unless excluded or modified ***, a warranty that the goods shall be merchantable is implied in a contract for their sale if the seller is a merchant with respect to goods of that kind. *** (2) Goods to be merchantable must be at least such as (a) pass without objection in the trade under the contract description; and >;< >;< * (c) are fit for the ordinary purposes for which such goods are used[.]” 810 ILCS 5/2—314(1), (2)(a), (2)(c) (West 1998). Section 2 — 104 defines “merchant” to mean: “[A] person who deals in goods of the kind or otherwise by his occupation holds himself out as having knowledge or skill peculiar to the practices or goods involved in the transaction or to whom such knowledge or skill may be attributed by his employment of an agent or broker or other intermediary who by his occupation holds himself out as having such knowledge or skill.” 810 ILCS 5/2—104 (West 1998). Section 2 — 102 further provides that the UCC “applies to transactions in goods.” 810 ILCS 5/2—102 (West 1998). Finally, case law establishes that the warranty provisions of the UCC do not apply to the rendition of services. Pitler v. Michael Reese Hospital, 92 Ill. App. 3d 739, 742, 415 N.E.2d 1255, 1257 (1980).  The test for applicability of the UCC in Illinois is whether the transaction at issue is predominantly one for the sale of goods with services incidentally involved, or one for the rendition of services with the sale of goods incidentally involved. Boddie v. Litton Unit Handling Systems, 118 Ill. App. 3d 520, 531, 455 N.E.2d 142, 150 (1983). If the transaction was primarily for services, then the UCC does not apply even if the sale of goods was part of the transaction. Pitler, 92 Ill. App. 3d at 742, 415 N.E.2d at 1257. Defendant contends that in the instant case, the sale of the sling was a necessary adjunct to the primary function of providing medical services, and therefore the UCC does not apply. We agree.  In general, when a person seeks medical care from a hospital, the primary purpose of the transaction is to obtain the hospital’s services, not to buy medical supplies or devices. Many courts have declined to allow products liability claims against hospitals based upon the sale of defective medical equipment. See, e.g., Parker v. St. Vincent Hospital, 122 N.M. 39, 41, 919 P.2d 1104, 1106 (1996), citing Hoff v. Zimmer, Inc., 746 F. Supp. 872 (WD. Wis. 1990) (hip prosthesis); Hector v. Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, 180 Cal. App. 3d 493, 225 Cal. Rptr. 595 (1986) (pacemaker); Fisher v. Sibley Memorial Hospital, 403 A.2d 1130 (D.C. 1979) (blood for transfusion); Roberts v. Suburban Hospital Ass’n, 73 Md. App. 1, 532 A.2d 1081 (1987) (same); Baptista v. Saint Barnabas Medical Center, 109 N.J. Super. 217, 262 A.2d 902 (1970) (same), aff’d, 57 N.J. 167, 270 A.2d 409 (1970); Goldfarb v. Teitelbaum, 149 A.D.2d 566, 540 N.Y.S.2d 263 (1989) (mandibular prosthesis); Ayyash v. Henry Ford Health Systems, 210 Mich. App. 142, 533 N.W.2d 353 (1995) (Vitek implant); Cafazzo v. Central Medical Health Services, 542 Fa. 526, 668 A.2d 521 (1995) (same). A hospital will often use and sell certain tangible items as a necessary part of providing service. However, the thrust of the transaction between patient and hospital is still the provision of services to treat a medical condition. The incidental sale of the product or device that is necessary to render the medical service does not transform the transaction into one primarily for the sale of goods.  In this case, plaintiff sought the hospital’s services for treatment of a medical condition. The rendition of services was the primary purpose of the transaction. The sale of the sling, though an important part of the services, was incidental to those services. The UCC does not apply. Plaintiff cites Garcia v. Edgewater Hospital, 244 Ill. App. 3d 894, 613 N.E.2d 1243 (1993), for support of her position that the sale of the sling was a sale of goods under the UCC. Garcia involved a claim of breach of implied warranty of merchantability regarding a defective heart valve sold to a patient by the defendant hospital and used in a heart surgery. The First District found that the supplying of mitral valves constituted a sale, and therefore, it was not error to base the defendant’s liability on breach of implied warranty of merchantability under section 2 — 314 of the UCC. Garcia, 244 Ill. App. 3d at 901, 613 N.E.2d at 1249. The First District based its decision on the Illinois Supreme Court’s decision in Cunningham v. MacNeal Memorial Hospital, 47 Ill. 2d 443, 451, 266 N.E.2d 897, 901 (1970), which held that supplying blood for purposes of transfusion was a sale. The legislature responded to Cunningham by passing legislation to overrule that decision. See Pub. Act 77—184, eff. July 2, 1971 (adding Ill. Rev. Stat. 1971, ch. 91, par. 182 (now 745 ILCS 40/2 (West 1998))). While Garcia does provide support for plaintiffs argument, it is a First District decision, which we are not compelled to follow. Nor do we find Garcia to be persuasive. Cunningham, the case on which Garcia relied, was not a UCC case, and it is therefore unclear what precedential value Cunningham has in a case based upon a UCC claim. It is also telling that the legislature acted to overrule the holding in Cunningham. While Cunningham does compel this court to recognize that the sale of the sling in this case was in fact a “sale,” the existence of a sale in and of itself does not automatically implicate the UCC. Rather, the sale must be the primary reason behind the transaction for the UCC to apply. Pitler, 92 Ill. App. 3d at 742, 415 N.E.2d at 1257. Garcia notwithstanding, we find that the transaction in this case was primarily for the rendition of services and that the UCC therefore does not apply. C. Requirement of Section 2 — 622 Affidavit  Although it does not affect our ruling in this case, we note that the trial court erred when it found plaintiffs UCC claim constituted a claim for “healing art malpractice” as defined in section 2 — 622 of the Code of Civil Procedure (735 ILCS 5/2—622 (West 2000)) and that plaintiff therefore needed to file a section 2 — 622 affidavit. The legislature’s purpose in passing section 2 — 622 was to reduce the number of frivolous suits that are filed and to eliminate such actions at an early stage, before the expenses of litigation have mounted. DeLuna v. St. Elizabeth’s Hospital, 147 Ill. 2d 57, 65, 588 N.E.2d 1139, 1142 (1992). Section 2 — 622 was part of the medical malpractice reform legislation enacted by the General Assembly in 1985 in response to what was perceived to be a crisis in the area of medical malpractice. DeLuna, 147 Ill. 2d at 65, 588 N.E.2d at 1142. The DeLuna decision solely addressed medical malpractice cases and included no language to expand its applicability further. The one allegation against defendant in this case concerns the sale of a defective sling, and plaintiff in this case does not allege malpractice or any breach of a standard of care. Therefore, the complaint sounds in breach of warranty under the UCC, and it is unnecessary for plaintiff to file a section 2 — 622 affidavit. As a final note, we will address defendant’s argument that plaintiff must present expert medical testimony to fully recover direct and consequential damages and, therefore, must file a section 2 — 622 affidavit. Defendant seems to argue that section 2 — 622 applies to any case where medical testimony may be required, whether or not malpractice is alleged, to prove medical injury damages. This is incorrect. We have already found that plaintiffs claim does not involve “healing art malpractice,” which is the trigger for applicability of section 2 — 622. Therefore, any medical testimony that may be presented in this case will not require the filing of a section 2 — 622 affidavit. This is true whether the testimony relates to direct or consequential damages, and this is in line with the case law that holds a section 2 — 622 affidavit is not required to present medical evidence of damages in other non-malpractice actions. See Mooney v. Graham Hospital Ass’n, 160 Ill. App. 3d 376, 382, 513 N.E.2d 633, 637 (1987); Owens v. Manor Health Care Corp., 159 Ill. App. 3d 684, 689, 512 N.E.2d 820, 823-24 (1987); Gragg v. Calandra, 297 Ill. App. 3d 639, 645-46, 696 N.E.2d 1282, 1287 (1998). III. CONCLUSION We affirm the trial court. TURNER, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9737607 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:29:56.651651+00 ===

JUSTICE MYERSCOUGH, specially concurring in part and dissenting in part: I respectfully concur in part and dissent in part. I concur with the majority that plaintiff’s UCC claim did not constitute a claim for “healing art malpractice” as defined in section 2 — 622 of the Code of Civil Procedure, and, therefore, plaintiff was not required to file a section 2 — 622 affidavit, I dissent, however, with the majority finding that hospitals are exempt from liability for the sale of defective products under the UCC. The majority decision to ignore Garcia, 244 Ill. App. 3d 894, 613 N.E.2d 1243, a UCC case, due to its rebanee on language in Cunningham, 47 Ill. 2d 443, 266 N.E.2d 897, a non-UCC case, is incorrect. While the Illinois legislature negated Cunningham by bmiting the liability of hospitals for the distribution of blood, it did not eliminate Cunningham’s applicability to the sale of other medical products intended for use in the human body, as specifically found by the Garcia court. Garcia, 244 Ill. App. 3d at 900, 613 N.E.2d at 1248. The facts and cause of action in Garcia mirror those in the instant case. Garcia involved a claim for breach of implied warranty of merchantability regarding a defective heart valve sold to a patient by the defendant hospital and used in a heart surgery. There, the plaintiff brought an action alleging breach of implied warranty of merchantability following the death of his wife. The plaintiffs wife, Victoria Garcia, was admitted to the defendant hospital for mitral valve replacement surgery. The mitral valve connects the heart’s atrial and ventricular chambers and allows blood to flow between the two chambers, thereby providing normal heart function. Garcia, 244 Ill. App. 3d at 896, 613 N.E.2d at 1246. During the surgery, the diseased mitral valve was removed and replaced with an artificial valve prosthesis. Following the surgery, Mrs. Garcia’s heart was not functioning properly, and upon reopening the heart, the doctor discovered that part of the artificial valve was floating in the heart’s chamber. The defective valve was removed and replaced with another valve. The surgery required the plaintiffs wife to be on a cardiopulmonary bypass machine for an extended time, which resulted in her developing a disorder that prevented the blood from clotting. The plaintiffs wife lost all of her blood and died. Garcia, 244 Ill. App. 3d at 897, 613 N.E.2d at 1246. The defendant in Garcia argued, as did defendant in the instant case, that it should not be liable under section 2 — 314 of the UCC for breach of implied warranty of merchantability. The trial court found that the hospital could be liable, and in upholding the trial court’s ruling, the appellate court stated that Cunningham makes it clear that the supplying of mitral valves constituted a sale, and therefore, it was not error to base the defendant’s liability on breach of implied warranty of merchantability. While the appellate court acknowledged the statutory change following the Cunningham decision that limited liability of hospitals for the distribution of blood, the appellate court, citing Hill v. Jackson Park Hospital, 39 Ill. App. 3d 223, 226, 349 N.E.2d 541, 544 (1976), stated that the Cunningham decision was controlling with respect to surgical implements, drugs, food, and other, articles intended for use in the human body. Garcia, 244 Ill. App. 3d at 900, 613 N.E.2d at 1248. Therefore, Garcia and Cunningham are controlling here. Moreover, the cases relied upon by the majority, Pitler v. Michael Reese Hospital, 92 Ill. App. 3d 739, 415 N.E.2d 1255, and Boddie v. Litton Unit Handling Systems, 118 Ill. App. 3d 520, 455 N.E.2d 142 (1983), are clearly distinguishable from the facts in the instant case. In Pitler, the court stated that the implied warranty of merchantability under the UCC did not apply in that case because the transaction between the plaintiffs parents and the defendant hospital was for the rendition of services (radiation treatments). In so ruling, however, the court noted that “[the plaintiff] does not *** mention the [UCC] anywhere in count I or elsewhere in the complaint, and [plaintiff] makes no allegations either that there was a sale of goods or that the stated warranties were breached in any manner.” (Emphasis added.) Pitler, 92 Ill. App. 3d at 742, 415 N.E.2d at 1257-58. Similarly, in Boddie, the appellate court found that the provision of construction services was not a sale of goods under the UCC. Boddie, 118 Ill. App. 3d at 531, 455 N.E.2d at 150. In Boddie, the plaintiff filed a claim for negligence, strict liability, willful and wanton conduct, and breach of warranty against the defendant, who was the general contractor for the construction of the postal facility. Boddie, 118 Ill. App. 3d at 522, 455 N.E.2d at 144. The court found the transaction between the defendant and plaintiffs employee, the United States Post Office, did not fall within the ambit of the UCC. The court based its ruling upon the language of the contract between the defendant and the United States Post Office. Further, the court noted that general construction contracts encompass the erection of buildings, the installation of utilities and services, with extensive excavation and demolition, and therefore, the construction contract between the defendant and the United States Post Office was clearly not a transaction for the sale of goods. Boddie, 118 Ill. App. 3d at 531, 455 N.E.2d at 150. Thus, the facts of Pitler (which does not allege UCC violations or the sale of goods) and Boddie (a contract for construction services) make these decisions distinguishable from the instant case. The majority opinion erroneously dismisses the applicable Illinois case law, relying instead on Pitier, Boddie, and other states’ case law. The majority cites nine cases, all from other jurisdictions, where courts dismissed products liability claims against hospitals based upon the sale of defective medical equipment. While there may be good policy reasons for creating a bright-line rule that hospitals are not liable for the sale of defective medical products under the UCC, the legislature has not done so — even though it could have done so when it made statutory changes following Cunningham. As such, Cunningham and Garcia should be followed. There is no authority for exempting hospitals for the sale of defective medical products. For these reasons, I would reverse the trial court.

=== CASE 2211301 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:04.871525+00 ===

771 N.E.2d 1072 (2002)
331 Ill. App.3d 930
265 Ill.Dec. 113
Gloria HARRIS, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
Sharon ECKERSALL, Evanston Township Assessor and Evanston Township, Defendants-Appellees.
No. 1-01-2450.
Appellate Court of Illinois, First District, Sixth Division.
June 7, 2002.
Kenneth N. Flaxman, Chicago, for Appellant.
Jack M. Siegel, Altheimer & Gray, Chicago, for Appellees.
Presiding Justice GALLAGHER delivered the opinion of the court:
Plaintiff, Gloria Harris, filed a three-count complaint for declaratory, injunctive and other relief against defendants, Sharon Eckersall (Eckersall), the Evanston Township assessor and Evanston Township (the Township). Plaintiff sought a declaratory judgment that her dismissal by Eckersall, the Evanston Township assessor, was null and void and sought an order providing for her reinstatement with back pay and benefits. Plaintiff further alleged that her dismissal by Eckersall interfered with prospective economic advantage and she should be awarded damages. Defendants filed a motion to dismiss, pursuant to section 2-615 of the Code of Civil Procedure (735 ILCS 5/2-615 (West 2000)). The trial court granted defendants' motion to dismiss. We affirm.
*1073 Our review of a trial court's grant of a motion to dismiss, under section 2-615 of the Code of Civil Procedure, is de novo. Neppl v. Murphy, 316 Ill.App.3d 581, 583, 249 Ill.Dec. 736, 736 N.E.2d 1174 (2000). We agree, however, with the trial court's analysis in granting defendant's motion to dismiss. In view of the statutory framework of the Evanston Township and the office of the township assessor, the trial court correctly dismissed plaintiff's complaint as failing to state a cause of action.
Section 77-5 of the Township Code provides that the township assessor "shall be elected and have powers and duties as provided in the Property Tax Code." 60 ILCS 1/77-5 (West 1996). One of these powers, relevant to the instant case, is found in section 2-65(a) of the Property Tax Code and states as follows:
"[W]here a township * * * assessor is unable alone to perform all duties of the office, he or she may appoint one or more suitable persons as deputies to assist in making the assessment, and may appoint other employees required for operation of the office. The deputies and other employees may be employed on an annual, monthly or daily basis." 35 ILCS 200/2-65(a) (West 1996).
Pursuant to this provision, plaintiff was employed as an assistant to the Evanston Township assessor from 1988 until May 2000. While employed as an assistant, plaintiff was paid by the Evanston Township, pursuant to its responsibility to provide funds for the operation of the assessor's office. This responsibility is found under section 2-80 of the Property Tax Code, which provides as follows:
"Expenses and office needs. * * * The board of town trustees shall provide the office and storage space, equipment, office supplies, deputies and clerical and stenographic personnel and other items as are necessary for the efficient operation of the office." 35 ILCS 200/2-80 (West 1996).
The office of Evanston Township assessor became vacant in April 1997 and remained vacant until August 17, 1999. During the vacancy, plaintiff continued to perform the same work and continued to receive her salary and benefits. On August 17, 1999, the Township appointed defendant Eckersall as Evanston Township assessor. On May 23, 2000, Eckersall fired plaintiff. On August 25, 2000, the Township paid plaintiff for her unused vacation and personal time and transferred her unused sick time to plaintiff's retirement pension plan.
Plaintiff now contends that her complaint fairly alleges that she became an employee of Evanston Township in April 1997. The gist of plaintiff's action is that (1) she was transformed into an employee of the Township, as evidenced by the fact that the Township continued to pay her salary during the time period of the vacancy, and (2) as an employee of the Township she had certain terms and conditions of employment, which included the provision that she could not be discharged without cause, after notice and hearing and in accordance with progressive discipline. Plaintiff's argument fails because she was at no time a Township employee but, at all times, was an employee of the assessor.
Plaintiff has also failed to allege any facts to support her conclusory allegation that, after the Evanston Township assessor position became vacant, she was "employed by" the Township. Under the above plain language of section 2-65(a) of the Property Tax Code (35 ILCS 200/2-65(a) (West 1996)), it was the Township assessor who had the plenary power to hire or fire the employees required for operation of the assessor's office. That the Township continued to pay plaintiff her salary, pursuant to its statutory obligation *1074 to provide the funding for the assessor's office, does not transform plaintiff into a Township employee. Plaintiff never became an employee of the Township under any theory.
Moreover, as defendant additionally notes, the authority of the Township board with respect to Township employees specifically excludes employees of the Evanston Township assessor. Section 100-5(a) of the Township Code states, in relevant part, as follows: "(a) The township board may employ and fix the compensation of township employees that the board deems necessary, excluding the employees of the offices of supervisor of general assistance, township collector, and township assessor." (Emphasis added.) 60 ILCS 1/100-5(a)(West 1996). A township may exercise only those powers conferred upon it by statute. Grassini v. Du Page Township, 279 Ill.App.3d 614, 618, 216 Ill.Dec. 602, 665 N.E.2d 860, 863 (1996). Any employment agreement between plaintiff and the Township, similar to other types of unauthorized agreements, would have been void ab initio. See, e.g., Cannizzo v. Berwyn Township 708 Community Mental Health Board, 318 Ill.App.3d 478, 251 Ill.Dec. 889, 741 N.E.2d 1067 (2000)(holding employment contracts of former executive director of township community mental health board ultra vires and void ab initio, though board members had staggered terms of appointment, because the contracts extended beyond the term of the township supervisor in office at the time of the execution of the contracts, and the board was appointed by the supervisor); Grassini, 279 Ill.App.3d at 620, 216 Ill.Dec. 602, 665 N.E.2d at 864-65 (explaining that because a former town administrator's employment contract with township was to extend beyond the remaining period of service of the officials who had authorized the contract, it was outside the township's authority and thus void ab initio); see also 1997 Ill. Att'y Gen. Op. No. 97-007 (employees of township assessors are subject to the supervision and control of the officers who appoint them, rather than the township board). Clearly, the Township board does not have any authority to hire or fire employees of the assessor's office. Thus, plaintiff's theory that she somehow was converted into an employee of the Township as a result of the Township's continued payment of her salary and benefits, as well as her unused vacation and personal time, is all the more meritless.
Plaintiff has misconstrued the effect of the Township's continuing to pay her salary and other benefits during the time that the assessor position was vacant. This fact did not make the Township her employer. See, e.g., Orenic v. Illinois State Labor Relations Board, 127 Ill.2d 453, 476, 130 Ill.Dec. 455, 537 N.E.2d 784, 795 (1989)(fact that a county pays salaries of nonjudicial employees in the judicial branch does not in constitutional or statutory terms make the county their employer); Drury v. County of McLean, 89 Ill.2d 417, 425, 60 Ill.Dec. 624, 433 N.E.2d 666 (1982)(fact that counties pay salaries and expenses of circuit court clerks does not make the office of circuit court clerk a county office); Levin v. Civil Service Comm'n, 52 Ill.2d 516, 521, 288 N.E.2d 97, 100 (1972)(holding that public employees working for the office of Cook County assessor and receiving their compensation from Cook County had no vested right in the expectation of the continuance of this compensation). In accordance with the applicable statutory provisions, plaintiff held her appointed position at the will and pleasure of the employerthe Evanston Township assessor. Plaintiff had no legitimate expectation in continued employment and, thus, no protected property interest.
Illinois is an employment-at-will state. Barr v. Kelso-Burnett Co., 106 Ill.2d 520, 88 Ill.Dec. 628, 478 N.E.2d 1354 (1985). *1075 Therefore, absent a specific contract to the contrary, employment contracts are terminable at will. Because an at-will employee can be terminated at any time for any reason or no reason, an at-will employee has no property interest in continued employment. Similarly, it is well settled that, "absent legislative, administrative or contractual provisions to the contrary, a public employee in Illinois holds his office at the pleasure of the appointing power, which may remove him at any time." Willecke v. Bingham, 278 Ill.App.3d 4, 10, 214 Ill.Dec. 768, 662 N.E.2d 122, 125 (1996), citing Levin v. Civil Service Comm'n, 52 Ill.2d 516, 288 N.E.2d 97 (1972). Therefore, if a public employee, such as plaintiff here, serves at the pleasure of the appointing authority, the employment relationship is at will. Similar to other at-will employees, the employee has no property interest in continued employment and may be terminated at will.
Because plaintiff was an at-will employeewho could be discharged by the assessor at any time, we need not consider plaintiff's claim against Eckersall for interference with prospective economic advantage. Plaintiff has conceded this claim fails if this court concludes, as we have done, that she was an employee of the assessor.
In accordance with the foregoing, we affirm the decision of the circuit court of Cook County granting defendants' motion to dismiss plaintiff's complaint.
Affirmed.
BUCKLEY and FROSSARD, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 2211305 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:04.916307+00 ===

210 Cal.App.2d 440 (1962)
MELVIN C. JOHNSON, as Special Administrator, etc., Plaintiff and Appellant,
v.
KEY SYSTEM TRANSIT LINES et al., Defendants and Respondents.
Civ. No. 19840.
California Court of Appeals. First Dist., Div. Three.
Dec. 3, 1962.
Walter H. Medak for Plaintiff and Appellant.
Hardin, Fletcher, Cook & Hayes and Cyril Viadro for Defendants and Respondents.
DRAPER, P. J.
This is a case of first and, probably, last impression. The question is whether an action for wrongful death survives the plaintiff heir. No California decision directly passes upon it. By amendment effective September 15, 1961 the statute (Prob. Code,  573) now provides expressly for such survival.
[1] In 1956, Melvin L. Johnson was killed in the collision of a train of defendant and the automobile in which he was riding. His mother, alleging that she was his sole heir, filed an action for damages for his death. The mother died in 1958, and the present plaintiff, as special administrator, was substituted *441 herein. The case went to trial in 1960. At the close of plaintiff's case, motion for nonsuit was granted on the ground that the cause of action did not survive the death of the mother.
At common law, a tort action did not survive either the injured party or the tortfeasor. The statutory trend to modification of this rule was marked in England by Lord Campbell's Act, adopted in 1846. Since 1872, California has provided by statute (Code Civ. Proc.,  377) that heirs or personal representatives of a decedent may maintain an action for his wrongful death. This statute, however, met only the problem of death of the injured party. The California rule was clear that the cause of action died with the tortfeasor (Clark v. Goodwin, 170 Cal. 527 [150 P. 357, L.R.A. 1916A 1142]). Despite a trend in other jurisdictions toward the view that the cause of action should survive the tortfeasor, California retained the older rule until 1946. In that year, our Supreme Court held that wrongful death of a person constituted an injury to his "estate" or that of his dependent heirs, in the sense of diminishing support he would otherwise have provided to them. Thus the cause of action was one for injury to "property" and, under the code (Prob. Code,  574) survived the death of the tortfeasor to the extent of such property damage only (Hunt v. Authier, 28 Cal.2d 288 [169 P.2d 913, 171 A.L.R. 1379]).
At its 1949 session, the Legislature adopted code amendments obviously stemming from the decision in Hunt (Stats. 1949, ch. 1380). The section authorizing wrongful death actions (Code Civ. Proc.,  377) was amended to provide expressly that such an action survives the tortfeasor. The section providing for survival of actions for injury to property (Prob. Code,  574) was amended to provide expressly that it not apply to actions for physical injury or death. It seems apparent that the legislative intent was to provide for survival of a cause of action for wrongful death, and at the same time to avoid the awkward limitation of such an action to injury to the "estate" or to "property."
Defendant, however, relies on the fact that the amended section 377 expressly provided that a wrongful death action shall survive the tortfeasor, but made no such provision for the death of the "heirs or personal representatives." Thus, defendant says, there was a clear legislative determination that there should be no such survival. We cannot agree. The same act which amended the above two sections added a new section, 956, to the Civil Code. That ection (repealed in 1961) provided *442 "A thing in action arising out of a wrong which results in physical injury to the person or out of a statute imposing liability for such injury shall not abate by reason of the death of the wrongdoer ..., nor by reason of the death of the person injured or of any other person who owns any such thing in action." [Emphasis added.] The conclusion is inescapable that this section provides expressly that a cause of action for wrongful death (which necessarily results from physical injury to the decedent in his lifetime) shall survive the plaintiff heir (the "person who owns" the cause of action). It has been held that by the 1949 amendments "[s]urvival ... in personal injury and death cases was lifted from the Probate Code and with extensions was included in section 956 of the Civil Code." (Cort v. Steen, 36 Cal.2d 437, 440 [224 P.2d 723].)
It follows that section 956 is applicable to plaintiff's cause of action here, and that recovery may be had under that section.
Judgment reversed.
Salsman, J., and Devine, J., concurred.

=== CASE 9737747 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:33:41.347367+00 ===

SCHUDSON, J.
¶ 1. Ondra Bond appeals from the judgment of conviction for intimidation of a witness, party to a crime, habitual criminality, following a jury trial, and from the order denying his postconviction motion. He argues that the trial court erred in admitting evidence of his statement in response to a police officer's remark to him, while in custody and before being advised of his Miranda1 rights. Bond contends that, under Rhode Island v. Innis, 446 U.S. 291 (1980), and State v. Cunningham, 144 Wis. 2d 272, 423 N.W.2d 862 (1988), the officer's remark was the functional equivalent of interrogation and, therefore, his incriminating response should have been suppressed. Bond is correct and, accordingly, we reverse.2
*636I. BACKGROUND
¶ 2. The facts relevant to resolution of this appeal are undisputed. Bond's two brothers and a third man were scheduled for a preliminary hearing on February 21, 1997, on drug charges flowing from an undercover investigation. Three of the officers involved in the investigation were Ronald Taylor (known as "Stoney" in the undercover work), Raymond Taylor (known as "Ray-Ray" in the undercover work),3 and Detective Rayford Weston.
¶ 3. Two days before the preliminary hearing, Detective Weston received two threatening calls on the FBI-issued cell phone that Officer Taylor and Officer Taylor had been using exclusively for their undercover *637investigation. Seven months later, answering the prosecutor's questions at Bond's trial, Detective Weston testified:
A: Sometimes drug dealers call whenever they want to. It's not a science, and they don't call when they normally should, they call whenever it's time to call. The phone rang at 11:20 [p.m.]. I answered the phone.
Q: Now, when you answered the phone in your undercover capacity and [on] an undercover F.B.I. ... phone, I am sure you [didn't] answer the phone[, "]Detective Weston.["]
A: No, I just say yeah. That's the way I answer all phones. I'm pretty rude.
Q: Specifically, you don't want to give away your identity when you answer that phone?
A: Exactly.
Q: And you say some nondescript yeah. And what kind of answer [did] you get from the caller?
A: The caller said is this Ray-Ray. I said who's calling, and we had ... a brief conversation.
Q: Did the caller ever identify himself?
A: No, not at all.
Q: When this caller called, was there any recognition of his voice on this first call at 11:20 p.m.?
A: No.
Q: And at first did it just sound like somebody calling for Ray-Ray?
A: Yes. I thought it was another drug dealer . . . trying to get ahold of. .. Ray or Ron Taylor.
*638Q: After a short time in this first call, were things said that you took special note of and later put into a report?
A: Yes.
Q: And what was that and why did you put it into a report?
A: Well, I perceived them as threats. I've worked narcotics a long time. . . . I've been a police officer long enough, and even without being a police officer, I've heard threats. I know what a threat is, and I interpreted what I heard over the phone as ... a threat to kill a person they thought was a drug dealer or a witness in court.
Q: Now, going specifically to the first phone call, what was the first indication you had that this was becoming threatening?
A: ... [T]he caller said I know who you are and ... I know where you live. Don't be in court on Friday.
Q: Do you know whether or not the caller was assuming that you were Ray-Ray or had you already said that you're not Ray-Ray?
A: The caller was assuming that I was Ray-Ray. That was my interpretation, yes.
Q: Because you didn't say let me get him, you said who is this?
A: I said who is this, yes.
Q: Okay. And was there ever anything said about snitching on the part of this caller?
A: Yeah. The caller said I know you snitched. Don't be in court on Friday, things of that nature, yes.
*639Q: Based upon your experience in working in the drug area, what is normally meant by the word snitch?
A: Working as an informant or somebody that helps the police with information.
Q: That wouldn't be a normal term that somebody would use to refer to an undercover officer. Would it?
A: No, it would not be.
Q: And there [were] some references to where somebody other than you lived?
A: Yes. He said I know where your parents live_ I know who you are. Don't be in court on Friday, things of that nature.
Q: ... [T]his was the only Friday drug case that you had going at that time?
A: That's correct.
Q: Can you estimate about how long this first telephone call lasted?
A: It didn't last very long. It was probably less — I don't know. I would be guessing, but a minute or so. I didn't time it.
Q: And then do you know how that call ended? Did one of the two of you hang up?
A: Yeah. I just hung up, and the phone rang about 3 minutes later. I recognized the same voice again.
Q: And are you sure it was the same caller 3 minutes later?
A: I'm positive it was the same person.
*640Q: What sorts of comments were made during the second call?
A: Pretty much of the same tone. I know who you are. What is up with your boy Ston[e]y. Ston[e]y is the name that Ronald Taylor was using during this undercover investigation.
Q: Now, who first mentioned the name Ston[e]y, you or the caller?
A: The caller. It [sic] didn't give out any information at all. That's typical. I don't try to obtain information. I done [sic] give it.
Q: Was there again reference made specifically to the Friday court appearance?
A: Yes. Don't be in court on Friday. I know where your family lives. . . . [H]e made a statement to the effect why you snitching to the white man and things of that nature.
Q: Okay. Were there any specific threats of violence made against either the person he thought was Ray-Ray or against Ston[e]y?
A: Yes. He threatened to kill Ston[e]y. Don't be in court on Friday, I'll kill you.
Q: Did you ever ask the caller to identify himself?
A: I asked several times. The caller wouldn't say. The caller said you know who I am. I'm the man behind the man, and things — cryptic things like that the caller would say.
Q: During the course of this whole couple month long drug investigation, had you heard anybody else use that phraseology, I'm the man behind the man?
A: No, not at all.
Q: Did you find that to be somewhat distinctive or unusual?
*641A: Yeah, I thought it was distinctive and unusual, sure.
Q: Did you put that into a written report after receiving this call?
A: Yes, I did.
¶ 4. Two days after receiving the threatening calls, Detective Weston, Officer Taylor, and Officer Taylor, all wearing plain clothes to maintain their undercover identities, were at the preliminary hearing court. Detective Weston observed Bond sitting at the defense table in the courtroom and also milling around with others in the lobby outside the courtroom. In the lobby, Detective Weston saw Bond and Officer Ronald Taylor in conversation and, Detective Weston testified at Bond's trial, when he heard Bond's voice he "recognized it right away" as the person who had made the threatening calls. Detective Weston also testified:
When I heard the voice initially [in the lobby conversation with Officer Ronald Taylor], I was sure that was the voice, but I wanted to give him the benefit of the doubt, and I stood around, and I wanted to hear Mr. Bond talk some more just to reaffirm the voice, and I was positive it was the voice I heard.
After recognizing Bond's voice, Detective Weston notified Officer Taylor and Officer Taylor that Bond was the person who had made the calls. Bond was then arrested. He did not resist but, Detective Weston testified, "some of the individuals that he was with came over and they got loud ... and started causing a disturbance in . . . the lobby of the preliminary court." Responding to the prosecutor's questions at Bond's trial, Detective Weston further explained:
*642Q: This arrest took place right out in the public access corridor?
A: That's correct.
Q: And did Mr. Bond ask anything as you advised him or Ston[e]y advised him that he was under arrest?
A: He kept asking, well, why am I under arrest. And we kept telling him, we will tell you in a few minutes. We didn't want to blurt it out in front of everybody. He kept asking me what am I here for, why are you arresting me, where are you going, things of that nature.
Q: Did you begin to walk him toward the elevator?
A: We walked him toward an elevator, and actually ended up walking him from . . . the Criminal Justice Facility [where the preliminary court was located] to the Milwaukee Police Department, so we walked him down State Street, which is about a block or so.
Q: And this is before the actual case is called for preliminary hearing?
A: That's correct.
Q: And did anybody respond in any way to Ondra Bond's question about why am I under arrest?
A: Sure. He kept asking why he was under arrest, and Officer Taylor I believe — Ron Taylor told him that you're under arrest and I'll tell you what it's for in a minute. And Mr. Bond said, oh, you're the man, and Taylor real quickly said, no, I'm the man behind the man, and he says, oh, that is what this is about.
¶ 5. Officer Ronald Taylor also testified at Bond's trial, clarifying that after Bond said, "You're the man," it was Officer Raymond Taylor who responded, "No, *643you're the man behind the man," and that Bond immediately replied, "Ah, so that's what this is about."4 Additionally, under cross-examination, when' asked the meaning of the phrase "the man behind the man," Officer Ronald Taylor testified:
A: [T]he man behind the man . . . would possibly be . .. I'm the man who does the dirty work, I'm the muscle; it could mean . . . that you are humbling yourself, no, I'm not the man, you the man. I'm just the man behind the man; it could mean... either or.
Q: Okay. Which one of those meanings was the one that you understood . . . Ray Taylor to mean when he said to Mr. Bond that, I'm the man behind the man? If it wasn't any one of those, that's okay, too. But did you understand it to have any one of *644those particular meanings when you heard him say it?
A: When. . . Mr. Bond said. . . you're the man, and [Raymond] Taylor said, no, I'm the man behind the man?
Q: Yeah.
A: I think that statement was-and this is just my opinion-was designed to-to elicit a response from Mr. Bond.
(Emphasis added.)
¶ 6. At Bond's trial, as soon as the prosecutor, in his opening statement, referred to Bond's statements upon being arrested, defense counsel interrupted: "Excuse me. I object. I believe this is post-custody/pre-Miranda that he's commenting on. He's never indicated he was going to use any of that in this case and I object and move that it be stricken." The trial court, however, did not rule on counsel's objection, merely stating: "Just move on. Let's go ahead." When defense counsel continued to object to the prosecutor's opening statement and its references to Bond's questions "like why are you arresting me, what's going on," the trial court again did not rule but "noted [the objection] for the record." The prosecutor continued, specifying that "when Officer Taylor tells Ondra Bond you're the man behind the man, Ondra Bond responds . . . oh, that's what this is all about."
¶ 7. The record confirms that the prosecutor had failed to advise defense counsel or the trial court of the State's intention to use Bond's statement, made in response to Officer Raymond Taylor's statement, in its case in chief. Prior to trial, the trial court neither held a *645Miranda-Goodchild hearing5 nor made any record of whether Bond would have challenged or stipulated to the introduction of his statement.6 Ultimately, how*646ever, the parties agreed to allow the trial court to decide Bond's motion to suppress the statement, based on the trial testimony.7
*647¶ 8. Denying suppression of Bond's statement, the trial court provided no explanation but simply concluded that Bond's response "was not under interrogation, that it was a spontaneous statement, and voluntary statement." Bond argues that, under Innis and Cunningham, Officer Raymond Taylor's remark, "No, you're the man behind the man," was the functional equivalent of interrogation and, therefore, that his response, "Ah, so that's what this is about," should have been suppressed. We agree.
II. DISCUSSION
¶ 9. In Innis, the Supreme Court "address[ed] for the first time the meaning of 'interrogation' under Miranda v. Arizona." Innis, 446 U.S. at 297. Innis, arrested for kidnapping, robbery, and murder, had been advised of his Miranda rights three times and had invoked his right to counsel. See id. at 294. While riding in the back seat of a squad car, Innis heard the two officers in the front seat discussing the possibility that a little girl from a school for handicapped children near the scene of the crime might find the gun the murderer had hidden and kill herself. See id. at 294-95. Innis interrupted the conversation and revealed the location of the gun. See id. at 295.
¶ 10. Innis contended that the officers' conversation constituted interrogation and, therefore, that under Miranda, because he was in custody and had invoked his right to counsel, the interrogation violated his right against compulsory self-incrimination. See id. *648at 297-98. Rejecting Innis's argument, the Supreme Court declared:
We conclude that the Miranda safeguards come into play whenever a person in custody is subjected to either express questioning or its functional equivalent. That is to say, the term "interrogation" under Miranda refers not only to express questioning, but also to any words or actions on the part of the police (other than those normally attendant to arrest and custody) that the police should know are reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response from the suspect. ... A practice that the police should know is reasonably likely to evoke an incriminating response from a suspect thus amounts to interrogation. But, since the police surely cannot be held accountable for the unforeseeable results of their words or actions, the definition of interrogation can extend only to words or actions on the part of police officers that they should have known were reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response.
Id. at 300-02 (footnotes omitted). In a footnote, the Supreme Court provided further guidance that, as we will explain, is significant in the instant appeal:
This is not to say that the intent of the police is irrelevant, for it may well have a bearing on whether the police should have known that their words or actions were reasonably likely to evoke an incriminating response. In particular, where a police practice is designed to elicit an incriminating response from the accused, it is unlikely that the practice will not also be one which the police should have known was reasonably likely to have that effect.
Id. at 302 n.7.
*649¶ 11. Determining that the Rhode Island Supreme Court had erred "in equating 'subtle compulsion' with interrogation," see id. at 303, the Supreme Court concluded:
The case thus boils down to whether, in the context of a brief conversation, the officers should have known that [Innis] would suddenly be moved to make a self-incriminating response. Given the fact that the entire conversation appears to have consisted of no more than a few offhand remarks, we cannot say that the officers should have known that it was reasonably likely that Innis would so respond. This is not a case where the police carried on a lengthy harangue in the presence of the suspect. Nor does the record support [Innis's] contention that, under the circumstances, the officers' comments were particularly "evocative." It is our view, therefore, that [Innis] was not subjected by the police to words or actions that the police should have known were reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response from him.
Id.
¶ 12. In Cunningham, our supreme court quoted Innis extensively and "appl[ied] the Innis test," see Cunningham, 144 Wis. 2d at 281, to decide whether "confronting [a] defendant -with physical evidence of a crime [is] the functional equivalent of interrogation so that subsequent statements of the defendant must be suppressed if made prior to receiving a Miranda warning," see id. at 273. Cunningham, arrested for being a felon in possession of a firearm and resisting an officer, was in custody but had not yet been advised of his Miranda rights. See id. at 275. After a police officer displayed a revolver to him, advised him that it had been found under the mattress in his bedroom, and *650then said to another officer, " 'This was apparently what Mr. Cunningham was running into the bedroom for,'" Cunningham made an incriminating statement. See id.
¶ 13. Applying the Innis test, the supreme court endeavored to give it further definition, explaining:
[Innis] implies an objective foreseeability test. The test is whether an objective observer could foresee that the officer's conduct or words would elicit an incriminating response. Another way of stating the objective foreseeability test is to ask whether the police officer's conduct or speech could reasonably have had the force of a question on the suspect.
Id. at 278. Additionally, in words that carry important implications for the instant case, the supreme court elaborated, "An officer's specific knowledge about the suspect may indicate that the officer should have known his or her conduct or words would have had the force of a question on the suspect." Id. And, of equal significance, the supreme court further explained, "If an impartial observer perceives the officer's purpose to be something other than eliciting a response, the suspect is also likely to view the officer's purpose that way." Id. at 280.
¶ 14. On appeal, the parties note the dearth of Wisconsin case law on the Innis/Cunningham issue. They agree that Bond's case presents a rare opportunity to evaluate whether certain police conduct or comment constitutes the functional equivalent of interrogation. The parties acknowledge that the facts of Bond's case, in several respects, are distinguishable from those in Innis and Cunningham. The parties also acknowledge that some of those distinguishing factors support Bond, while others would seem to favor the *651State. We acknowledge that both parties have presented reasonable arguments. We conclude, on the basis of certain significant facts and several critical passages in Innis and Cunningham, that Bond's arguments prevail.8
¶ 15. In determining whether police conduct or comment constitutes the functional equivalent of interrogation, "[e]ach case must be considered upon its own facts." See Cunningham, 144 Wis. 2d at 274. "The determination of whether the facts of the case satisfy the legal standard articulated in Innis is a question of law" reviewed independently on appeal. See id. at 282. Here, five key factors link significantly to the Innis/ Cunningham standards and support Bond's position.
¶ 16. First, both Innis and Cunningham explain that "the term 'interrogation' under Miranda refers not only to express questioning, but also to any words or actions on the part of the police (other than those normally attendant to arrest and custody) that the police should know are reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response from the suspect." Innis, 446 U.S. at 301 (footnote omitted; emphasis added); see Cunningham, 144 Wis. 2d at 277 (quoting Innis). Here, *652unquestionably, the words, "No, you're the man behind the man," were not words "normally attendant to arrest and custody."
¶ 17. Second, both Innis and Cunningham emphasize that because "police surely cannot be held accountable for the unforeseeable results of their words or actions, the definition of interrogation can extend only to words or actions on the part of police officers that they should have known were reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response." See Innis, 446 U.S. at 301-02; Cunningham, 144 Wis. 2d at 277-78 (quoting Innis). Further, in a footnote immediately following this passage, the Supreme Court added, "Any knowledge the police may have had concerning the unusual susceptibility of a defendant to a particular form of persuasion might be an important factor in determining whether the police should have known that their words or actions were reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response from the suspect." Innis, 446 U.S. at 302 n.8; see Cunningham, 144 Wis. 2d at 279 (citing and paraphrasing Innis). Similarly, Cunningham explained, "An officer's specific knowledge about the suspect may indicate that the officer should have known his or her conduct or words would have had the force of a question on the suspect." Cunningham, 144 Wis. 2d at 278. Here, unquestionably, Officer Raymond Taylor's "specific knowledge" about Bond and the words Bond used in the threatening calls enabled him to utilize "a particular form" of speech that elicited Bond's incriminating response.9
*653¶ 18. Third, both Innis and Cunningham explain that in determining whether police should have known that their words or actions were "reasonably likely to evoke an incriminating response," we "focus[ ] primarily upon the perceptions of the suspect," see Innis, 446 U.S. at 301; Cunningham, 144 Wis. 2d at 277 (quoting Innis), but we do not ignore "the intent of the police," see Innis, 446 U.S. at 301 n.7. Innis declared that "the intent of the police . . . may well have a bearing on whether the police should have known that their words or actions were reasonably likely to evoke an incriminating response." Innis, 446 U.S. at 301 n.7. And Cunningham provided the measure for that intent: "If an impartial observer perceives the officer's purpose to be something other than eliciting a response, the suspect is also likely to view the officer's purpose that way." Cunningham, 144 Wis. 2d at 280. Here, unquestionably, Officer Ronald Taylor was not "an impartial observer." Thus, all the more powerfully, his perception that Officer Raymond Taylor's comment "was designed ... to elicit a response from Mr. Bond" is compelling.
¶ 19. Fourth, in Innis, the Supreme Court concluded that the officers' conversation did not constitute interrogation, in part because the conversation "consisted of no more than a few offhand remarks," and those remarks were not "particularly 'evocative.'" See Innis, 446 U.S. at 303. In Cunningham, the supreme *654court concluded that the officer's conduct and words did not constitute interrogation, in part because they were not even as provocative as those in Innis. See Cunningham, 144 Wis. 2d at 283. Here, by contrast, while Officer Raymond Taylor's remarks were few, they drew force from his specific knowledge of Bond, they were anything but "offhand," and, indeed, they were "particularly 'evocative'" or provocative.10
¶ 20. And fifth, while in both Innis and Cunningham police officers were talking to each other in the presence of their suspects, here Officer Raymond Taylor spoke directly to Bond, eliciting his incriminating response.
¶ 21. Still, the State emphasizes that the police comments here, like those in both Innis and Cunningham, were brief; the police did not "carr[y] on a lengthy harangue." See Innis, 446 U.S. at 303. We understand that. But "[e]ach case must be considered upon its own facts," Cunningham, 144 Wis. 2d at 274, and, somewhat ironically perhaps, the length of the Taylor/Bond exchange actually supports Bond's position. After all, Officer Raymond Taylor needed no lengthy discussion to elicit Bond's response. Speaking directly to Bond, *655with knowledge of the words of the threatening calls, Officer Taylor was able to confront Bond immediately with the specific words that would elicit Bond's incriminating response. As the prosecutor contended in his closing argument, as soon as Bond heard Officer Taylor's words:
[H]e understands why he's under arrest. He says, oh, that's what this is all about. Just like that, it erased his doubts of exactly what he was being arrested for, because he had made those phone calls, was well aware of those phone calls. So it should erase any last vestige of doubt any of us might have had before that happened.
¶ 22. Thus, in this case, the brevity of the conversation confirms the evocative and provocative power of Officer Raymond Taylor's comment. To conclude otherwise would be to discount the claim of a defendant simply because he or she quickly succumbs to an effective police technique. That would indeed " 'place a premium on the ingenuity of the police to devise methods of indirect interrogation, rather than to implement the plain mandate of Miranda.'" See Innis, 446 U.S. at 299 n.3 (quoted source omitted).
¶ 23. The State also argues that if the trial court erred by not suppressing Bond's statement, the error was harmless. The State contends that "[e]ven without introducing Bond's response to Officer Taylor's remark, the state could have presented evidence that Bond stopped asking questions about why he was arrested as soon as Officer Taylor said, 'You're the man behind the man.'" Thus, the State maintains, "This evidence, combined with Detective Weston's positive identification of Bond's voice as that of the anonymous *656caller, and evidence that Bond kept following Officer Ronald Taylor while he waited to testify against Bond's brothers at their preliminary hearing, was-strong proof of guilt, albeit circumstantial."
¶ 24. A trial court error is not harmless if "there is a reasonable possibility that the error contributed to the conviction." See State v. Dyess, 124 Wis. 2d 525, 543, 370 N.W.2d 222 (1985). To establish that the error in this case was harmless, the State, as "beneficiary of the error," bears the burden "to establish that there is no reasonable possibility that the error contributed to the conviction." See id.
¶ 25. Notably, the State does not contend that its evidence would have been sufficiently strong to support a harmless error argument if neither Bond's statement nor his silence would have been admitted. The reason is clear. Bond was prosecuted under two alternative theories: (1) that he made the threatening calls; and (2) that if he did not make the calls, he knew about them and, as party to the crime, aided and abetted the intimidation when he came to court two days later. Thus, as Bond accurately argues, proof of his "awareness of the telephone threat was necessary to establish criminal liability" under either theory.
¶ 26. The State does not disagree. In fact, in the trial court, the prosecutor, seeking admission of Bond's statement, asserted that Bond's response to Officer Raymond Taylor indicated awareness of the telephone threat "which is a critically relevant issue for the jury to consider." In closing argument, the prosecutor told the jury that "[t]his would be a much, much harder case if it was only about a voice I.D."
¶ 27. Not surprisingly, therefore, the State, pursuing its harmless error argument on appeal, *657maintains only that Bond's silence — that is, his failure to continue asking why he had been arrested once he heard "You're the man behind the man" — would have effectively substituted for his suppressed response to Officer Raymond Taylor's remark. The State's argument has no merit. Evidence of Bond's silence would have been no more admissible than evidence of his response. "The prosecution may not... use at trial the fact that [a defendant] stood mute ... in the face of accusation." Miranda, 384 U.S. at 468 n.37.
¶ 28. Therefore, we conclude that the trial court erred in failing to suppress Bond's statement, and that the error was not harmless. Accordingly, we reverse and remand for a new trial.
By the Court. — Judgment and order reversed and cause remanded with directions.
See Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436 (1966).
Bond also argues that he was denied due process of law when, at jury selection, he was allowed only three peremptory challenges. Alternatively, he argues that counsel's failure to object to being allowed only three peremptory challenges constituted ineffective assistance of counsel. The State explains: "The 'Jury Panel Roster' shows that the prosecution and defense each *636exercised three peremptory strikes rather than the four to which the parties were entitled under [Wis. STAT. § 972.03], Unfortunately, the record does not reflect why this occurred." At oral argument, however, Bond's counsel tacitly acknowledged that the supreme court's recent decision in State v. Erickson, 227 Wis. 2d 758, 596 N.W.2d 749 (1999), cert. denied, 120 S. Ct. 987 (2000), establishes that, because trial counsel did not object, only Bond's ineffective assistance of counsel theory is viable and, because no prejudice can be shown, that theory fails. As the supreme court in Erickson concluded:
[I]n light of the failure of [the defendant's] attorney to object and preserve for appeal the deprivation of. . . peremptory strikes, the proper framework for analyzing his claim is that of ineffective assistance of counsel. In order to prevail on a claim of ineffective assistance of counsel, a defendant must establish prejudice. Since we decline to presume prejudice where there is a denial of an equal number of peremptory strikes to both the defense and the prosecution and since [the defendant] has failed to show actual prejudice, the claim for ineffective assistance of counsel must fail.
Id. at 777.
Officer Taylor and Officer Taylor had no familial relationship to each other.
The balance of the trial testimony establishes that the critical exchange was between Bond and Officer Raymond Taylor. Neither party suggests that any of the slight distinctions in the several testimonial paraphrasings of their conversation makes any difference. For clarity and consistency in this decision, we will use the following version:
Bond: You're the man.
Officer Raymond Taylor: No, you're the man behind the man.
Bond: Ah, so that's what this is about.
Officer Ronald Taylor's testimony also clarified the location of this exchange. He explained that he, Officer Raymond Taylor, Detective Weston, and Bond traveled down the elevator of the Criminal Justice Facility, exited onto Ninth Street, walked north to State Street, and were walking east on State Street toward the Police Administration Building when, in front of the Safety Building, Officer Raymond Taylor and Bond had their conversation. Thus, contrary to the assertion in the dissenting opinion, Officer Taylor's comment did not come "in the midst of a highly volatile situation." Dissent at ¶ 37.
The supreme court has defined a Miranda-Goodchild hearing as "a combined procedure designed to determine the following issues: (1) the voluntariness of a defendant's statement; (2) whether proper Miranda warnings were given; and (3) whether the defendant's statement was made as a result of a knowing and intelligent waiver of the Miranda privilege." State v. Hockings, 86 Wis. 2d 709, 715-16, 273 N.W.2d 339 (1979). See also Miranda, 384 U.S. 436; State ex rel. Goodchild v. Burke, 27 Wis. 2d 244, 133 N.W.2d 753 (1965).
The prosecutor repeatedly argued that because the criminal complaint referred to Bond's statement, Bond must have known that the State intended to introduce it. The argument misses the mark. The evidence referred to in a complaint is not necessarily the evidence that will be introduced at trial. Further, in this case, defense counsel advised the court that the prosecutor never told him that the State intended to introduce Bond's statement and that as a "matter of fact, it was [defense counsel’s] understanding [that the prosecutor] was not going to use it." And even accepting the prosecutor's premise that Bond should have expected the State to use his statement, a Miranda-Goodchild hearing, or its waiver, would have been a prerequisite to the introduction of the statement in the State's case in chief. See Wis. Stat. § 971.23(1)(b) (1997 — 98) (requiring district attorney to disclose to defendant or defendant's attorney, upon demand, before trial, "written summary of all oral statements of the defendant which the district attorney plans to use in the course of the trial" as well as names of witnesses to such statements); State v. Benoit, 83 Wis. 2d 389, 403, 265 N.W.2d 298 (1978) ("Precisely because [WlS. Stat. § 908.01(4) (b)l] makes any prior out-of-court statements of the defendant admissible at trial, the State must inform the defendant before trial of which statements it plans to use."); see also Hockings, 86 Wis. 2d at 715-16; Miranda, 384 U.S. 436; Goodchild, 27 Wis. 2d 244.
*646The trial court also missed the legal mark. Rather than ruling on the defense objections and determining whether a Miranda-Goodchild hearing was needed, the trial court eventually commented:
The whole thing is absurd that it wasn't — it wasn't brought to light, if that's in fact what you're — I can't imagine that [defense counsel] would be surprised by the fact that on direct examination, or even perhaps on cross-examination, that a statement like that wouldn't have been brought out—
The trial court agreed with the State's position, concluding that the criminal complaint had given Bond notice. The trial court was mistaken. While, logically, one might join the prosecutor and trial court in assuming that Bond should have assumed that the State intended to use his statement, such assumptions do not substitute for a clear record establishing whether the State intends to introduce a defendant's statement in its case in chief, and establishing whether the trial court will permit the State to do so.
Further complicating the record, while the parties explicitly advised the trial court that the only issue was whether Officer Raymond Taylor's statement to Bond was the functional equivalent of interrogation, they also asked the trial court to decide that issue based only on the portion of Detective Weston's direct examination that had occurred by that juncture in his testimony. Subsequent trial testimony, however, significantly filled out the record on which both parties now rely. Among other things, the balance of the trial testimony established: (1) that Detective Weston had mistakenly recalled that Officer Ronald Taylor, not Officer Raymond Taylor, had made the crucial remark to Bond; and (2) that Officer Ronald Taylor thought Officer Raymond Taylor's remark was "designed ... to elicit a response from Mr. Bond." At oral argument before this court, the parties explicitly advised us, as they implicitly had done by the manner in which they presented their arguments in *647their appellate briefs, that the entire testimonial record from Bond's trial should be considered in resolving the issue of whether Officer Raymond Taylor's remark was the functional equivalent of interrogation.
We acknowledge that the dissenting opinion has, for the most part, reasonably articulated the rationale supporting the State's position. We reject, however, the dissent's assertion that we have reached our conclusion "because a police officer, trying to do his job to protect this community, responded to Ondra Bond's statement 'You're the man' in a way that the majority does not like." Dissent at ¶ 29 (emphasis added). Whether we like or dislike the officer's response is not the issue and has no bearing on our decision. Whether the officer's response constitutes the functional equivalent of interrogation, under the standards articulated by the United States Supreme Court and the Wisconsin Supreme Court, is the issue we address.
See United States v. Perez, 948 F. Supp. 1191, 1198 (S.D.N.Y. 1996) (FBI agent's general response to suspect's inquiry as to charges against him, in combination with agent's factually-specific assertion to suspect that" 'we know you are a Latin King,'"" 'posit[ed] [the suspect's] guilt'" and constituted *653the functional equivalent of interrogation). Not unlike the statement in Perez, Officer Raymond Taylor's remark to Bond "posit[ed] guilt" insofar as it could have made sense only to one aware of the content of the threatening calls. As the prosecutor maintained in his closing argument: "When he hears the words, youfre] the man behind the man, he understands why he's under arrest. . . . Just like that, it erased his doubts of exactly what he was being arrested for...."
The State concedes that Officer Raymond Taylor "may have tried to get a rise out of Bond by making the remark," but argues that making such a remark "does not mean it was likely to elicit an incriminating response." The State's candid concession is noteworthy. Its argument, while not entirely wrong, must be tempered by the understanding that an "incriminating response" need not be an explicit confession. "[T]he words 'incriminating response' mean any response — 'whether inculpa-tory or exculpatory — that the prosecution may seek to introduce at trial.'" State v. Cunningham, 144 Wis. 2d 272, 279, 423 N.W.2d 862 (quoting Rhode Island v. Innis, 446 U.S. 291, 301 n.5 (1980)).

=== CASE 9737748 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:33:41.35581+00 ===

FINE, J.
¶ 29. (dissenting).
Ah, when constabulary duty's to be done, to be done,
A policeman's lot is not a happy one, happy one.
So wrote William S. Gilbert in The Pirates of Penzance. Sadly, the majority's decision reverses a conviction because a police officer, trying to do his job to protect this community, responded to Ondra Bond's statement "You're the man" in a way that the majority does not like. In my view, the officer's response, "No, you're the man behind the man," made "real quickly" (Majority op. at 7) in a swirling, unstable, and potentially dangerous situation, is so far from what both the United States and Wisconsin supreme courts have characterized as the "functional equivalent of interrogation" that the rules governing what police officers in this state *658can and cannot do have been dramatically and substantially changed. If today's decision is allowed to stand, the lot not only of police officers will be less happy, but, indeed, so will the lot of our community. Accordingly, I respectfully dissent.
¶ 30. We are all familiar with how an object that appears to be bright when it is viewed in isolation will seem to have less luster when placed next to something far brighter. In my view, whether the officer's fleeting response to Bond's statement was the functional equivalent of interrogation for the purposes of Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436 (1966), must be decided by comparing the circumstances here to the circumstances in the two cases that control our decision: Rhode Island v. Innis, 446 U.S. 291 (1980), and State v. Cunningham, 144 Wis. 2d 272, 423 N.W.2d 862 (1988). Once that comparison is made, it is clear that the officer's repartee to Bond was not the functional equivalent of interrogation.
¶ 31. Innis: Thomas J. Innis was arrested for the shotgun robbery of a taxi driver. Id., 446 U.S. at 293-294. Advised of his Miranda warnings, Innis told the officers that he wanted to speak with a lawyer. Id., 446 U.S. at 294. Three officers rode with Innis as they took him to a police station. Ibid. Two of the officers then discussed how horrible it would be if the shotgun they suspected Innis had used would be found by children attending a nearby school for the handicapped. Ibid. Innis heard all of the comments. Id., 446 U.S. at 294 n.1.
¶ 32. One of the officers said, as related by him in his testimony, "there's a lot of handicapped children running around in this area, and God forbid one of them might find a weapon with shells and they might hurt themselves." Id., 446 U.S. at 294-295. The third *659officer, who did not participate in the discussion, testified that the first officer also "said it would be too bad if the little — I believe he said a girl — would pick up the gun, maybe kill herself." Id., 446 U.S. at 295. At that point, Innis apparently had enough and said that he would show them where the shotgun was. Ibid.
¶ 33. In holding that the officer's comments were not the functional equivalent of interrogation for Miranda purposes, the majority in Innis opined that "[i]t cannot be said" that the officers — expressing their concern that a little handicapped girl might, "God forbid," find the shotgun and "maybe kill herself' — "should have known that their conversation was reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response from" Innis. Id., 446 U.S. at 302. The majority explained:
There is nothing in the record to suggest that the officers were aware that [Innis] was peculiarly susceptible to an appeal to his conscience concerning the safety of handicapped children. Nor is there anything in the record to suggest that the police knew that [Innis] was unusually disoriented or upset at the time of his arrest.
Id., 446 U.S. at 302-303. That the officer's dialogue may have constituted "subtle compulsion" and that it "struck a responsive chord" was not enough because, as the majority put it, there was nothing in the appellate record that established that Innis's "incriminating response was the product of words or actions on the part of the police that they should have known were reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response." Id., 446 U.S. at 303.
*660¶ 34. Justice Thurgood Marshall, dissenting in an opinion joined in by Justice William J. Brennan, Jr., put the majority's holding in perspective:
One can scarcely imagine a stronger appeal to the conscience of a suspect — any suspect — than the assertion that if the weapon is not found an innocent person will be hurt or killed. And not just any innocent person, but an innocent child — a little girl — a helpless, handicapped little girl on her way to school. The notion that such an appeal could not be expected to have any effect unless the suspect were known to have some special interest in handicapped children verges on the ludicrous. As a matter of fact, the appeal to a suspect to confess for the sake of others, to "display some evidence of decency and honor," is a classic interrogation technique. See, e.g., F. Inbau & J. Reid, Criminal Interrogation and Confessions 60-62 (2d ed. 1967).
Id., 446 U.S. at 306. Clearly, if the compelling appeal to conscience in Innis was not the functional equivalent of interrogation for Miranda purposes, the officer's "No, you're the man behind the man" here also is not.
¶ 35. Cunningham: Police officers lawfully entered the home of Robert W. Cunningham to execute a search warrant. Id., 144 Wis. 2d at 274-275, 423 N.W.2d at 863. Cunningham resisted the search, ran into his "bedroom in an attempt to grab or discard items near the head of the bed," scuffled with the officers, and was subdued by them. Id., 144 Wis. 2d at 275, 423 N.W.2d at 863. He was arrested and handcuffed. Ibid. The officers did not advise him of his rights under the Miranda decision. Ibid.
¶ 36. After they subdued Cunningham, the officers searched his bedroom and "found a loaded revolver between the mattress and box spring, two to *661four feet from the headboard and about one foot from the side of the bed." Ibid. What then happened was argued by Cunningham to be the functional equivalent of interrogation in violation of the Miranda and Innis decisions:
One officer unloaded the revolver and then showed it to the defendant, advising him where it had been found and saying to the other officer, "This was apparently what Mr. Cunningham was running into the bedroom for." Upon seeing the revolver and hearing the officer's comment, [Cunningham] stated something to the effect that it was his bedroom and that he had a right to have a gun.
Cunningham, 144 Wis. 2d at 275, 423 N.W.2d at 863. Holding that what the officer did and said was not the functional equivalent of interrogation, Cunningham noted that Innis applied "at least two factors" that Cunningham recognized as important:
First, the Innis court considered the length of conversation between the officer and the suspect in determining whether the police officer should have known that his words would elicit an incriminating response. Second, the Innis court looked to the emotional state of the suspect in determining the suspect's unusual susceptibility.
Cunningham, 144 Wis. 2d at 281, 423 N.W.2d at 866. Applying these factors here, I conclude — as in Cunningham — that the record in this case does not support the majority's conclusion that the officer's comment to Bond was the functional equivalent of interrogation.
¶ 37. First, the officer's remark to Bond here was fleeting — far shorter than either the show-and-say display in Cunningham or the dialogue in Innis. Moreover, unlike the situation in both Innis and Cun*662ningham, the officer's comment was made in immediate response to Bond's statement to the officer. Additionally, the officer's comment was not made in the calm, stable atmosphere that was present in both Innis and Cunningham, but, rather, as we have already seen, in the midst of a highly volatile situation.
¶ 38. Second, there is nothing in the appellate record here indicating that Bond's "emotional state" made him unusually susceptible to the officer's repartee. Most important, however, Cunningham recognizes that Innis is the benchmark against which assertions that are claimed to be functional equivalents of interrogation must be measured. See Cunningham, 144 Wis. 2d at 283, 423 N.W.2d at 866 ("The facts of this case are stronger for the prosecution than those in Innis. The police officer's conduct and words in this case were not as provocative as the officer's comments in Innis."). The officer’s response to Bond here was not nearly as provocative as were the officer's we-must-protect-the-children assertions in Innis. I would affirm.1
That the officers' dialogue in Innis was not with Innis, while here the "No, you're the man behind the man" was directed to Bond in response to Bond's comment to the officer is a distinction without a difference. Thus, Justice John Paul Stevens noted in his dissenting opinion in Innis that the officer could have gotten Innis to tell them where the shotgun was in any one of three ways, any of which, in Justice Stevens's view, would have been the functional equivalent of interrogation for Miranda purposes. The officer could have:
(1) directly asked Innis:
Will you please tell me where the shotgun is so we can protect handicapped school children from danger?
(2) announced to the other officers in the wagon:
If the man sitting in the back seat with me should decide to tell us where the gun is, we can protect handicapped children from danger.
*663or (3) stated to the other officers:
It would be too bad if a little handicapped girl .would pick up the gun that this man left in the area and maybe kill herself.
In my opinion, all three of these statements should be considered interrogation because all three appear to he designed to elicit a response from anyone who in fact knew where the gun was located.
Innis, 446 U.S. at 312.

=== CASE 2211867 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:12.830613+00 ===

90 Ill. App.3d 612 (1980)
413 N.E.2d 16
THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF ILLINOIS, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
ALVIN NASH et al., Defendants-Appellants.
No. 79-430.
Illinois Appellate Court  First District (2nd Division).
Opinion filed November 5, 1980.
*613 *614 Ralph Ruebner and Bradley S. Bridge, both of State Appellate Defender's Office, of Chicago, for appellants.
Bernard Carey, State's Attorney, of Chicago (Marcia B. Orr, Iris Sholder, and Armand Andry, Assistant State's Attorneys, of counsel), for the People.
Judgment affirmed.
Mr. JUSTICE DOWNING delivered the opinion of the court:
Defendants, Alvin Nash and Joe Reed, were charged by information with robbery and aggravated kidnapping. A jury found them guilty of unlawful restraint. Nash received a three-year sentence, and Reed received a one-year sentence. Defendants appeal their convictions and ask this court (1) whether the information charge of aggravated kidnapping was defective because a judge at the preliminary hearing found no probable cause on the charge of unlawful restraint, (2) whether the trial court erred when it permitted two eyewitnesses, ages 12 and 13, to testify absent full competency hearings, (3) whether Reed was denied his right to confrontation where complainant testified to an inculpatory statement by Nash who did not testify, (4) whether defendants were prejudiced by the prosecutors' comments during closing arguments, and (5) whether defendants were proved guilty beyond a reasonable doubt.
On May 6, 1978, Nash and Reed were arrested and charged with the robbery and unlawful restraint of Alfred Watson. Two days later, at defendants' preliminary hearing, Watson testified that on the evening of May 6, defendants grabbed him by the neck, beat him, took his money and keys, and threw him in the back of his own car, which Nash then drove until he crashed into a nearby garage. The hearing judge found probable cause on the robbery charge, but no probable cause on the charge of unlawful restraint. One week later the State filed an information charging defendants with robbery and aggravated kidnapping.
Defendants' jury trial began three months later. Watson testified he was sitting in his car on the evening of May 6, when an acquaintance, Reed, approached him and offered $2 in exchange for a ride. After Watson agreed, Reed called Nash to the car, and the two drove off with Watson. Their destination was an apartment building where Nash's sister, Dorothy Turner, lived. When they arrived at the building, Reed asked Watson to accompany defendants to Turner's flat. Once there, the trio *615 began to play cards for money. Watson drank a shot glass of vodka, won $6 in two hands, and then announced he was returning home. He testified he left the apartment and defendants followed him to the street where Nash grabbed his neck and Reed beat upon his head. They searched his pockets and took his keys, money, and wallet. Watson stated Nash said, "We going [sic] to kill you." Defendants threw complainant into the rear of his station wagon, got into the front seat of the car, and, with Nash driving, left the scene at a high rate of speed. Nash crashed into a garage a few blocks away and a police car arrived quickly thereafter. Watson's wallet and keys were recovered on the sidewalk near the right front door of the disabled vehicle.
Darrell and Sherri Shannon, ages 13 and 12 respectively, testified they saw Nash grab Watson's neck and Reed beat complainant's head while the trio was in the station wagon. They also saw defendants throw Watson into the rear of his auto before the trio sped away.
Chicago police officer Charles Bowers testified he arrived at the scene of the collision shortly after its occurrence. Nash and Reed were arrested and searched. Bowers detected the scent of alcohol on both Watson and Reed.
Reed, testifying in his own behalf, stated that when the trio arrived at Turner's apartment they began to drink vodka. Watson won the first two hands of cards, but lost every hand played subsequently. According to Reed, Watson became drunk and accused Reed and Nash of cheating. The trio then left the apartment. When they got to the car, Watson insisted that he drive. Reed thought Watson incapable and, after a brief scuffle, he pushed Watson into the rear of the auto. In response to questions by the assistant state's attorney, Reed indicated he did not recall ever saying a fourth man was involved in the scuffle with Watson.
Dorothy Turner testified consistently with Reed's statement relative to the events inside her apartment.
The State then provided a rebuttal witness, Assistant State's Attorney Frank Stachyra, who had interviewed Reed within a few hours of the collision. Stachyra testified that Reed claimed on that day Watson suffered scratches and cuts as a result of a fourth man's attack.
After arguments of counsel, the jury found defendants guilty of unlawful restraint, but not guilty of aggravated kidnapping or robbery.
I.
We first consider defendants' contention that the information charge of aggravated kidnapping was improper. The charge of aggravated kidnapping was added to the information's robbery charge after a preliminary-hearing judge found no probable cause on a charge against *616 defendants of unlawful restraint. Defendants argue their subsequent conviction on the lesser-included offense (see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1977, ch. 38, par. 2-9) of unlawful restraint is unfair in the light of the finding by the hearing judge.
Prosecution of a felony by information must be preceded by a preliminary hearing where "probable cause to believe the defendant committed an offense was found." (Emphasis added.) (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1977, ch. 38, par. 111-2(a).) Where, however, a charge of an offense within an information is supported by a probable cause finding, prosecution for other offenses arising from the same transaction or conduct may be pursued without a prior probable cause determination. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1977, ch. 38, par. 111-2(e); see generally People v. Johnson (1980), 82 Ill. App.3d 338, 341, 404 N.E.2d 531.) The rationale in support of this permitted "adding on" of offenses may be gleaned from language in People v. Redmond (1977), 67 Ill.2d 242, 367 N.E.2d 703, cert. denied (1978), 434 U.S. 1078, 55 L.Ed.2d 785, 98 S.Ct. 1272, where our supreme court states at 246: "[T]he first purpose of the [preliminary hearing requirement] provision is to insure that a defendant is not held without a prompt showing of probable cause." (See also Gerstein v. Pugh (1975), 420 U.S. 103, 114, 43 L.Ed.2d 54, 95 S.Ct. 854.) Redmond indicates that once probable cause has been found, and the accused properly detained, the underlying reason for a preliminary hearing has been satisfied. Thus, the subsequent prosecution of related offenses by information, absent such a hearing, offend no fundamental rights. See Redmond, 67 Ill.2d 242, 248.
 1 Here, defendants were arrested and presented for a probable cause determination. At that hearing probable cause was found on the robbery offense. Any offense arising from that transaction, therefore, could be prosecuted without a second hearing. The alleged offense of aggravated kidnapping arose from that transaction. Thus, the conviction of the lesser-included offense of unlawful restraint was permissible.
Defendants' exclusive reliance upon People v. Hovanec (1979), 76 Ill. App.3d 401, 412, 394 N.E.2d 1340, is misplaced. Thus, absent a clear statutory prohibition, the information as filed and defendants' subsequent convictions thereon were proper.
II.
 2 Defendants claim the trial court erred when it failed to conduct full competency hearings prior to the testimony of two witnesses under the age of 14. Defendants first contend the procedure the court used to ascertain the competency of Sherri Shannon (age 12) was an abuse of judicial discretion because it was conducted in the absence of defense *617 counsel and was not of record. Second, they contend Darrell Shannon (age 13) testified in the absence of any preliminary competency inquiry. The State responds[1] that the trial judge's in camera examination of Sherri was sufficient to establish competency. Furthermore, the State notes that defendants do not contest the children's competency, but only the court's procedure for determining it.
 3-5 It is axiomatic in Illinois that the degree of a child's intelligence, and not his age, determines his competency to testify at trial. (See People v. Edwards (1973), 55 Ill.2d 25, 33, 302 N.E.2d 306, cert. denied (1974), 415 U.S. 928, 39 L.Ed.2d 486, 94 S.Ct. 1438; People v. Ballinger (1967), 36 Ill.2d 620, 621, 225 N.E.2d 10, cert. denied (1967), 388 U.S. 920, 18 L.Ed.2d 1366, 87 S.Ct. 2141; People v. Davis (1957), 10 Ill.2d 430, 436, 140 N.E.2d 675, cert. denied (1957), 355 U.S. 820, 2 L.Ed.2d 35, 78 S.Ct. 25.) A trial court's competency determination should generally include a "preliminary in-person examination" of the child witness (People v. Crews (1967), 38 Ill.2d 331, 338, 231 N.E.2d 451) to ascertain whether the child is "sufficiently mature to receive correct impressions by his senses, to recollect and narrate intelligently and to appreciate the moral duty to tell the truth * * *." (People v. Ballinger (1967), 36 Ill.2d 620, 622.) In the case at bar defendants cite People v. Seel (1979), 68 Ill. App.3d 996, 386 N.E.2d 370, appeal denied (1979), 75 Ill.2d 593, and People v. Sims (1969), 113 Ill. App.2d 58, 251 N.E.2d 795, for the proposition that a court's failure to conduct a preliminary competency hearing with participation by the parties is reversible error. Our reading of the authority upon which these cases rely compels us to disagree. Counsel's participation in a preliminary competency hearing, if held, is not required. (People v. Seel (1979), 68 Ill. App.3d 996, 1003-04.) Furthermore, although it is clear a preliminary examination is preferable to no inquiry, the absence, per se, of such an examination is not error. (See People v. Edwards (1973), 55 Ill.2d 25, 32-33.) Error could arise where there has been an abuse of discretion or a manifest misapprehension of some legal principle. (People v. Davis (1957), 10 Ill.2d 430, 437.) The trial court here conducted a preliminary in camera inquiry of Sherri Shannon's education. Both Darrell[2] and Sherri Shannon were subject to defense counsel's cross-examination. *618 Defense counsel failed to move that their testimony be stricken for demonstrated incompetency. The record shows, on the contrary, that these witnesses, whose demeanor and ability to testify had been observed by the trial court, were competent. We find no abuse of discretion.
III.
A.
Defendant Reed claims he was denied his constitutional right of confrontation. At trial, the court admitted, over objection, Watson's testimony that during the scuffle Nash said, "We going to kill you." Nash did not testify. Reed argues that this testimony, conjoined with Nash's failure to take the stand, operated to deny Reed his right to cross-examine declarant Nash, and therefore admission of the testimony mandates reversal in accordance with Bruton v. United States (1968), 391 U.S. 123, 20 L.Ed.2d 476, 88 S.Ct. 1620. We disagree.
This case presents facts unlike the circumstances in Bruton v. United States. In that case two defendants, Evans and Bruton, were tried jointly. A postal inspector testified Evans confessed to him that Evans and Bruton committed the charged armed robbery. Evans did not testify. The trial court admitted the testimony, but instructed the jury to disregard it as to Bruton's culpability because it was inadmissible hearsay against him. On review the United States Supreme Court reversed Bruton's conviction. In its opinion, the court focused upon the issue of whether, under the circumstances presented, a jury could reasonably be expected to follow the trial court's limiting instructions. Because the court found a high risk of serious prejudice, it held it could not accept "limiting instructions as an adequate substitute for [Bruton's] constitutional right of cross-examination" (391 U.S. 123, 137, 20 L.Ed.2d 476, 485, 88 S.Ct. 1620, 1628), "where the powerfully incriminating extrajudicial statements of a codefendant * * * are deliberately spread before the jury in a joint trial" (391 U.S. 123, 135-36, 20 L.Ed.2d 476, 485, 88 S.Ct. 1620, 1628). The instant case presents no confession, no high risk of serious prejudice, and no deliberate presentation before the jury.
 6 The instant extrajudicial statement was elicited during direct examination of Watson when the following exchange occurred:
"Q [Assistant State's Attorney]: What was Nash doing while Reed was hitting you on the side of the head and going through your pockets?
A: [Watson] He was choking me, telling me `We going to kill you.'
Ms. Bucko [Defense Counsel]: Objection.
*619 Mr. Silver [Defense Counsel]: Objection.
The Court: Overruled."
That statement does not constitute a confession. "A confession is a voluntary acknowledgment of guilt after the perpetration of an offense * * *" (Emphasis added.) (People v. Georgev (1967), 38 Ill.2d 165, 176, 230 N.E.2d 851, cert. denied (1968), 390 U.S. 998, 20 L.Ed.2d 97, 88 S.Ct. 1202), or an admission of facts which necessarily and directly imply guilt. (See E. Cleary & M. Graham, Handbook of Illinois Evidence § 502.13, at 192 (3d ed. 1979).) Nash's alleged extrajudicial statement was made during the events for which Reed was subsequently arrested. The statement consisted of no fact which necessarily implied guilt. Accordingly, the nature of that extrajudicial statement does not fall within the protection afforded by the right to confrontation as enounced in Bruton v. United States.
In addition, the high risk of serious prejudice which the court in Bruton found is not evident here. The alleged extrajudicial statement by Nash was not fabricated after the charged event. It was uttered during a scuffle in which Reed actively participated. Obviously, the statement's relevance is limited to evidence of a threat in furtherance of the unlawful restraint offense. Nevertheless, our review of the record as discussed in part V below compels us to conclude that elimination of Nash's statement would not have altered the verdict. Therefore, prejudice is absent.
 7 Furthermore, the record discloses no deliberate presentation of the utterance by the State. The State's question was proper and Watson's response was appropriate. "From the viewpoint of the Confrontation Clause, a witness under oath, subject to cross-examination, and whose demeanor can be observed by the trier of fact, is a reliable informant not only as to what he has seen but also as to what he has heard." (Dutton v. Evans (1970), 400 U.S. 74, 88, 27 L.Ed.2d 213, 226, 91 S.Ct. 210, 219 (plurality opinion).) Thus, Watson's testimony regarding what he heard Nash say during the scuffle was not unresponsive. It does appear, however, to have been unexpected. This case, therefore, is clearly distinguishable from the anticipated testimony of the postal inspector in Bruton v. United States.
 8, 9 Finally, we note that defendant Reed does not allege error on account of admission of improper hearsay evidence. In fact defense counsel's general objection at trial was inadequate to preserve such an issue. In People v. Trefonas (1956), 9 Ill.2d 92, 98, 136 N.E.2d 817, our supreme court held:
"The function of the objection is, first, to signify there is an issue of law, and, secondly, to give notice of the terms of the issue. * * * Objections to evidence should * * * point out the objectionable *620 features complained of. Failure to * * * giv[e] specific reason for the objection or motion to strike out such evidence generally constitutes a waiver of the right to object and cures the error, if any."
Whether Watson's testimony about Nash's utterance amounted to hearsay depends, of course, upon the purpose for which the evidence is admitted. If Watson's testimony was used to prove merely that the statement had been made, it is not hearsay. (Dutton v. Evans (1970), 400 U.S. 74, 88, 27 L.Ed.2d 213, 226, 91 S.Ct. 210, 219.) If the testimony was offered to establish the truth of the matter asserted therein, and rested for its value upon the credibility of Nash, it was inadmissible hearsay. (See People v. Rogers (1980), 81 Ill.2d 571, 411 N.E.2d 223.) We conclude, however, that even assuming the latter improper purpose, the error, if any, is harmless. See People v. Pittman (1973), 55 Ill.2d 39, 59, 302 N.E.2d 7; see also Chapman v. California (1967), 386 U.S. 18, 24, 17 L.Ed.2d 705, 87 S.Ct. 824.
B.
 10 In conjunction with the constitutional claim above, defendants volunteer the suggestion that their trials should have been severed. Defendants did not move at any time during trial for such severance. This apparent afterthought, however, is meritless. Defendants' theories of defense were consistent and their interests did not appear adverse. Accordingly, counsel's failure to request severance does not amount to inadequate representation. (See, e.g., People v. Nelson (1980,), 82 Ill.2d 67, 411 N.E.2d 261.) Furthermore, the trial court was not obliged, sua sponte, to sever their trials. See generally People v. Brooks (1972), 51 Ill.2d 156, 166, 281 N.E.2d 326.
IV.
A.
 11 Defendants also claim reversible error arose from comments made by the State during closing arguments. Defendants first complain the State attempted to shift the burden of proof when, in response to a defense statement noting the absence of a particular eyewitness, an assistant state's attorney stated, "Any defense lawyer in Cook County has as much subpoena power as we do." Our review of the record convinces us that the prosecutor's statement was a permissible reply (see People v. Martinez (1978), 62 Ill. App.3d 7, 16, 377 N.E.2d 1222, appeal denied (1978), 71 Ill.2d 612) to defendants' fair comment on the failure to produce a witness.
*621 B.
 12 Defendants also contend the prosecutor's personal opinion was injected into the proceedings when he called defendant Reed and another witness "boldface, insulting liars." We first note that defense counsel first used the word "liar" when characterizing the conclusion to be drawn from the State's attack upon witness Turner's credibility. Second, the assistant state's attorney's characterization of the witnesses as liars was within the context of a catalogue of evidence indicating impeached credibility and bias of the witnesses. Under these circumstances the comment was not prejudicial. (See People v. Baptist (1979), 76 Ill.2d 19, 29-30, 389 N.E.2d 1200.) Similarly, defendants' claim that the State impermissibly referred to Watson's "constitutional right" of dignity is without merit.
V.
 13 Defendants' last contention is that they were not proved guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. Three witnesses gave consistent testimony that defendants threw Watson into the rear of his car and drove off at a high rate of speed. The jury heard the evidence and weighed the credibility of the witnesses. Absent a record showing evidence so improbable as to raise a reasonable doubt of guilt, we will not substitute our judgment for that of the jury. People v. Akis (1976), 63 Ill.2d 296, 298-99, 347 N.E.2d 733; People v. Todorovic (1977), 53 Ill. App.3d 1, 11-12, 368 N.E.2d 471.
In accordance with the aforementioned reasons, we affirm defendants' convictions.
Affirmed.
PERLIN, P.J., and STAMOS, J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  The State initially argues defendants waived the competency issue because it was not specified in their post-trial motion. Defendants, however, made a general oral motion for a new trial without objection by the State. Accordingly, this issue is not waived due to any defect in post-trial procedure. People v. Whitehead (1966), 35 Ill.2d 501, 503-04, 221 N.E.2d 256; People v. Houck (1977), 50 Ill. App.3d 274, 280, 365 N.E.2d 576.
[2]  We note that although Darrell's age was initially represented by the State to be 14 years, preliminary testimony revealed his age as 13 years. Defense counsel made no objection to his testimony.

=== CASE 2211310 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:04.98039+00 ===

11 Mich. App. 630 (1968)
162 N.W.2d 114
PEOPLE
v.
TIMOTHY JACKSON.
PEOPLE
v.
TILLMAN.
Docket Nos. 3,411, 3,412.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided June 3, 1968.
Frank J. Kelley, Attorney General, Robert A. Derengoski, Solicitor General, George N. Parris, Prosecuting Attorney, and Max D. McCulloch, Assistant Prosecuting Attorney, for the people.
Norman L. Zemke, for defendants on appeal.
PER CURIAM:
An armed robbery[*] of a gasoline station attendant took place at about 3:30 a.m. at *631 12 Mile road and Van Dyke in the city of Warren on September 6, 1966. A few minutes thereafter a car carrying 3 persons, 2 of which satisfied the description of the perpetrators of the armed robbery, was stopped by the police at Dodge and Van Dyke, one block south of 9 Mile road.
Defendants raised 3 issues on appeal from their conviction of robbery armed:
(1) Was there probable cause for their arrest?
(2) Was the search and seizure of their automobile while defendants were in custody proper?
(3) Was evidence surrendered by one of the defendants while in custody pursuant to an officer's request to empty his pockets admissible in evidence?
The record discloses that the two men picked up in the automobile and arrested closely resembled the description given to the police of the two men who perpetrated the armed robbery. The fruits of the search of the automobile after arrest while defendants were in custody were not introduced into evidence. The lighter given up by one of the defendants to one of the police officers when requested to empty his pockets was introduced into evidence and was connected to the crime as being owned by the victim of the armed robbery. It was the subject of a proper search.
We find that the arrest was proper and legal. We find no prejudicial error. Affirmed.
T.G. KAVANAGH, P.J., and HOLBROOK and BEER, JJ., concurred.
NOTES
[*]  CLS 1961, § 750.529 (Stat Ann 1968 Cum Supp § 28.797).

=== CASE 2211317 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:05.084793+00 ===

210 Cal.App.2d 43 (1962)
CRESTLAWN MEMORIAL PARK ASSOCIATION et al., Plaintiffs and Appellants,
v.
JOHN G. SOBIESKI, as Commissioner of Corporations, et al., Defendants and Respondents.
Civ. Nos. 26091, 26092.
California Court of Appeals.
Nov. 21, 1962.
R. D. Sweeney and Cameron W. Cecil for Plaintiffs and Appellants.
Stanley Mosk, Attorney General, and Bonnie Lee Martin, Deputy Attorney General, Sidney Knable, Hill, Farrer & Burrill and William S. Scully for Defendants and Respondents.
BURKE, P. J.
Appeals in two separate proceedings for writs of mandate were consolidated by stipulation of counsel who agreed that a single opinion might be written covering both appeals. Although relating essentially to the same subject matter and the same controversy they are not dependent upon *46 the determination of an equity action considered concurrently therewith. (Sheppard, et al., plaintiffs and respondents, v. Ray A. Wilcox, et al., defendants and appellants,   [fn. *]post, p. 53 [26 Cal.Rptr. 412].) Since the latter case in an action to declare a constructive trust it will be referred to herein as the "equity case." Reference is made to the decision in that case for details as to the background of this litigation in order to avoid a needless repetition thereof in this decision.
[1a] These proceedings seeking peremptory writs of mandate were brought to set aside two decisions of the Commissioner of Corporations by which the latter determined that a permit to issue stock previously issued by him on December 18, 1957 ("1957 permit"), should be amended. These determinations were made after a substantial portion of the stock, which was the subject matter of the permit, had been sold and issued pursuant to the permit. In this decision we will refer to defendant John G. Sobieski as "commissioner" and to the remaining defendants who are the real parties in interest as "defendants." The latter were the "accusers" before the commissioner.
Details with respect to the issuance of the 1957 permit and with respect to the first permit given the corporation to issue stock dated November 10, 1952, are set forth in the equity case.
On January 6, 1958, an accusation was filed by defendants protesting the issuance of the 1957 permit. On January 7, 1958, the 1957 permit was summarily suspended by the commissioner and notice of hearing given. On December 18, 1958, the authority to issue stock under the 1957 permit expired by its terms. On August 11, 1959, a proposed decision was adopted by the commissioner determining that the 1957 permit should be amended to provide for a prior offering to the holders of common shares to purchase the number of the new common issue proportionate to the number of shares of old common stock then held by them and extending the permit so as to expire six months from the date of the amendment. On August 14, 1959, pursuant to the latter decision, a permit was issued amending the 1957 permit to add the prior offering condition applicable to all stockholders of record on December 6, 1957. (The authority to sell securities under this permit expired by its terms on February 15, 1960, and no stock was ever sold or issued pursuant to it.)
On October 8, 1959, the first mandate action was filed by *47 plaintiffs attacking the validity of the commissioner's decision of August 11, 1959.
On September 3, 1959, defendants filed a petition for reconsideration to correct certain omissions in the August 11, 1959, decision. On September 11, 1959, the commissioner filed an order for reconsideration and set the matter down for hearing, indicating that the hearing would be predicated upon the matters set forth in the petition for reconsideration. A rehearing was then held by Deputy Commissioner Harshbarger on September 22, 1959. This commissioner subsequently retired without filing a proposed decision.
On February 29, 1960, an amended proposed decision, and order adopting same, resulting from the rehearing of September 22, 1959, was filed by Deputy Commissioner Winton and adopted by the commissioner. That decision set aside the amended permit of August 14, 1959. In this decision and order the commissioner determined that by virtue of the purchase of 8,400 common shares pursuant to the 1957 permit the plaintiffs, except Crestlawn, together with the persons associated with and controlled by them, increased their percentage holdings of common voting power in Crestlawn from 42.3 per cent to 81.5 per cent and reduced the holdings of voting power of defendants from 57.6 per cent to 18.8 per cent. Reference is made to the opinion in the equity case for a discussion of the findings of the commissioner upon which the decision is based. The proposed decision and order declared that the 1957 permit be amended to provide that Crestlawn be permitted to sell and issue to all of its common shareholders of record as of December 6, 1957, an aggregate of not to exceed 10,000 of its common shares in the proportion that the number of common shares held by each shareholder bears to the whole number of common shares issued and outstanding as of that date. The price was set at $5.00 per share to be paid either in cash or in return for cancellation of indebtedness.
On April 27, 1960, the second mandate action was filed by plaintiffs, this time attacking the validity of the February 29, 1960 decision of the commissioner.
[2] The trial judge determined in the first writ of mandate proceeding that since the order and decision complained of had been vacated by the commissioner, who also issued a substitute decision, the issue presented was moot. This was a correct determination and properly disposed of that proceeding.
The second writ of mandate was denied. *48
[1b] Plaintiffs assert that the procedure adopted by the commissioner is contrary to law and violates due process. They revert to the conditions of the original stock permit issued in 1952 and referred to in the decision in the equity case recognizing a clear distinction between the holders of promotional shares and the holders of investment shares. They argue that when the commissioner issued his 1957 permit it was merely a continuation of the recognition of the distinction between the two classes of shares and that the discrimination set forth in the 1957 permit against the holders of the promotional shares was entirely justified. Therefore, they argue, the 1957 permit is valid.
Plaintiffs, however, wholly ignore the fact that both the commissioner and the court found that the 1957 permit was issued as a result of plaintiffs' nondisclosures and would not have been issued had the commissioner been placed in possession of the true facts as to the motives and intentions of plaintiffs and the group of stockholders associated with them.
Plaintiffs assert that the commissioner may not issue a decision and an amended permit which will adversely affect the rights of stockholders who had already purchased stock under a permit prior to its amendment. The commissioner, on the other hand, contends that he may amend a permit at any time for the general welfare of the public or for the protection of security holders pursuant to the express authority of Corporations Code sections 25513 and 25316. He points out that his decision did not purport to determine the rights of individual shareholders nor the rights of shareholders in the corporation; that the rights of shareholders who knowingly participate in a conspiracy may be different from those of innocent shareholders and should be determined in an independent action where specific remedies are sought. The authority to issue stock under the amended decision was permissive only and did not purport to direct the corporation to reacquire its stock.
[3] Plaintiffs contend that the commissioner has no power to hold a hearing based on an "accusation" to modify or change a permit and that the sole remedy of anyone aggrieved by the permit is to apply to the superior court within sixty days after its issuance under procedure set out in Corporations Code section 25318. On the contrary, the language of this section is merely permissive and the law is clear that the commissioner may hold a hearing either on an accusation or on his own motion to modify or amend a permit. (See Corp. Code,  25513, 25316, 25350 and 25352.) [4] Similarly, plaintiffs' contention that since no procedures *49 are provided for a rehearing the commissioner may not grant one, or having granted a limited rehearing may not vacate his decision entirely without giving the parties notice or an opportunity to be heard, are without foundation and contrary to the broad regulatory powers given the commissioner. The commissioner may grant a rehearing under the same general power and continuing jurisdiction which authorizes him to hold an original hearing. [5] In their attack upon the regularity of the hearings of the commissioner and a purported lack of "due process," plaintiffs refer to requirements of the State Administrative Procedure Act governing hearings by the various state boards and commissions required to conduct proceedings under the act. To answer these various contentions is unnecessary since the provisions of such act do not govern or apply to proceedings of the type under review here. [6] Suffice it to say that the commissioner afforded the plaintiffs every opportunity to be heard and the fact that he conducted conferences or inquiries in the form of "hearings" in an effort to be entirely fair to both sides may not be used as a weapon to attack the proceedings as not complying with the requirements of an act which is clearly inapplicable  [fn. 1] or as not conforming to the formalities of a judicial proceeding.
[7] Plaintiffs contend that since the permit under attack provides that stock could be issued to stockholders of record as of December 6, 1957, persons who were not stockholders of record on that date had no standing to complain. The commissioner points out that the permit is issued to the corporation, that the accusers are merely complaining witnesses, and that no "standing" is required to lodge a complaint with the commissioner since the commissioner may take cognizance of such matters on his own motion. (Corp. Code,  25316; cf. Sale v. Railroad Com., 15 Cal.2d 612, 617-618 [104 P.2d 38]; Tapley v. State Bar, 8 Cal.2d 167, 172-173 [64 P.2d 404].)
Plaintiffs cite Transportation Bldg. Co. v. Daugherty, 74 Cal.App.2d 604, 615 [169 P.2d 470], as sustaining their view that having once found on the facts before him that a plan is *50 fair, just and equitable the commissioner is foreclosed from reinquiring into his determination in the light of after-discovered facts which if known to him at the time would have materially affected his action. In that case, however, the petitioners sought to compel the commissioner to issue his permit authorizing a corporation to change its capital structure wherein the commissioner refused the permit not upon the grounds that the plan was unfair, unjust, inequitable or fraudulent, but because he felt that the stockholders could work out a better plan. The commissioner not having found that the plan was unfair, unjust or inequitable, the court held it was his duty to issue the permit. From the holding of this case plaintiffs argue that the commissioner once having issued the permit has no legal power to change it or to correct any errors or to redress any wrongs which were caused or were inherent in the issuance of the permit. Clearly, the case does not support this contention and there is nothing therein which would in any way modify the clear authority vested in the commissioner by section 25513 of the Corporations Code to amend, alter or revoke any permit issued by him or temporarily suspend the rights of the holder under the permit and whenever he deems it necessary for the general welfare of the public or for the protection of security holders. These powers continue whether or not any permit or order has been suspended, revoked or consummated.
[8] Plaintiffs contend that the decision of the commissioner could not be carried into effect without the corporation reacquiring about 3,500 shares of the stock issued under the 1957 permit so that it would then have sufficient stock to issue pro rata to the holders of stock issued under the 1952 permit. They further contend that the commissioner doesn't have the power to require persons who have bought stock under a permit to transfer that stock to other stockholders. A reading of the decision of the commissioner disposes of these contentions since at no time did he purport to order the corporation to reacquire its stock nor require any stockholders to transfer their stock. The effect of the commissioner's decision is simply to amend the 1957 permit.
Plaintiffs point out that each of the shareholders who purchased stock under the 1957 permit, who were called as witnesses, testified they would not have invested any more money in the corporation if the promotional shares would have been entitled to buy five shares of the new stock for each one share of the promotional stock held by the persons holding the promotional stock. Here, it must be pointed out, however, *51 that the commissioner's decision did not purport to determine the rights, liabilities and defenses of those selling or buying shares and such issues were not properly before the trial court in the mandate proceedings.
[9] Furthermore, insofar as plaintiffs are concerned, in view of the findings of both the commissioner and the court, they cannot be held to be innocent purchasers and are in no position to complain in view of the breach of trust found to have been perpetrated by their representatives. The provisions of the Corporate Securities Act are for the benefit of the public and to safeguard the purchasers against the perpetration of fraud. It is not designed for the protection of those who violate it. (Meyer & Holler v. Ramona Village, 5 Cal.App.2d 679, 686 [43 P.2d 823, 44 P.2d 634].)
[10] The court determined that plaintiffs participated in a conspiracy and that each of them sought the aid of the court with unclean hands in that they were unjust, unfair and inequitable in their acts and dealings. A proceeding for a writ of mandate is an equitable proceeding in which the trial court is vested with a wide discretion and the doctrine of "unclean hands" is therefore applicable. (Allen v. Los Angeles County District Council of Carpenters, 51 Cal.2d 805, 811 812 [337 P.2d 457].)
[11] Plaintiffs complain that ten shareholders holding 5,875 outstanding shares of stock were not given notice of the hearing and that their rights are affected by the amended decision of the commissioner. These shareholders are not parties to these lawsuits, and plaintiffs have no standing to complain that someone else's property rights are jeopardized. The granting of a writ of mandate is discretionary and will be granted only when it is shown that the petitioner has a beneficial interest. (See Parker v. Bowron, 40 Cal.2d 344 [254 P.2d 6].) It should be noted again, however, that the commissioner did not make a determination that the shares issued pursuant to the 1957 permit were void. [12] There is no requirement in the law that the commissioner give notice to all those who might have purchased stock before he exercised his discretionary power to suspend the permit or to amend it. Such a requirement would defeat the very purposes of the Legislature in giving the commissioner continuing power to act expeditiously in these matters upon his own motion. Even though the commissioner was not required under the law to hold hearings or take sworn testimony under the Corporations Code sections heretofore mentioned, nevertheless the record indicates that he did hold hearings on notice and received *52 sworn testimony, extended the right of cross-examination and published detailed findings of fact and conclusions stating in writing not only his decision but the basis therefor.
[13] This being a "privilege" or permit case, the scope of judical review of the orders of the commissioner is limited to determining whether there was any substantial evidence to support the administrative decision. (Drummey v. Board of Funeral Directors & Embalmers, 13 Cal.2d 75 [87 P.2d 848]; Standard Oil Co. v. State Board of Equalization, 6 Cal.2d 557 [59 P.2d 119].) [14] Where the subject matter determined by statewide statutory administrative agencies involves matters of privilege rather than vested rights, constitutional considerations do not require the court to exercise an independent judgment, but merely to determine that the agency had reasonable ground for its decision and that its action did not constitute an abuse of its discretion. (McDonough v. Goodcell, 13 Cal.2d 741 [91 P.2d 1035, 123 A.L.R. 1205].) That there was substantial evidence in the cases at bar to sustain the actions of the commissioner there can be no doubt.
[1c] The orders denying the peremptory writs of mandate are affirmed.
Jefferson, J., and Ford, J.,  [fn. *] concurred.
Corporations Code section 25710 provides for conducting proceedings for the suspension or revocation of a broker's or agent's certificate or concerning an order to cease and desist from the sale of securities under Corporations Code section 25707. No similar reference is made with reference to proceedings for the suspension, revocation, or amendment of a permit to sell securities.
NOTES
[fn. *]  *. Post, p. 53, 2d Civil No. 26099, decided by this court this day.
[fn. 1]  1. Government Code section 11501 provides that the procedure of any agency shall be conducted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter only as to those functions to which the chapter is made applicable by the statutes relating to the particular agency.
[fn. *]  *. Assigned by Chairman of Judicial Council.