=== CASE 9739756 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:20:27.019766+00 ===

OPINION
BAKER, Judge.
Appellant-petitioner Vicki Sue Young appeals the trial court's judgment denying her petition for modification of support and request for an order finding contempt. Specifically, Vicki contends that the trial court erred in: 1) terminating the support obligation of appellee-respondent Thomas Mac Young (estate); 2) refusing to find the estate in contempt for failure to pay support; and 3) awarding attorney fees to the estate.
FACTS
Thomas and Vicki were divorced on January 16, 1986. Vicki was awarded custody of their daughter, Krista, who was ten years old at the time. Thomas was ordered to pay $50.00 per week in child support which he paid until his death on March 18, 1992. Since his death, Thomas' estate has not made any of the $50.00 per week child support payments. However, Krista did receive social security benefits in the amount of $821.00 per month from March 1992, through December 1992, and $848.00 per month from January 1998, until August 1998. She also received a monthly dependent benefit from Thomas' Teacher's Retirement Fund in the amount of $450.44 from March 1992, until August 1998. The social security and the retirement fund benefits ceased upon Krista's eighteenth birthday on August 31, 1993. In addition to the monthly benefits paid to Krista, she received the statutory survivor's allowance of $8,500.00, a lump sum payment in the amount of $49,522.99 from the retirement fund, for which she had been named beneficiary, and the lump sum amount of $969.76 from an annuity for which she had been named beneficiary.
In August 1998, Krista enrolled at Indiana University as a full-time student with the intent of completing an undergraduate degree and a graduate degree. On January 12, *8831994, Vicki filed a petition to modify the support order seeking an increase in child support and payment of educational expenses for Krista. Additionally, Vicki filed a petition for contempt, alleging that the estate had failed to pay support and that she was entitled to back support. At the time of the hearing in April 1994, Krista had lived on campus since her enrollment in school and had been paying all of her college and living expenses. She was not employed and the expected cost of her education was $10,000.00 to $11,000.00 per year.
Initially, Thomas' estate had total assets of $88,186.46, which included the retirement fund and the annuity that were paid to Krista. At the time of the hearing, the estate's assets were approximately $1,800.00 and a claim against Horace Mann Insurance Co. in which the estate alleged that Horace Mann improperly paid a $100,000.00 benefit to Vieki.1
On May 17, 1994, the trial court entered an order in which it denied Vicki's petition for contempt, denied her request to require the estate to contribute to Krista's educational expenses, and found her request for back support was time barred. In addition, the court determined that the estate's support obligation had terminated because Krista became emancipated on her eighteenth birthday. Finally, the court denied Vicki's request for attorney's fees, but ordered Vicki to pay the estate's attorney's fees in the amount of $660.00.
DISCUSSION AND DECISION
I. Standard of Review
The trial court entered findings of fact and conclusions of law pursuant to Vicki's request. When we review such a case, we will not set aside the judgment unless it is clearly erroneous. A judgment is clearly erroneous when the evidence does not support the findings of fact or when the findings of fact do not support the conclusions. Garrod v. Garrod (1992), Ind.App., 590 N.E.2d 163, 167. In determining whether the findings and judgment are clearly erroneous, we will neither reweigh the evidence nor judge witness credibility, but we will consider only the evidence and reasonable inferences therefrom which support the judgment. Id.
IIL. Termination of Support
Vicki contends that the trial court's conclusion that Krista was emancipated as of September 1998, is not supported by the findings of fact and thus, the trial court erred in concluding that the estate's support obligation terminated at that time. IND.CODE § 31-1-11.5-12(d)(1) provides that child support terminates when the child is emancipated before reaching twenty-one years of age. The child is emancipated before reaching twenty-one years of age only if the court finds that the child (1) has joined the armed forces, (2) has married, or 8) is not under the care or control of (A) either parent, or (B) an individual or agency approved by the court. IC. § 31-1-11.5-12(e) Taylor v. Chaffin (1990), Ind.App., 558 N.E.2d 879, 888. What constitutes emancipation is a question of law, while whether there has been an emancipation is a question of fact. Id. at 882. Emancipation cannot be presumed, but must be established by competent evidence. Free v. Free (1991), Ind.App., 581 N.E.2d 996, 997. The petitioner seeking emancipation has the burden of proving that the child is emancipated. Id.
Aceording to I.C. § 31-1-11.5-12(e)(8)(A), emancipation occurs when the child places himself beyond the control, custody, and care of either parent. Our inquiry under that section is whether the child is in fact supporting herself without the assistance of her parents. Taylor, 558 N.E.2d at 883. In the present case, there is no evidence that Vicki provided Krista with any support for either college expenses or living expenses. Rather, the record reveals that Krista was in fact supporting herself without the assistance of either parent. Thus, the trial court correctly found that as of September 1993, Kris*884ta was over the age of 18, living on her own, and paying all of her college and living expenses. This finding is sufficient to support the trial court's conclusion that Krista was emancipated.
Further, the trial court terminated the estate's obligation to pay support as of September 1998, the date of Krista's emancipation. I.C. § 31-1-11.5-12(d)(1) provides that the duty to support a child ceases upon a child's emancipation. In addition, LC. § 31-1-11.5-17(d) provides that child support obligations are terminated by the emancipation of the child. Here, since the trial court properly determined that Krista was emancipated as of September 19983, the trial court properly terminated the estate's obligation to pay support as of that date.2
TII Contempt
Next, Vicki alleges that the trial court erred in refusing to find the estate in contempt for failure to pay support. Vicki argues that this was error because the social security benefits should not have been credited to the estate and because any overpayment of support through the social security benefits could not be treated as prepayment of support.
Contempt is available only upon a finding that a delinquency in support was the result of a willful failure by the parent to comply with the support order and the parent had the financial ability to comply. Pettit v. Pettit (1993), Ind., 626 N.E.2d 444, 447. We will reverse a trial court's refusal to hold a party in contempt only upon a showing of an abuse of discretion in the trial court's determination that the party did not willfully disobey the support order. Kirchoff v. Kirchoff (1993), Ind.App., 619 N.E.2d 592, 596.
IND.CODE § 31-1-11.5-17(d) provides that child support obligations are not terminated by the death of the parent obligated to pay support. Here, the estate did not pay Thomas' support obligation of $50.00 per week after Thomas' death in March of 1992. However, from March 1992, until August 19983, Vicki received, as Krista's guardian, social security survivor benefits resulting from Thomas' death in excess of $800.00 per month, an amount greater than his support obligation. We have held that social security disability benefits paid on behalf of minor children should be credited towards the disabled parent's support obligation. Poynter v. Poynter (1992), Ind.App., 590 N.E.2d 150, 152.3 This is because social security benefits are not a gratuity, but are earned and are a substitute for lost earning power. Id. We find no reason why this rule should not apply to social security survivor benefits paid on behalf of a minor child. Therefore, the trial court did not err in finding that the estate was not in contempt for failure to pay child support from March 1992 through August 1998, while Krista was receiving the social security survivor benefits.
Furthermore, the trial court did not err in refusing to find the estate in contempt for failure to pay support after the social security benefits ceased. The social security benefits ceased on Krista's eighteenth birthday, the date of Krista's emancipation. Accordingly, the estate's obligation to pay support terminated at that time. Since the estate had no obligation to pay support, it could not be held in contempt.
IV. Attorney's Fees
Vicki argues that the trial court erred in awarding attorney's fees to the es*885tate because the estate did not request attorney's fees and because no evidence was presented as to the amount of time or effort expended by the estate's attorney to defend this action. IND.CODE § 31-1-11.5-16(a) provides that "[the court from time to time may order a party to pay a reasonable amount for the cost to the other party of maintaining or defending any proceeding under this chapter and for attorney's fees...." The award of attorney's fees in proceedings to modify a child support award is within the sound discretion of the trial court and will be reversed only upon a showing of a clear abuse of that discretion. Searcy v. Searcy (1991), Ind.App., 583 N.E.2d 1216, 1222, trans. denied.
IC. § 81-1-11.5-16(a) does not mandate that a party must request attorney's fees in order for the trial court to award them. Thus, it is irrelevant that the estate did not request attorney's fees. Further, although the better practice is to present evidence as to the time expended and the nature and difficulty of the case, attorney's fees may be awarded in modification proceedings even where no such evidence is presented. See In re Marriage of Murray (1984), Ind.App., 460 N.E.2d 1023. The trial court may take judicial notice of what a reasonable fee would be. Id. In determining the award of attorney's fees, the trial court must consider the parties' resources, their economic condition, their ability to engage in gainful employment, and other factors that bear on the award's reasonableness. Id. Here, the trial court found that the estate had assets of approximately $1,800.00 with a potential asset of $100,000.00 from the pending claim against Horace Mann. Vick's annual income was approximately $45,000.00 and she received $118,000.00 from life insurance policies upon Thomas' death. The trial court did not abuse its discretion in awarding attorney fees to the estate in the amount of $660.00.
Judgment affirmed.
RUCKER, J., coneurs:
BARTEAU, J., dissents with separate opinion.
. The estate's claim against Horace Mann Insurance, in which it alleged that the insurance company improperly paid a $100,000.00 benefit to Vicki, was resolved in favor of Vicki and the insurance company. We affirmed the trial court's decision on appeal. Distler v. Horace Mann Life Ins. Co. (1994), Ind.App., 644 N.E.2d 918.
. Vicki also argues that the trial court erred in terminating the estate's obligation to pay support because the estate did not petition to have support revoked. See LC. § 31-1-11.5-17(d). However, since we determined that the support obligation terminated because of Krista's emancipation, we need not address whether the trial court could have revoked the support obligation due to Thomas' death.
. Vicki argues that Poynter is not good law in light of Head v. State (1994), Ind.App., 632 N.E.2d 749. In Head, this court, following Sullivan v. Stroop (1990), 496 U.S. 478, 110 S.Ct. 2499, 110 L.Ed.2d 438, held that social security disability payments were not "support" as that term is used in state and federal statutes mandating that recipients of Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) assign to the state any rights to "support." Id. at 751-52. Because Poynter did not involve eligibility for AFDC benefits, Head does not affect the court's holding in Poynter that social security payments may be credited towards a parent's support obligation under a child support order.

=== CASE 2217521 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:29.276965+00 ===

69 Ill. App.3d 375 (1979)
387 N.E.2d 795
THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF ILLINOIS, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
WILLIAM E. HOPE, Defendant-Appellant.
No. 77-308.
Illinois Appellate Court  First District (5th Division).
Opinion filed February 16, 1979.
Ralph Ruebner and Patricia Unsinn, both of State Appellate Defender's Office, of Chicago, for appellant.
Bernard Carey, State's Attorney, of Chicago (Lee T. Hettinger, Kenneth T. McCurry, and Michael R. Sherwin, Assistant State's Attorneys, of counsel), for the People.
Judgment reversed.
Mr. JUSTICE LORENZ delivered the opinion of the court:
Following a bench trial, defendant was convicted of theft (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1975, ch. 38, par. 16-1) and possession of a stolen vehicle (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1975, ch. 95 1/2, par. 4-103(a)). He was sentenced to concurrent terms of one to four years for theft and one to three years for possession of a stolen vehicle. On appeal he contends that he was not proven guilty beyond a reasonable doubt and that the trial court erred in: (1) admitting a business record without requiring a proper foundation; (2) admitting *376 hearsay testimony; (3) allowing the State to cross-examine a defense witness regarding a prior inconsistent statement without presenting rebuttal evidence where the witness denied having made the statement; (4) failing to hold a hearing prior to imposing sentence; (5) imposing sentence prior to disposing of a post-trial motion; and (6) finding defendant guilty of a lesser included offense.
The following pertinent evidence was adduced at trial.
For the State
Cary B. Seiderman, Assistant General Manager of Nortown Oldsmobile, Inc.
Nortown, which is located at 6501 N. Western Avenue, Chicago, Illinois, buys and sells new and used Oldsmobiles. On July 8, 1976, Nortown was the owner of a 1976 Oldsmobile 98 as evidenced by a carbon copy of an invoice for the automobile. The invoice, which included a serial number, indicated that the automobile was delivered to Nortown on May 20, 1976, from General Motors. He believed that the original invoice was with the Oldsmobile Division of General Motors in Lansing, Michigan.
Prior to July 8, 1976, Nortown reported to the police department and to General Motors that the said automobile had been stolen. The approximate value of the automobile then was $6,000. Sometime after it was reported stolen, he observed the automobile again when it was returned to Nortown's service department by two other Nortown employees. "To the best of [his] recollection" the automobile had been damaged on the driver's side, across the front and back doors. He checked the vehicle identification number of the returned automobile and verified that it was the same as the identification number on the previously mentioned invoice from General Motors. This automobile was subsequently repaired and sold in the ordinary course of business. Nortown did not "ever give the Defendant William E. Hope permission to use, possess, operate or in any way control that automobile."
Dennis Blum, Franklin Park Police Officer
He was proceeding east on Grand Avenue shortly after midnight on July 8, 1976, when he observed a 1976 Oldsmobile parked in front of the Western Auto Tires Store at 9777 Grand Avenue. Two people exited the car, walked up to the front of the building and looked into the store window. Defendant was one of these two people. After observing them for four or five minutes he drove around the block in order to "position myself in such a manner as to observe the parties." The two returned to the automobile and proceeded eastbound on Grand Avenue. As he followed them he ran a check on the license plates and determined that the plates had been issued to a 1971 Dodge Dart. When they drove into a *377 Motorola parking lot he called for a back-up unit. Officer Robert Flood arrived to provide assistance. Blum then asked the driver for his driver's license and vehicle identification. The driver, who was the defendant, produced an expired temporary Illinois driver's license and stated that he did not have the vehicle registration with him. He asked defendant why the license plates on the vehicle did not register to a 1976 Oldsmobile, but received no response. At his request Flood ran a check to determine whether the Oldsmobile was stolen and upon receiving a report over the radio stating that "the vehicle identification and vehicle in question was reported stolen," he placed defendant under arrest. He was later "informed that the vehicle was owned by Nortown Oldsmobile." Although he recalled that there was "minor damage to the side" of the automobile, he could not recall whether the passenger's side or driver's side was damaged.
For the Defendant
Terry Bullock
He is defendant's cousin. On the evening of July 8, 1976, defendant and 10 or 12 other people were playing cards and shooting pool in the basement of his house at 642 N. Homan, Chicago, Illinois. Defendant was present for approximately four hours. At about 9:30 or 9:45 p.m. that evening Willie Wilson, "better known as Fast Willie," arrived at his house along with Margaret McKnight. Defendant asked Wilson if he could borrow his car. When Wilson gave defendant the car keys, Bullock asked defendant if he could ride along because he wanted to pick up a friend. With the defendant driving, they left in a white Oldsmobile 98. They travelled north on Homan to Grand Avenue and then took Grand to Franklin Park "to pick up the girls." Along the way they stopped at a tire store and stood for several minutes looking in the display window. They then left the store and drove "to the place to pick up the girls." After waiting in the parking lot for 10 or 15 minutes, they were approached by two police officers. When he and defendant exited the car, one of the officers stated "The license plates to the car do not match." He testified that before he entered the Oldsmobile that evening he had no knowledge that it was a stolen automobile.
On cross-examination he admitted that he did not know Willie Wilson's address or age and did not really know Wilson very well, but had seen him in the neighborhood five or six times prior to July 1976. He admitted that he spoke with John Healy, an investigator, for the State's Attorney's Office, on November 12, 1976. He told Healy that at the time of the arrest he was "in Franklin Park to pick up a girl at Motorola and drive her home." However, he did not recall telling Healy that this was the only time he had seen the Oldsmobile. Although he did not recall telling Healy *378 that he did not know where the automobile came from, he admitted that he could have made such a statement. He did not tell "this story" to the police when defendant was arrested because, "[T]hey didn't ask me anything."
Emma Hope
She is defendant's mother. She testified that on July 8, 1976, defendant was living at her home at 642 N. Homan Avenue, Chicago, but was free to "stay out" when he wanted to. On the evening of July 8, 1976, defendant had a "get together" in the basement of her home. Willie Wilson, who she called "Speedy Willie," arrived at the get together at approximately 10 p.m. accompanied by a lady named Margaret. She did not observe the automobile Wilson drove that evening. However, on a number of prior occasions Wilson drove her to work, to the store and to the clinic in a 1976 white Oldsmobile. The first time Wilson drove her to the store in a 1976 white Oldsmobile 98 was June 14, 1976. Wilson lived on her block and frequently visited her home. She knew him for about two years. She described Wilson as being 5 feet 7 inches tall, 145 pounds, thin faced and very dark complected. He was "Black-black, not negro black but black, black" and had "a partial on the side of his mouth which hooks onto his teeth."
At approximately 10 or 10:30 p.m. her son received a phone call. Although she did not know to whom he was speaking, she heard him say, "I'll be there about 12:00 or 12:30 if I can borrow a car." Defendant then borrowed a car from Willie Wilson and left along with Terry Bullock in a white Oldsmobile 98.
On cross-examination, she testified that defendant did not, to her knowledge, use the name Willie Wilson. She admitted that prior to trial two white men who said they were from the State's Attorney's Office came to her home. She testified that although she told one of these men that defendant had not lived with her for five years, he was at her home every day. She denied telling Mr. Healy of the State's Attorney's Office that she had not observed the automobile which defendant borrowed on July 8, 1976.
Margaret McKnight
On July 8, 1976, at about 9:30 or 10 p.m. she arrived at 642 N. Homan with her boyfriend, Willie Wilson. They drove there in a white Oldsmobile which Wilson had been driving for a couple of months. When they arrived she saw Terry Bullock, Emma Hope and defendant. She observed Wilson and defendant engage in a conversation following which Wilson gave defendant car keys. Defendant asked his brother for his driver's license and then left with Terry Bullock. She remained there until about 12:30 a.m. and then left with Wilson. The next day Wilson gave her $500 to post bail bond for defendant.
*379 On cross-examination, she testified that she had not seen Willie Wilson since the incident. She had known Wilson for a month prior to July 8, 1976. Although she went "out socially" with Wilson, she had never been to his home. She believed he lived "on Trumbull somewhere," about two blocks from defendant's home. She testified that defendant and Wilson were probably friends and that she "had seen them together" five or ten times prior to July 8, 1976. She admitted that she did not see defendant get into the car and that she did not know what he did after leaving the house. She and Wilson left the party and went to her house on a bus. She first learned of defendant's arrest when he called Willie Wilson at her house the next day. She did not know whether defendant ever used the name Willie Wilson.
For the State  Rebuttal
The parties stipulated that Officer Lemke of Area 4 Special Operations would testify that when he arrested defendant on June 24, 1976, defendant identified himself as Willie Wilson and gave his address as 642 N. Hoyne.
OPINION
Defendant contends that he was not proven guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. He argues that the State failed to prove that the Oldsmobile allegedly owned by Nortown was the same automobile he was driving at the time of his arrest.
Count I of the complaint against defendant alleged that on July 8, 1976, he "committed the offense of theft in that he knowingly obtained and exerted unauthorized control over a 1976 Oldsmobile Ninety Eight automobile * * *, the property of Nortown Oldsmobile, Inc., a corporation." Count II alleged that on the same date defendant "committed the offense of possession of a stolen vehicle in that he, not being entitled to possession of a vehicle, to wit: a 1976 Oldsmobile Ninety Eight automobile, serial number 3V39T6M400689, possessed said vehicle, the property of Nortown Oldsmobile, Inc. knowing it to have been stolen."
 1 Our supreme court has held that "[w]here an indictment charges an offense either against persons or property, the name of the person or property injured, if known, must be stated, and the allegation must be proved as alleged." (People v. Walker (1955), 7 Ill.2d 158, 161, 130 N.E.2d 182, 183.) Such an essential element may not be merely inferred. (People v. Mosby (1962), 25 Ill.2d 400, 185 N.E.2d 152.) In determining whether the State has met its burden of proof, we note that although great consideration must be given to the findings of the trier of fact, those findings are not conclusive, and "it is our duty to set a conviction aside *380 where the evidence is so unsatisfactory as to raise a reasonable doubt of a defendant's guilt." People v. Reese (1966), 34 Ill.2d 77, 80, 213 N.E.2d 526, 527.
We believe, after a careful review of the record before us, that the State failed to conclusively establish beyond a reasonable doubt that the automobile driven by defendant at the time of his arrest was owned by Nortown. The evidence established that a 1976 white Oldsmobile 98 was reported stolen by Nortown sometime between May 20, 1976, and July 8, 1976, and that defendant was arrested on July 8, 1976, while driving a 1976 white Oldsmobile 98 which had apparently been reported stolen by an unidentified owner. However, the vital link necessary to establish that the Oldsmobile driven by defendant and the one missing from Nortown were the same automobile is clearly lacking. The State did not introduce a certificate of title for the automobile driven by defendant to establish Nortown's ownership. Nor did the State prove the Oldsmobile driven by defendant and the one missing from Nortown bore the same vehicle identification numbers, although both numbers were available to the State. Furthermore, no chain of custody testimony was presented to indicate that the Oldsmobile in which defendant was arrested was later returned to, and accepted by, Nortown. Although Cary B. Seiderman, assistant general manager of Nortown, testified that Nortown's missing Oldsmobile was returned by two other Nortown employees, the record does not indicate where or how these employees had obtained the automobile. There is certainly no evidence establishing that these employees obtained possession of the Oldsmobile from the police. The record does not reflect that date on which Nortown's automobile was returned and does not even preclude the possibility that Nortown had recovered its Oldsmobile prior to July 8, 1976 the date of defendant's arrest. A judgment of conviction cannot be allowed to stand where, as here, the evidence fails to convincingly establish the ownership of the automobile allegedly stolen by defendant. See People v. Williams (1962), 24 Ill.2d 214, 181 N.E.2d 353.
 2 The State contends, however, that Officer Blum's testimony that he was later "informed" that the Oldsmobile driven by defendant was owned by Nortown was sufficient to establish Nortown's ownership. We cannot agree that Blum's hearsay statement concerning information from an unidentified source was sufficient to establish ownership beyond a reasonable doubt. The record is devoid of any evidence concerning the reliability of Blum's information.
 3 The State also relies upon In re Woods (1974), 19 Ill. App.3d 753, 312 N.E.2d 822, to support its contention that Nortown was proven beyond a reasonable doubt to be the owner of the Oldsmobile driven by defendant at the time of his arrest. They argue that based upon Woods the similarity *381 of year, make, model and color, and the damage to one side, were sufficient to establish Nortown's ownership. However, the facts in the Woods case are significantly distinguishable from those of the instant case. In Woods the owner of a 1972 Ford Torino with a red body and black top reported his automobile missing on February 25, 1973. At approximately 11:45 a.m. on February 27, 1973, defendant was arrested while driving a red and black 1972 or 1973 Torino. The arresting officer discovered a "lock puller" in the back seat of the automobile and stated that the automobile was in such a condition that it could be started without a key. He did not find a key in the car or on defendant. The owner testified that around noon on February 27, 1973, he recovered his automobile from the police station and that the ignition had been pulled from the car when he recovered it. Unlike the situation in Woods, there was no evidence in the present case to indicate that Nortown recovered the missing Oldsmobile from the police station shortly after defendant's arrest. We do not believe that the mere fact that the automobile missing from Nortown and that driven by defendant were quite similar to each other is sufficient to prove defendant's guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.
In light of our disposition of defendant's first contention we need not consider his remaining contentions.
For the foregoing reasons the judgment of the circuit court must be reversed.
Reversed.
SULLIVAN, P.J., and WILSON, J., concur.

=== CASE 9738662 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:00:04.292003+00 ===

FOSHEIM, Justice
(concurring specially).
Regarding disallowance of CWIP on which no AFUDC was taken, the majority opinion reads:
In its application company opted to treat the $303,607 as a capital asset and include the entire sum in its computation of base rate, rather than capitalize it as AFUDC, and the PUC excluded it from company’s rate base. In doing so the PUC stated in its rehearing decision that it is proper to exclude all CWIP from rate base.
The opinion concludes the PUC thus stated the rule too narrowly because it does not allow for a showing as to the imminence of use of the CWIP.
In South Dakota Public Utilities Commission v. Otter Tail Power Co., 291 N.W.2d 291 (S.D.1980), we held that a utility generally is not allowed to earn a return on construction until it is actually placed in service, and based on the facts in that case, we concluded that the refusal of the PUC to include such amounts in rate base was not arbitrary or capricious or an unwarranted exercise of discretion.
The imminence of use is an exception to that rule. It permits the computation of the rate base to include the value of assets not presently in use if the time for using them is so near that they may be said, at least by analogy, to have the quality of working capital. Application of Northwestern Bell Telephone Co., 78 S.D. 15, 30, 98 N.W.2d 170, 178 (1959).
This exception is subject to the further condition that, although the property under construction has reached the point of imminent use, it should not be included in rate base if inclusion results in a double return because of additional revenue resulting therefrom. Application of Northwestern Bell Telephone Co., supra.
Accordingly, the PUC did not erroneously state the rule. They simply did not add the exceptions, which was appropriate because the absence of evidence rendered them irrelevant, The issue was therefore properly dispatched by the PUC, silent as to exceptions much as we approved in South Dakota Public Utilities Commission v. Otter Tail Power Co., supra.

=== CASE 9738663 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:00:04.296035+00 ===

DUNN, Justice
(concurring in part, dissenting in part).
First of all, I would concur generally in the standard of review used in the majority opinion. Under this standard, the majority upholds the PUC as to disallowance of CWIP, determination of AFUDC, determination of ad valorem taxes on CWIP, and deduction of negative working capital. Un*472der this same standard, this court should affirm the PUC and the trial court as to determination of power supply costs, and the disallowances of increased payroll and pension expenses. As to both of these issues, the PUC was faced with competent, but conflicting evidence and conflicting expert opinions, and under the standard set up, was justified in reaching its decision on each of these issues. I do not feel that our standard of review permits this court to “pick and choose” between determinations made by the PUC on the basis of competent evidence.
As to power supply costs, the Commission’s findings were based on the presentation made by SDEC. It rejected both the .Staff recommendation as well as the recommendation of NWPS. The SDEC witness testified that his figures and calculations regarding power supply costs were based upon information contained in what is referred to as the Johnson Letter. The Johnson Letter was a letter written by the superintendent of the Big Stone Plant to Montana-Dakota Utilities, one of the owners of the plant, prior to the time that the plant was operating. In the letter, he estimates the plant’s future power output in order to ascertain operating and maintenance costs. The output estimate is based upon the assumption that the plant was to operate for the full year in 1975 at an unrestricted load. Based on this type of operation, the annual generation at the plant was expected to be 3,202,800 MWHs. The SDEC witness went on to compute NWPS’s ownership share of the generation and broke down that share to the amount of excess energy to be sold to other electric utilities. This amount of excess energy was then multiplied by eleven mills per KWH to determine the revenue amount to be rolled into NWPS’s operating income figures. This price was purportedly the price reflecting the average price to MAPP pool members at which NWPS was selling surplus power during 1975.
The basic attack on the Commission’s adoption of the SDEC method of calculating power supply costs is that the Johnson Letter power output assumptions are totally unsubstantiated in facts. NWPS offered the testimony of the vice-president of production of Ottertail Power Company regarding actual operating experience of the plant. The evidence revealed numerous unexpected difficulties in the operation of the plant which were neither normal nor representative.
Whether there was evidence to uphold the PUC finding on this issue would depend on the relevance and probative value of the Johnson Letter. The utility as well as staff would follow the established custom and usage of considering only the evidence produced by the utilities for a rate increase, and the testimony of experts in the field interpreting and giving their informed opinion on this evidence.
The Johnson Letter was apparently a routine report made by the utility in its ordinary course of business estimating the future power output for an unrestricted load for the year 1975 in order to ascertain operating and maintenance costs. It was not submitted in connection with any rate hearing. Yet from this repórt evidence can be gleaned that is directly related to the operation of the plant for an unrestricted load during the test period. Based upon the assumption that the power output was for a full year in 1975 at an unrestricted load, the annual generation of the plant was estimated at 3,202,800 MWHs.
I find no logical reason for foreclosing consideration of the Johnson Letter because it was not submitted in connection with a rate increase. The evidence is relevant and probative on the output of the plant during normal operation.
Ordinarily, great deference should be given to staff recommendations, with their admitted expertise, but they too are inclined to discount any information received from a collateral source. Their expertise is in dealing with the information “submitted for a rate increase” and the expert testimony concerning that evidence.
In my opinion, it was not only proper for the PUC to consider this Johnson report in this decision, it was also justified in finding *473this evidence which came in a routine report more credible than the volumes of testimony and documents submitted by the utility to justify a rate increase.
This leaves the real argument of whether the actual operating experience of the plant should be utilized as opposed to the estimated output at unrestricted load capacity. The estimation was based upon a reasonable and proper determination of the normal and representative operation of the plant, whereas the actual operating experience during the first year was representative of abnormal conditions involving difficulties in operation and plant shutdowns. There was no evidence to show that NWPS was unable to attain the normal level of generation. The actual level of generation was lower than the estimate due to operating problems and nothing else. The adjustment to operating income should represent normal operating conditions of the plant and no abnormal conditions. It was not unreasonable for the PUC to conclude that rates cannot be based upon abnormalities which are neither indicative nor representative of normal operating conditions. Although there is conflicting evidence as to output, it would appear that there is substantial evidence from the Johnson Letter to support the finding of the Commission as to power supply costs.
The Commission concluded that increased payroll and pension expenses were excluded from cost of service because the Commission found that the increased salary expense resulted in increased productivity. Such an exclusion is allowable where it is shown to be offset by increased productivity. N. W. Pub. Serv. v. Cities of Chamberlain, Etc., 265 N.W.2d 867 (S.D.1978).
The evidence shows that the per-unit cost of wages and salaries of producing power increased .36 mills per KWH over a nine-year period. On the basis of this increase, the cost of labor did not increase despite increased wages and related expenses. The conclusion follows that increased productivity has offset increases in payroll and related expenses. A staff witness testified that according to his study based on the years 1965 through 1974 the rate of energy sold increased 5.60% annually while the rate of wage and salary increased 0.73% annually. The Commission further noted that part of the adjustment that NWPS wanted to make to test-year wages and pension costs was actually incurred beyond the test period. The Commission found that it was improper to increase test-year costs on the basis of non-test-year increases in costs without at the same time taking into account the revenue side of the equation, i. e., sales and revenue might have gone up just as costs went up. The Commission found that the test period would be improperly distorted without such a matching up of costs and revenues. There would appear to be sufficient evidence to support the Commission’s finding. Here again, the Commission was forced to decide between conflicting experts and such a decision should not be disturbed.
I am hereby authorized to state that Justice Henderson joins in this concurrence in part and dissent in part.

=== CASE 9738664 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:00:06.08666+00 ===

BRAY, J.*
The respondent Grant B. LaDeaux brought this action to recover for overtime worked while a deputy sheriff in the service of the County of Alameda. The trial court entered judgment in respondent’s favor in the sum of $4,170.12.
There is little dispute about the evidence. Respondent began work for the County of Alameda in January 1945 and resigned May 1, 1963. Records of the sheriff’s office show that, during his service, he accumulated 1,121 hours of overtime, based upon a 40-hour work week. He was not paid for his accumulated overtime, either by cash or compensating time off his job. Upon termination of his services, he demanded pay in cash for his overtime work. The sheriff notified him that he had no authority to make payment. The county board of supervisors declined to pay his claim on the ground that the *263overtime worked had not been authorized, and because he had failed to seek payment on a regular monthly basis.
The county salary ordinance was in evidence. It was stipulated that its pertinent provisions were unchanged throughout the period of time covered by respondent’s overtime claim. Paragraph 12 of the ordinance relates to compensation for overtime services of employees of the county. The relevant provisions of the ordinance are quoted below.1
There was evidence that, in certain situations, as where the sheriff’s deputies were required to work overtime at the *264county fair, or in the event of overtime work in ease of public peril, such as flood, the sheriff had requested, and the board of supervisors authorized payment in cash for such services.
However, it was stipulated “that no employee of the County of Alameda has ever been paid in money for overtime served in any department in the County, without prior resolution of the Board of Supervisors having first approved said overtime or, in the case of an emergency, by subsequent written approval of said Board" except the “payment of the regular salary during which times a person is taking compensatory time off from his job. ’ ’
A system of “compensatory time payback" was also used by the sheriff to pay deputies for overtime services. In practice this meant giving the deputies time off the job, with pay. The county administrator and the board of supervisors were fully aware of this practice. The board of supervisors also knew that county employees were accumulating overtime and that the accumulation extended over a long period of time. It was stipulated that “the Board of Supervisors left the decision as to the granting of overtime leave to the discretion of the Department Head, if he could find time at or during which the employee would be away from the job." It would appear that the knowledge of the board concerning the overtime situation and particularly the fact that the board left the granting of overtime to the sheriff, met the ordinance requirement that the Board “in general terms" authorized the overtime work.
The sheriff kept careful records of overtime worked by employees of his department. He allowed compensating time off where possible and thereby reduced the accumulation, although much unpaid for time was owing. Some employees, upon leaving county service, were paid their overtime in cash by the simple device of adding their overtime to terminal leave, thus extending their separation date and continuing their regular pay.
There was also evidence that respondent was assigned to the civil division of the sheriff’s office during a part of his employment, and it was common knowledge that, in the service of civil process, employees of this division were often required to work overtime. For seven years of respondent’s service he was assigned to the “on call" list, by written assignment. Deputies on the “on call" list were required to work overtime when called.
Despondent’s claims for overtime were submitted to his *265superiors and approved in writing by them each month, as his services were rendered. When compensating time off was allowed it was deducted from his total, and in this way a running account of his overtime was kept up to date. The same practice was followed for others working in the sheriff’s department.
The superior court found from the evidence that respondent had worked the overtime claimed and had not been compensated for it; that the board of supervisors and the sheriff knew of, consented to, and authorized his overtime services. From these and other findings the court concluded that respondent had substantially complied with the provisions of the salary ordinance in the performance of overtime and that he was entitled to payment in cash for the services rendered.
Although the parties raise many issues in their briefs, we proceed at once to the heart of the case, exposed in appellant’s fourth point on appeal, in which it is urged that a public employee is not entitled to compensation for overtime work except in the manner specifically provided by law. This proposition is accepted by the respondent, who counters that he has complied with the salary ordinance of the county and hence is entitled to his compensation.
Appellant cites Martin v. Henderson, 40 Cal.2d 583 [255 P.2d 416] for the proposition that a person accepting a public office at a fixed salary is bound to perform the duties of the office for the salary stated, even though the salary be inadequate and the duties and burdens of the office later increased. In that ease the court said: “The fact that normal hours of work are established and compensating time off is provided for work beyond those hours does not, of itself, give the employee a right to payment for overtime.” (P. 590.) But in Martin the court was speaking of those situations uncontrolled by some statute or ordinance. In disapproving prior cases of the Court of Appeal, the Supreme Court expressly declared that, insofar as such eases “. . . determine that a state officer or employee, in the absence of specific statutory authority, is entitled to a cash payment for accrued overtime upon separation from service, they are disapproved.” (P. 591.) (Italics ours.) Here, of course, statutory provisions are made by the county ordinance providing for the payment of authorized overtime in cash. The critical questions thus are whether respondent’s overtime was “authorized” within the meaning of paragraph 12, subparagraphs (1) and (5) of the salary ordinance; whether the provisions of paragraph 12, *266subparagraph 8 providing for payment of overtime monthly are applicable, and whether the provisions of paragraph 12, subparagraph 9, which require compensating time off to be taken within one year, operate to defeat respondent’s claims. The effect of paragraph 8, subparagraph 2, quoted in footnote 1 above, must also be considered in determining the validity of the judgment.
Paragraph 12, subparagraph (1) of the Alameda County Salary Ordinance makes clear that overtime necessarily performed by county employees shall be paid for by the county. This portion of the ordinance declares the basic policy of the county, which is to pay for all services rendered to it by its employees, subject to essential procedural safeguards later spelled out in detail in the ordinance, likewise subject to any limitations contained therein.
Under the terms of the ordinance, overtime must be properly authorized by stated county officials in the manner described in the ordinance before it may become a valid charge against the county. Thus paragraph 12, subparagraph (5) requires that overtime be (a) found necessary before the services are performed; (b) approved in writing by the head of the department in which the services are rendered and (c) that the Board of Supervisors also authorize such services ‘ ‘ in general terms ’ ’ prior to performance.
The evidence in this case establishes substantial compliance with the foregoing requirements of the salary ordinance. The necessity for overtime services is shown by the establishment of the “on call” list, which clearly recognizes the need for the services of deputies at times other than during regular assigned hours. Respondent’s name was on that list from time to time for over seven years of his tenure, and it is a fair inference from the record that some of his overtime services resulted from that assignment. There was evidence, too, that working overtime was essential to proper performance of the duties of the civil division of the sheriff’s office where respondent also served, and that this fact was generally known. Finally, the fact that detailed records of overtime were kept by the sheriff is some recognition of the fact that it was necessary from time to time for overtime services to be rendered by the sheriff’s personnel.
Approval in writing by the sheriff before rendition of the services is also found in the evidence just described. The “on call” lists were in writing, and respondent was assigned in writing on that list for a long period of time.
Finally, approval by the board of supervisors is established *267by the evidence which shows knowledge on the part of the board that overtime services were being rendered by county employees, that records of such services were being kept by department heads, and that, where possible, compensatory time off was allowed employees who had overtime to their credit. The board had knowledge of all the facts, and presumably also knew of the basic policy expressed in the salary ordinance to the effect that overtime worked by county employees should be paid for. As stipulated, the board, aware of the practice, simply left the matter to the discretion of the head of the particular county department involved, and thus gave approval to their actions.
We come to the most serious question in the ease, namely, whether plaintiff may recover the value of his compensatory overtime for more than one year prior to his resignation. While his uncompensated overtime had been accumulating for approximately eight years, in the last year of his service he received more compensatory overtime than he earned in that particular year. So, unfortunately for him, if the provision in the ordinance limiting compensatory overtime to “within one year after the rendering of such service” applies, plaintiff may not recover in this case. We find nothing in the ordinance to overcome that provision.
The ordinance, of course, provides that overtime shall be paid for either in cash or in compensatory extra time. But such provision is subject to the rules and limitations set forth in the ordinance. While paragraph 12, subparagraph (1) provides “Anything in this Ordinance to the contrary notwithstanding . . . overtime . . . shall be paid for. . . .” it limits this phrase by the words immediately following “and except as hereinafter provided. ” (Italics ours.) One rule is that the sheriff has the discretion of determining whether the overtime shall be paid for in cash or in compensatory time off. The sheriff, exercising his discretion, determined that with the exceptions when he went to the board of supervisors for cash payment approval, overtime should only be paid for in time off. This is shown by the custom and by the fact that under paragraph 12, subparagraph 8 cash payments for overtime must be made monthly and no such payments were made, nor was compensation for overtime computed as paragraph 12 subparagraph 8 provides. This was for the very good reason that cash compensation was not to be paid.
It having been determined that overtime was to be paid only in time off, the one year limitation applies. There is no *268provision in the ordinance to the contrary. It is contended that because plaintiff’s overtime cannot now be compensated in time off and its value must be paid in cash, the situation must be considered as if the sheriff had elected during plaintiff’s employment to pay him in cash, and that there is no limitation in the ordinance on the time when that cash can be collected. However, there is such limitation. The cash payment is specifically made payable monthly on a specified type of computation. Compensatory time off is limited to within the year of the service. As plaintiff’s service has terminated it cannot be paid for in time off and if paid at all, must be paid in cash. Such fact does not permit of plaintiff receiving pay for a longer period than that to which he would have been entitled during his service.
• Paragraph 8, subparagraph (2) of the ordinance provides ‘ ‘ except as herein otherwise specifically provided, and except that overtime for which no special compensation is provided and for which time off has not been received may be added to the periods of time hereinafter specified for leave with pay. ’ ’ This provision does not change the one year time limitation in subsection (9). It should be noted that in all of the sections dealing with leaves of absence either with or without pay, limitations on length of absence are provided, a matter of significance in determining whether it was contemplated by the ordinance that compensatory time off would have no limitation.
As before stated, plaintiff’s overtime earned • during the year prior to his leaving the sheriff’s office was compensated for by time off. Although there is overtime in prior years which is not compensated for, the one year limitation bars recovery therefor.
Plaintiff contends that the doctrines of unjust enrichment and constructive trust are applicable here. In Gama v. County of Kern (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 1, 4 [3 Cal.Rptr. 370], the court said: “Appellant cites no authority and we have found none authorizing the application of the theory of ‘unjust enrichment’ and ‘constructive trust’ to the general fund of a county on an ordinary debt for alleged unpaid wage items. We have here a simple case of alleged unpaid wages from a county to its employees. ”
In Slocomb v. City of Los Angeles (1961) 197 Cal.App.2d 794 [17 Cal.Rptr. 529] the court, in an action brought against the city by city employees for alleged overtime services, quoted with apparent approval the above statement from Gama and affirmed a judgment in favor of the city.
*269In the case at bench, we have been cited to no authorities making applicable either of said doctrines to the situation here, which is a claim for unpaid wages for overtime.
The judgment is reversed.
Draper, P. J., concurred.
Re tired Presiding Justice of the Court of Appeal sitting under assignment by the Chairman of the Judicial Council.
“Paragraph 12—Compensation por Overtime: 1. Overtime Pay Rate—Anything in this Ordinance to the contrary notwithstanding and except as hereinafter provided, each hour of authorized overtime necessarily performed by an employee or appointive officer of the County shall be paid for at the hourly rate applicable to the compensation of such employee. ... 2. Overtime Defined—‘Overtime work’ as used herein is hereby defined as all time which an employee or appointive officer of the County is required to work in excess of forty hours in any one week, . . . 5. How Overtime Pay is Authorised—No compensation for overtime work shall bo allowed unless the doing of the work in overtime has been specifically found to be necessary and prioi- to its performance, approved in writing by the head of the office or department in which the work is to he done, nor unless the Board of Supervisors has in general terms authorized such overtime work and prior to its performance, has determined that it. is necessary, provided however, t-liat subsequent approval by the head of the office or department and the Board of Supervisors shall be sufficient whore the overtime work is made necessary by a sudden emergency which could not be reasonably anticipated in time to obtain such approvals prior to the doing of such work in overtime. ... 7. Complete Overtime Records Required—Bach office or department shall keep complete and accurate records of the overtime worked by each employee in such office or department. If such records are not kept, employees shall not be eligible to be paid or receive time off for overtime work performed during such period, or periods, in which such records are not kept. 8. Overtime Pay Period-—Compensation for overtime work shall be payable monthly and shall be computed up to and including the last full week prior to the L’Oth day of the calendar month. 9. Overtime Compensation Method— ()vertimc may be compensated for in money or by an equal amount of time off in the discretion of the head of the office or department, and if time off is granted it shall be taken at such time as the head of the office or department may determine, but within one year after the rendering of such service. . . . 12. Compensation for Holidays—Any employee or appointive officer who is required to work during a holiday in the course of a regularly assigned shift, or, in the event an employee’s or appointive officer’s regular day or days off in any week occur on a holiday, such person shall, in addition to his regular compensation, be entitled to be compensated for any such holiday. The method and rates of compensation, and the definition of the term ‘holiday’ shall be as specified in this paragraph, except that the requirements set forth in sub-paragraph 5 shall not apply unless such compensation is to be in money. ’ ’
Paragraph 8, subparagraph 2 of the Salary Ordinance reads: “The compensation herein provided shall be in full for all services rendered to the County of Alameda, except as herein otherwise specifically provided, and except that overtime for which no special compensation is provided and for which time off has not been received may be added to the periods of time hereinafter specified for leave with pay.’’

=== CASE 9738665 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:00:06.091113+00 ===

SALSMAN, J.
I dissent.
I do not read the ordinance as my associates do.
The facts are simple and undisputed. Eespondent rendered overtime services to the county. Accurate records were kept of his services. His supervisor elected to compensate him by granting him time off, but did not do so. Must the county now pay him in cash ? I think so.
Paragraph 12, subparagraph (1) of the county salary ordinance declares the basic policy of the county, which is to pay county employees for their overtime services. It says that “Anything in this Ordinance to the contrary notwithstanding and except as hereinafter provided, each hour of authorized overtime . . . shall be paid for at the hourly rate applicable to the compensation of such employee. ...” (Italics ours.)
Paragraph 12, subparagraph (9) allows an employee’s overtime services to be paid for by compensatory time off or by cash, in the discretion of the head of the employee’s department, and says that “. . . if time off is granted it shall be taken at such time as the head of the office or department may determine, but within one year after the rendering of such service. ...” (Italics ours.) Here, as I understand the prevailing opinion, since the employee’s compensatory time off was not taken “within one year after the rendering of such service” he is barred from any claim for compensation.
The result is an unjust one. The county, by electing to compensate the employee for his overtime by granting time off, defeats his claim by the simple process of failing to fulfill its promise. I would interpret the language of paragraph 12. subparagraph (9), which says that “. . . if time off is granted it shall be taken . . . within one year. ...” to mean that the county must make the time off actually available, and if it does not do so, then payment in cash must be made.
It is clearly inferable from the record here that the county did not grant the compensatory time off it elected to give for the simple reason that the sheriff’s office was short-handed, and the men could not be spared.
*270Edwin Kaufman, undersheriff during the time respondent rendered his services, testified: “Q. Setting aside that there was something in terms of disciplinary or otherwise, wasn’t it the policy of the Sheriff’s Office that you wanted people to get their time back if you could allow them to go ? A. It was reasonable to assume this. We liked to cut down the overtime hours, if possible. Q. But the reason that you couldn’t is because there wasn’t sufficient staff? Isn’t that correct? A. That could be one reason, yes.
The respondent testified: ‘ ‘ Q. Did you ever ask to take time off in order to cut down the number of hours—A. Yes. Q. —that you claimed? A. Yes. Q. When was the first time that you asked to take time off ? A. Oh, this is a long ways back in my Civil Division career. Around a vacation-period time I tried to. I think the first time, I was in the Civil Division. I asked for extra weeks on my vacation in order to get rid of it. Q. And were they granted or denied ? A. They were denied. Q. On -what ground? A. Well, that they just couldn’t spare the time, couldn’t spare me the time. They didn’t have time. Q. They didn’t have time? A. They couldn’t spare me. This was usually the answer. Q. They didn’t have enough men at the time? A. They didn’t say that. They just couldn’t spare me. Q. They couldn’t spare you ? A. That is right. ’ ’
I find no testimony in the record to show that the county was ready, willing and able to grant time off to respondent to make up for his overtime, despite its promise, and accordingly I would require the county to pay him in cash.
A petition for rehearing was denied on December 22, 1967, and the opinion was modified to read as printed above. Salsman, J., was of the opinion that the petition should be granted. Respondent’s petition for a hearing by the Supreme Court was denied January 17, 1968.

=== CASE 2217188 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:22.879798+00 ===

249 Ind. 115 (1967)
234 N.E.2d 498
STATE OF INDIANA EX REL. LAWRENCE
v.
MORGAN CIRCUIT COURT ET AL.
No. 0-838.
Supreme Court of Indiana.
Filed November 15, 1967.
Marvin Leo Lawrence, pro se.
PER CURIAM.
Petitioner has filed on August 2, 1967 a verified petition for writ of mandate with the Clerk of this Court. *116 His motion for appointment of counsel was denied under Cause No. 0-823 by this Court in an opinion reported as In re Petition of Marvin Leo Lawrence at 224 N.E.2d 512 (1967). Much of the history of his case is set out therein. It appears that this case has had the following chronology since the opinion of March 14, 1967:
March 21, 1967  Pro se request to trial court for appointment of appellate counsel.
June 21, 1967  Pro se motion for trial court to rule on request for counsel.
June 22, 1967  Trial court denied request for appointment of appellate counsel.
Now Petitioner asks that this Court direct the trial court to sustain his petition for appointment of counsel filed in the trial court on March 21, 1967. This Court finds that the duty of the trial court to provide petitioner with appellate counsel has been discharged in this case by two prior appointments of appellate counsel as set out in the last paragraph of In re Petition of Marvin Leo Lawrence, supra, p. 513.
Petitioner cites the recent U.S. Supreme Court case of Anders v. California 386 U.S. 738, 18 L.Ed 2d 493, 87 S.Ct. 1396 (1967) to support his assertion that the trial court has a duty to appoint additional successive appellate counsel. This Court will not regard newly announced constitutional principles as having retroactive effect unless they are made retroactively plainly and unequivocally by the United States Supreme Court, State v. Gurecki 247 Ind. 218, 214 N.E.2d 392, 394, (1966). The Anders case was decided on May 8, 1967, and since the United States Supreme Court did not expressly make the decision retoactive, it has no application to a case where the trial in which error is alleged to have occurred was concluded before May 8, 1967. The conviction in this case was on April 7, 1964, and therefore this petition is denied.
NOTE.  Reported in 234 N.E.2d 498.

=== CASE 9738666 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:00:06.830628+00 ===

DONLIN, P.J.
Rickaby suffers from cerebral palsy and is certified to receive Medical Assistance benefits. For these reasons, and because no suitable alternative living arrangement is available, Rickaby resides at a skilled nursing facility. In August, 1978, Rickaby requested that the Department of Health and Social Services provide him with an electric wheelchair through the Medical Assistance program. The nursing home also submitted a request on Rickaby’s behalf.
The Department’s Bureau of Health Care Financing denied these requests, and Rickaby requested a hearing to review this denial. Following a hearing, the Department made findings of fact and affirmed the denial. Rickaby petitioned for ch. 227 review in the circuit court. The circuit court upheld the Department’s decision, and Rickaby appeals.
The purpose of Wisconsin’s Medical Assistance program is to permit persons like Rickaby to “obtain the most benefits available under Title XIX of the federal social security act.”1 Title XIX, commonly called “Medicaid,” makes federal grants-in-aid available to states. While participation in the program is voluntary, once states accept Title XIX funds they must abide by the purposes and provisions of the Act.2 The central purposes of the Medicaid Act are to help persons like Rick-aby “to meet the costs of necessary medical services” and “to attain or retain capability for independence or self-care.”3
Participating states may determine which particular services to fund under the program, as long as “basic and necessary” services are provided consistent with the *458federal act.4 Wisconsin has chosen to make the purchase or rental of electric wheelchairs available to eligible Medical Assistance recipients in nursing homes.5 Pursuant to secs. 49.45(2) (a)3 and 49.46(2) (a)7, Stats., the Department promulgated rules governing when authorizations will be made to provide durable medical equipment like electric wheelchairs to Medical Assistance recipients. The policy criteria statement in effect at the time Rickaby applied for his electric wheelchair provided in part:
Policy: Criteria for MA provision of wheelchairs for Nursing Home Residents
Nursing home patients requiring wheelchairs should be provided with the type of wheelchair which will maximize their potential for independent functioning. . . . For the “atypical” patient with “unique” health care needs a wheelchair can be viewed as an extension of their body and a primary requisite to the maintenance and/or achievement of their highest potential level of functioning. Therefore, provision should be made under the Medical Assistance program for the purchase or rental of a special wheelchair for the nursing home patient with unique health care needs.
2. A wheelchair may be purchased for a nursing home resident by the Medical Assistance program only under one of the following conditions:
*459a. The resident has a long term or permanent disability and the wheelchair requested constitutes basic and necessary health care for the resident consistent with a plan of health care. Long term will generally be interpreted to mean more than one year.
and
The the [sic] wheelchair is prescribed by the attending physician and the purchase of the wheelchair will contribute towards the rehabilitation of the resident through maximizing the resident’s potential for independence. The patient requires a wheelchair for which the home would rarely have a need. That is for at least one year it is reasonable to assume no other patient in this home would use this wheelchair.
b. A wheelchair may be purchased for nursing home residents by the Medical Assistance program if the resident is about to transfer from a nursing home to an alternative and more independent setting.
The mandates of this policy are perfectly clear. Since the policy continually refers to nursing home patients and residents, it can only mean that wheelchairs may be made available to persons who reside in nursing homes. Moreover, the type of wheelchair to be provided is that which maximizes the individual’s potential for independent functioning. The strong, descriptive language used, such as “extension of their body” and “primary requisite” demonstrates that wheelchairs are, for the appropriate patient, “basic and necessary health care.”
Likewise, Wis. Adm. Code, sec. HSS 107.24 authorizes the purchase of electric wheelchairs through the Medical Assistance program if a request for prior authorization is made pursuant to sec. HSS 107.24(2) and if the conditions under sec. HSS 107.24(3) (a) 1 are met. Section HSS 107.24 (3) (a) 1 provides:
Purchase of a wheelchair prescribed by a physician is covered for a nursing home recipient if the wheelchair *460will contribute towards the rehabilitation of the recipient through maximizing the recipient’s potential for independence, and if:
a. The recipient has a long-term or permanent disability and the wheelchair requested constitutes basic and necessary health care for the recipient consistent with a plan of health care; or
b. The recipient is about to transfer from a nursing home to an alternative and more independent setting.
We believe the new rule makes it clear that nursing home residents who plan to stay in nursing homes can be eligible to receive electric wheelchairs.
The Department found that Rickaby cannot independently propel his wheelchair nor is he capable of satisfactory ambulation. The Department further found that it “is unlikely that the petitioner will ever be able to reside outside of a nursing home setting . . . .” The Department concluded that it could not, “therefore, find that the electric wheelchair meets the criteria of basic and necessary health care . . . .”
The circuit court reviewed the Department’s findings and concluded that they were supported by substantial evidence. We agree that the evidence supports these findings. The Department stopped short of the dis-positive issue, however. The policy rules state that electric wheelchairs may be purchased for nursing home recipients if the wheelchair will contribute towards the rehabilitation of the recipient through maximizing the recipient’s potential for independence, and if two alternative and very different conditions are met: (1) the recipient has a long-term or permanent disability and the wheelchair requested constitutes basic and necessary health care for the recipient consistent with a plan of care; or, (2) the recipient is about to transfer from a nursing home to an alternative and more independent setting. One can qualify under either criterion (1) or *461(2) above, but one need not — indeed one could not— qualify simultaneously under both (1) and (2) above.
It appears that the Department’s findings and decision in this case are consistent with criterion (2) and would be justified if that were the only criterion to be considered. This is not the rule, however. As we stated previously, we think it clear that nursing home residents can be eligible, pursuant to ch. HSS 107, to receive electric wheelchairs. Nowhere does the rule imply that independent functioning is “living outside a nursing home setting.”
While administrative agencies are accorded deference in interpreting their own rules, the court need not accept those definitions that are clearly erroneous or are inconsistent with the plain meaning of the words in question.6 The Department’s interpretation that independence means living outside a nursing home misconstrues the preexisting policy criteria statement and ch. HSS 107. Such an interpretation is inconsistent with the plain language of the rules and an interpretation that would never allow consideration of the individual’s personal potential, as this would be irrelevant if the individual was not likely to leave a nursing home setting. Furthermore, such an interpretation rewrites the rules to exclude one of two eligible categories of persons entitled to electric wheelchairs.
The circuit court concluded that the Department was acting within its discretion when it denied Rickaby’s request. Discretion, however, means a process of reasoning, not decision-making, and reasoning must “depend on facts in the record or reasonably derived therefrom, and a conclusion based on a logical rationale founded *462upon proper legal standards.”7 Here, the Department did not invoke or apply the proper legal standard. In reaching its determination, the Department essentially considered only whether Rickaby was likely to move out' of the nursing home.
The Department failed to consider and make findings of certain requirements: whether Rickaby has a long-term disability, whether the electric wheelchair would promote his maximum potential for independence (within the nursing home), whether the chair was prescribed to that end by a doctor, and whether, considering all these factors, the chair constitutes basic and necessary health care. We reverse the judgment of the circuit court and remand this matter to the circuit court for remand to the Department for further fact-finding and consideration of these requirements.
We also note that Rickaby seems to qualify under the rules to receive an electric wheelchair. All the evidence in the record indicates that the professionals charged with Rickaby’s care believed that the electric wheelchair would be a major contribution to his health care. The wheelchair was prescribed by petitioner’s attending physician. The evidence in the record indicates that the electric wheelchair would be a major step toward maximizing petitioner’s potential for independence. Rickaby would be expected to use the chair for between ten and twenty years, and, since he would be using the chair throughout the day, no other person could use it.
Finally, an electric wheelchair would give Rickaby the fundamental freedom of movement. It would give him the ability to choose his daily activities without relying first on the presence of someone to propel him. Rickaby could move about in the community. Rickaby could take care of his basic body and hygiene needs. *463Equally important, the abilities to move about, to make choices, and to have the opportunity to try self-care promise to greatly enhance Rickaby’s self-esteem and quality of life. It would appear that if all these uncon-tradicted benefits do not contribute toward Rickaby’s capability to maximize his potential for self-care, then nothing short of a miracle freeing him of his disability altogether would.
By the Court. — Judgment reversed and cause remanded with instructions.
Section 49.45(1), Stats.
Schaak v. Schmidt, 344 F. Supp. 99 (E.D. Wis. 1971).
42 U.S.C.A. §1396 (West 1974).
Preterm, Inc. v. Dukakis, 591 F.2d 121, 124 (1st Cir. 1979).
Section 49.46(2) (a)7, Stats; Wis. Adm. Code §HSS 107.24. The Department rule governing its decision in this case was not then in the Wisconsin Administrative Code. Rather, like most rules then governing the Medical Assistance program, it was in the form of a “Policy Criteria Statement.” This statement is in the record before this court. This policy rule was placed in the Administrative Code virtually verbatim, as ch. HSS 107, effective February 1, 1980. We note the substantial similarity between the policy criteria statement and the formally adopted §HSS 107.24 et seq. We have cited ch. HSS 107 as it appears to codify the preexisting policy criteria.
Beal v. First Federal Savings & Loan Ass’n, 90 Wis.2d 171, 279 N.W.2d 693 (1979); Josam, Mfg. Co. v. State Bd. of Health, 26 Wis.2d 587, 133 N.W.2d 301 (1965).
Reidinger v. Optometry Exam. Bd., 81 Wis.2d 292, 297, 260 N.W.2d 270, 273 (1977).

=== CASE 9738667 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:00:06.837261+00 ===

FOLEY, J.
(concurring) I concur in the court’s decision to remand this case to the Department for further findings. As pointed out by the majority, the Department’s order appears to limit electric wheelchairs to individuals who will eventually be able to live outside nursing homes. This would be an erroneous interpretation of the Department’s own rule.
I do not, however, concur with the statement that Rickaby seems to qualify under the rules to receive an electric wheelchair. I believe the Department is entitled to find, from the record, that an electric wheelchair is not basic or necessary health care in Rickaby’s case. Rickaby’s basic need for the wheelchair is to permit him to move about the nursing home and an achievement center he is bussed to. He will not foreseeably be able to reside outside the home, and his only activities outside the home are at the center. At both the home and the center he is under supervision, and there is always someone available to move him about. His basic need is therefore being met.
Although I am sympathetic to Rickaby’s desire for additional independence of movement, I cannot conclude, as has the majority, that this necessarily qualifies him for the wheelchair. The Department is charged with the responsibility for avoiding unnecessary utilization of *464services. 42 U.S.C.A. §1396a(a) (30) (West 1974). A wheelchair would no doubt improve the quality of Rick-aby’s life. Unlimited government funds, however, would also improve the lives of many poor or disadvantaged people.
It is properly a function of the Department to determine whether a need is basic and, if it is, whether the need is being met. If the basic need is being met, it is then up to the Department to determine whether it is necessary health care to meet that need in another manner. These determinations involve interpretation and application of the Department’s own rules and, unless plainly erroneous or inconsistent with the federal regulations involved, courts should accept the Department’s determination. Vonasek v. Hirsch and Stevens, Inc., 65 Wis.2d 1, 221 N.W.2d 815 (1974).

=== CASE 2217192 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:22.941357+00 ===

99 Mich. App. 442 (1980)
297 N.W.2d 696
ZMUDCZYNSKI
v.
LEAGUE GENERAL INSURANCE COMPANY
Docket No. 46577.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided August 13, 1980.
Lopatin, Miller, Bindes, Freedman, Bluestone, *443 Erlich & Rosen (by Steven G. Silverman), for plaintiff.
Zweig & Harkness, P.C., for defendant.
Before: BASHARA, P.J., and D.C. RILEY and E.A. QUINNELL,[*] JJ.
PER CURIAM.
Plaintiff brought this action contesting the computation of benefits paid by defendant, a no-fault automobile insurer. From summary judgment, pursuant to GCR 1963, 117.2(1), in favor of the defendant, plaintiff appeals.
Plaintiff was injured in an automobile accident which resulted in his inability to work for approximately four months. Defendant admits that it is liable for work-loss benefits under the no-fault insurance policy. The controversy concerns interpretation of MCL 500.3109a; MSA 24.13109(1), which states:
"An insurer providing personal protection insurance benefits shall offer, at appropriately reduced premium rates, deductibles and exclusions reasonably related to other health and accident coverage on the insured. The deductibles and exclusions required to be offered by this section shall be subject to prior approval by the commissioner and shall apply only to benefits payable to the person named in the policy, the spouse of the insured and any relative of either domiciled in the same house-hold."
and MCL 500.3107b; MSA 24.13107(b), which states in part:
"The benefits payable for work loss sustained in a single 30-day period and the income earned by an injured person for work during the same period together *444 shall not exceed [$1,285.00], which maximum shall apply pro rata to any lesser period of work loss."
There is no dispute that the plaintiff purchased "coordinated benefits" coverage from defendant pursuant to MCL 500.3109a. Plaintiff admits that he received $205 per week sickness and accident benefits from sources other than the defendant. The defendant computed benefits owing to plaintiff by subtracting $205 per week from the $1,285 monthly maximum.
Plaintiff contends that the defendant's computation was in error. He alleges that his wages were substantially more than $1,285 per month at the time of the accident. He concludes that his wage loss is the base figure from which the other benefits should be deducted. He argues that the $1,285 per month maximum is the maximum amount payable after deductions rather than before.
The trial court held that defendant's method of computing coordinated benefits under the policy and the statute was correct. The judge ruled that "benefits payable", as used in the statute, plainly means the maximum amount payable by the insurer, in this case $1,285. Therefore, it is from that figure that the deductibles must be subtracted, rather than from the plaintiff's actual wage loss.
Plaintiff argues that the method of computation adopted by the defendant and approved by the trial court results in a windfall to the defendant. We disagree. At the hearing on the motion for summary judgment, it was agreed that plaintiff pays a lesser premium for coordinated benefits coverage. It is only fair that his benefits be reduced accordingly.
In O'Donnell v State Farm Mutual Automobile Ins Co, 404 Mich 524; 273 NW2d 829 (1979), the *445 Court held that the no-fault act did not violate the Equal Protection Clause of the state and Federal constitutions by requiring set-off of governmental benefits but not private benefits. By so providing, the Legislature allowed persons with incomes exceeding the maximum benefits payable under the no-fault act to purchase the extra coverage by paying extra premiums. The Court stated:
"It was finally resolved that these persons with extra needs would directly bear the burden of those needs; none of that burden would be borne by the no-fault system. The payment of extra premiums would pay in full for the extra coverage. Therefore, there would be no discrimination in this totally voluntary option." Id., 548-549.
In the case at bar, the plaintiff chose to pay a lesser premium for coordinated benefits coverage. Certainly, had he wished to pay a greater premium and receive the maximum benefits payable in order to meet his greater needs, he could have done so.
Affirmed, costs to defendant.
NOTES
[*]  Circuit judge, sitting on the Court of Appeals by assignment.

=== CASE 2217193 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:22.955651+00 ===

256 Cal.App.2d 357 (1967)
WEST COAST ADVERTISING COMPANY, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO et al., Defendants and Appellants.
Civ. No. 23483.
California Court of Appeals. First Dist., Div. Two.
Nov. 27, 1967.
Thomas M. O'Connor, City Attorney, and Edmund A. Bacigalupi, Deputy City Attorney, for Defendants and Appellants.
Molinari, Casalnuovo & Berger and Leonard B. Berger for Plaintiff and Respondent.
TAYLOR, J.
The City and County of San Francisco, its zoning administrator and its director of planning, appeal from a judgment granting petitioner, West Coast Advertising Company, a peremptory writ of mandate directing the issuance of a building permit to erect a billboard. The question on appeal is whether the trial court's order granting the writ pursuant to the then-existing city ordinance should now be reversed because of a subsequent amendment prohibiting such billboards.
The facts are not in dispute. On April 1, 1965, petitioner, a California corporation engaged in the business of erecting and maintaining advertising signs, applied to the city zoning administrator for a permit to erect a billboard on its premises adjacent to the freeway at 2513 San Bruno Avenue. The zoning administrator denied the permit and thereafter petitioner appealed to the Board of Permit Appeals, hereafter Board. The Board heard the appeal of petitioner on May 10, June 16 and June 21, 1965, overruled the decision of the zoning administrator and ordered approval of the application for a permit on the grounds that the billboard was not a structure within the planning code. Thereafter, the zoning administrator and planning director requested a rehearing before the Board, which was denied on August 16.
On September 7, petitioner filed its application for a writ of mandate and the alternative writ issued. At the September 29 hearing on the application, all parties knew that the city was then considering a new ordinance, No. 263- 65, prohibiting billboards on property adjacent to freeways and that if passed, petitioner could not compel the issuance of the writ. *359 Petitioner indicated it would take its chances on the new ordinance. The new ordinance was passed on October 11, had its second reading on October 18, was signed on October 22, and became effective 30 days thereafter on November 21. On October 21, the court below granted the writ of mandate on the basis of the original ordinance still in effect. This appeal ensued.  [fn. 1]
[1] Petitioner contends that the writ was properly issued as the new ordinance did not become effective until 30 days after the order entered by the court below and that it now has a vested right to the building permit. The applicable principle of law was recently stated by our Supreme Court in Russian Hill Improv. Assn. v. Board of Permit Appeals, 66 Cal.2d 34 [56 Cal.Rptr. 672, 423 P.2d 824].  [fn. 2] The court, citing Brougher v. Board of Public Works, 205 Cal. 426, 432-435 [271 P. 487], stated at page 39: "... even a permit which had achieved administrative finality can be revoked on the basis of a subsequent change in the zoning laws. The permittee could win immunity from such 'ex post facto' revocation only by constructing a substantial portion of the structure authorized by his permit in good faith reliance upon the prior law." In the instant case, there was no permit issued and thus no substantial construction in reliance thereon.
The situation here is similar to that involving the revocation of a permit after the passage of prohibitory legislation. In view of the pending ordinance, the administrator was well within his discretion in refusing the permit. [2] As stated by the court in the Russian Hill Improvement case, the administrative bureau has the "discretion to deny the permit application on the ground that the structure described therein would soon be rendered illegal by the pending ordinance." (P. 37, fn. 5.) Wheat v. Barrett, 210 Cal. 193 [290 P. 1033], is directly in point. In that case, a judgment granting a writ of mandate ordering the issuance of the building permit was reversed where a new ordinance prohibiting the structure in question was enacted while the judgment was on appeal.
[3] Petitioner argues for the first time in its petition for rehearing that section 150, subdivision (d) of the San Francisco *360 City Planning Code  [fn. 3] precludes this court from applying the new ordinance. It relies on Russian Hill Improv. Assn. v. Board of Permit Appeals, supra, to argue that the permit had been granted within the meaning of section 150 when the Board overruled the denial of the planning officer. But as stated by Justice Tobriner in the Russian Hill case in referring to the effect of section 150, "Defendants correctly note that the Board of Permit Appeals cannot itself 'grant' a permit but can only direct the permit bureau to do so." (P. 43.) Since the zoning administrator here refused to comply either with the order of the Board or the trial court to "grant" the permit but chose rather to stick by his guns and exhaust the legal remedy afforded by this appeal, the permit had never "been legally granted prior to the effective date" of the amendment and thus section 150 is clearly not applicable.
This court must decide the question here presented according to the existing law and thus set aside the judgment (Wheat v. Barrett, supra; Pacific Gas etc. Co. v. State of California, 214 Cal. 369 [69 P.2d 78]; Ziffrin, Inc. v. United States, 318 U.S. 73 [87 L.Ed. 621, 63 S.Ct. 465]; City & County of San Francisco v. Budde, 139 Cal.App.2d 10, 12 [292 P.2d 955, 294 P.2d 503]; Thompson v. City of Los Angeles, 82 Cal.App.2d 45 [185 P.2d 393]; Messenger v. Kingsbury, 158 Cal. 611 [112 P. 65]). Inasmuch as we have determined that the trial court's order granting the writ must be reversed, it is unnecessary to discuss the remaining contentions of the parties.
The judgment is reversed.
Shoemaker, P. J., and Agee, J., concurred.
NOTES
[fn. 1]  1. Thereafter, this court granted the city's motion to augment the record to include the new ordinance.
[fn. 2]  2. The case is factually distinguishable as there the new ordinance became effective while the matter was pending before the Board.
[fn. 3]  3. Section 150, subdivision (d) provides: "Any building or use for which a permit has been lawfully granted prior to the effective date of an amendment to the City Planning Code, where such date is subsequent to May 2, 1960, may be completed and used in accordance with the approved plans, provided that construction is started and diligently prosecuted to completion in accordance with Section 304 of the Building Code, and such building or use shall thereafter be deemed to be a lawfully existing building or use." (Amended Ord. 200-60, approved April 21, 1960.) (Italics added.)

=== CASE 2217197 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:23.00012+00 ===

354 Mass. 4 (1968)
234 N.E.2d 723
ROBERT W. WHITAKER'S CASE.
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Suffolk.
February 7, 1968.
March 5, 1968.
Present: WILKINS, C.J., SPALDING, WHITTEMORE, CUTTER, & KIRK, JJ.
Pasquale J. Ventola for the employee.
John T. Foynes for the insurer.
WHITTEMORE, J.
This is an appeal from a final decree in the Superior Court adjudging that the employee has failed to sustain the burden of proving an injury arising out of and in the course of employment. The single member had *5 so ruled and the reviewing board had affirmed and adopted his findings and decision.
The employee's affliction was chronic bronchitis, emphysema and bronchiectasis. Some of the medical testimony tended to show that paint mist from his spray painting job aggravated the condition. There was contrary testimony. Because of his affliction the employee shifted to a different and lower paying job.
The insurer relies on the usual rule that the findings below are conclusive unless unsupported by the evidence or tainted by error of law. See Look's Case, 345 Mass. 112, 114. The single member made his ruling of failure to sustain the burden of proof "on all the evidence." This by itself undoubtedly would imply that the member had rejected the testimony that permitted a finding of significant aggravation. But the single member began his findings with the statement, "I find the credible evidence to be as follows." Although the intent is by no means clear, this statement could be taken to assert as credible all the evidence set out in the following recitals including that which if believed, taken with the consistent and supplementary testimony, would have furnished support, though slight, for a finding that the paint spray had aggravated the condition. Clarici's Case, 340 Mass. 495, 498. There is further difficulty. There was direct testimony of two physicians that the paint spray could not have caused the plaintiff's illness. The ambiguous decision does not foreclose the possibility that the member wrongly deemed that the failure to show that the spray was the original cause of the affliction defeated the plaintiff's case.
We again call attention to the requirement that the findings on which the conclusion of the board depends be clearly and directly stated. Mathewson's Case, 227 Mass. 470, 473. Rozek's Case, 294 Mass. 205, 207. Moore's Case, 330 Mass. 1, 5-6. Herson's Case, 341 Mass. 402, 407.
The final decree is reversed. A decree is to enter remanding the case to the board for further findings and the taking of additional evidence in its discretion.
So ordered.

=== CASE 9739757 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:20:27.024299+00 ===

BARTEAU, Judge,
dissenting.
I respectfully dissent. Indiana Code 31-1-11.5-12(d)(1) provides that child support terminates when the child is emancipated before reaching twenty-one years of age. The child is emancipated before reaching twenty-one years of age only if the court finds that the child (1) has joined the armed forces, (2) has married, or (8) is not under the care or control of (A) either parent, or (B) an individual or agency approved by the court. I.C. 31-1-11.5-12(e); Taylor v. Chaffin (1990), Ind.App., 558 N.E.2d 879, 883. Subsection (e)(8)(A) is the only emaneipating event relevant to this appeal. What constitutes emancipation is a question of law, while whether there has been an emancipation is a question of fact. Id. at 882. Emancipation cannot be presumed, but must be established by competent evidence. Moody v. Moody (1991), Ind.App., 565 N.E.2d 388, 390. The petitioner seeking emancipation has the burden of proving that the child is emancipated. Free v. Free (1991), Ind.App., 581 N.E.2d 996, 997.
The trial court found that Krista had not lived at home since turning eighteen and enrolling at college and had been paying all of her college and living expenses. The trial court further found that after paying for first year college and living expenses, Krista had remaining funds of approximately $40,000. These findings are correct but they do not satisfy any of the emancipating events set out in 1.0. 31-1-11.5-12(e).
Emancipation cannot be found merely because Krista is living on campus and paying her own college and living expenses while at school. See Taylor, 558 N.E.2d 879 (many children attending college live away from home during school and exhibit some independence, but are not necessarily emancipated); see also In re Marriage of Brown (1992), Ind.App., 597 N.E.2d 1297. "[Nlei-ther a child's employment nor independent living necessarily means the child is emanei-pated. Rather, emancipation occurs when the child places herself beyond the control, custody and care of her parents." Id. at 1300. There was no evidence presented nor did the trial court find that Krista was no longer under the care and control of Mother. Further, there was no evidence presented *886from which it could be inferred that Krista is no longer under the care and control of her Mother and supporting herself without the assistance of her Mother. 'We certainly cannot presume, nor can an inference be made, that Krista is no longer under the care and control of her mother where the only evi'dence is that Krista was living on campus while in school and paying her own living expenses. The hearing took place during Krista's first year of college. No evidence was presented as to where Krista would live during the summers and we cannot presume she would not live with Mother, as she had been doing before enrolling school. Therefore, we cannot presume that she was not under Mother's care and control and supporting herself without the assistance of her Mother. The estate had the burden of proving she was not under Mother's care and control. Free, 581 N.E.2d at 997. Because the estate did not present evidence that Krista was no longer under the care and control of Mother, the trial court erred in finding that Krista was emancipated in September of 1998. Thus, the estate's obligation to pay support did not cease as of September, 1998.
Further, the trial court erred in failing to find the estate in contempt for failure to pay support after the social security payments ceased. The estate has not paid its obligated support payments since September of 1998. Although the trial court concluded that this failure to pay was not intentional, no evidence supports this conclusion.
We will reverse the trial court's refusal to find contempt only upon a showing that the trial court abused its discretion. Kirchoff v. Kirchoff (1993), Ind.App., 619 N.E.2d 592, 596. The trial court abuses its discretion if no evidence supports its determination. Id. The person seeking a finding of contempt has the burden of showing that there is a support obligation established and that the obligation has not been met. Once this is done, the burden of proof then shifts to the person or entity charged with contempt who must prove that the failure to meet the support obligation was not wiliful or otherwise excused. Id. at 597; see also Patrick v. Patrick (1988), Ind.App., 517 N.E.2d 1234, 1237; Holman v. Holman (1985), Ind.App., 472 N.E.2d 1279, 1284.
Here Mother established a support order and the fact that the support was not paid. Thus, the burden shifted to the estate to show the nonpayment was not willful. The estate presented absolutely no evidence excusing its nonpayment of support for the child after the social security benefits terminated. The only evidence in the record is that the estate did not pay support and it had funds available to pay support. Under these cireumstances, there is no evidence to support the trial court's finding that the refusal to pay was not intentional. The trial court abused its discretion in refusing to find the estate in contempt.

=== CASE 2217200 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:23.035154+00 ===

250 Ind. 27 (1968)
234 N.E.2d 628
FAGEL, ET UX., EXECUTOR OF THE ESTATE OF FRANK W. FAGEL
v.
FAGEL, ET AL.
No. 368-S-51.
Supreme Court of Indiana.
Filed March 14, 1968.
Gene Graebe, Shelbyville, Alan H. Lobley, Indianapolis and Terry and Graebe, of counsel, of Shelbyville, and Ice Miller Donadio and Ryan, of counsel, of Indianapolis, for appellants.
*28 James A. Emmert, Jack R. Wood, George W. Barger, Shelbyville, and Emmert and Robison, of counsel, of Shelbyville, for appellees.
PER CURIAM.
This case comes to us and is transferred to this Court from the Appellate Court. See opinion of Appellate Court reported in 225 N.E.2d 776.
This is an action by certain heirs of Frank W. Fagel against the executrix and widow to construe the provisions of a will and to determine the interests of parties in the residuary estate.
The court, after hearing the matter, made special findings and conclusions of law and rendered judgment for the petitioners and heirs of the decedent and against the widow and executrix. A motion for a new trial was filed, based solely upon the specifications that the decision is not sustained by sufficient evidence and is contrary to law. The motion for a new trial was overruled and on appeal the appellants seek to question the sufficiency of the evidence as to finding No. 10 and the conclusion of law No. 5. Under Rule 2-6 of this Court all errors occurring prior to the time of the filing of the motion for a new trial shall be separately specified as grounds for a new trial whenever such a motion is appropriate. Errors claimed in special findings and conclusions of law filed prior to a motion for a new trial must be specified in a motion for a new trial to be presented on appeal, pursuant to Rule 2-6. Edwards v. Wyllie (1964), 246 Ind. 261, 203 N.E.2d 200, 202; Fair Share Organization v. Nagdeman & Sons (1963), 135 Ind. App. 610, 193 N.E.2d 257 (transfer denied); Flanagan, Wiltrout, and Hamilton, Indiana Trial and Appellate Practice § 1733, Comment 1 (1963 Supp.); 3 Wiltrout, Indiana Practice § 2396, (1967).
In Dorweiler et al. v. Sinks et al. (1958), 128 Ind. App. 532, 548, 148 N.E.2d 570 (transfer denied) the Appellate Court held that a specification in a motion for a new trial that the decision of the court is contrary to law presents no question as to the conclusions of law.
*29 In Bays v. State (1959), 240 Ind. 37, 43, 159 N.E.2d 393, 395, we stated:
"The chief reason for requiring that such errors be set forth as causes in a motion for new trial is that the trial judge have a chance to review the subject matter complained of and correct the error, if any, by granting the motion for new trial prior to appeal."
It therefore appears to us that we have no question presented on appeal as to the insufficiency of the fiindings and conclusions of law specified in the argument section of appellant's brief.
For the above reasons, the judgment of the trial court is affirmed.
NOTE.  Reported in 234 N.E.2d 628.

=== CASE 2217204 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:23.085277+00 ===

142 Ind. App. 310 (1968)
234 N.E.2d 509
BROWN
v.
KUJAWA B/N/F SCHAFFER ET AL.
No. 20,748.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
Filed March 7, 1968.
Rehearing denied March 27, 1968.
Transfer denied May 14, 1968.
*311 James H. Pankow, and Jones, Obenchain, Johnson, Ford and Pankow, of South Bend, for appellant.
Richard C. Kaczmarek, of South Bend, for appellees.
COOK, P.J.
This is an action for damages for personal injuries instituted on behalf of the minor appellee, Steven Kujawa, by his mother and next friend, Shirley Schaffer, against appellee Ronald Brown and appellant Betty Brown.
The injuries complained of were sustained by Steven Kujawa while playing on a child's playground type slide on the Brown premises. At the time of the injury Steven Kujawa was one day short of five years old.
Betty Brown, the appellant, and Shirley Schaffer are sisters.
On the date the injury occurred, appellant called Steven's mother and asked her if she would drive appellant to a bank in downtown South Bend. Steven's mother agreed that she would do so.
Steven's mother arrived at appellant's premises with Steven and his two brothers to pick up appellant. Mrs. Schaffer had previously determined that she would take Steven and his brothers downtown for lunch.
When appellant and Steven's mother were ready to leave for the bank, Steven's mother told Steven and his two brothers to get into the car. However, appellant's ten year old daughter asked that the boys be allowed to stay for lunch. Mrs. Schaffer asked the boys whether they would rather go downtown or stay with appellant's daughter. With Mrs. Schaffer's approval, they chose to stay with appellant's daughter. While the mothers were away, Steven carried a piece of a broken lawn sprinkler down the slide and in some manner the sprinkler inflicted a laceration to his left eye ball.
Trial was by jury, which returned a verdict in favor of appellee Steven Kujawa and against the appellee Ronald Brown and his wife, the appellant Betty Brown.
*312 Thereafter, Ronald Brown and Betty Brown filed their separate motions for new trial. The trial court granted the motion of Ronald Brown, who is designated here as an appellee; appellee Kujawa has not assigned as cross errors the action of the trial court in granting a new trial to Ronald Brown. The trial court denied the motion of appellant Betty Brown.
The sole assignment of error relied upon in this appeal is the overruling of appellant's motion for new trial.
The primary question presented to this court is whether the appellee, Steven Kujawa, was an invitee or licensee upon the Brown premises at the time of the accident, and consequently, what duty was owed him by the appellant.
The trial court instructed the jury that Steven was an invitee as a matter of law and that appellant owed him a "duty of reasonable, ordinary care to have and keep the premises in a safe and suitable condition."
The trial court refused instructions tendered by the appellant which would have instructed the jury that Steven was a licensee, and that the appellant was thus, "under no duty of care ... except to abstain from inflicting intentional, wanton or wilful injury...."
These actions by the trial court are included as specifications of error in appellant's motion for new trial. We are of the opinion that the trial court erred in instructing the jury that Steven Kujawa was an invitee. The court should have instructed the jury that he was a licensee.
A licensee is one "... who, for his own convenience, curiosity or entertainment, goes upon the premises of another by his (the owner or occupant's) permission or sufferance." Cleveland, etc., R. Co. v. Means (1915), 59 Ind. App. 383, 393, 104 N.E. 785. See also: Standard Oil Co. of Indiana, Inc. v. Scoville (1961), 132 Ind. App. 521, 525, 175 N.E.2d 711. The definition of licensee also includes what the courts now refer to as a "social guest." Olson v. *313 Kushner (1965), 138 Ind. App. 73, 7 Ind. Dec. 108, 211 N.E.2d 620, 621-22. In Olson this court quoted, with approval, and adopted as applicable law the rule stated by Prosser, Torts, § 60, p. 387 (1964 Ed.) as follows:
"Thus nearly all of the decisions are agreed that a social guest, however cordially be may have been invited and urged to come, is not in law an invitee  a distinction which has puzzled generations of law students, and even some lawyers. The guest is legally nothing more than a licensee, to whom the possessor owes no duty of inspection and affirmative care to make the premises safe for his visit."
We do not believe that, under the undisputed facts of this case, Steven Kujawa could be considered an invitee upon the Brown premises at the time of the accident. It is impossible to see how appellant derived any benefit from his mother's decision to allow Steven to remain on the Brown premises.
Appellee, Kujawa, urges that because his mother was going to accompany appellant on an errand he was an invitee on appellant's premises. However, the accident occurred after appellant and Mrs. Schaffer had left the Brown property. Thus, at the time the accident occurred, Mrs. Schaffer did not have any status whatsoever on the Brown property.
Looking at Steven in his own right, his mother had intended to take him downtown with her and had even told him to get into the car. When Steven chose to stay "to eat lunch and play in the backyard," and his mother affirmed this choice, he became a social guest. It is not necessary for this court to determine what status Steven enjoyed before that moment.
Judgment reversed, with instructions to grant appellant's motion for new trial.
Bierly, Pfaff and Smith, JJ., concur.
NOTE.  Reported in 234 N.E.2d 509.

=== CASE 2217205 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:23.102425+00 ===

256 Cal.App.2d 312 (1967)
Estate of DOMENICO CASELLA, Deceased. MARY CASELLA, Plaintiff and Appellant,
v.
MICHAEL CASELLA et al., Objectors and Appellants.
Civ. No. 23566.
California Court of Appeals. First Dist., Div. Three.
Nov. 24, 1967.
Watson, Tedesco & Sanguinetti and William G. Filice for Objectors and Appellants.
Weir, Hopkins, Jordan & Mitchell, Weir, Hopkins, Donovan, Jordan & Mitchell and Robert C. Donovan for Plaintiff and Appellant.
BRAY, J.  [fn. *]
This is an appeal by Paul Casella and Michael Casella, brothers of Domenico Casella, deceased, from certain portions of the judgment herein, and appeal by Mary Casella, widow of said deceased, from certain other portions of the judgment. As the parties are both petitioners and appellants, Paul and Michael will be referred to as the "Brothers" and the widow will be referred to as Mary.
Questions Presented
1. Did the probate court have jurisdiction to determine the ownership of joint tenancy properties?
2. Were the joint tenancies between Domenico and Mary destroyed?
3. Was the effect of the will's in terrorem clause before the court?
Record
Domenico Casella died April 11, 1964. The Brothers obtained admission of his will to probate and letters testamentary were issued to them. Mary filed in the estate "Petition for Decree Determining Interest in Estate." The Brothers filed "Petition for Determination of Entitlement to Distribution of Estate." Also Mary and the Brothers filed "Statements of Interest."
After a hearing the court found that all of the property of Domenico was originally his separate property; that certain of the properties became joint tenancy properties and that a certain quitclaim deed obtained by Domenico from Mary was obtained in violation of the confidential relationship between them. The court proceeded to make disposition of the properties as hereinafter set forth. The appeals followed. *316
The Testimony
In 1929 Domenico and the Brothers became partners in a grocery business which they operated until 1945 when it was sold. During the 15-year period of the business, the partners worked 12 to 15 hours per day with no vacations. The partners withdrew an equal share of the income of the business and equally divided the proceeds of the sale of the business.
On December 11, 1932, approximately three years after the start of the grocery business, Domenico and Mary were married and lived together until his death, over 31 years later. There were no children of the marriage. Apparently Domenico had the old country idea that he should manage all the business affairs of the spouses, pay the bills and keep his wife in complete ignorance thereof and of the property accumulated. He took care of everything. She signed any paper he presented to her for signature without knowing its contents.
After sale of the grocery business Domenico retired, continuing, however, to manage the properties he had acquired before and after marriage. In 1950 he reopened the grocery store for a brief period. The venture was not successful and the business went broke. The properties listed in the inventory in the estate will be hereinafter discussed. The will dated October 7, 1963, approximately six months before Domenico's death, left all of his property to his brothers, with the exception of personal effects and a $10,000 cash trust, payable $50 per month to Mary. Domenico apparently had discovered a note written to Mary by her brother advising her to leave $10,000 to Domenico out of her separate estate. Mary told Domenico she would leave him $10,000, and he then said that he would leave her a like sum.
The inventory and appraisement filed in the estate showed the following items of property, valued at the following amounts:
Tabular Material Omitted
*317 4.
Item 1 is the only property which is not in issue on this appeal. (The court held that it was Mary's separate property.) We will discuss separately the disputed items of property.
Item 2. The $27,500 note Alvarez to Domenico.
The source of this note was a sale of Lot 4, Wright's Subdivision, Sunol Addition, San Jose on January 1, 1963 to Mr. and Mrs. Joe Alvarez. The lot was owned by Domenico at the time of his marriage. The note and deed of trust resulting from the sale of the lot was found by the court to be Domenico's separate property. Mary contends that this property was transmuted from Domenico's separate property to community property by reason of the fact that Domenico and Mary in 1947 filed separate income tax returns in which these items were reported as community property. This contention is hereinafter discussed, and we hold that this one act of the parties did not transmute the status of the property into community property.
Item 3. $10,500 note Phillips to Domenico.
In 1926, prior to the marriage, Domenico acquired Lot 35, Columbia Avenue. It was the family residence from 1932 until 1956. In 1958 by deed executed by both spouses, the property was conveyed to Phillips, who executed a promissory note to Domenico and Mary as joint tenants. On April 4, 1963, Mary assigned to Domenico said note as his separate property. The trial court declared this assignment void and set it aside as being obtained by violating the husband and wife confidential relationship while Mary was under the undue influence of Domenico.  [fn. 1] The court held that the note remained in joint tenancy and that Mary, as surviving tenant, is entitled to it. As hereinafter set forth, the court's holding was proper. *318
Item 4. Promissory Note and Deed of Trust, Alvarez to Domenico for $80,000.
The court found that these comprised the sale prices of three lots sold by Domenico to Joe R. and Mary Alvarez which were as follows:
The note and deed of trust given by the Alvarezs for the purchase price were executed to Domenico, "a married man, as his separate property."
Lot 2. The court found that Lot 2 was Domenico's separate property and hence that portion of the note and deed of trust resulting from its sale was likewise his separate property. This lot had been purchased in 1943 by Domenico from the proceeds of a sale of Paula Street property which Domenico had acquired in 1925. Title was vested in Domenico by the deed. In 1964 Domenico sold Lot 2, together with Lots 3 and 7, to the Alvarezs. The grantor clauses in all three deeds read "Domenico Casella, who acquired title as a married man, as his separate property hereby grants. ..." The Alvarezs executed for the three lots a promissory note and deed of trust for $80,000 to "Domenico Casella, a married man, as his separate property." In 1946 and 1947 Lot 2 was rental property. Domenico kept the property in repair and had put on a new roof. The trial court found that 30,050/80,000 of the amount of the note was the price received by Domenico for the sale of Lot 2; that the lot was Domenico's separate property and, therefore, that portion of the note and deed of trust representing its sale price was his separate property. Mary claims that by the 1947 income tax return Lot 2 had been transmuted into community property. As hereinafter set forth, we hold that the return did not have such effect.
Lots 3 and 7. Domenico and Mary acquired, as joint tenants, Lot 3 on November 6, 1957, and Lot 7 on July 26, 1957. These lots, as before stated, were sold to Alvarez and the purchase moneys were included in the $80,000 note. The court found that 49,950/80,000 of the note was attributable to the sale of these two lots. On April 3, 1963, Domenico obtained from Mary a quitclaim deed quitclaiming any interest in these two lots and in the family home hereinafter mentioned. The court found that this deed was obtained in violation of the husband and wife's confidential relationship and by reason of Domenico's undue influence and set the deed aside. The effect *319 of setting aside that deed will hereinafter be discussed. The court found that at the time of the sale to Alvarez Lots 3 and 7 were held in joint tenancy and that the moneys from the sale, $49,950, also were held in joint tenancy, and that Mary is entitled to them as surviving joint tenant.
Item 5. Savings Account--$1,818.90.
[1] The record title to this account at Domenico's death was in joint tenancy. The court found this account to be the deceased's separate property. There was no evidence as to the source of the moneys that made up this account. The Brothers contend that Domenico received payments on various notes which the court found to be his separate property and that it must be assumed that these payments went into the account. Assuming this to be true, there is still no evidence to overcome the presumption that the account was what it purported to be, held in joint tenancy. See Cordasco v. Scalero (1962) 203 Cal.App.2d 95, 105 [21 Cal.Rptr. 339], where the court states: "[T]he general rule that where community personal property or any other personal property, no matter what its original form might have been, has been changed by the parties to joint ownership during the joint lives of the owners, the funds so changed to joint tenancy, or any property acquired from the funds held in joint tenancy, will remain joint tenancy in character, unless there has been a change in the character of the property by some agreement between the parties." Benam v. Benam (1960) 178 Cal.App.2d 837, 844 [3 Cal.Rptr. 410], quoting from Gudelj v. Gudelj (1953) 41 Cal.2d 202, 212 [259 P.2d 656], states: " '[T]he presumption arising from the form of the deed may not be rebutted solely by evidence as to the source of the funds used to purchase the property. ...' " No agreement for change of the patent status of this account appears in the evidence.
Item 6. Family Residence, Willow Oaks Street, San Jose.
Domenico and Mary acquired this property as joint tenants on January 30, 1956. This property was included in the quitclaim deed which the court held null and void. The court quieted title in Mary as surviving joint tenant. As hereinafter appears in the discussion concerning Lots 3 and 7, the setting aside of the quitclaim deed restored the title to the properties as it was prior to the execution of that deed--namely to joint tenancy. Therefore, the title to the family residence was in joint tenancy at Domenico's death, and the court properly quieted the title in Mary as surviving tenant. *320
1. Jurisdiction.
[2] The pleadings before the probate court consisted of the petitions to determine heirship; that of the Brothers and that of Mary. The Brothers in their petition alleged that all of the property of the estate was the separate property of Domenico. Mary alleged that all of the property was community property and that the quitclaim deed hereinbefore mentioned was fraudulently obtained. Later she contended that she was entitled as surviving tenant to the property which was in joint tenancy.
The Brothers contend that the court had no jurisdiction to do other than determine whether the properties of the estate were either community or separate property and had no right to vest the joint tenancy property in Mary as surviving tenant.
In Estate of Baglione (1966) 65 Cal.2d 192 [53 Cal.Rptr. 139, 417 P.2d 683], the widow of the decedent filed a petition to determine heirship in the probate court. She contended that because of an alleged oral contract between her and the decedent in which it was agreed that the survivor would succeed to all property acquired by the spouses during the marriage, she was entitled to the entire property of the estate which the court found was community property. The probate court refused, as being beyond its jurisdiction, to consider the alleged contract. In holding that the probate court did have jurisdiction to consider the alleged agreement, the Supreme Court stated: "As a general rule the jurisdiction of superior courts sitting in probate to administer decedents' estates does not encompass power to pass upon assertions of title to property by parties who are not in privity with the estate but are claiming adversely to it. [Citations.] There are, however, several well-recognized exceptions to this rule 'where a controversy has been held to have a sufficient connection with a pending probate proceeding to be properly litigated therein. ...' (Central Bank v. Superior Court, 45 Cal.2d 10, 15 [285 P.2d 906].) The connection may arise out of the relationship between the parties. Thus the superior court sitting in probate can adjudicate a claim to assets from the estate asserted by an executor or administrator in his individual capacity [citations], and it can determine whether an assignment or other transfer of the interest of an heir, legatee, or devisee to a third party is valid and order distribution accordingly. [Citations.] The connection may also arise out of the nature of the claim to the property. The superior court sitting in probate can *321 determine the claim of a surviving wife to her share of the community property [citations] or adjudicate a dispute between claimants to property 'conceded ... to be or to have been acquired ... in the course of probate proceedings.' [Citations.] In Woods v. Security-First Nat. Bank, 46 Cal.2d 697 [299 P.2d 657], we recognized a third type of exception based on the nature of the claim and the claimant's relationship to the estate. When a party invokes the jurisdiction of a court sitting in probate by asserting a substantive right in a particular piece of property or in certain assets as an heir, legatee, or devisee, he may also obtain a judgment in that court determining any additional claims that he asserts against those in privity with the estate in the same property. [Citations.] The rationale for this exception is the conservation of time, energy, and money of all concerned. To deny a superior court sitting in probate the power to determine the whole controversy between the parties before it is pointless. In the exercise of its legal and equitable powers [citations], a superior court sitting in probate that has jurisdiction over one aspect of a claim to certain property can determine all aspects of the claim. A claimant is not required to sever and litigate a multifaceted claim in separate proceedings once all the necessary parties are before the court. Thus in the instant case, once the court determined that Marie had a community interest in the Lake Tahoe property subject to probate, it should have resolved the entire controversy and determined her rights to that property under the alleged oral agreement with the deceased. Any statements in Sieroty v. Silver, 58 Cal.2d 799 [26 Cal.Rptr. 635, 376 P.2d 563], and Smith v. Smith, 220 Cal.App.2d 30 [33 Cal.Rptr. 559] to the contrary are disapproved." (At pp. 196-197.)
In Merola v. Superior Court (1954) 125 Cal.App.2d 1 [269 P.2d 664], it was held that the probate court did not have jurisdiction to consider the claim of the widow to joint tenancy property as she was claiming adversely to the estate and not in privity to it. However, this was prior to Estate of Baglione, supra, which definitely holds that for the probate court to have jurisdiction the claimant need not necessarily be in privity with the estate. Baglione expressly overruled Sieroty v. Silver (1962) 58 Cal.2d 799 [26 Cal.Rptr. 635, 376 P.2d 563], where, in an action between the executors of an estate and decedent's widow to obtain proceeds of life insurance policies, the court held that the probate court did not have jurisdiction of the widow's claim because her claim was not *322 in privity with the estate, and Smith v. Smith (1963) 220 Cal.App.2d 30 [33 Cal.Rptr. 559], where, in an action for declaratory relief, the court held that in heirship proceedings in the probate court, the court could not consider the appellant's claims under an oral agreement with the decedent as he was not in privity with the estate.
It is clear that Baglione has changed the rule requiring privity with the estate to exist in order to give the court jurisdiction to try the claims of a surviving spouse to property of a decedent. In an excellent discussion An Extension of Probate Jurisdiction (1967) 7 Santa Clara Lawyer, page 275, the writer points out that in addition to the "privity" exceptions to the general rule, "the probate court, by reason of Baglione, has power to determine a stranger's claim to property if such determination is necessary and proper to a complete judgment, but only if the stranger's claim and relationship bear a particular relation to the estate." We hold that such a situation exists in the case at bench and that the probate court had jurisdiction to consider Mary's claims to the joint tenancy property.
2. The Joint Tenancies Were Not Destroyed.
As we have hereinbefore set forth, joint tenancies were created in the following properties: Item 3--the Phillips promissory note and deed of trust, Item 4--Lots 3 and 7, portions of the $80,000 note and deed of trust, Item 6--the Willow Oaks family home.
[3a] The Brothers contend that these joint tenancies were transmuted into separate property by (a) the quitclaim deed and assignment by Mary to Domenico, even though they were declared null and void by the court, and (b) the deeds executed by Domenico to the Alvarezs.
(a) The Brothers contend that the execution by Mary of the quitclaim deed, even though void, destroyed the unities necessary to sustain a joint tenancy and caused the property to be held thereafter in tenancy in common. [4] It is true, as contended by the Brothers, that the absence of the unities will change the nature of a joint tenancy estate (Hammond v. McArthur (1947) 30 Cal.2d 512, 514 [183 P.2d 1]), also, that a joint tenancy is terminated when one joint tenant conveys his entire interest to the other joint tenant. (Estate of Harris (1937) 9 Cal.2d 649 [72 P.2d 873].) Moreover, the voluntary conveyance by one joint tenant to a third person will break the joint tenancy even though the other joint tenant had no *323 knowledge of the transaction. (Palmer v. Palmer (1942) 49 Cal.App.2d 331 [121 P.2d 822].) [3b] However, we have been cited to no authority, nor do we find one, holding that where one of the joint tenants has been induced fraudulently to convey his interest in the joint tenancy to his co-joint tenant, such act destroys the joint tenancy unities. The Brothers, because the deed was a voidable one (see Hicks v. Hicks (1962) 211 Cal.App.2d 144, 156 [27 Cal.Rptr. 307]), seem to be confused with the results of the execution of the deed as between the maker of the deed and the innocent purchaser and its execution as to the other tenant who committed the fraud. When the court set the deed aside, the joint tenancy relationship between the parties was restored, or rather, it was as though no deed had ever been executed. (See Gillette v. Nicolls (1953) 121 Cal.App.2d 185, 190 [262 P.2d 856].) As said in Reina v. Erassarret (1949) 90 Cal.App.2d 418, 422 [203 P.2d 72, 7 A.L.R.2d 1309], title rests in the joint tenants at the time of the original grant. The status of the title remained as it was before the execution of the deed--joint tenancy.
[5a] (b) The Brothers contend that if the voidable quitclaim deed did not sever the joint tenancy, the conveyance from Domenico to Alvarez did. It is conceded that as the Alvarezs were purchasers for value without notice of the invalidity of the quitclaim deed, title was conveyed to them, and hence, it is the portion of the $80,000 given in payment of Lots 3 and 7 which is the subject of our determination. [6] Where a tenant sells only his joint tenancy interest, the joint tenancy is terminated. (Delanoy v. Delanoy (1932) 216 Cal. 23 [13 P.2d 513]; Estate of Harris (1937) 9 Cal.2d 649 [72 P.2d 873].) [5b] However, in this case it was not Domenico's intention to dispose only of his interest in the property. He did not intend by the sale to sever the tenancies. He intended by obtaining the fraudulent deed to get for himself as his separate property the entire purchase prices. As the law, in effect, creates as between Mary and the bona fide purchasers a consent by her to the sale, the purchase prices must be regarded as if received in a sale in which the joint tenants conveyed together. To hold that by this sale the joint tenancy relationship as to the purchase money was destroyed would be to give Domenico a premium on his fraud.
[7] Where a joint tenant gives a joint tenancy property in exchange for personal property, that property retains its joint tenancy characteristics. (Estate of Harris (1915) 169 *324 Cal. 725, 726 [147 P. 967]; Fish v. Security-First Nat. Bank (1948) 31 Cal.2d 378 [189 P.2d 10]; Estate of Zaring (1949) 93 Cal.App.2d 577 [209 P.2d 642].) (See generally 13 Cal.Jur.2d, Cotenancy,  6.) Estate of Zaring, supra, is closest to the instant case. In Zaring it was held that proceeds received when a parcel of joint tenancy real estate was condemned retained its character as joint tenancy property. In Zaring the applicable rule was stated to be: "And the proceeds of joint tenancy property, in the absence of contrary agreement, retain the character of the property from which they were acquired." (At p. 580.) [8] There was no evidence in this case of an agreement between the parties that the proceeds of the sale of Lots 3 and 7 were to be held in any relationship other than that of the real title to the properties--joint tenancies.
The court properly held that Lots 3 and 7 were held in joint tenancy at the time of Domenico's death, and that Mary, as surviving tenant, is entitled to an interest in the Alvarez' $80,000 note and deed of trust equal to the sale price thereof, namely, $49,950.
Lot 2.
[9] As hereinbefore stated, the title to Lot 2 vested in Domenico on August 2, 1943, approximately 11 years after the marriage. Civil Code section 164 reads in part: "All other real property situated in this state and all other personal property wherever situated acquired during the marriage by a married person while domiciled in this state is community property, ..." The disputable presumption raised by this section is fundamental to the community property system and strong evidence is required to overcome it. Estate of Jolly (1925) 196 Cal. 547, 553 [238 P. 353], has greater force in cases where the marriage has been a long-continued relation. (Estate of Duncan (1937) 9 Cal.2d 207, 217 [70 P.2d 174].)
The court found, in effect, that the presumption had been overcome by the evidence and held that the property was Domenico's separate property.
[10] In Mason v. Mason (1960) 186 Cal.App.2d 209, at pp. 211-212 [8 Cal.Rptr. 784], it is said: "The presumption thus created is disputable, and as such is the weakest and least satisfactory form of evidence. (Estate of McGee, 168 Cal.App.2d 670, 677 [336 P.2d 622].) Such presumptions 'are allowed to stand, not against the facts they represent, but in lieu of proof of them.' (Simonton v. Los Angeles Trust & Sav. Bank, 205 Cal. 252, 258 [270 P. 672].) Though plaintiff *325 argues that 'clear and satisfactory' proof is necessary to defeat the presumption, the quantum of proof is generally a matter for the trial court and that court's determination of the factual issues is conclusive on appeal unless the evidence upon which the determination is based is so weak and improbable that the finding is without substantial support. (Estate of McGee, 168 Cal.App.2d 670, 677 [336 P.2d 622]; Estate of Ades, 81 Cal.App.2d 334 [184 P.2d 1].)"
The evidence in support of the court's determination in the case at bench follows: Michael Casella testified that Lot 2 was purchased by decedent with the proceeds from the sale of the Paula Street property (which was undisputedly the separate property of decedent). Although Michael later weakened and said that he could not be sure where the money for the sale of Lot 2 came from, the trial court could have believed his earlier testimony. Lot 2 was purchased shortly after the Paula Street property was sold. Michael's testimony was further fortified by Mary while she was being cross- examined. While discussing the lots on San Carlos (Lot 2 was one of them) she referred to them as "His lots on San Carlos Street." She further admitted that in discussions with decedent she never said "our lots," but used to say "... They are your lots." Moreover, Mary did not testify that there ever was any agreement between the parties that Lot 2 would be considered community property. This evidence supported the court's conclusion.
[11a] Mary contends further that the title to Lot 2 (and also to Lot 4, hereinbefore mentioned) was transmutted into community property by the action of the parties in filing separate federal income tax returns for the calendar year 1947 in which one-half of the income therefrom and one-half of the deductions, including expenses, taxes and depreciation attributable to the two lots, were reported one-half on Domenico's return and one-half to Mary's.
Prior to 1948, the income from separate property of a husband had to be reported only on the husband's federal income tax return, whereas, if the separate property was converted to community property, the husband and wife would split the income and have a lower tax bracket and a lower tax. Many individuals converted separate property into community property to obtain these tax savings. Indeed, several eastern states passed community property laws so that their citizens would have the tax benefit resulting at that time for community property. In 1948, the federal income tax law *326 was amended to allow all married couples to split their income whether it came from separate or community property.
In Estate of Neilson (1962) 57 Cal.2d 733 [22 Cal.Rptr. 1, 371 P.2d 745], the court discussed the rebuttable presumption arising from spouses filing separate income returns, saying: "Ines testified that Charles filed joint income tax returns each year of their marriage except 1946 when individual returns were filed. The 1946 returns also split the total income of both spouses. The fact that a husband and wife filed tax returns splitting their income before 1948 is substantial evidence that will support a finding of transmutation. [Citations.] The filing of such returns, however, does not establish transmutation as a matter of law. [Citations.]"
"It is presumed that a person obeys the law. [Citations.] Charles and Ines could split their income for tax purposes prior to 1948 only if it was community income or each owned half the property. Their returns were signed under the penalty of perjury and created a disputable presumption that Charles had filed lawful income returns and that his separate property had therefore been transmuted into community property. [Citation.] This presumption can be overcome by evidence that the income splitting represented nothing more than an 'overzealous desire to minimize income taxes.' [Citations.] Such evidence might consist of testimony that the returns were prepared by or upon the advice of a tax expert and the spouses did not understand the significance of reporting income in this manner [citations], or of testimony or documents indicating that the spouses regarded the property as separate property despite the filing of income-splitting returns." (Pp. 744, 745.) [12] It is for the trial court to determine whether a presumption or inference has been overcome by preponderating evidence. (Price v. Price (1963) 217 Cal.App.2d 1, 10 [31 Cal.Rptr. 350]; Thomasset v. Thomasset, 122 Cal.App.2d 116, 123 [264 P.2d 626].)
[11b] In the instant case the trial court could have believed that decedent and respondent had their income tax returns prepared by an accountant and did not understand the significance of that manner of reporting income. (Estate of Neilson, supra.) Domenico solely handled the affairs of the spouses without discussing them with Mary. There is no indication that in having separate tax returns made Domenico thereby intended to convert the properties into community properties. It is significant that Mary at no time testified that the parties agreed or considered that by the income tax *327 returns for 1947 they were transmuting Domenico's separate property into community property. The court apparently concluded that there was no substantial evidence to find a transmutation and that the separate returns filed for the 1947 taxable year represented nothing more than an overzealous desire to minimize income taxes. (Estate of Neilson, supra.) We uphold the court's finding that Lot 2 was Domenico's separate property.
3. The in terrorem clause.
The will contains an in terrorem clause. The Brothers claim that the judgment purports to distribute to Mary property under the provisions of the will without regard to the effect of that clause. The record fails to disclose that this clause was called to the attention of the court.
[13] Whether a person has forfeited his rights under a contest clause, or has elected to take under the will instead of asserting community property rights, are matters which must be taken up at the time of final distribution. (See 21 Cal.Jur.2d,  824; Cook v. Cook (1941) 17 Cal.2d 639 [111 P.2d 322].) The court below in its judgment followed section 1081 of the Probate Code, which states in pertinent part that in an heirship proceeding "... the court ... shall determine who are ... entitled to distribution of the estate and shall specify their interests." Had the question of the effect of the in terrorem clause been raised in this proceeding, its raising would have been premature. It may be considered at the time of distribution.
The judgment is affirmed except as to that portion determining that the $1,818.90 savings account at Pioneer Investors Savings and Loan Association is separate property of the estate. That portion of the judgment is remanded to the probate court with directions to decree that Mary, as surviving tenant, is the sole and absolute owner of the whole of the account. The appeal from the "memorandum and order" filed on May 14, 1965 is dismissed.
Each party will bear his own costs.
Draper, P. J., and Salsman, J., concurred.
NOTES
[fn. *]  *. Retired Presiding Justice of the Court of Appeal sitting under assignment by the Chairman of the Judicial Council.
[fn. 1]  1. As this determination of the court is not attacked in any way, we will not discuss the evidence supporting the court's action concerning it, or the court's setting aside of the quitclaim deed Mary to Domenico, hereinafter mentioned for the same reason.

=== CASE 2217210 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:23.161903+00 ===

248 Ind. 422 (1967)
234 N.E.2d 499
STATE OF INDIANA
v.
HADDEN.
No. 0-837.
Supreme Court of Indiana.
Filed September 20, 1967.
*423 Leroy Hadden, pro se.
PER CURIAM.
On July, 1967, the petitioner filed with the Clerk of this Court a petition for a writ of mandamus directed to the "District Court" for Lake County, Crown Point, Indiana, and a pauper's oath. It appears that on or about February 3, 1966, the "Chief Deputy" of Lake County, Crown Point, Indiana, placed a warrant detainer against petitioner for "uttering a forged instrument." At the time the warrant detainer was issued petitioner was incarcerated in the Federal penetentiary at Sandstone, Minnesota. Petitioner further alleges that he filed a motion for speedy trial on or about April 25, 1966, in the "District Court" for Lake County, Crown Point, Indiana.
The basis of petitioner's contention is that the delay in his being brought to trial violates the requirement that he be brought to trial speedily unless the delay be caused by his own acts. Petitioner alleges that extradition would have been possible, and therefore there is no reason for delay on the part of the State.
However, the general rule is that delay caused by the prisoner being imprisoned in another jurisdiction is not a violation of a constitutional right to a speedy trial. 21 Am. Jur, 2d, Criminal Law, 250, and this has been held to be true even where the State authorities have failed to request the delivery of the accused to the state court. 22A C.J.S., Criminal Law, § 472 (2)b, Note 79, and certiorari has been denied by the United States Supreme Court on a case in which this point was in question. State of Minnesota v. Jerry Alvin Hall, 266 Minn. 74, 123 N.W.2d 116 (1963), cert, den. (1964), 375 U.S. 978. 11 L.Ed. 423 (1964).
The petition is denied.

=== CASE 9738668 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:00:15.440352+00 ===

Per Curiam.
On September 4, 1980, the Ingham Circuit Court issued an order which, inter alia, stated:
"[T]his court declares the Tisch’ proposal, and any and all such petitions filed with defendant Secretary of State are legally insufficient and that the said proposal is not entitled to placement on the ballot scheduled for the November, 1980, General Election.”
The order further provided that the defendant Secretary of State, the defendant Director of Elections, and the defendant Board of State Canvassers were to take "no steps whatsoever to effectuate placement of such proposal on said ballot”. Finally, the order provided that the defendant Board of State Canvassers was "enjoined and restrained from certifying for placement on the ballot the so-called 'Tisch’ amendment”.
The basis for the circuit court’s ruling was its finding that the petitions which were circulated to gather signatures in support of the proposed constitutional amendment did not comply with the requirement of MCL 168.482; MSA 6.14821 in that *587all existing provisions of the Constitution which the proposal would alter or abrogate were not set forth therein. Specifically, the circuit court found that the petitions did not include reference to Const 1963, art 2, § 9; 2 art 4, § l;3 art 4, § 33;4 art 4, *589§ 34;5 and art 4, § 40.6 The circuit court found that each of the aforementioned constitutional provisions would be "altered or abrogated” if the proposed constitutional amendment were adopted.
Defendants Secretary of State, Director of the Elections Division of the Department of State and the Board of State Canvassers, as well as intervening defendant Tisch Coalition for Property Tax Cut in Michigan, Inc., filed claims of appeal, together with requests for ancillary relief, in the Court of Appeals. That same day, September 8, 1980, the defendants and intervening defendant sought leave to appeal to this Court prior to the decision of the Court of Appeals. By order dated September 10, 1980, we granted leave to appeal.
I
As early as 1918, it had been recognized by this Court that:
"Of the right of qualified voters of the State to propose amendments to the Constitution by petition it may be said, generally, that it can be interfered with neither by the legislature, the courts, nor the officers charged with any duty in the premises. But the right is *590to be exercised in a certain way and according to certain conditions, the limitations upon its exercise, like the reservation of the right itself, being found in the Constitution.”7
Const 1963, art 12, § 2 provides for the exercise of the right of popular amendment and describes the conditions imposed on that right.8 This section *591is self-executing — it does not depend upon statutory implementation.9 And, as this Court has recently reaffirmed:
" 'It is settled law that the legislature may not act to impose additional obligations on a self-executing constitutional provision. Soutar v St Clair County Election Commission, [334 Mich 258; 54 NW2d 425 (1952)]; Hamilton v Secretary of State, [227 Mich 111, 125; 198 NW 843 (1924)]:
"' " 'The only limitation, unless otherwise expressly indicated, on legislation supplementary to self-executing constitutional provisions is that the right guaranteed shall not be curtailed or any undue burdens placed thereon.’ ” ’ ”10
The rationale for making the right of popular amendment by initiative self-executing, and for judicial care in insuring that the Legislature does not unduly burden the exercise of the right, was *592expressed in the lead opinion in Hamilton v Secretary of State:11
"The initiative found its birth in the fact that political parties repeatedly made promises to the electorate both in and out of their platforms to favor and pass certain legislation for which there was a popular demand. As soon as election was over their promises were forgotten, and no effort was made to redeem them. These promises were made so often and then forgotten that the electorate at last through sheer desperation took matters into its own hands and constructed a constitutional procedure by which it could effect changes in the Constitution and bring about desired legislation without the aid of the legislature. It was in this mood that the electorate gave birth to the constitutional provision under consideration. In view of this I am persuaded that it was not the intention of the electorate that the legislature should meddle in any way with the constitutional procedure to amend the State Constitution. It was fittingly said in the following cases that:
" 'A constitutional provision designed to remove an existing mischief should never be construed as dependent for its efficacy and operation on legislative will.’ Morley v Thayer, 3 F 737 [CC D Mass, 1880]; People v Rumsey, 64 Ill 44 [1872]; Brien v Williamson, [8 Miss (7 How) 14 (1843)].”
The Constitution does not require that the petition set out existing provisions that will be altered or abrogated. The Constitution places the burden of publishing this information on the state, as a means of informing the voters.12 The Legislature, apparently feeling it proper to extend the educational function of this requirement to persons signing petitions, has placed the burden on petitioners, allegedly pursuant to the constitu*593tional provision that "[a]ny such petition shall be in the form, and shall be signed and circulated in such manner, as prescribed by law”.13
Assuming, arguendo, that a new requirement regarding substantive content is a regulation of form, and assuming that the Legislature can impose minimal burdens to keep the process fair, open and informed,14 the burden imposed cannot unduly restrict the exercise of the right.
In construing the burden placed on petitioners by § 482, we are mindful that
"under a system of government based on grants of power from the people, constitutional provisions by which the people reserve to themselves a direct legislative voice ought to be liberally construed.”15
Further, where, as here, there is doubt as to the meaning of legislation regulating the reserved right of initiative, that doubt is to be resolved in favor of the people’s exercise of the right.16
II
Historically, our interpretation of the words "alter or abrogate” has occurred in the context of the constitutional publishing requirement.
In School Dist of Pontiac v Pontiac, 262 Mich 338; 247 NW 474, 787 (1933), this Court was faced with a challenge to an amendment to the Constitution of 1908. The amendment was proposed by the requisite number of qualified electors, was submit*594ted at the November, 1932, election, and received the necessary votes for its adoption. Const 1908, art 17, § 3 provided:
"All proposed amendments to the constitution submitted to the electors shall be published in full, with any existing provisions of the constitution which would be altered or abrogated thereby, and a copy thereof shall be posted at each registration and election place. Proposed amendments shall also be printed together with any other special questions to be submitted at such election in full on a single ballot separate from the ballot containing the names of candidates or nominees for public office.”
It was argued before this Court that the amendment which was approved by the electors altered or abrogated many other provisions of the Constitution and that the failure to publish those existing provisions nullified the attempted amendment.
In sustaining the validity of the amendment, this Court held:
"In determining what constitutes compliance with the constitutional requirement as to publication, a matter of prime importance is the purpose that prompted the people of the State of Michigan to include such a provision in the Constitution. All will agree that this was a means adopted by which it was believed the elector would be definitely advised as to the purpose of the proposed amendment and what provision of the constitutional law it modified or supplanted. Being so advised, the elector could intelligently determine whether his vote would be for adoption or rejection. But the ordinary elector, not being a constitutional lawyer, would be confused rather than helped by a publication of all the other constitutional provisions which were or might be directly or only remotely, and possibly only contingently, affected by the proposed amendment. We think the requirement in substance is this: That in case a proposed constitutional provision amends or replaces *595('alters or abrogates’) a specific provision of the Constitution, that such provision should be published along with the proposed amendment; that other provisions which are still operative, though possibly they may need thereafter to be construed in conjunction with the amending provision, need not necessarily be published.” 262 Mich 338, 344.
The principles announced in School Dist of Pontiac v Pontiac were applied in the context of allegedly defective petitions in City of Jackson v Comm’r of Revenue, 316 Mich 694; 26 NW2d 569 (1947). In concluding that the constitutional amendment in that case should not be invalidated, this Court quoted with approval the language found in School Dist of Pontiac v Pontiac.
The case of Carman v Secretary of State, 384 Mich 443; 185 NW2d 1 (1971), is of little assistance to us since in that case the problem was that the petitions proposing the constitutional amendment made no mention of any existing language of the Constitution which would be "altered or abrogated” by the proposed amendment, although the express intent of the proposal was to amend art 8, §2.
Ill
We turn to a construction of the statutory requirement that the petition list existing provisions of the Constitution that it would "alter or abrogate”. The Constitution is a broad, interrelated document composed largely of general principles of government rather than narrow, detailed requirements.
As interpreted by Ferency and the circuit court, § 482 conditions the right of initiative upon a correct assessment by the petitioner of the impact *596the proposed amendment has on these general, interrelated principles. The task which this Court often finds so difficult is imposed on the petitioner, with the risk of a voided petition for an incorrect resolution. The difficulty, if not impossibility, of meeting this requirement is demonstrated by the history of this case. Ferency, himself an able attorney, identified at least seven constitutional provisions that would be altered by the proposed amendment. The circuit court identified at least five provisions, only one of which had been listed by Ferency. Doubtless, plausible arguments could be made that additional provisions will be altered.
Correctly interpreting the Constitution to identify all provisions affected by a proposed amendment is too onerous a burden to place upon the right of popular amendment. Nor can it be justified as a means of educating persons signing petitions. A petitioner faced with the prospect of having his or her entire petition drive nullified by the failure to list a constitutional provision will, out of caution, err on the side of inclusion. Petitions will become a maze of constitutional provisions, if indeed petitioners will not simply attach copies of the entire Constitution to their petitions. The provisions expressly being amended may be lost among those less directly affected. Few people will understand, without extensive explanation, how or how much a particular listed provision is being altered.
IV
We have examined the provisions of our Constitution which the plaintiff claims the proposed amendment would "alter or abrogate” if adopted, as well as those which the circuit court found would be "altered or abrogated” if the proposed *597amendment were to be adopted. While we agree that virtually all of these provisions will, to one degree or another, be affected by the proposed constitutional amendment,17 should it be adopted, we cannot conclude that any of these provisions would be "altered or abrogated”.
We hold that it is only where the proposed amendment would directly "alter or abrogate” ("amend or replace”) a specific provision or provisions of the existing Constitution that the provision or provisions must be noted on the petitions. An existing constitutional provision is altered or abrogated if the proposed amendment would add to, delete from, or change the existing wording of the provision, or would render it wholly inoperative. Here the petitions which were circulated notified the prospective signer that the proposed amendment would "alter or abrogate” present art 9, § 1, § 2, § 3 and § 31. We are persuaded that those are the provisions which the proposed amendment will directly "alter or abrogate” if the amendment is adopted.
In the language employed by this Court in School Dist of Pontiac v Pontiac, supra, the provisions cited by the plaintiff and by the circuit court, will remain "operative, though possibly they may need thereafter to be construed in conjunction with the amending provision^].” See also Graham v Miller, 348 Mich 684, 694; 84 NW2d 46 (1957).
Since the petitions which were circulated clearly specified those provisions of the Constitution which the proposed amendment would directly "alter or abrogate” if the amendment were adopted, we hold that the requirements of MCL 168.482; MSA 6.1482 were met. To adopt a more expansive definition of the "alter or abrogate” requirement would *598effectively require a petition circulator, in order to insure against subsequent judicial nullification of the effort, to secure a judicial determination of which provisions of the existing Constitution the proposed amendment would "alter or abrogate”. We do not believe that such a state of affairs was contemplated by the Legislature in promulgating the statute.
V
Plaintiff argues that the instant controversy is moot because defendant Board of State Canvassers failed to certify the petition within 60 days of the general election as required by Const 1963, art 12, § 2 and MCL 168.477; MSA 6.1477.18 We conclude that this contention is without merit.
This Court has previously confronted a claim concerning an analogous constitutional deadline and concluded, under seemingly similar circumstances, that the petition proponent was not entitled to relief. Kuhn v Dep’t of Treasury, 384 Mich 378; 183 NW2d 796 (1971). The difference between the Kuhn case and the instant controversy helps explain our decision today.
In Kuhn, plaintiffs asked us to determine whether the Income Tax Act of 1967, MCL 206.1 et seq.; MSA 7.557(101) et seq., was subject to the referendum power of the people. The facts in Kuhn reveal the following: Plaintiff Kuhn took no action while the courts deliberated. He did not collect any petition signatures within prescribed time limitations; nor did he invoke the emergency *599consideration of this Court. Further, before this Court could resolve the issue, the constitutional time limit, requiring that the petition process be completed within 90 days following the legislative session at which the target act was passed, had long expired.
Therefore, even though we ultimately decided that voters could approve or reject the Income Tax Act through their right of referendum, we gave plaintiff no relief. In explaining this result, we quoted with approval from Judge, now Justice, Levin’s opinion in the Court of Appeals:
" 'In a case of this kind the moving party is entitled to an expeditious disposition by the courts so that the right of referendum guaranteed by the constitution is not jeopardized. The plaintiffs in this case obtained such an expeditious disposition at the trial court level.
" 'Their claim of appeal was filed October 19, 1967. No application for emergency consideration by our Court or for by-pass of our Court or for emergency consideration was filed with the Supreme Court.
" 'There is no provision in the constitution extending the time within which a referendum may be sought by reason of the pendency of litigation and it would be extraordinary for the courts to declare such an extension of time. If the plaintiffs desired to exercise the power of referendum they were obliged to proceed within the time provided by the constitution to obtain signatures. It is not claimed that any such effort was made. We conclude that the time for seeking a referendum on the income tax act has expired.’ ” (Emphasis added.) Kuhn, supra, 386-387.
This is the first time since Kuhn that we have faced a question involving a constitutional election deadline in the context of the initiative and referendum process. And because this case presents such unique circumstances, we must regard it as *600justifying the extraordinary action referred to in Kuhn.
In contrast to Kuhn, intervening defendant Tisch Coalition complied with constitutional dictates. It collected the necessary petition signatures required to place the proposed amendment on the ballot. Further, the Coalition filed its petitions with the Secretary of State at the proper time, 120 days before the election. Const 1963, art 12, § 2.
Defendant Board of State Canvassers also attempted to fulfill its constitutional duties in a timely fashion. The board met on September 5, 1980, the last day for compliance with the certification deadline.
One of the items on the agenda, which defendant was fully prepared to address, was the question of certification of the proposed "Tisch” amendment. But at the same time, the board faced a September 4th circuit court order which prohibited it from taking any action on that same proposed amendment. The board resolved the dilemma by obeying the court order. Thereby the constitutional deadline passed.
Again in contrast to Kuhn, both defendants immediately filed an emergency appeal in this Court, bypassing the Court of Appeals. They did not sit back and wait for the judicial process to proceed according to its normal pace.
In essence, the facts in this case are almost the opposite of those in Kuhn. In Kuhn, the inaction of the plaintiffs who wished to invoke the referendum procedure created the delay. In the instant case, intervening defendant Tisch Coalition did everything the Constitution requires of it. Defendant board was ready to timely perform its constitutional duties, but was prohibited from doing so by the active intervention of the circuit court. In *601other words, but for court interference, all the constitutional and statutory requirements for presenting the amendment to the voters on November 4 would have been met.
This Court has a tradition of jealously guarding against legislative and administrative encroachment on the people’s right to propose laws and constitutional amendments through the petition process. Wolverine Golf Club v Secretary of State, 384 Mich 461; 185 NW2d 392 (1971). The question now is whether we will protect the process from court interference with procedural deadline requirements as well.
It would be manifestly unfair to hold that because the deadline has passed this Court can afford no relief. Such a decision would encourage opponents of a proposal to try to keep it off the ballot by waiting until the last minute to file a challenge in circuit court.19 We cannot tolerate either such distortion of the initiative process or such misuse of the judicial process.
In addition, our holding is based on the nature of the constitutional requirement in issue. The 60-day requirement does not relate to the sufficiency or validity of the petitions themselves. We read the time limit as essentially designed to facilitate the electoral process by giving the Secretary of State and county clerks enough time to print and distribute ballots and ready the machinery for election day. See, e.g., Wolverine Golf Club v Secretary of State, 384 Mich 461; 185 NW2d 392 (1971). It should not be used to prevent a proposal *602from appearing on the ballot when its proponents have done everything the Constitution requires of them.
This is not to say that the 60-day requirement may be circumvented as a matter of course. We do not suspend constitutional directory limits lightly. Only the most extreme circumstances, such as the last-minute active judicial intervention in the instant case, can justify this deviation.
Finally, our decision is consistent with a long line of cases in which the Michigan courts have actively protected and enhanced the initiative and referendum power. Wolverine Golf Club, supra; Kuhn, supra; Newsome v Board of State Canvassers, 69 Mich App 725; 245 NW2d 374 (1976). In effect, we simply repeat today what we have said before: "[Cjonstitutional provisions by which the people reserve to themselves a direct legislative voice ought to be liberally construed” and their exercise should be facilitated rather than restricted. Kuhn, supra, 385.
For the foregoing reasons, under the unique circumstances of this case, the expiration of the 60-day deadline does not preclude the certification of the proposed Tisch Amendment.
Accordingly, we reverse the judgment of the Ingham Circuit Court and we direct that the defendants proceed forthwith to attend to the duties prescribed in MCL 168.477; MSA 6.1477 and such other statutory duties as may follow thereon, observing, in each instance, to the maximum extent practicable, the time limits prescribed for the performance of such various duties.
No costs, a public question being involved.
Coleman, C.J., and Kavanagh, Levin, Fitzgerald, Ryan, and Blair Moody, Jr., JJ., concurred.
*603Per Curiam.
The instant case originated with a complaint filed in the Ingham Circuit Court in which the plaintiff requested the circuit court to rule that the defendants are obliged, pursuant to Const 1963, art 12, § 2,1 to publish a notice that a proposed amendment to the Constitution (popularly known as the "Tisch amendment”) would, if adopted, "alter or abrogate” existing provisions of the Constitution including, but not limited to art *6042, § 9; art 4, §§ 27, 33, 34 and 40; art 6, § 4; art 7, §§ 2 and 21; and art 8, § 35.
On September 25, 1980 the Ingham Circuit Court issued an order which stated in pertinent part:
"Petition for declaratory relief having been filed by the plaintiff, acting in pro per; the court having heard arguments concerning the matter; the court having previously rendered an opinion in the case of [Ferency v Secretary of State], File No. 80-25614-AA, in which the court found that the so-called 'Tisch’ Amendment 'alters or abrogates’ certain provisions of the 1963 Michigan Constitution, including, but not limited to art 2, § 9; art 4, § 1; art 4, § 33; art 4, § 34; and art 4, § 40, which finding is hereby specifically incorporated herein as though recited herein; the court having found further that the foregoing provisions, which would be 'altered or abrogated’ by the 'Tisch’ proposal if adopted, have not been published by the defendant Secretary of State or other defendants herein whereby copies of such publication shall be posted in each polling place and furnished to news media as required by art 12, §2 of the Constitution and as provided by law; and the court being fully advised in the premises;
"Now therefore it is ordered and adjudged that the process for the publication of the 'Tisch’ proposal as filed with the defendant agencies, together with the existing provisions of the state Constitution which would be altered or abrogated thereby as hereinbefore set forth shall commence as required by Constitution and law on or before Tuesday, September 30, 1980, at 4 p.m., except as hereinafter provided; and
"It is further ordered and adjudged that the defendants herein, and each of them, shall take such action as may be necessary to effectuate the publication of the 'Tisch’ proposal and the existing provisions of the Constitution which-would be altered or abrogated thereby as required by Constitution and law; * *
The defendants in this matter, represented by the Attorney General, filed a claim of appeal in *605the Court of Appeals and at the same time asked this Court to grant leave to appeal prior to a decision of the Court of Appeals. On September 29, 1980 we granted leave to appeal pursuant to the aforementioned request.
I
The position taken by the circuit court in this matter is essentially consistent with and is a reaffirmation of a prior decision made by that court in a previous lawsuit brought by the same plaintiff against the same defendants. In the previous lawsuit the circuit court declared that the petitions which were circulated in order to place the proposed "Tisch amendment” on the ballot were "legally insufficient” and thus were not entitled to be placed on the ballot scheduled for the November 1980 general election. The rationale expressed by the circuit court for its prior ruling was that the petitions failed to satisfy the requirement of MCL 168.482; MSA 6.14822 that the petitions specify *606and set forth therein any provisions of the existing Constitution which the proposed amendment, if adopted, would "alter or abrogate”. The circuit court found the petitions to be defective because they failed to state that the proposed amendment, if adopted, would "alter or abrogate” Const 1963, art 2, § 9; art 4, § 1; art 4, § 33; art 4, § 34; and art 4, §40. In that matter we also granted leave to appeal prior to decision by the Court of Appeals and on September 12, 1980 we issued an order which stated:
"This cause having been brought to this Court by appeal prior to the decision of the Court of Appeals and having been argued by counsel and due deliberation having been had thereon by the Court, it is hereby ordered that the judgment of the circuit court for the County of Ingham is reversed and the complaint filed in that court is dismissed. We are persuaded that the burdens imposed upon intervening defendant by the provisions of MCL 168.482 have been met.
"Defendants Secretary of State, Director of Elections and Board of State Canvassers are directed to proceed forthwith to attend to the duties prescribed in Const 1963, art 12, §2 and MCL 168.477 [MSA 6.1477] and such other statutory duties as may follow thereon, observing, in each instance, to the maximum extent *607practicable, the time limits prescribed for the performance of such various duties.
"Pursuant to GCR 1963, 866.3(c), the Clerk is directed to issue this judgment order forthwith. This judgment is final. The opinion of the Court will follow.
"No costs are to be taxed.”
II
We have, this day, issued an opinion in which we stated the reasons for concluding that the Ingham Circuit Court erred in ruling that the petitions which were circulated were "insufficient”. We did so because we concluded that the petitions, in notifying the petition signers that the proposed amendment, if adopted, would "alter or abrogate” Const 1963, art 9, § 1, § 2, § 3 and § 31, satisfied the requirements of MCL 168.482; MSA 6.1482. We note that Const 1963, art 12, §2 also requires the Secretary of State to publish those provisions of the existing Constitution which the proposed amendment would, if adopted, "alter or abrogate”.
For the same reasons which we expressed in our opinion that the circuit court erred in finding the petitions to be "insufficient” we find that the circuit court erred in issuing its order in this case. The petitions specified all of the provisions of the existing Constitution which the proposed amendment would directly "alter or abrogate”, if adopted, and thus the circuit court erred in ordering the defendants in this matter to give notice that other provisions of the existing Constitution, not specified in the petitions, would be "altered or abrogated” by the proposed amendment, if adopted.
The difficulty of determining which provisions *608will be altered is the same for the state as for the petitioner. The risk that the voter will be confused by overinclusion and will lose sight of the provisions being directly amended among those indirectly affected on a publication posted at the polls, is at least as great as the risk that a prospective petition signer will be so confused.
To construe the phrase "altered or abrogated” more broadly in the constitutional context would inject a degree of uncertainty into the constitutional amendment process which could only be resolved by this Court.3 Because the Constitution is a cohesive document whose underlying principles and constituent parts are interrelated, proposed amendments are likely to affect the operation of a number of existing provisions. Determining a proposal’s effect upon an existing provision is likely to be an uncertain exercise for the Secretary of State and Attorney General. The more emphasis is placed on resolving doubts in favor of inclusion, the more diluted the informational effect of the publication will become.
Given the breadth and generality of our Constitution and the interrelation of its provisions, it is difficult to see how an assessment of a proposed amendment’s constitutional impact could be definitively resolved short of an appeal to this Court. One can foresee challenges to the Secretary of State’s selection of provisions to be published being brought not only by opponents of a proposal who *609argue that other provisions should be included, but also by proponents who claim that overinclusiveness has exaggerated the impact of the proposal in question.
It is hardly proper or practical for this Court to issue advisory opinions on the constitutional implications of every proposed amendment. The people, in reserving to themselves the power to amend their Constitution through a self-executing process, cannot have intended to require state election officials to make complex judgments which would require judicial imprimatur in order to establish that the election officials had properly performed their duties under Const 1963, art 12, § 2.
The reasonable interpretation of what the people intended in requiring publication of the constitutional provisions that would be altered or abrogated by a proposed amendment is that the requirement contemplates the purely ministerial task of setting out the provisions expressly being altered.4
*610We reaffirm for the state, as we have for the petitioner, the narrow publishing requirement set out in School Dist of Pontiac v Pontiac, 262 Mich 338, 344; 247 NW 474, 787 (1933):
"We think the requirement in substance is this: That in case a proposed constitutional provision amends or replaces ('alters or abrogates’) a specific provision of the Constitution, that such provision should be published along with the proposed amendment; that other provisions which are still operative, though possibly they may need thereafter to be construed in conjunction with the amending provision, need not necessarily be published.”
We further hold that an existing constitutional provision is altered or abrogated if the proposed amendment would add to, delete from, or change the existing wording of the provision, or would render it wholly inoperative.
Accordingly, we reverse the judgment of the Ingham Circuit Court.
No costs, a public question being involved.
Coleman, C.J., and Kavanagh, Levin, Fitzgerald, Ryan, and Blair Moody, Jr., JJ., concurred.
"The size of all petitions mentioned in this section shall be 8-1/2 inches by 13 inches. If the measure to be submitted proposes a constitutional amendment, initiation of legislation, or referendum of legislation, the heading of each part of the petition shall be prepared in the following form and printed in capital letters in 14-point bold face type:
"INITIATIVE PETITION
"AMENDMENT TO THE CONSTITUTION
"OR
"INITIATION OF LEGISLATION
"OR
*587“REFERENDUM OF LEGISLATION
"PROPOSED BY INITIATIVE PETITION
"The full text of the amendment so proposed shall follow, printed in 8-point type. If the proposal would alter or abrogate any existing provision of the constitution, the petition should so state and the provisions to be altered or abrogated shall be inserted, preceded by the words:
" 'Provisions of existing constitution altered or abrogated by such proposal if adopted.’
"We, the undersigned qualified and registered electors, city residents in the (strike 1) of. . . .in the county of.... , township state of Michigan, hereby respectively petition for said (amendment to constitution) (initiation of legislation) (referendum of legislation).
"Immediately above the place for signatures, on each part of the petition shall be printed in 12-point type the following warning:
"WARNING
"Whoever knowingly signs this petition more than once, signs a name other than his own, signs when not a qualified and registered elector, or sets opposite his signature on a petition, a date other than the actual date such signature was affixed, is violating the provisions of this act. The remainder of the petition form shall be as provided following the warning in section 544c.”
"Initiative and referendum; limitations; appropriations; petitions. Sec. 9. The people reserve to themselves the power to propose laws and to enact and reject laws, called the initiative, and the power to approve or reject laws enacted by the legislature, called the referendum. The power of initiative extends only to laws which the legislature may enact under this constitution. The power of referendum does not extend to acts making appropriations for state institutions or to meet deficiencies in state funds and must be invoked in the manner prescribed by law within 90 days following the final adjournment of the legislative session at which the law was enacted. To invoke the initiative or referendum, petitions signed by a number of registered electors, not less than eight percent for initiative and five percent for referendum of the total vote cast for all candidates for governor at the last preceding general election at which a governor was elected shall be required.
"Referendum, approval. No law as to which the power of referendum properly has been invoked shall be effective thereafter unless approved by a majority of the electors voting thereon at the next general election.
"Initiative; duty of legislature, referendum. Any law proposed *588by initiative petition shall be either enacted or rejected by the legislature without change or amendment within 40 session days from the time such petition is received by the legislature. If any law proposed by such petition shall be enacted by the legislature it shall be subiect to referendum, as hereinafter provided.
"Legislative rejection of initiated measure; different measure; submission to people. If the law so proposed is not enacted by the legislature within the 40 days, the state officer authorized by law shall submit such proposed law to the people for approval or rejection at the next general election. The legislature may reject any measure so proposed by initiative petition and propose a different measure upon the same subject by a yea and nay vote upon separate roll calls, and in such event both measures shall be submitted by such state officer to the electors for approval or rejection at the next general election.
"Initiative or referendum law; effective date, veto, amendment and repeal. Any law submitted to the people by either initiative or referendum petition and approved by a majority of the votes cast thereon at any election shall take effect 10 days after the date of the official declaration of the vote. No law initiated or adopted by the people shall be subject to the veto power of the governor, and no law adopted by the people at the polls under the initiative provisions of this section shall be amended or repealed, except by a vote of the electors unless otherwise provided in the initiative measure or by three-fourths of the members elected to and serving in each house of the legislature. Laws approved by the people under the referendum provision of this section may be amended by the legislature at any subsequent session thereof. If two or more measures approved by the electors at the same election conflict, that receiving the highest affirmative vote shall prevail.
"Legislative implementation. The legislature shall implement the provisions of this section.”
"Legislative power. Sec. 1. The legislative power of the State of Michigan is vested in a senate and a house of representatives.”
"Bills passed; approval by governor or veto, reconsideration by legislature. Sec. 33. Every bill passed by the legislature shall be presented to the governor before it becomes law, and the governor shall have 14 days measured in hours and minutes from the time of presentation in which to consider it. If he approves, he shall within that time sign and file it with the secretary of state and it shall become law. If he does not approve, and the legislature has within that time finally adjourned the session at which the bill was passed, it shall not become law. If he disapproves, and the legislature continues the session at which the bill was passed, he shall return it within such 14-day period with his objections, to the house in which it originated. That house shall enter such objections in full in its journal and reconsider the bill. If two-thirds of the members elected to and serving in that house pass the bill notwithstanding the objections of the governor, it shall be sent with the objections to the other house for reconsideration. The bill shall become law if passed by two-thirds of the members elected to and serving in that house. The vote of each *589house shall be entered in the journal with the votes and names of the members voting thereon. If any bill is not returned by the governor within such 14-day period, the legislature continuing in session, it shall become law as if he had signed it.”
"Bills, referendum. Sec. 34. Any bill passed by the legislature and approved by the governor, except a bill appropriating money, may provide that it will not become law unless approved by a majority of the electors voting thereon.”
"Liquor control commission; liquor tax; local option. Sec. 40. The legislature may by law establish a liquor control commission which, subject to statutory limitations, shall exercise complete control of the alcoholic beverage traffic within this state, including the retail sales thereof. The legislature may provide for an excise tax on such sales. Neither the legislature nor the commission may authorize the manufacture or sale of alcoholic beverages in any county in which a majority of the electors voting thereon shall prohibit the same.”
Scott v Secretary of State, 202 Mich 629, 643; 168 NW 709 (1918).
Const 1963, art 12, § 2 provides:
"Amendment by petition and vote of electors. Sec. 2. Amendments may be proposed to this constitution by petition of the registered electors of this state. Every petition shall include the full text of the proposed amendment, and be signed by registered electors of the state equal in number to at least 10 percent of the total vote cast for all candidates for governor at the last preceding general election at which a governor was elected. Such petitions shall be filed with the person authorized by law to receive the same at least 120 days before the election at which the proposed amendment is to be voted upon. Any such petition shall be in the form, and shall be signed and circulated in such manner, as prescribed by law. The person authorized by law to receive such petition shall upon its receipt determine, as provided by law, the validity and sufficiency of the signatures on the petition, and make an official announcement thereof at least 60 days prior to the election at which the proposed amendment is to be voted upon.
"Submission of proposal; publication. Any amendment proposed by such petition shall be submitted, not less than 120 days after it was filed, to the electors at the next general election. Such proposed amendment, existing provisions of the constitution which would be altered or abrogated thereby, and the question as it shall appear on the ballot shall be published in full as provided by law. Copies of such publication shall be posted in each polling place and furnished to news media as provided by law.
"Ballot statement of purpose. The ballot to be used in such election shall contain a statement of the purpose of the proposed amendment, expressed in not more than 100 words, exclusive of caption. Such statement of purpose and caption shall be prepared by the person authorized by law, and shall consist of a true and impartial statement of the purpose of the amendment in such language as shall create no prejudice for or against the proposed amendment.
"Approval of proposal, effective date; conflicting amendments. If the proposed amendment is approved by a majority of the electors voting on the question, it shall become part of the constitution, and shall abrogate or amend existing provisions of the constitution at the end of 45 days after the date of the election at which it was approved. If two or more amendments approved by the electors at the same election conflict, that amendment receiving the highest affirmative vote shall prevail.”
Provisions for popular amendment in prior Michigan constitutions have been found self-executing. Hamilton v Secretary of State, 227 Mich 111; 198 NW 843 (1924); Thompson v Secretary of State, 192 Mich 512; 159 NW 65 (1916). While some of the legislation-like procedural detail was eliminated in the 1963 Constitution, much was retained with the express purpose of preserving the self-executing character. 2 Official Record, Constitutional Convention 1961, pp 2459-2460. See also id., pp 2468-2469. The analogous provision for initiative legislation in Const 1963, art 2, § 9 was held self-executing in spite of the directive in that section, not present in Const 1963, art 12, §2, that "[t]he legislature shall implement the provisions of this section”. Wolverine Golf Club v Secretary of State, 384 Mich 461; 185 NW2d 392 (1971).
Wolverine Golf Club, supra, p 466.
Although Wolverine Golf Club involved popularly initiated legislation under Const 1963, art 2, §9, rather than, as here, popularly initiated amendments to the constitution under Const 1963, art 12, §2, the principle that the Legislature may not unduly burden the self-executing constitutional procedure applies equally to both. As the quotation from Hamilton v Secretary of State immediately following in the text illustrates, both are procedures whereby the people reserved to themselves the power to directly change the law, constitutional or statutory, under which they live.
Hamilton v Secretary of State, supra, p 130.
Const 1963, art 12, § 2, ¶ 2.
M., ¶ 1.
See State v Campbell, 265 Or 82; 506 P2d 163 (1973), app dis 414 US 803 (1973).
Kuhn v Dep’t of Treasury, 384 Mich 378, 385; 183 NW2d 796 (1971).
State v Campbell, supra, p 95.
See Appendix foldout following Justice Williams’ opinion.
The implementing legislation differs slightly from the constitutional mandate in that it specifies that the board must certify the petition two months before the election rather than 60 days prior to the vote. Under the terms of either provision, the time for certifying the petition has passed in this case.
This fear should not reflect on the actions of the parties in the instant case. Plaintiff Ferency cannot be faulted for the last-minute judicial intervention. On the contrary, he persistently challenged the proposal long before the 60-day deadline. Further, the lower court cannot be charged with undue delay. The learned trial judge acted as quickly as time would allow.
"Amendment by petition and vote of electors. Sec. 2. Amendments may be proposed to this constitution by petition of the registered electors of this state. Every petition shall include the full text of the proposed amendment, and be signed by registered electors of the state equal in number to at least 10 percent of the total vote cast for all candidates for governor at the last preceding general election at which a governor was elected. Such petitions shall be filed with the person authorized by law to receive the same at least 120 days before the election at which the proposed amendment is to be voted upon. Any such petition shall be in the form, and shall be signed and circulated in such manner, as prescribed by law. The person authorized by law to receive such petition shall upon its receipt determine, as provided by law, the validity and sufficiency of the signatures on the petition, and make an official announcement thereof at least 60 days prior to the election at which the proposed amendment is to be voted upon.
"Submission of proposal; publication. Any amendment proposed by such petition shall be submitted, not less than 120 days after it was filed, to the electors at the next general election. Such proposed amendment, existing provisions of the constitution which would be altered or abrogated thereby, and the question as it shall appear on the ballot shall be published in full as provided by law. Copies of such publication shall be posted in each polling place and furnished to news media as provided by law.
"Ballot, statement of purpose. The ballot to be used in such election shall contain a statement of the purpose of the proposed amendment, expressed in not more than 100 words, exclusive of caption. Such statement of purpose and caption shall be prepared by the person authorized by law, and shall consist of a true and impartial statement of the purpose of the amendment in such language as shall create no prejudice for or against the proposed amendment.
"Approval of proposal, effective date; conflicting amendments. If the proposed amendment is approved by a majority of the electors voting on the question, it shall become part of the constitution, and shall abrogate or amend existing provisions of the constitution at the end of 45 days after the date of the election at which it was approved. If two or more amendments approved by the electors at the same election conflict, that amendment receiving the highest affirmative vote shall prevail.”
"The size of all petitions mentioned in this section shall be 8-1/2 inches by 13 inches. If the measure to be submitted proposes a constitutional amendment, initiation of legislation, or referendum of legislation, the heading of each part of the petition shall be prepared in the following form and printed in capital letters in 14-point bold face type:
"INITIATIVE PETITION
"AMENDMENT TO THE CONSTITUTION
"OR
"INITIATION OF LEGISLATION
"OR
"REFERENDUM OF LEGISLATION
"PROPOSED BY INITIATIVE PETITION
"The full text of the amendment so proposed shall follow, printed in 8-point type. If the proposal would alter or abrogate any existing provision of the constitution, the petition should so state and the provisions to be altered or abrogated shall be inserted, preceded by the words:
" 'Provisions of existing constitution altered or abrogated by such proposal if adopted.’
*606"We, the undersigned qualified and registered electors, city residents in the (strike 1) of. . . .in the county of.... , township state of Michigan, hereby respectively petition for said (amendment to constitution) (initiation of legislation) (referendum of legislation).
"Immediately above the place for signatures, on each part of the petition shall be printed in 12-point type the following warning:
"WARNING
"Whoever knowingly signs this petition more than once, signs a name other than his own, signs when not a qualified and registered elector, or sets opposite his signature on a petition, a date other than the actual date such signature was affixed, is violating the provisions of this act. The remainder of the petition form shall be as provided following the warning in section 544c.”
The consequence of the state’s failure to fulfill its obligations is not the same as follows from a like failure by the petitioner. The failure of the petitioner to meet constitutional obligations, at least where the challenge is brought prior to the vote, aborts the amendment effort. Such cannot be the result of the state’s failure, since it seems clear that the people, in reserving to themselves the power to amend their Constitution through a self-executing process, cannot have intended the state to have the power to bring that process to naught through either inaction or erroneous action by its officials.
Apparently the committee responsible for art 12, § 2 at the 1961-1962 Constitutional Convention considered requiring more, but chose instead the narrow obligation. Commenting upon the proposed BrownBoothby substitute to art 12, § 2, which would have eliminated much of the procedural requirements set out in art 12, §2, including the publishing requirement, Mr. Durst, a member of the committee, said:
"Now Mr. Brown completely eliminates those provisions and he eliminates almost all of what is contained on page 4 of the proposal, and here are some things which the committee also thought should be included for a good, self executing provision: one was that the state was required to publish the proposal along with setting forth the material that it was expected to delete or change and that this publication be listed in the polling places. There was considerable discussion that we should go further and require even the preparation of a pro and con pamphlet in order to educate the people. This was decided to be impractical and what is included here was thought to be a minimum that was necessary, that at least it should be set forth clearly and concisely and placed in the polling places and presented to the news media so there would be an opportunity for the people of this state to be thoroughly advised upon the amendment they are voting on.” 2 Official Record, Constitutional Convention 1961, p 2467 (emphasis supplied).

=== CASE 9738669 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:00:15.448777+00 ===

Williams, J.
I concur that the initiative petition1 for the proposed Tisch Amendment need not state or insert "any existing provision of the Constitution” beyond those already stated and inserted. However, I would hold that there are different standards determining whether on the one hand a petition to be circulated, (Const 1963, art 12, § 2, ¶ l)2 and, on the other hand, a proposed amendment *611to be published and put on the ballot, (art 12, § 2, ¶ 2)3 contains provisions which would "alter or abrogate” provisions of the existing Constitution. As a consequence, I would hold that our order4 heretofore issued in this matter, "Defendants . Secretary of State, Director of Elections and Board of State Canvassers are directed to proceed forthwith to attend to the duties prescribed in Const 1963, art 12, §2 and MCL 168.477 [MSA 6.1477] and such other statutory duties as may follow thereon” requires that the appropriate election authorities charged by art 12, § 2, ¶ 2 with seeing that "[s]uch proposed amendment, existing provisions of the constitution which would be altered or abrogated thereby, and the question as it shall appear on the ballot shall be published in full as provided by law”, shall be construed to mean that those authorities have a duty independent of that of the petition circulator to determine whether in the *612proposed amendment there are provisions which would "alter or abrogate” sections of the existing Constitution. I would further hold that the proposed Tisch Amendment does "alter or abrogate” existing provisions of the Constitution beyond those the proposed Tisch Amendment states and inserts.
I. Analysis of Art 12, § 2 and MCL 168.482
The explanation for this seeming paradox lies in our analysis of the Constitution’s solution to the dilemma posed by the initiative and referendum process. On the one hand, the framers of the Constitution wanted to make the process as freely available as possible to those who would wish to circulate a petition for initiative or referendum. On the other hand, they wanted voters to have reasonable notice of the impact of a proposed initiative or referendum on existing provisions of the Constitution.
If an average citizen without access to skilled legal counsel wishing to circulate an initiative or referendum petition had to supply exhaustive notice to definitively inform a voter, it could well have a chilling effect on the exercise of that right. This the framers of the Constitution did not want to do. However, they did want the people to have sufficient notice and information in order to exercise a proper judgment in voting.
The constitutional solution to this apparent dilemma is indicated in the construction of art 12, §2. In that portion of §2, ¶ 1 relating to the petition and its circulation appears this pertinent sentence:
"Any such petition shall be in the form, and shall be *613signed and circulated in such manner, as prescribed by law.”
In that portion of § 2, ¶ 2 relating to the "amendment proposed by such petition” after the petition had been circulated and the required signatures obtained appear these two pertinent sentences:
"Such proposed amendment, existing provisions of the constitution, which would be altered or abrogated thereby, and the question as it shall appear on the ballot shall be published in full as provided by law. Copies of such publication shall be posted in each polling place and furnished to news media as provided by law.”
The comparison of these two parts of § 2 is pregnant. It is clear that the Constitution intended that, for the circulation of a petition, there should be a certain standard as to form and signature; but for the publication of the proposed amendment there was a different prescription and standard. The standard intended for the citizen circulator of a petition was to fit the purpose of the greatest possible freedom in the effective exercise of the right to petition by any citizen regardless of his sophistication in the intricacies of the Constitution. However, for the publication of the proposed amendment a higher standard could be exacted, because this duty was to be performed by public officials with a particular competence in the matter, assisted by government legal counsel including the Attorney General. In a word, the constitutional solution to the dilemma was to confront the petition circulator with a much easier standard than that imposed upon the public officials who have the competence to meet the higher requirements of publication. This would give the citizen *614the requisite information when it was most important, when he voted.
In construing art 12, § 2 as I do I am faced with the fact that the Legislature in responding to this section of the Constitution not only prescribed the size of the petition, the language of the heading, the kind of type to be used, etc., but provided:
"If the proposal would alter or abrogate any existing provision of the constitution, the petition should so state and the provisions to be altered or abrogated shall be inserted.” MCL 168.482; MSA 6.1482.5
*615The language of MCL 168.482 relating to the petition to be circulated employs the same "alter or abrogate” language as that found in art 12, § 2, ¶ 2 requiring the proposed amendment to be published and put on the ballot. This presents four decisional alternatives. First, the Legislature has intended to shift from the appropriate election officials to the petition circulator the duty of determining and announcing whether provisions of the proposed constitutional amendment would "alter or abrogate” existing provisions of the Constitution. Second, the Legislature has lawfully imposed the same duty on the petition circulator as upon the appropriate election officials to determine and announce those provisions of the proposal which would "alter or abrogate” existing provisions of the Constitution. Third, the Legislature has imposed the same duty unconstitutionally and the "alter or abrogate” language must be stricken. Fourth, the duty imposed by the Legislature upon the petition circulator, although using the same words as those found in art 12, § 2, ¶ 2, can be interpreted in light of the overall constitutional purpose to preserve that purpose while at the same time some meaning can be given to the legislative language as not being in conflict with the constitutional purpose.
With the exigencies imposed by the electoral schedule, and the necessity of announcing an opinion in time to comply therewith, it is impossible to extensively and definitively explore the legal ramifications of each of these alternatives. Suffice it to say, to begin with, that analysis of art 12, §2 so far indicates that we should not ascribe to the Legislature an intention to shift the duty of au*616thoritative determination of whether the proposed amendment "alters or abrogates” provisions of the existing Constitution from the constitutionally designated election officials (art 12, §2, ¶ 2) to the petition circulator (MCL 168.482). To do so would be to conclude more than the statutory words imply. Further, the Court does lightly construe legislation to change the Constitution.6 As a consequence I find the first alternative non-viable.
Once having made that decision, I need go no further to choose between the second, third and fourth alternatives, to hold that the appropriate election officials have, under art 12, § 2, ¶ 2 the duty to determine whether the proposed amendment "alters or abrogates” provisions of the existing Constitution, for all three of these alternatives recognize that constitutional duty. Consequently, I would hold that the appropriate election officials have that duty.
But in order to justify my concurrence with the majority opinion that the petition circulated in this case satisfied the requirements of MCL 168.482 I must consider the remaining three alternatives.
The second decisional alternative is that the Legislature lawfully imposed the same duty on the petition circulator as the Constitution had imposed upon the appropriate election officials. I also reject this alternative for reasons previously discussed. My analysis of the Constitution is that it provides freedom and flexibility in petition circulation so as *617to encourage and not chill this important right. I also consider that the necessity to make an in-depth and authoritative determination whether the proposed amendment "altered or abrogated” existing constitutional provisions would chill the exercise of that right. As a consequence, I would hold the statute cannot be construed to impose the same duty on the circulator as art 12, §2, ¶ 2 imposes upon the appropriate election officials in publication.
This leaves alternatives three and four for consideration. Alternative three implies that the Legislature acted unconstitutionally in imposing the same duty upon the petition circulator as upon the appropriate election officials to determine alteration or abrogation. While this is a possibility, using the same analysis I did with respect to alternative two, I would hold that such action by the Legislature will not be assumed, if there is another alternative.
That alternative is, of course, the fourth alternative, to wit, that while the Legislature employed in MCL 168.482 the same "alter or abrogate” words used by art 12, § 2, ¶ 2 the Legislature was using them in a different context and consequently they should be interpreted in that context. I adopt this alternative, which, of course, permits me to concur with the result reached by the majority.
II. Analysis of Pertinent Precedent
The critical case in those cited to us is not School Dist of Pontiac v Pontiac, 262 Mich 338; 247 NW 474, 787 (1933), but Carman v Secretary of State, 384 Mich 443; 185 NW2d 1 (1971). Car-man is not only the last word of this Court on the subject, it is more apposite for the following reasons. First, it construes the present 1963 Constitu*618tion, not the prior 1908 Constitution interpreted by Pontiac. Second, the fact situation in Carman is more on point. In Carman, as in the instant matter, the action was brought to court prior to submission of the proposed amendment to the voters —the petition was circulated without indicating any sections of the Constitution which would be altered or abrogated, although the Secretary of State published the text of the existing and proposed sections of the Constitution as required of him. In the instant case, the petitioner may or may not have indicated all the provisions of the Constitution which would be altered or abrogated, but the matter has been brought to court before the submission of the proposal to the electorate, giving the appropriate election officials an opportunity to publish such further provisions of the Constitution as would be "altered or abrogated”. In Pontiac no action was brought prior to the election so the Secretary of State had no opportunity to consider what further provisions of the Constitution would be "altered or abrogated”. City of Jackson v Comm’r of Revenue, 316 Mich 694; 26 NW2d 569 (1947), and DeMaggio v Attorney General, 300 Mich 251; 1 NW2d 530 (1942), like Pontiac, are cases where action was brought after the election, not before it when the Secretary of State or other appropriate election officials might act to remedy any defects in the petition process.
In Carman, plaintiffs brought an original action for mandamus in the Court of Appeals to force submission of an initiative proposal to amend the Constitution. There was absolutely no reference to the sections and no recitation of the text of provisions to be altered or abrogated. In an opinion jointly written by Judge Holbrook and now Justice Fitzgerald, the Court of Appeals held on *619exclusively statutory grounds that the petition was sufficient and the question whether art 12, §2 is self-executing was avoided on the principle that constitutional questions are not reached if a case can be decided on other grounds. 26 Mich App 403; 182 NW2d 563 (1970). The writ was granted, an appeal taken, and leave to appeal denied. However, after the proposal was adopted by the people, the Supreme Court did grant leave to appeal. The majority reached the same result as the Court of Appeals, but did so on what has been referred to as the "election-cures-error” doctrine. .
The majority of this Court in Carman indicated three points of relevance to consideration of the instant matter:
1) That the discretional perimeters for decision as to compliance with procedural requirements are greater before the people have approved a provision in an election than afterward.
2) That the Secretary of State acting under art 12, § 2, ¶ 2 may, and did, in connection with publication, cure errors of omission by the circulator as to required reference and recitation of provisions of the existing Constitution to be "altered or abrogated”.
3) That the standards for testing "altered or abrogated” are not the same for the circulation and publishing processes, and the test for publishing is more stringent.
As to the first point, that there is wider judgmental discretion before than after the initiative or referendum election, Carman analyzed Jackson and Attorney General, ex rel Miller v Miller, 266 Mich 127, 133; 253 NW 241 (1934), relied on by Jackson, to conclude that "the courts should look at procedural errors of submission through differ*620ent eyeglasses, once the electors have voted affirmatively”. 384 Mich 443, 455.
As to the second point, that the action of the Secretary of State in remedying omissions of the circulator can satisfy constitutional requirements, Carman stated as follows:
"Our summarized ruling is that after this particular affirmative vote of the electors was certified, the quoted requirement of § 482 [MCL 168.482] became directory only, and that the requirement was fulfilled to constitutional satisfaction by the manner in which the Secretary of State performed his duty.” 384 Mich 443, 456.
As to the third point, the variance in standards controlling the circulator and the publisher, Car-man said:
"A thought of constitutional substance rather than form should be inserted here. It is that the constitutional purpose of the 'alter or abrogate’ requirement of publication, set forth as it is in the second paragraph of § 2 of Article 12, is to assure as near as law can provide that, before and particularly on election day, all voters are fully informed of the effect an initiated proposal will have upon an existing constitutional provision (or provisions) should that proposal receive electoral approval. The Secretary of State satisfied that constitutional purpose when he saw to it that his published notice listed existing § 2 of Article 8 as liable to alteration or amendment.
"Comparing the above purpose with the salient requirement of the statute (§ 482), we find that the latter was intended to inform the petition-signer, should he sign, of that same effect. Both methods of dissemination of necessary information to the public are wholesome and desirable, yet the one that counts in controlling substance over the more technical other is that which the elector himself — not the petition-signer — receives by the separate action of the Secretary of State. Here the buttonholed petition-signers were not apprised pursuant *621to § 482 of such effect, at least by the petition sheets themselves. But they, along with the far greater throngs of electors on election day, were directly notified — if they would but read — of that same effect.” (Emphasis in original opinion.) 384 Mich 443, 454-455.
The lesson of Carman for the instant matter is that that decision would support us in doing three things: first, taking necessary action now, before, rather than after the election to respond to claimed failures to react to procedural requirements; second, assisting the appropriate election officials to take action required of them under art 12, § 2, ¶ 2 in publishing the amendatory proposal’s alteration or abrogation of the existing Constitution; third, holding the circulator to a lesser standard of "alter or abrogate” than we would the publisher for the election, thereby sanctioning our acceptance of the petition but indicating to the appropriate election officials the necessity of recognizing certain other instances of alteration or abrogation.
The Jackson case involved primarily an effort of cities and school districts to enforce distribution of funds under the sales tax diversion amendment adopted by initiative. However, the validity of its adoption under the 1908 Constitution was challenged for failure to give notice. For our purposes, Jackson made two points: First, as indicated above, Jackson supports Carman that there is more judicial discretion before rather than after election in judging compliance with procedural requirements. Jackson is a post-election case. Second, in determining whether there was an alteration or abrogation, Jackson followed Pontiac, which I will consider next.
The Pontiac case was asked to interpret the 15-mill limitation amendment after its adoption by *622the electors, and incidentally consider whether the 1908 constitutional equivalent of present art 12, §2 was complied with. On the latter point, this Court spoke as follows:
"In determining what constitutes compliance with the constitutional requirement as to publication, a matter of prime importance is the purpose that prompted the people of the State of Michigan to include such a provision in the Constitution. All will agree that , this was a means adopted by which it was believed the elector would be definitely advised as to the purpose of the proposed amendment and what provision of the constitutional law it modified or supplanted. Being so advised, the elector could intelligently determine whether his vote would be for adoption or rejection. But the ordinary elector, not being a constitutional lawyer, would be confused rather than helped by a publication of all the other constitutional provisions which were or might be directly or only remotely, and possibly only contingently, affected by the proposed amendment. We think the requirement in substance is this: That in case a proposed constitutional provision amends or replaces ('alters or abrogates’) a specific provision of the Constitution, that such provision should be published along with the proposed amendment; that other provisions which are still operative, though possibly they may need thereafter to be construed in conjunction with the amending provision, need not necessarily be published.” School Dist v Pontiac, 262 Mich 344.
To accurately understand this paragraph it is important to consider it in toto rather than just the last line or two. Essentially it makes four points.
1) The reason for the publication requirement (now art 12, § 2, ¶ 2) is that "the elector * * * be definitely advised as to the purpose of the proposed amendment and what provision of the constitu*623tional law it modified or supplanted” so that he or she might vote intelligently.
2) To avoid confusion there need not be "publication of all the other constitutional provisions which [are] or might be directly or only remotely, and possibly only contingently, affected * * *”.
3) "[I]n case a proposed constitutional provision amends or replaces ('alters or abrogates’) a specific provision of the Constitution, that * * * provision should be published * *
4) "[0]ther provisions which are still operative, though possibly they may need thereafter to be construed in conjunction with the amendatory provision, need not necessarily be published”. (Emphasis added.)
The quoted paragraph from Pontiac was heavily relied on by appellants. What weight should we assign it, and what does it mean?
First of all it relates to a post-election case, whereas the instant matter relates to a pre-election case. Carman and Jackson encourage us to use different eyeglasses before election from those we would use sitting where the Pontiac Court sat after election. This probably would mean we should:
1— pay more attention to the intended purpose of publication,
2— credit the voter with more competence to cope with a number of altered provisions,
3— lean toward publication if there is any doubt whether a provision "amends or replaces”, "alters or abrogates”,
4— lean toward publication if there is any doubt whether a "still operative provision” should be published.
While the question of "alteration or abrogation” will be considered in connection with each consti*624tutional provision affected, most of them have the same general problem as art 2, § 9, where the approval in a referendum election is by a majority. The proposed Tisch Amendment §§ 2 and 2(a) modify this rule by requiring a 60% vote where a new or increased tax is involved. In other words, any referendum is decided by majority vote, except one relating to a legislatively enacted new or increased tax, in which case the affirmation shall be by 60% vote.
Is such an exception "an alteration or abrogation”? Let us look to the four tests.
1) The intended purpose of the Constitution is to inform the voter so he or she can vote intelligently on the referendum. Is it important for the voter to know that in all instances except new or increased tax legislation, if there is a referendum, the voter can speak by a majority vote rather than a 60% vote? I believe the voter is entitled to this information.
2) Would the voter be confused by reference to six constitutional provisions which I believe the proposed Tisch Amendment would impact? I believe not.
3) Pontiac posits publication where the proposed constitutional provision "amends or replaces ('alters or abrogates’) a specific provision of the Constitution”. Does Tisch Amendment §§ 2 and 2(a) alter or amend art 2, § 9 by effectively inserting an exception of a 60% vote for a simple majority in case of a new or increased tax legislation referendum? Certainly any normal understanding of the terms alter or amend would so indicate. Whether the alteration or amendment is direct or by implication makes no difference because the purpose of these terms is to lay the foundation for necessary elector information. Cf. Alan v Wayne County, 388 Mich 210, 285; 200 NW2d 628 (1972).
*6254) In the case of doubt, although I see none, between whether the modification by exception is an "amendment” or a section still operative, though in need of construction with the amending provision, we should lean toward publication.
To sum up, the precedential cases either support my analysis or are compatible with it.
III. Does Tisch Alter or Abrogate Per Art 12, §2?
My analysis of art 12, § 2 is that the constitutional purpose is to allow maximum reasonable freedom to citizens in preparation and circulation of petitions, at least as to post-circulation review. On the other hand I read art 12, §2 and the principal cases to indicate that information should be freely available for electors on election day, where that can be enforced prior to election. And finally outside of the possibility of egregious disregard of the constitution, after the electoral vote a policy of "election-cures-error” will prevail. In short, at this post-approved-circulation, pre-election day point in the electoral time table, the order of the day is to review petition information with great understanding and concentrate on any possible informational omissions in publishing that may be cured prior to election day.
We turn then to the following words from the Pontiac opinion:
"In determining what constitutes compliance with the constitutional requirement as to publication, a matter of prime importance is the purpose that prompted the people of the State of Michigan to include such a provision in the constitution. All will agree that this [the art 12, §2, 1908 constitutional equivalent] was a means adopted by which it was believed the elector *626would be definitely advised as to the purpose of the proposed amendment and what provision of the constitutional law it modified or supplanted.” 262 Mich 338, 344.
The issue before us could be the narrow one, whether the "alter or abrogate” provision of MCL 168.482 relating to petition circulation was violated or the broader one whether art 12, § 2, ¶ 2 relating to publication was violated. If our decision were that MCL 168.482 were violated, we would in effect throw out the baby with the bath and negate the effort of 420,000 sincere petition signers. However, on the other hand, if we fail to examine whether art 12, §2, ¶ 2 was violated relative to publication we jeopardize the ability of millions of electors to cast an intelligent ballot. Furthermore, because of the adopted "election-cures-error” doctrine, this is the people’s last chance to have judicial determination as to the extent of information about the proposed Tisch Amendment that they are entitled to receive from the election officials.
In one sense the parties in this matter argued only the narrow statutory issue. In another sense they argued the broader constitutional issue as well. Insofar as the parties relied on such cases as Pontiac, Jackson and Carman they were considering the implication of the constitutional interpretation of alter or abrogate as regards publication, not circulation. For example, the language from Pontiac, supra, begins "In determining what constitutes compliance with the constitutional requirement as to publication” (emphasis added). Publication, of course, refers to post-petition circulation action and to art 12, § 2, ¶ 2, and not to MCL 168.482. Jackson, 316 Mich 694, 706-707, also considers publication and relies on Pontiac. De-*627Maggio, 300 Mich 251, 256-257, also deals with publication. Carman distinguishes between publication and circulation and deals with art 12, § 2, ¶ 2. 384 Mich 443, 454.
In conclusion, since the electoral time table requires us to speak now or never and since the parties have consciously or unconsciously considered the question of "alter or abrogate” from the constitutional publication standpoint,7 it is in the public interest for us to consider the broader constitutional issue so that those going to the polling booths may be informed.
To say that it does not "alter”, or even stronger, "abrogate” the Michigan Constitution is to underestimate the revolutionary character of the Tisch Amendment and to do violence to the plain meaning of the English language.
The revolutionary intent and purpose of the Tisch proposal is best stated in the forthright language of the sponsor of the Tisch proposal himself, Robert Tisch. His clarion words under oath must be considered by every citizen of Michigan. They are:
"[T]he 'Tisch’ Amendment presents a substantial change in the Michigan Constitution of 1963, if adopted, and, in addition thereto, would have signiñcant impact *628upon the operative affect [sic] of our form of government.” (Emphasis added.)8
What is arresting and demands attention is that the author of the Tisch Amendment in this statement does not say that his proposed amendment would change the tax provisions of the Michigan Constitution but that the proposed amendment would have a "significant impact upon the operative affect [sic] of our form of government”.
These words indicate an amendatory proposal far broader and more fundamental than the then-considered basic and far-reaching constitutional amendments such as the 15-mill and sales tax diversion amendments with which our previous principal opinions on the constitutionality of initiatory opinions have dealt. These words introduce an amendatory proposal which, unlike the 15-mill or the sales tax diversion amendment, is not limited to tax matters but which in the candid and carefully chosen words of the author and proponent of the proposal "impact * * * the operative affect [sic] of our form of government”.
Was Robert Tisch only engaged in idle boasting, in predicting his authored amendatory proposal would impact not only the taxing power of the Constitution but the very "operative affect [sic] of our form of government” itself? Is this language idle boasting or is it indeed an honest and accurate appraisal of what the Tisch Amendment proposes? This is strong, powerful, revolutionary language more characteristic of forces in our society ' which would change our form of government than of those which would change our tax laws.
The fact of the matter is that in analyzing this *629case we ignore Robert Tisch’s language at our peril. For he has "called it as it is”. The Tisch Amendment does indeed "impact * * * the operative affect [sic] of our form of government”, not merely the constitutional taxing power.
A. Alterations Per Trial Judge
The trial court, Judge Giddings, has very carefully analyzed those provisions of the Constitution "impacted” beyond the article on taxation and there is no question but that the Tisch Amendment "alters or abrogates” sections of the Constitution other than those listed on the initiative petition as "altered or abrogated”.
The learned trial judge held that the Tisch Amendment "altered or abrogated” the following sections of the Constitution:
Art 2, § 9. Initiative and referendum etc.
Art 4, § 1. Legislative power.
Art 4, § 33. Bills passed; approval by governor or veto etc.
Art 4, § 34. Bills, referendum.
Art 4, §40. Liquor control commission; liquor tax etc.
I do not agree with the learned judge that MCL 168.482 was violated. I would, however, hold that with respect to each of the above mentioned sections, art 12, § 2, ¶ 2 was violated. I will examine these sections seriatim.
Art 2, §9 and Art 4, § 34
It takes no great effort or analysis to immediately see that one particular provision in both art 2, §9 and art 4, §34 has been "altered or abrogated”.
*630Article 2, § 9 in pertinent part provides:
"No law as to which the power of referendum properly has been invoked shall be effective thereafter unless approved by a majority of the electors voting thereon at the next general election.” (Emphasis added.)
Article 4, § 34:
"Any bill passed by the legislature and approved by the governor, except a bill appropriating money, may provide that it will not become law unless approved by a majority of the electors voting thereon.” (Emphasis added.)
The significant point in the above two sections of the Constitution is that whether a referendum is caused by popular initiative (art 2, §9) or action by the Legislature (art 4, §34), the people can exercise their will by a majority vote.
The Tisch Amendment would change all this. It would deny a majority of the people the significant right to approve a new tax or increase an old one. The denial of majority decision is effected by the proposed art 9, §§ 2 and 2(a) of the Tisch Amendment.
Proposed art 9, § 2 in pertinent part provides:
"The Legislature shall not impose any new * * * [or increased old tax] until such proposed tax or increased tax is first approved by affirmation of the electors * * * 9>
Proposed art 9, § 2(a) provides:
"Sixty (60) percent of the votes cast in favor of the question shall constitute affirmation.”
It is not, of course, the office of this Court to *631comment as to a policy of the people speaking in an election by a 60% vote as opposed to a majority vote, but it is clearly the office of this Court to determine whether the change is an "alteration or abrogation” of our existing Constitution that must be brought to the attention of the people deciding to adopt a proposed amendment. Taking away the right of the majority to exercise their will in initiative and referendum actions most definitely impacts "the operative affect [sic] of our form of government”. That there has been an "alteration or abrogation” is as clear as the fact that if the proposed Tisch Amendment were adopted the people could no longer approve a tax increase or new tax by majority vote.
Article 4, § 1
Article 4, § 1 provides:
"The legislative power of the state of Michigan is vested in a senate and house of representatives.”
It is axiomatic that the Legislature has the power of the purse, i.e., the power to tax and appropriate. Article 9, § 1 recognizes the Legislature’s taxing and appropriating power in providing as follows:
"The legislature shall impose taxes sufficient with other resources to pay the expenses of state government.”
Proposed Tisch Amendment art 9, § 2 in pertinent part provides:
"The legislature shall not impose any new [or increased old tax] until such proposed tax or increased *632tax is first approved by affirmation of the electors ‡ * * 9t
The existing Constitution vests the legislative power, including the power to tax, in the Legislature. However, proposed Tisch, art 9, § 2, prohibits the Legislature from exercising that power in certain instances without affirmance of the electors, incidentally by 60% (proposed art 9, § 2[a]). In effect, proposed art 9, §§2 and 2(a) "alter” or amend art 4, § 1 to read as follows:
"The legislative power of the state of Michigan is vested in a senate and house of representatives except THAT NEW OR INCREASED TAX LEGISLATION CAN BE ENACTED ONLY WHEN FIRST APPROVED BY AFFIRMATION OF THE ELECTORS.”
Clearly, proposed Tisch art 9, §§ 2 and 2(a) "alter or abrogate” a fundamental existing provision of the Constitution, namely that the legislative power is vested in a Senate and House of Representatives, and I would so hold.9
Article 4, § 33
The analysis applied to art 4, § 1, can be utilized with equal force to find art 4, § 33 has been "altered or abrogated” by the proposed amendment. That section provides:_
*633"Every bill passed by the legislature shall be presented to the governor before it becomes law * * *. If he approves, he shall within that time sign and file it with the secretary of state and it shall become law.”
With the advent of art 9, § 2 and 2(a), set forth above, the process described would be augmented by the additional step of voter affirmance whenever the bill involved imposition of new taxes or changes in taxes extant in 1978. Once again, the proposed amendment would essentially write in a limitation phrase, curtailing the operation of this section where tax matters are concerned.
Thus, art 4, § 33 is "altered or abrogated” by the proposal, and must be published , by the express terms of art 12, § 2, ¶ 2.
Article 4, § 40
In pertinent part, art 4, § 40 establishing a state liquor control system, provides:
"The legislature may provide for an excise tax on such sales.”
It is obvious that the proposed Tisch Amendment "alters or abrogates” this provision. Section 2 of the proposed Tisch Amendment provides in part as follows:
"The legislature shall not impose any new tax * * * until such proposed tax or increased tax is first approved by affirmation of the electors * * *.”
As we have seen, existing art 4, §40 provides: "The legislature may provide for an excise tax on such sales”, but the proposed Tisch Amendment provides "The legislature shall not impose any *634new tax”, and "tax” is defined to include "any money collected by the state”, unless "first approved by affirmation of the electors”. In other words art 4, §40 is effectively "altered” to read: "The legislature may provide for an excise tax on such sales provided that if it is a new or increased excise tax it is first approved by an affirmation of the electors”.
B. Alterations Per Plaintiff
In the complaint filed in Ingham Circuit Court, plaintiff Zolton Ferency directed the court’s attention to eight provisions of the 1963 Constitution which would be altered or abrogated by passage of the Tisch Amendment. The trial court agreed that art 4, § 34 was so impacted, but did not discuss the remaining provisions.
I find plaintiff’s contentions as to this section, as well as to art 4, § 27, well-taken. However, I am in agreement with the trial court’s implicit rejection of the following six additional sections:
Art 8, § 5. University controlling boards.
Art 6, §§ 1, 4, 5. Judicial power.
Art 7, § 2. County charters.
Art 7, § 21. Cities and villages.
Article 4, § 27
Article 4, § 27 provides as follows:
"No act shall take effect until the expiration of 90 days from the end of the session at which it was passed, but the legislature may give immediate effect to acts by a two-thirds vote of the members elected to and serving in each house.”
Article 9, §§ 2 and 2(a), as proposed by the Tisch *635Amendment, have already been quoted and discussed. The sections provide that the Legislature shall not impose any new or increased tax without the approval of a 60% majority in a referendum. It is obvious that such tax legislation, requiring approval of 60% of the voters in a referendum, will not have "immediate effect” or take effect upon the expiration of 90 days as now provided in art 4, § 27. As a consequence, with respect to tax legislation imposing a new or increased tax, existing art 4, § 27 would be non-operable if the Tisch Amendment passed. Therefore I find that the proposed Tisch provisions art 9, §§ 2 and 2(a) would "alter or abrogate” art 4, § 27.
Other Sections
Plaintiff’s rather cursory explanation of the alteration or abrogation of these sections contains a major analytical fault. In each instance, the potential alteration or abrogation is alleged because of the novel and extensive definition of "tax” of the proposed art 9, § 33(a):
" 'Tax’ means any money collected by the state or any unit of local government to pay for any service or product performed or produced by the state or any unit of local government and shall be interpreted and construed as including any fee, levy, user charge, special assessment, license, permit, weight or volume tax or any imposition of any nature whatsoever to include appropriation to meet deficiencies in state funds. 'New tax’ means any tax not devised, specified, indentified [sic] or titled and which is not in effect when this amendment is adopted.”
Facially, this broad definition would seem to open a veritable Pandora’s box of troubles and to have implications for the general supervisory power of *636the judiciary and the controlling boards of the state universities, as well as the power to levy additional taxes granted to county charter commissions, cities, and villages.
However, the proposed amendment only requires electoral affirmance of new or increased "taxes” enacted by the Legislature. Proposed art 9, §2 states:
"* * * The legislature shall not impose any new tax nor shall there be any increase in the rate of or any broadening of the base of any tax which was in effect during the calendar year 1978, until such proposed tax or increased tax is first approved by affirmation of the electors voting on the question at the next general election following the passage of the legislation proposing such tax or increased tax.” (Emphasis added.)
By the terms of the proposed amendment, "affirmation” is necessitated only for new or increased taxes which are enacted by the Legislature. It is therefore erroneous to argue that provisions of the Constitution which — owing to the broadened definition of "tax” — potentially involve imposition of so-defined new or increased taxes by other bodies are subject to electoral approval. It would strain logic as well as the electoral system to find that, merely because the authority of municipal corporations to "tax” under the new definition was originally derived from the Legislature, new or increased old "taxes” are void unless approved by 60% affirmation of the electors.
As a consequence of this analysis, I would hold that the proposed Tisch Amendment does not alter or abrogate art 8, § 5, art 6, §§ 1, 4, 5, or art 7, §21.
Conclusion
I concur with the majority that the Tisch *637Amendment petition was not invalid. However, my study of the Constitution and principal precedential cases convinces me that this moment of time, between the submission of the petition with the necessary number of signatures and the election, is extremely critical. It is the only practical time to test not only the sufficiency of the circulated petition but also the extent of notice that is required under Article 12, § 2, ¶ 2. It is the only practical time to test the sufficiency of the notice, since after election nothing effective can be done because of the "election-cures-error” doctrine.
It may be argued that now is not the time to test the sufficiency of the notice, because the appropriate election officials have not yet published their notice. It is true they have not published their notice, but they have effectively published what would be in the notice by the position they have taken in this matter. Their position is that the proposed Tisch Amendment does not alter or abrogate provisions of the existing Constitution that I believe are clearly altered or abrogated. This is particularly significant, because their arguments are based on cases relating to publication, not circulation. As a consequence, the publication notice issue as well as the circulation issue has effectively been argued. Then, too, the inexorable election schedule is such that election officials will not have, or will have inadequate, time to publish correctly if this Court does not speak now.
I conclude that Carman is the controlling case here, because it is the latest and it alone relates to facts similar to the instant case, i.e., brought as a post-circulation, pre-election case, the other cited cases being exclusively post-election. I would hold therefore that the rule in Pontiac must be *638modified accordingly and that equal emphasis must be given to the four factors in its oft-quoted test from page 262 Mich 344, rather than just the last one, where suit is brought before election. See supra 622.
I would hold therefore that art 12, § 2 differentiated between the notice requirements of petition circulation set forth in ¶ 1 and the notice requirements for publication by the appropriate election officials set forth in ¶ 2. I concur that the petition circulation requirements were met. I would hold that the publication requirements have not been met with respect to art 2, § 9, art 4, §§ 1, 27, 33, 34, 40.
No costs, a public question.
See Appendix for a reproduction of the Tisch petition.
Article 12, § 2, ¶ 1 states:
"Amendment by petition and vote of electors. Sec. 2. Amendments may be proposed to this constitution by petition of the regis*611tered electors of this state. Every petition shall include the full text of the proposed amendment, and be signed by registered electors of the state equal in number to at least 10 percent of the total vote cast for all candidates for governor at the last preceding general election at which a governor was elected. Such petitions shall be filed with the person authorized by law to receive the same at least 120 days before the election at which the proposed amendment is to be voted upon. Any such petition shall be in the form, and shall be signed and circulated in such manner, as prescribed by law. The person authorized by law to receive such petition shall upon its receipt determine, as provided by law, the validity and sufficiency of the signatures on the petition, and make an official announcement thereof at least 60 days prior to the election at which the proposed amendment is to be voted upon.”
Article 12, § 2, ¶ 2 states:
"Submission of proposal; publication. Any amendment proposed by such petition .shall be submitted, not less than 120 days after it was filed, to the electors at the next general election. Such proposed amendment, existing provisions of the constitution which would be altered or abrogated thereby, and the question as it shall appear on the ballot shall be published in full as provided by law. Copies of such publication shall be posted in each polling place and furnished to news media as provided by law.”
Quoted ante, 409 Mich 606 (1980).
MCL 168.482; MSA 6.1482 states in full:
"The size of all petitions mentioned in this section shall be 8-1/2 inches by 13 inches. If the measure to be submitted proposes a constitutional amendment, initiation of legislation, or referendum of legislation, the heading of each part of the petition shall be prepared in the following form and printed in capital letters in 14-point bold face type:
"INITIATIVE PETITION
"AMENDMENT TO THE CONSTITUTION
"OR
"INITIATION OF LEGISLATION
"OR
"REFERENDUM OF LEGISLATION
"PROPOSED BY INITIATIVE PETITION
"The full text of the amendment so proposed shall follow, printed in 8-point type. If the proposal would alter or abrogate any existing provision of the constitution, the petition should so state and the provisions to be altered or abrogated shall be inserted, preceded by the words:
" 'Provisions of existing constitution altered or abrogated by such proposal if adopted.’
"We, the undersigned qualified and registered electors, city residents in the (strike 1) of. . . .in the county of....., township state of Michigan, hereby respectively petition for said (amendment to constitution) (initiation of legislation) (referendum of legislation).
"Immediately above the place for signatures, on each part of the petition shall be printed in 12-point type the following warning:
"WARNING
"Whoever knowingly signs this petition more than once, signs a name other than his own, signs when not a qualified and registered elector, or sets opposite his signature on a petition, a date other than the actual date such signature was affixed, is violating the provisions *615of this act. The remainder of the petition form shall be as provided following the warning in section 544c.”
In City of Jackson v Comm’r of Revenue, 316 Mich 694, 716; 26 NW2d 569 (1947), this Court addressed a similar situation, holding: "Sections 2 and 3 of article 17, as amended in 1941, as well as Act No. 246, impose a duty on all of the above-named officials [Secretary of State, Attorney General and State Board of Canvassers]. Sections 2 and 3 of article 17 were not superseded by Act No. 246, Pub Acts 1941, nor could they be. The Constitution cannot be amended or superseded by legislation.”
We note in passing that the Solicitor General conceded to this Court during oral arguments that the Secretary of State, armed as he is with expert legal advice in construing the Constitution, is held to a higher standard under art 12, § 2. It is the constitutional duty of the Secretary to carefully review the effects of the proposed amendment on the Constitution and publish the "existing provisions of the Constitution which would be altered or abrogated thereby” by placing them on the ballot, posting them at each polling place and furnishing them to the news media. Const 1963, art 12, § 2, ¶ 2. This higher standard assures that the public will be made aware of the proposed amendment’s scope and meaning before the critical time of voting, thereby lessening the import of requiring the circulator to attach a comprehensive list of "altered or abrogated” provisions to his petition.
Affidavit of Robert E. Tisch in Support of Circuit Court Motion to Stay, p 1, ¶ 3, September 5,1980 (emphasis added).
Section 3(f) likewise may alter Const 1963, art 4, § 1. It reads in pertinent part:
"The Legislature shall not change, adjust or alter the state school aid formula in effect for fiscal year 1980-81, or any fiscal year thereafter, to diminish or reduce the yield in number of dollars per mill per child in any school district of the state without approval, of the governor and consent, by roll call vote, of 4/5ths of the members elected to and serving in each house of the legislature.”
However, since it was not covered in argument before us and since it would call for the publication of the same provision we do not here consider or rule on it.

=== CASE 2217228 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:23.481794+00 ===

347 Mass. 390 (1964)
198 N.E.2d 297
RALPH SULMONETTI & others[1]
vs.
FRANK HAYES & others.[2]
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Worcester.
January 6, 1964.
April 30, 1964.
Present: WILKINS, C.J., CUTTER, KIRK, SPIEGEL, & REARDON, JJ.
Dominic A. Caronna (Ernest S. Hayeck with him) for the defendants.
Edward J. McCabe for the plaintiffs.
KIRK, J.
This is an appeal by the defendants Frank Hayes (Frank) and Emily Hayes (Emily), and Grafton Oil Company, Inc. (Grafton Oil), from a final decree which (a) enjoined Frank and Emily from engaging in the oil business in Worcester County for ten years from February 2, 1960, and from in any way soliciting oil customers of any of the plaintiffs, and (b) enjoined Grafton Oil, its officers, servants, and agents from soliciting in any way the oil customers of the plaintiffs.
The judge was not requested to file a report of the material facts under G.L.c. 214, § 23, as appearing in St. 1947, c. 365, § 2. He did, however, file a voluntary statement of findings of fact. We have a report of the evidence pursuant to designations made under Rule 2 of the Rules for the Regulation of Practice before the Full Court (1952), 328 Mass. 693, which is to be treated as a report of all the evidence. Hanrihan v. Hanrihan, 342 Mass. 559, 564, and cases cited. So treated, it is our duty to examine the evidence and decide the case according to our own judgment, accepting as true the findings of the trial judge, whether based wholly or partly upon oral evidence, unless they are shown to be plainly wrong, and finding for ourselves such other *392 and additional facts as we deem to be justified by the evidence. Carroll v. Markey, 321 Mass. 87, 87-88. Hanrihan v. Hanrihan, 342 Mass. 559, 564, and cases cited. We accordingly summarize the findings made by the judge and by us, augmented by admitted or undisputed facts in the report of the evidence, in order to pass upon the propriety of the relief granted in the decree.
In 1950, upon the death of his father, Frank, then twenty-six years old and married, took over the operation of S.J. Hayes & Son, the name under which his father had been engaged for many years in the retail fuel oil business in North Grafton. Frank had been identified with his father in the business since 1945. The business at all times was conducted from the Hayes residence which was owned by Frank's mother. The property consisted of a large house and yard. The business office was on the first floor of the dwelling. In the yard were five fuel oil storage tanks, two of 12,000 gallon capacity, one of 10,000 gallon capacity, and two of 5,000 gallon capacity. Frank's wife, Emily, who had participated in the business to a limited extent prior to the father's death, actively assisted her husband after 1950, particularly in receiving and processing telephone orders for oil and in collecting bills. Emily's business aptitude, interest, and capabilities were greater than those of her husband. The business employed two truck drivers and a part time bookkeeper. Fifty per cent of the Hayes customers lived in North Grafton; the remainder lived in Shrewsbury, Grafton Center, Worcester, and Millbury.
Under Frank's management the business was not a success. By 1960 the liabilities were nearly $43,000; the tangible assets consisted of three or four used trucks, some fuel oil, and office equipment. The accounts receivable were estimated at $19,000. One of the principal creditors was the plaintiff Central Oil of which the plaintiff Sulmonetti was an officer.
On February 3, 1960, Frank by a writing sold the business to Sulmonetti (the buyer). The agreement expressly recognized that the Hayes oil business was in financial difficulty. *393 The buyer bought the assets and the good will, including the right to use the name Hayes in any reasonable variation, and agreed to pay off the scheduled liabilities of the business, to exonerate Frank from liability, and to employ Frank on mutually agreeable terms. Frank agreed not to "reenter the business of selling fuel oil in any capacity, directly or indirectly, or compete with Buyer in the fuel oil business in any way in Worcester County for a period of ten (10) years" after the date of the agreement, or after he ceased working for the buyer, whichever event occurred later. As separate compensation for the agreement not to compete the buyer paid Frank $10,000 with the understanding that if Frank broke the agreement not to compete the buyer could recover the entire $10,000 or, at his option, specifically enforce the agreement. The agreement recognized Frank's right, on his own, to sell, install and service heating systems, but, in so doing, he was not to solicit customers of the buyer.
The buyer thereafter organized the plaintiff Hayes Oil Corporation, employed Frank as manager at $100 a week plus a flat weekly expense allowance, paid $80 a month for the use of the office and yard on the Hayes premises, hired the two truck drivers and part time bookkeeper, and paid for two of the telephones on the premises including the business office telephone.
Although Emily did not sign the agreement with the buyer on February 3, 1960, she was then, or shortly thereafter, aware of it. As the winter of 1961 approached, and probably much earlier, following consultations with a lawyer known to both Frank and his wife, a decision was made and a plan devised by them to resume the business of selling fuel oil at the Hayes premises commencing January 1, 1962. To this end in December, 1961, Grafton Oil was organized, with Emily as the sole stockholder and as president and treasurer. The part time bookkeeper was temporary clerk. Toward the close of December, 1961, and during the days immediately thereafter, the following took place: fliers were sent to all householders in Grafton and to householders *394 elsewhere, including the buyer's customers, announcing, over Emily's name as proprietor, the opening for business of Grafton Oil at the Hayes premises, with telephone number, on January 1, 1962; an advertisement to the same effect was published in the local newspaper; notice was sent by Frank's mother to Hayes Oil to vacate the premises on January 31, 1962; the two truck drivers and the part time bookkeeper who had been working for the buyer were hired by Grafton Oil on the order of Grafton Oil on December 31, 1961, a 6,000 gallon trailer tank from another wholesaler was parked in the yard to dispense oil to smaller tank trucks operated by the two drivers who commenced on January 1, 1962, the delivery of oil on behalf of Grafton Oil to the buyer's customers; telephone calls to the Hayes residential line were answered "Grafton Oil"; the extension line from the residence to the office on January 2, 1962, was severed to Frank's and Emily's knowledge but not reported to the telephone company or to the buyer. During the early days of January, 1962, Emily actively solicited the buyer's customers and others to buy from Grafton Oil. In soliciting the buyer's customers, she made use of the buyer's customer list. Thirty-seven customers of the buyer cancelled their orders to the buyer. Emily planned to take away from the buyer as many customers as she could, and actually took away approximately two hundred.
During this period, Frank remained in the employ of the buyer and played an apparently passive role in organizing Grafton Oil and in soliciting the buyer's customers. Although asked by the buyer's representative to help win back customers the buyer had lost, Frank made no effort to do so. He did not personally make any deliveries to the buyer's customers, or try to expedite deliveries by drivers newly hired by the buyer. Deliveries to the customers of Grafton Oil were prompt; those to the buyer's customers lagged behind schedule.
The buyer filed this bill of complaint on January 12, 1962.
The judge quite rightly concluded that Frank and his wife, acting in concert, had contrived to deprive the buyer *395 of the fruits of his purchase for their own advantage. He reasonably inferred that Frank's passive role was an assumed one to give the impression that he was not violating his agreement with the buyer. Similarly, the judge inferred that testimony of a marital rift between Frank and Emily was, in part at least, a screen to conceal the fact that they were acting in collaboration to achieve a common end.
The principal question is what relief, if any, the buyer should be granted against the defendants.
As to Frank, the governing principles are clear. He is bound by his express covenant not to compete if it is limited reasonably in time and place. Old Corner Book Store v. Upham, 194 Mass. 101, 104-105. Tobin v. Cody, 343 Mass. 716, 720-721, and cases cited. We find nothing unreasonable in either respect in the terms of the covenant quoted earlier in this opinion. The decree, however, goes somewhat beyond the terms of the covenant in one respect, and falls short of its terms in another respect. The covenant provided that Frank should not "reenter the business of selling fuel oil in any capacity ... in Worcester County for a period of ten (10) years after the execution of ... [the] Agreement, or after he ceases to work for the Buyer, whichever event occurs later." The decree in part provides that Frank is "enjoined ... from ... engaging in the oil business in " Worcester County. The decree against Frank should be modified by substituting the words "the business of selling fuel oil" for the words "the oil business." The decree also makes the injunction effective for ten years from February 2, 1960. It should be effective for ten years from January 12, 1962, the day when the bill of complaint was filed which for practical purposes may be said to be the date when Frank's employment by the buyer terminated.
The decree as against Emily presents a different question. It is identical with the decree against Frank, which was founded on the express covenant. Emily, however, did not sign the covenant not to compete, and, since she was not the seller of the Hayes business, there is no basis to imply an *396 agreement by her not to compete. The evidence does not bring the case within the class of cases where a third party induces or causes the covenantor to violate his covenant (Moran v. Dunphy, 177 Mass. 485; Beekman v. Marsters, 195 Mass. 205, 209-213; Comerford v. Meier, 302 Mass. 398, 404-405; Lumley v. Gye, 2 El. & Bl. 216), or of those cases where a third party merely assists or acts as the covenantor's agent in avoiding his covenant. Weickgenant v. Eccles, 173 Mich. 695, 700-701. Howell v. Keck, 127 N.J. Eq. 87. Lyle v. Haskins, 24 Wash.2d 883, 901.
The evidence does, however, clearly establish that Emily deliberately and wilfully connived with her husband, and purposefully acted both with him and independently of him, to appropriate to herself and her husband the good will that the buyer had purchased from Frank. The good will thus bought and the good will which enured to the buyer after the purchase were exploited by Emily and her husband to their joint advantage in derogation of the sale and in breach of Frank's duty as an employee of the buyer. Although we are not aware of any reported case where the factual situation is sufficiently similar for us to cite as being precisely in point, we recognize that one of the concepts underlying the principle which restricts the right of a seller of a business to compete with the buyer in such a way as to deprive the buyer of the good will which he has purchased is the fundamental concept of fair dealing. See Novelty Bias Binding Co. v. Shevrin, 342 Mass. 714, 717; Ranft v. Reimers, 200 Ill. 386, 394. Emily's conduct, in conjunction with that of her husband, in the circumstances here disclosed, amounts to a total disregard of that concept and reaches a form of unfair competition which calls for injunctive relief. Injunctive relief has been granted in comparable cases. Fleckenstein Bros. Co. v. Fleckenstein, 21 Dick. (N.J.) 252, 260. Merager v. Turnbull, 2 Wash.2d 711, 725. Annotation, 94 A.L.R. 345-351. Williston, Contracts (Rev. ed.) § 1641, pp. 4601-4602. We do not undertake to lay down any broad rule. The facts of the case dictate the result. A decree should be entered which will afford the buyer reasonable *397 protection from the activities engaged in by Emily. Foss v. Roby, 195 Mass. 292, 297-298. Accordingly, the decree should be modified to provide that Emily be enjoined for a period of ten years commencing January 12, 1962, from soliciting, directly or indirectly, for the sale of fuel oil, any person who was a customer of S.J. Hayes & Son and, for the same period, from engaging, directly or indirectly, in the business of selling fuel oil in Worcester, Grafton Center, North Grafton, Millbury, and Shrewsbury.
The decree is to be modified in accordance with the foregoing and, as so modified, it is affirmed with costs.
So ordered.
NOTES
[1]  The other plaintiffs are Hayes Oil Corporation (Hayes Oil) and Central Oil Company of Worcester (Central Oil).
[2]  The other defendants are Emily Hayes, wife of the defendant Frank, Emma F. Hayes, mother of Frank, and Grafton Oil Company, Inc. The bill was dismissed as to the defendant Emma F. Hayes, and there has been no appeal from that aspect of the decree by the plaintiffs.

=== CASE 2217231 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:23.544576+00 ===

297 N.W.2d 523 (1980)
CITY OF DUBUQUE, Iowa, A Municipal Corporation, Appellant,
v.
TELEGRAPH HERALD, INC., Appellee.
No. 63800.
Supreme Court of Iowa.
October 15, 1980.
*524 Barry A. Lindahl, City Sol., Dubuque, for appellant.
Allan J. Carew of Fuerste, Carew, Coyle, Juergens & Sudmeier, Dubuque, for appellee.
Considered by REYNOLDSON, C. J., and LeGRAND, UHLENHOPP, ALLBEE and McGIVERIN, JJ.
*525 REYNOLDSON, Chief Justice.
Both this appeal and a related appeal we have decided today, Telegraph Herald, Inc. v. City of Dubuque, 297 N.W.2d 529 (Iowa 1980), arise out of the Herald's attempts to secure the names of, and other information about, applicants for the position of Dubuque city manager. This case involves the Herald's efforts to secure this information under Iowa's public records act, chapter 68A, The Code 1979.
Dubuque brought a section 68A.8 injunction action to restrain the newspaper from examining the records relating to the applicants, and for a declaration that the names of the applicants and the contents of their applications were confidential records within the meaning of section 68A.7. The city alleged in the alternative that such examination was precluded under section 68A.8 because it was not in the public interest and would substantially and irreparably injure some or all of the applicants. Trial court held all of the applications were subject to the Herald's inspection except those of five applicants who requested confidentiality. Dubuque has appealed, asserting none of the applications should be subjected to examination. The Herald has cross-appealed, contending trial court erred in not enforcing its request for information concerning all applicants. We affirm on Dubuque's appeal and affirm in part and reverse in part on the Herald's cross-appeal.
Dubuque commenced this action July 6, 1979. The Herald's answer as amended limited its inquiry to the name, address, employers, education, training and experience of each of the forty-one applicants for the city manager vacancy. The amended answer also alleged that chapter 68A "constitutes an unconstitutional prior restraint on the press to the extent it prohibits or purports to prohibit [the Herald's] right of access to the information it requested of [Dubuque]."
Trial was held promptly on July 13. The evidence disclosed the Dubuque city manager had resigned. The city's advertisement for applicants to fill the vacancy warned the applications were subject to the open meetings law, chapter 28A, The Code. The assistant city manager testified the purpose of this warning was "to put prospective applicants on notice that by reason of Iowa Law their identities might be revealed in a public meeting of some kind."
Forty-one persons made application to the city council. Of these, thirty-nine were employed at other jobs when they submitted applications, and five specifically requested their applications remain confidential. Supporting the Herald's written demands for information concerning all these persons, its managing editor testified it was "extremely important" that the public be informed of the names, addresses, employment status, training, experience and education of the applicants because "[i]t is in the public interest to know that the best candidate has been selected, and what the qualifications of the candidates are."
July 17, 1979, trial court issued its decree, finding the specific information sought by the amended answer was neither personal nor confidential, and that there was no evidence of any potential adverse consequence to the applicants that might outweigh the public interest in disclosure. The court denied the city's request to judicially notice the "well established business custom and practice that an application for employment will not be disclosed publicly without the consent of the applicant." It held all of the applications were public records, subject to inspection, except those of the five persons requesting confidentiality:
By failing to advise these five applicants that the request[s] for confidentiality could not be honored, it does seem that the public, acting through its duly constituted public officials, should, in equity, be estopped from breaching the implied contract of confidentiality in view of the absence of any claim of bad faith or intentional impropriety on the part of the Mayor or City Council. To that extent, the Court does feel that the need that the government not only be fair but appear to be fair, outweighs the public's right to know of the five candidates who sought confidentiality and were given to understand *526 that they would receive confidential treatment.
Trial court also held it was unnecessary to consider the Herald's claim that chapter 68A imposed an unconstitutional prior restraint on the press to the extent it prohibited or purported to prohibit the Herald's right to the requested information, because the issue before the court was the "disclosure of information" and not a "prior restraint" on the "publication of information."
We discuss the issues presented by the appeal and cross-appeal in the divisions that follow.
I. Did the applications fall within the section 68A.7(11) exception to public record disclosure requirements?
Dubuque argues none of the applications submitted are subject to inspection because they are exempt from disclosure as "[p]ersonal information in confidential personnel records of public bodies ... including ... cities" under section 68A.7(11), The Code.
Section 68A.7, which itemizes exceptions to chapter 68A disclosure requirements, must be interpreted in light of the purpose and intent of the public records act.
Section 68A.1 defines "public records" to include "all records and documents of or belonging to this state or any ... city." Both parties agree the applications at issue are public records of Dubuque. Section 68A.2 insures that "[e]very citizen of Iowa shall have the right to examine all public records and to copy such records, and the news media may publish such records, unless some other provision of the Code expressly limits such right or requires such records to be kept secret or confidential...."
The legislature's intent is further illuminated by the following caveat found in section 68A.8 (which provides for an injunction action to withhold records):
The district court shall take into account the policy of this chapter that free and open examination of public records is generally in the public interest, even though such examination may cause inconvenience or embarrassment to public officials or others.
In Howard v. Des Moines Register and Tribune Co., 283 N.W.2d 289, 299 (Iowa 1979), cert. denied, 445 U.S. 904, 100 S.Ct. 1081, 63 L.Ed.2d 320 (1980), we endorsed the concept that the act established a liberal policy of access from which departures are to be made only under discrete circumstances. It is plain that our analysis must start from the premise that chapter 68A is to be interpreted liberally to provide broad public access to Dubuque's public records.
Whether an application for an appointive city office is "personal information in confidential personnel records" is a question of first impression in Iowa. The language employed by the legislature in this section 68A.7(11) exception weighs heavily against the city's position. The records that may be withheld from the public obviously do not include all personnel records-only confidential personnel records. In addition, even when confidential personnel records are involved, not all information contained therein is exempt from public scrutiny-only personal information in such records. Bypassing for the moment the issue whether an application for public employment is a confidential personnel record, or even a personnel record, we fail to discern, absent specific evidence, how the limited information requested by the Herald can be classified as personal information that the right of privacy would protect.
Our conclusion is supported by federal decisions applying and interpreting 5 U.S.C. § 552(b)(6) (1977), which exempts from disclosure agency information contained in "personnel and medical files and similar files the disclosure of which would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy." Because the federal statute similarly protects information in personnel files that may invade personal privacy, federal court interpretations are helpful. See Best v. Yerkes, 247 Iowa 800, 812, 77 N.W.2d 23, 30 (1956); 2A Sutherland, Statutes and Statutory Construction § 52.03 (4th ed. C. Sands 1973).
*527 In determining whether disclosure of specific information falls within the federal exemption, the federal courts balance the public interests served by disclosure against the private interests in protecting against invasion of privacy. See, e.g., Department of the Air Force v. Rose, 425 U.S. 352, 372-73, 96 S.Ct. 1592, 1604-05, 48 L.Ed.2d 11, 27-28 (1976) ("Congress sought to construct an exemption that would require a balancing of the individual's right of privacy against the preservation of the basic purpose of the Freedom of Information Act `to open agency action to the light of public scrutiny.'"); Chamberlain v. Kurtz, 589 F.2d 827, 841-42 (5th Cir.), cert. denied, 444 U.S. 842, 100 S.Ct. 82, 62 L.Ed.2d 54 (1979); Committee on Masonic Homes of the R. W. Grand Lodge v. NLRB, 556 F.2d 214, 220 (3d Cir. 1977); Campbell v. United States Civil Service Commission, 539 F.2d 58, 61 (10th Cir. 1976); Wine Hobby USA, Inc. v. United States Internal Revenue Service, 502 F.2d 133, 136-37 (3d Cir. 1974).
Courts construing the federal act impose a presumption in favor of disclosure and require the government to carry the burden of justifying nondisclosure. See, e.g., Committee on Masonic Homes, 556 F.2d at 218; Campbell, 539 F.2d at 61. Statutory exemptions from disclosure are given a narrow construction. Rose, 425 U.S. at 361, 96 S.Ct. at 1599, 48 L.Ed.2d at 21; Consumers Union of United States, Inc. v. Heimann, 589 F.2d 531, 533 (D.C.Cir. 1978). We conclude the language of sections 68A.2 and 68A.9, noted above, indicates a legislative intent similar to the congressional purpose in the federal act and justifies similar presumptions and interpretations in applying the Iowa law. See Howard, 283 N.W.2d at 299.
Dubuque argues the section 68A.7(11) exception is the legislature's effort to apply to public bodies the private business practice of keeping employment applications confidential. We are requested to judicially notice that custom, a step trial court refused to take. However, we do not reach the question whether we could take judicial notice of that alleged fact, see State v. Howard, 284 N.W.2d 201, 203 (Iowa 1979), or recognize it as a "legislative fact" undergirding section 68A.7(11), see McCormick's Handbook of the Law of Evidence § 328, at 759 (2d ed. E. Cleary 1972).
Chapter 68A obviously was enacted to remedy unnecessary secrecy in conducting the public's business, not to maintain the breadth of secrecy often found in private business. We must give effect to the intent of the legislature, Hamilton v. City of Urbandale, 291 N.W.2d 15, 17 (Iowa 1980), and we do not read into a statute language the legislature could have used, had it so intended. Neumeister v. City Development Board, 291 N.W.2d 11, 14 (Iowa 1980). The legislature could have exempted employment applications from disclosure. Its failure to do so, coupled with its plain intent that we construe the exemptions narrowly, persuades us that the disputed applications do not fall within the section 68A.7(11) exemption. In so holding, we do not reject Dubuque's argument that disclosure of such applications may deter qualified persons holding responsible positions from applying. But it is not this court's role to pass on the wisdom of legislation. Richards v. City of Muscatine, 237 N.W.2d 48, 58 (Iowa 1975). In failing to provide for nondisclosure of such applications, the legislature may have determined the advantages of attracting more applicants were outweighed by the disadvantages of secrecy relating to the applicants.
II. Did trial court properly exercise its section 68A.8 equitable power to exclude five of the applications?
As we have already noted, trial court held the applications of five persons who requested confidentiality were "confidential records within the meaning of Sec. 68A.8" not subject to disclosure, and the Dubuque officials "should, in equity, be estopped from breaching the implied contract of confidentiality."
We observe at the outset the advertisements for applicants specifically stated the applications were subject to the open meetings law. This should have alerted knowledgeable, qualified persons the hiring procedures *528 would probably not be secret. Although it is conceded these five persons requested that their applications be confidential, there is no evidence city officials made any assurances these requests would be honored.
A threshold issue is whether section 68A.8 was designed to provide an equitable relief valve to the disclosure requirements of chapter 68A, or merely a method of enforcing, by injunction, the section 68A.7 exceptions to disclosure. Our analysis of the statutory language persuades us it is an equitable remedy independent of the section 68A.7 exceptions, and is applicable when specific criteria are met.
Section 68A.8 provides the petition must be supported by affidavit that shows (and district court must find) "such examination would clearly not be in the public interest and would substantially and irreparably injure any person or persons." It further requires the district court to "take into account the policy of this chapter that free and open examination of public records is generally in the public interest, even though such examination may cause inconvenience or embarrassment to public officials or others." The final sentence in section 68A.8 provides that a reasonable delay by a public official in permitting a record examination, in order to seek an injunction, is not a violation of the chapter. If a section 68A.7 exception to disclosure was applicable, there would be no need to absolve the public official of the statutory violation due to the delay in obtaining an injunction.
Having concluded section 68A.8 provides a procedure for equitable relief against disclosure in a narrow area, we must determine whether the situation before us meets the statutory criteria. A subsumed issue is whether the request for confidentiality is to be given any weight, and if so, how much.
Several federal courts that have addressed this or similar questions have indicated a governmental entity's pledge of confidentiality to the provider of information is not enough, in and of itself, to prevent disclosure. See, e.g., Providence Journal Co. v. F.B.I., 602 F.2d 1010, 1014 n.8 (1st Cir. 1979), cert. denied, 444 U.S. 1071, 100 S.Ct. 1015, 62 L.Ed.2d 752 (1980); Petkas v. Staats, 501 F.2d 887, 889 (D.C.Cir.1974); Robles v. Environmental Protection Agency, 484 F.2d 843, 846 (4th Cir. 1973); cf. Charles River Park "A", Inc. v. Department of Housing and Urban Development, 519 F.2d 935, 940 (D.C.Cir.1975) (`If [the information] is not found to be confidential under the [Freedom of Information Act], it must be disclosed on request even if it was submitted in confidence."). Most courts, however, have considered a pledge of confidentiality to be a factor in the balancing process. See, e.g., Lee Pharmaceuticals v. Kreps, 577 F.2d 610, 616 n.7 (9th Cir. 1978), cert. denied, 439 U.S. 1073, 99 S.Ct. 847, 59 L.Ed.2d 40 (1979) (citing cases); Metropolitan Life Insurance Co. v. Usery, 426 F.Supp. 150, 172 & n.95 (D.D.C.1976); Sonderegger v. United States Department of Interior, 424 F.Supp. 847, 853 (D. Idaho 1976).
It is apparent, however, that there was no "pledge" of confidentiality in the case before us. There is no indication the applications were submitted on the condition they be held confidential. Dubuque officials made no pledge; rather, they merely sought to maintain secrecy with respect to these records.
No evidence was introduced to show disclosure would "substantially and irreparably injure" any applicant. This is a required finding for the court to grant injunctive relief under section 68A.8. Trial court observed that "[n]o evidence was introduced bearing on the need of confidentiality in the public interest or showing any substantial or irreparable injury to one or more applicants by disclosing the information sought." Under other specific criteria of section 68A.8, mere inconvenience or embarrassment is not enough. Even assuming the record would support finding an implied contract by Dubuque to hold the applications confidential, it is apparent other statutory prerequisites for section 68A.8 relief were not met. Trial court traveled beyond *529 statutory parameters in granting nondisclosure for the five applicants who requested confidentiality.
The Herald further contends chapter 68A is unconstitutional "to the extent it prohibits or purports to prohibit Respondent's right of access to the information it requested of the Petitioner." The newspaper appears to have challenged the constitutionality of this chapter as applied by trial court. Because we have determined the Herald shall have the information it requested as to all applicants, its constitutional challenge to the application of the chapter is moot. See State ex rel. Turner v. Buechele, 236 N.W.2d 322, 324 (Iowa 1975). We have a duty to avoid constitutional questions concerning statutes when the merits of the case may be decided without facing such questions. State v. Conner, 292 N.W.2d 682, 689 (Iowa 1980); Salsbury Laboratories v. Iowa Department of Environmental Quality, 276 N.W.2d 830, 837 (Iowa 1979); State v. Davis, 269 N.W.2d 434, 439 (Iowa 1978).
We affirm trial court's decision on Dubuque's appeal, and reverse its decision on the Herald's cross-appeal to the extent that trial court's ruling barred disclosure of requested information concerning the five applicants who asked for confidentiality. Our stay issued August 8, 1979, is hereby nullified.
AFFIRMED ON THE APPEAL; AFFIRMED IN PART AND REVERSED IN PART ON THE CROSS-APPEAL.

=== CASE 2217233 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:23.574684+00 ===

99 Mich. App. 150 (1980)
297 N.W.2d 639
PEOPLE
v.
McDONALD
Docket No. 46231.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided July 24, 1980.
Frank J. Kelley, Attorney General, Robert A. Derengoski, Solicitor General, William L. Cahalan, Prosecuting Attorney, Edward Reilly Wilson, Principal Attorney, Appeals, and A. George Best, II, Assistant Prosecuting Attorney, for the people.
James W. McGinnis, for defendant on appeal.
Before: MacKENZIE, P.J., and BRONSON and ALLEN, JJ.
PER CURIAM.
Defendant was convicted on his plea of guilty on April 21, 1975, to a charge of assault with intent to rob while armed, MCL 750.89; MSA 28.284. On April 25, 1975, he was sentenced to a five-year period of probation, the first six months to be spent in the Detroit House of Correction. On May 4, 1978, defendant pled guilty to violating the terms of his probation by admitting he had not paid certain court costs and that he had not obtained a high school diploma. He was then sentenced to a prison term of from 5 to 15 years. Defendant then brought a motion to set aside the violation of probation and vacate the sentence imposed, which was granted by the trial court on August 28, 1978, and defendant was restored to his probation. On December 14, 1978, a second notice of probation violation was filed, alleging a failure to report since September 27, 1978. Defendant pled not guilty, but after a hearing held on April 30, 1979, defendant was found in violation of his probation. On May 3, 1979, he was again sentenced to a prison term of from 5 to 15 years. Defendant's claim of appeal to this Court was not timely but was treated as an application for delayed appeal and granted.
Defendant attacks only his sentence on appeal. He argues that he must be resentenced because *152 the trial court failed to consider a presentence report. We agree. The record of defendant's sentencing on May 3, 1979, reveals no mention of a presentence report. Such reports are mandatory in this state in felony cases. MCL 771.14; MSA 28.1144. Use of the report serves the announced policy of individualizing criminal punishment in an informed manner. People v Lee, 391 Mich 618; 218 NW2d 655 (1974), People v McFarlin, 389 Mich 557; 208 NW2d 504 (1973). They are considered so important a tool in the exercise of the trial court's sentencing discretion that production may not be waived even if all parties agree. People v Brown, 393 Mich 174, 181; 224 NW2d 38 (1974). Given the preeminent position of the presentence report in Michigan criminal procedure, resentencing is required where the record does not disclose that a presentence report was prepared and consulted.
The prosecution argues that no error occurred because the record of defendant's May 4, 1978, sentencing discloses that a presentence report was considered at that time. The prosecution ignores the fact, however, that the probation violation and sentence arising out of the May 4, 1978, proceedings were later set aside. Defendant is clearly challenging his May 3, 1979, sentence which arose out of a second probation violation based on different grounds than the first. The fact that the trial court had consulted a presentence report during a hearing on a separate matter held a year before does not excuse the failure to consult such a report during the proceedings presently before this Court.
The prosecution's reference to the May 4, 1978, sentencing proceedings brings to light another rule regarding presentence reports that is applicable to the instant case. In People v Triplett, 407 Mich *153 510; 287 NW2d 165 (1980), the Supreme Court held that a "reasonably updated" presentence report is required. Twice during the proceedings on May 4, 1978, the trial court characterized the presentence report before it as "old". Although not clearly stated, it is reasonable to infer that the report used in 1978 had been prepared for defendant's original sentencing in 1975. At resentencing, the trial court shall consider a "reasonably updated" presentence report.
Remanded for resentencing. We do not retain jurisdiction.

=== CASE 9738670 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:00:22.542796+00 ===

Landis, C. J.
— This is an original action in this Court for a writ of mandate directing respondent court to grant a change of venue from the county in a certain will contest action brought by relator and others in respondent court. We issued the alternative writ. The Court’s previous opinion herein which has been vacated by the granting of a rehearing herein appears in 186 N. E. 2d 881.
From the petition before us it appears that the will contest action was filed on November 16, 1961, and summons was served on the defendants on November 25 and November 27, 1961, to appear on December 11, 1961. On November 28, 1961, a general appearance was entered for the defendants by counsel. No further pleadings were filed nor were further entries made in the cause until April 11, 1962, when relators filed affidavit for change of venue from the county. The change of venue was denied and relators’ petition for writ of mandate in this Court followed. Relators contend respondent court should have granted a change of venue under Rule 1-12B providing:
“In any action except criminal no change of judge or change of venue from the county shall *261be granted except within the time herein provided. Any such application for change of judge or change of venue shall be filed not later than ten (10) days after the issues are first closed on the merits, or if the issues are closed without answer by operation of law, or where a cause is remanded for a new trial by the Appellate or Supreme Court, not later than ten (10) days after the party has knowledge the cause is ready to be set for trial....”
Respondents have filed return to the writ contending that will contests are not governed by the rules pertaining to civil procedure generally, and that the issues were closed by operation of law without the necessity of defendants filing any pleading.
The statutes pertaining to will contests provide as follows:
“Any interested person may contest the validity of any will or resist the probate thereof, at any time within six [6] months after the same has been offered for probate, by filing in the court having jurisdiction of the probate of the decedent’s will his allegations in writing verified by affidavit, setting forth the unsoundness of mind of the testator, the undue execution of the will, that the same was executed under duress, or was obtained by fraud, or any other valid objection to its validity or the probate thereof; and the executor and all other persons beneficially interested therein shall be made defendants thereto.” Burns’ §7-117 (1953 Repl.)1
“When an action is brought to contest the validity of any will as provided in this code, summons shall be served upon the defendants in the manner following:
“(1) If the defendant is a resident of the state of Indiana summons shall be served on him by the sheriff as provided in section 112(a) [§6-112(a)].
“(2) If the defendant is a nonresident of the state of Indiana notice shall be served on him as *262provided in section 112(b) [§6-112(b)].” Burns’ §7-118, (1953 Repl.)2
“At the time of filing his verified complaint, as provided by section 717 [§7-117], the plaintiff in said action, or some other person in his behalf, shall file a bond, with sufficient sureties, in such amount as shall be approved by the clerk of the court, conditioned for the due prosecution of such proceedings and for the payment of all costs therein in case judgment be rendered against him.” Burns’ §7-119 (1953 Repl.)3
“In any suit to resist the probate, or to test the validity of any will after probate, as provided in section 717 [§7-117] of this code, the burden of proof shall be upon the contestor.” Burns’ §7-120 (1953 Repl.)4
“If such determination be against the validity of such will or the competency of the proof, the court shall refuse or revoke the probate thereof; but if it be in favor of the validity and due execution of such will, probate thereof shall be admitted or ratified.” Burns’ §7-121 (1953 Repl.)5
It will be noted that there is no provision for the filing of pleadings in will contest actions other than “ . . . allegations in writing [of the contestor] verified by affidavit. ...” There is no specific provision for the filing of an answer nor is there provision to the effect that actions to contest wills are governed by the rules of procedure in civil actions.
Actions to contest wills are purely statutory proceedings, Blanchard v. Wilbur (1899), 153 Ind. 387, 392, 55 N. E. 99, 101; The Evansville, etc., Co. et al. v. Winsor, by Next Friend (1897), 148 Ind. 682, 686, 48 N. E. 592, 593, and we are therefore *263governed by the apparent intent of the legislature to indicate that while formal pleadings may be permitted in will contests, as in ordinary civil actions, such formality in the formation of issues is not necessary. See: Bartlett et al. v. Manor et al. (1897), 146 Ind. 621, 45 N. E. 1060; The Evansville, etc., Co., et al. v. Winsor, by Next Friend (1897), supra, 148 Ind. 682, 690, 48 N. E. 592, 595; State v. Marion Juvenile Court (1962), 243 Ind. 209, 212, 184 N. E. 2d 20, 21.
We believe the situation here presented is somewhat comparable to numerous proceedings concerning decedent’s estates, as for example, petitions to determine heirship. In State ex rel. Crawford, et al. v. Howard Circuit Court (1962), 242 Ind. 593, 598, 181 N. E. 2d 18, 20, 21, we recently stated:
“It may be noted that there is no provision in the Probate Code of 1953 to the effect that proceedings in decedents’ estates shall be governed by the rules pertaining to civil actions generally. Had the legislature intended to change the law in this respect it could have made provision therefor.1”
“[Footnote] 1. See Model Probate Code Comments (§10), (annotated under Burns’ §6-107, 1953 Repl.), wherein it is stated:
“ ‘In some states it is provided by statute that where there is no other applicable statute or rule, the rules of civil procedure may be applied. . . . Such legislation is not recommended. Much of the proceedings in matters of probate is administrative in character and not adversary. It is believed, therefore, that rules of civil procedure designed primarily for adversary proceedings should not be applied.’ ”
It is true in the case before us relators have alleged that at the time of the filing of the motion for change of venue there was no entry in the court’s order book setting the cause for trial. However, it should be *264noted that Rule 1-12B, supra, does not give a party-ten days after the setting of the cause for trial within which to file his change of venue petition. It provides the “ . . . application . . . shall be filed ... if the issues are closed without answer by operation of law, . . . not later than ten (10) days after the party has knowledge the cause is ready to be set for trial. ...” (Italics supplied.)
The record in the case before us discloses that no formal pleadings were filed in the will contest action below except for the contestors’ written allegations or complaint although it had been pending for a period of four months. We are compelled to come to the conclusion that there has been no affirmative showing by relators in this case that the issues in the instant will contest action were not closed by operation of law nor that relators did not have knowledge the cause was ready to be set for trial. Yet such showing must be made if relators’ action for writ of mandate in this Court is to prevail.
It is well settled that the burden of proof in actions of mandate is on the party having the affirmative of the issue and that this rule applies to original actions for mandate in this Court. State ex rel. Rooney et al. v. Lake C. C., etc. (1957), 236 Ind. 345, 346, 140 N. E. 2d 217, 218; State ex rel. Wall v. Cass C. C. etc. (1954), 233 Ind. 192, 194, 117 N. E. 2d 126, 127; West’s I. L. E., “Mandate and Prohibition,” §123.
The alternative writ of mandate heretofore issued is dissolved and the permanent writ denied.
Arterburn and Achor, JJ., concur. Myers, J., not participating. Jackson, J., dissents with opinion.
. Acts 1953, ch. 112, §717, p. 295.
. Acts 1953, ch. 112, §718, p. 295.
. Acts 1953, ch. 112, §719, p. 295.
. Acts 1953, ch. 112, §720, p. 295.
. Acts 1953, ch. 112, §721, p. 295.

=== CASE 9738671 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:00:22.547845+00 ===

*265Dissenting Opinion
Jackson, J.
— The, majority opinion as now written is, in my opinion, erroneous, and I dissent thereto.
This is an original action for a writ of mandate directing the respondent court to grant a change of venue from the county in the case of Mary Jane Bigler, et al. v. The Farmers Loan and Trust Company, Exr. etc., being cause No. 17458 on the dockets of respondent court. We issued an alternative writ on April 26, 1962.
From the petition before us it appears that the will contest action was filed on November 16, 1961, summons was served on the defendants on November 25th and November 27, 1961, to appear on December 11, 1961. On November 28, 1961, a general appearance was entered for the defendants by counsel. No further pleadings were filed nor were further entries made in the cause until April 11, 1962, when relator filed affidavit for change of venue from the county. The change of venue was denied and relator’s petition for writ of mandate in this court followed. Relator contends respondent court should have granted a change of venue under Rule I-12B.1
Respondent filed return to the writ contending that will contests are not governed by the rules pertaining to civil procedure generally, and that the issues were closed by operation of law without the necessity of defendants filing any pleadings.
*266One of the determinates in this action is whether or not an action to contest a will is a “civil action” within the meaning of Acts 1881 (Spec. Sess.), ch. 38, §1, p. 240; 1911, ch. 157, §1, p. 415, being §2-101, Burns’ 1946 Replacement, which reads as follows:
“There shall be no distinction in pleading and practice between actions at law and suits in equity; and there shall be but one form of action for the enforcement or protection of private rights and the redress of private wrongs, which shall be denominated a ‘civil action.’ All courts which are vested with jurisdiction both in law and equity may, to the full extent of their respective jurisdictions, administer legal and equitable remedies, in favor of either party, in one and the same suit, so that the legal and equitable rights of the parties may be enforced and protected in one [1] action.”
The courts in Indiana have defined a “civil action” by quoting with approval a decision of the Supreme Court of Montana, which says:
“What is a civil action? It is an action wherein an issue is presented for trial, formed by the averments of the complaint, and the denials of the answer, or the replication to new matter, and the trial takes place by the introduction of legal evidence to support the allegations of the pleadings and a judgment in such an action is conclusive upon the rights of the parties, and could be plead in bar.” Evans v. Evans (1886), 105 Ind. 204, 210, 5 N. E. 24, quoting from Deer Lodge Co. v. Kohrs (1874), 2 Mont. 66; Indiana State Board etc. v. Davis (1918), 69 Ind. App. 109, 120, 121 N. E. 142; Kney v. Gahimer, Gdn. (1935), 99 Ind. App. 510, 516, 193 N. E. 394; State ex rel. Bradshaw v. Probate Ct. (1947), 225 Ind. 268, 73 N. E. 2d 769.
It has long been held that a proceeding to revoke and set aside the probate of a will is a civil action. Lowes’ Rev., Works’ Ind. Pract., Vol. 1, §1.1, 1.2, 1.3; *267Goodbud v. The Estate of Hornung (1891), 127 Ind. 181, 185, 26 N. E. 770; Evans v. Evans (1886), 105 Ind. 204, 5 N. E. 24; Fort v. White (1913), 54 Ind. App. 210, 220, 101 N. E. 27; McConahey’s Estate v. Foster (1899), 21 Ind. App. 416, 419, 52 N. E. 619.
Thus, there can be no doubt that a will contest is a civil action within the meaning of Acts 1911, ch. 157, §1, p. 415, being §2-101, Burns’ 1946 Replacement.
The fact that a procedure is statutory is relatively unimportant. If such statutory proceeding provides its own procedure it must be followed. Where it is only partly provided, the civil code of procedure steps-in and provides the rest. The fact that the provision for contest of a will does not say that it shall be governed by the civil code is not important, as all cases and authorities say it will.
“Not infrequently the opinions make the remark or comment or in effect rule, that on the question whether or not Code procedure is applicable, it does not matter whether the proceeding be regarded as a civil action or as a special proceeding.” Lowes’ Rev., Works’ Ind. Pract., Vol. 1, §1.4, p. 13; Crawfordsville Trust Co. v. Ramsey (1912), 178 Ind. 258, 271, 98 N. E. 177; Robertson v. State ex rel. Smith (1887), 109 Ind. 79, 87, 10 N. E. 582; In re Griffin (1904), 33 Ind. App. 153, 154, 69 N. E. 192.
“Where no mode of procedure is especially provided in probate matters it has been said that the rules of procedure in civil cases may be followed. Thus, the decedents’ act does not provide a complete Code of procedure, and hence the rules of pleading and practice provided for civil actions are applied. ...” Lowes’ Rev., Works’ Ind. Pract., Vol. 1, §1.4, p. 14; Goodbud v. The Estate of Hornung (1891), 127 Ind. 181, 185, 26 N. E. 770; Scherer v. Ingerman, Administrator (1887), 110 Ind. 428, 441, 11 N. E. 8, 12 N. E. 304; McConahey’s Estate v. Foster (1899), 21 Ind. App. 416, 419, 420, 52 N. E. 619.
*268“In actions to contest the validity of wills or resist their probate, the rules governing the trial of civil actions under the code are applicable, and pleadings, demurrers, motions, answers, pleas in abatement, statute of limitations, estoppel, etc., are sanctioned in such actions by the reported cases.” Henry’s Probate Law and Pract. [6th Ed.], Vol. 1, p. 247, and cases cited therein.
Issues must be formed in all civil cases. This means complaint and answer. The case is not at issue until an answer or demurrer is filed.
The question of the time for filing a change of venue in a will contest is after the answer has been filed.
The temporary writ heretofore issued should be made permanent.
I further dissent to the granting of the petition for rehearing in this cause for the reason that at the time the former majority opinion (see 186 N. E. 2d 881 for opinion and concurring opinion) was written, the same had been written, voted on and approved prior to 9:30 a. m., January 7, 1963, the time it was handed down to the clerk’s office. The delivery of the opinion to the clerk’s office at that time had no more effect than if it had been delivered there at 4:00 or 4:30 p. m. on Friday, January 4, 1963. If so called late or delayed handing down of a case is the criteria by which the validity of the opinion is to be determined, then several recent decisions of the Appellate Court are suspect. Decker v. Rev. Board of Ind. Employ. Sec. Div. (1963), 124 Ind. App. 164, 186 N. E. 2d 890; Elberson v. Tokheim Corp. (1963), 135 Ind. App. 688, 186 N. E. 2d 894.
Note. — Reported in 198 N. E. 2d 3.
. “In any action except criminal no change of judge or change of venue from the county shall be granted except within the time herein provided. Any such application for change of judge or change of venue shall be filed not later than ten (10) days after the issues are first closed on the merits, or if the issues are closed without answer by operation of law, . . . not later than ten (10) days after the party has knowledge the cause is ready to be set for trial.”

=== CASE 9738672 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:00:23.747481+00 ===

Landis, J.
— Appellant brought this action to enjoin appellees from levying any tax on appellant’s property or issuing bonds of the Indianapolis Park District as extended or taking any other action which would facilitate the levy of such a tax or the issuance of such bonds, purportedly authorized by certain sections of ch. *460144 of the Acts of 1919, as amended by ch. 279 of the Acts of 1961,1 and ch. 396 and ch. 397 of the Acts of 1963.2
The issues were formed by appellant’s complaint contending the above statutes were unconstitutional and appellees’ answers contending to the contrary. The lower court found for appellees and entered judgment in their favor from which determination appellant appeals to this Court.
Appellant’s first contention on this appeal is that she is denied equal privileges guaranteed to her by Art. 1, §23 of the Indiana Constitution3 and the fourteenth (14th) amendment of the U. S. Constitution4 by ch. 279 of the Acts of 1961, which purports to authorize the common council of the city of Indianapolis to levy taxes on appellant’s property located outside the city of Indianapolis.
The above statutes purport to expand the area of operations of the park districts in cities of the first class from the territory within the city of Indianapolis to all the territory within Marion County. The purpose *461is conceded to be to provide for a county-wide park system, in light of the obvious expansion of metropolitan Indianapolis beyond the boundaries of the city.
Appellant contends, however, those portions of the Act are unconstitutional which purport to authorize the common council of the city of Indianapolis to levy taxes on appellant’s property located outside the city.
Burns’ §48-5504, 1963 Repl. (Acts 1919, ch. 144, §4, p. 639; 1933, ch. 110, §1, p. 698; 1961, ch. 279, §3, p. 641, supra), in this respect provides as follows:
“All the territory included within the corporate limits of any such city of the first class and on and after January 1, 1963, all area in the county in which such city is located to the extent provided by section 1A [§48-5501a] of this act shall constitute a taxing district for the purpose of levying special benefit taxes for park purposes as provided in this act [§§48-5501 — 48-5531]. The term ‘park purposes’ as used in this act shall be considered and held to cover and include parks, boulevards, pleasure drives, parkways, wheelways, park boulevards, bridlepaths, playgrounds, play-fields, bathhouses, comfort stations, swimming pools, community centers, recreation centers and the establishment, the equipment and operation thereof. Except for park districts in cities of the second class that have adopted this act but have not elected to extend its boundaries pursuant to section 1A [§48-5501a], references in this act to park district or to or concerning territory within a city of the first class shall be construed on and after January 1, 1963, to refer to all area within the park district as its boundaries are extended beyond the corporate limits of the city by section 1A [§48-5501a] of this act unless the context otherwise requires,....” (Emphasis added.)
The foregoing statute thus merely extended the boundaries of the Indianapolis Park District. The power to levy taxes was continued in the common council, acting as an administrative agency.
*462Appellant has also attacked the constitutionality of Burns’ §48-5528a, 1963 Repl. (Acts 1919, ch. 144, §25A as added by Acts 1961, ch. 279, §7, p. 641, Acts 1963, ch. 397, §3, p. 1101, supra), authorizing the city council upon request of the board of park commissioners, to adopt an ordinance establishing a cumulative building and sinking fund and to levy annual taxes for such purposes, viz:
“The board of park commissioners of any such city, in order to raise money for any of the purposes for which bonds may be issued pursuant to section 25 [§48-5525] of this act, is authorized to request the common council of such city to adopt an ordinance establishing a cumulative building and sinking fund in the manner hereinafter provided. . . . After approval by the state board of tax commissioners, the common council of the city shall levy annually thereafter, for a period of twelve [12] years, the amount of tax set forth in the ordinance and approved by the state board of tax commissioners, but in no event exceeding ten cents [10^] on each one hundred dollars [$100] of taxable personal and real property within the park district: Provided, that if the common council deems it advisable to do so, it may cause such annual levy at any time thereafter to be reduced by adoption of an ordinance; or ten [10] or more taxpayers in any such park district who will be affected by such tax, may file with the county auditor of the county in which such park district is located, not later than August 1 of any year, a petition for reduction of said levy setting forth their objections thereto. . . .” (Emphasis added.)
Appellant also refers to Burns’ §48-5508, 1963 Repl., (Acts 1919, ch. 144, §8, p. 639; 1920 (Spec. Sess.), ch. 32, §1, p. 105), giving the city council authority to pass an ordinance authorizing the sale of park lands, the proceeds of which may be used by the board of *463park commissioners as it may deem for the best interests of the city of Indianapolis, viz:
“If such a board of park commissioners in any city of the first class should wish to sell any part of the park lands now owned by such city or that may hereafter be acquired, it is hereby authorized to prepare an ordinance authorizing such sale and submit the same to the city council. If the council shall pass such ordinance, such lands shall be sold as other lands of the city are sold, and the proceeds of such sale shall be credited to the department of public parks and expended in the improvement of the remaining park lands or in the purchase of other lands for park purposes, as such board may deem for the best interests of the city...."
It is appellant’s argument that extending the taxing power of the Indianapolis city council to include property such as that of appellant beyond the corporate limits of such city in Marion County, is taxation without representation; that appellant has no voice, direct or indirect, in choosing the members of such council who are elected solely by the voters of said city, and that appellant would not receive equal protection of the laws with the residents of the city of Indianapolis.
Appellant relies to a considerable extent upon the out of state decisions in: Town of Oneida v. Hardwood Flooring Co. (1935), 169 Tenn. 449, 88 S. W. 2d 998; State ex rel. Hinson v. Nickerson (1916), 99 Neb. 517, 156 N. W. 1039; and Klich et ux. v. Miami Land & Development Co. (1939), 139 Fla. 794, 191 So. 41, and statements appearing in 64 C. J. S., Municipal Corporations, §2003, p. 695; 38 Am. Jur., Municipal Corporations, §392, p. 81. However, these authorities do not appear applicable to the case at bar as they relate to situations where the attempt to levy on *464property outside the taxing unit was caused by a change in boundaries, disannexation, or a void annexation.
On the other hand, in support of appellees’ position, it is pointed out that a statute similar to that involved in this case was passed by the legislature in 1917 which provided for the creation of sanitary districts and authorized the levy of taxes by a city council or board where the land outside the city was benefitted by the taxes levied. This Court in State Board, etc. v. State ex rel. (1926), 198 Ind. 343, 153 N. E. 404, 153 N. E. 576, in considering such statute, recognized the duty of the state board of tax commissioners to perform its duties with reference to the taxes levied by the Indianapolis city council on property located (outside the city) in the town of Woodruff Place, for the operation of the Indianapolis sanitary district. Such taxes under the present law upheld in Archer, Jr., etc. et al. v. City of Indpls., etc. et al. (1954), 233 Ind. 640, 122 N. E. 2d 607, are now levied on property outside the city in areas annexed to the district by the board of sanitary commissioners, the board being appointed by the mayor of the city of Indianapolis. In City of Indianapolis v. Bryan (1919), 188 Ind. 586, 125 N. E. 38, we also upheld the constitutionality of an act providing for levying by the board of park commissioners of the city of Indianapolis of assessments outside the city for benefits to such property, such board having been then appointed by the mayor of the city of Indianapolis.
We believe it should be further pointed out that this Court in the early case of Conwell v. The President and Trustees of Connersville (1856), 8 Ind. 358, held an act not to be unconstitutional which provided that all persons residing within two hundred (200) yards of the corporation line should be taken as residents *465within the limits of the corporation for purposes of taxation. See also: Visalia Savings Bank v. Visalia (1908), 153 Cal. 206, 94 Pac. 888; Wible v. City of Bakersfield, (1919), 42 Cal. App. 77, 183 Pac. 291; Ratigan v. Davis (1963), 175 Neb. 416, 122 N. W. 2d 12.
In regard to appellant’s argument of taxation without representation, we have heretofore held that the levying of local taxes is not a local legislative function administered by officers elected locally but amounts only to administrative action which the state can delegate to any unit. See: Zoercher v. Agler (1930), 202 Ind. 214, 172 N. E. 186, 172 N. E. 907, 70 A. L. R. 1232. Appellant is represented in the General Assembly and is therefore not subject to taxation without representation. See: 1 Cooley, Taxation, §21, p. 84.
It is well settled that the wisdom of legislative action in the field of taxation and assessment is not a matter the courts may consider as long as the legislature violates no constitutional provision. Western Adj. & Insp. Co. v. Gross Inc. Tax Div. (1957), 236 Ind. 639, 142 N. E. 2d 630; Sun Oil Co. v. Gross Inc. Tax Div., etc. (1958), 238 Ind. 111, 149 N. E. 2d 115.
While it is true the common council of the city of Indianapolis could not levy taxes on property outside the city for general city purposes which in no way benefited the outside property, this is because the General Assembly could neither authorize such a local tax nor levy it directly. However, when the taxes levied are for the benefit of the entire district, are levied on a uniform and equal basis throughout the entire district, and the money expended by a board in which all the taxpayers of the district have representation, there is no opportunity of dis*466crimination against the taxpayers owning property outside the city by the levy of such taxes.
No discrimination is here contended by appellant in the assessment process nor does any exist in the process of spending of tax money for the purchase or improvement of land for park purposes for as the statute provides all taxpayers in the county are represented on the board of park commissioners.5 All taxpayers of the district, including those outside the city may object to the tax rates set by the city council and require review by the state board of tax commissioners.6
We find appellant’s contentions heretofore made to be Avithout merit.
Appellant next contends that those portions of the Act purporting to authorize the board of park commissioners of the city of Indianapolis to levy special taxes on appellant’s property located outside the city of Indianapolis, which will be used to pay for land acquisition and the principal and interest on bonds issued by the city of Indianapolis for park purposes violate Art. 1, §23 of the Indiana Constitution and the fourteenth (14th) amendment of the U. S. Constitution.
Appellant concedes the act does provide appellant some indirect representation in the administration of the park district, as extended, by means of appointments to the board of park commissioners by the Marion county council. Burns’ §48-5501b, 1963 Repl. (Acts 1919, ch. 144, §1C, as added by Acts 1963, ch. 396, §1, p. 1100), provides:
*467“Upon the extension of the boundaries of any park district of any city pursuant to section 1A [§48-5501a], the board of park commissioners shall consist of five [5] members. Three [3] members shall be appointed by the mayor of such city and two [2] members shall be appointed by the county council of the county in which such city is located. The members appointed by the county council shall be residents of the area of the park district outside the corporate boundaries of such city....”
The powers given to the board of park commissioners in connection with the park district include the authority to acquire land for park purposes, the issuance of bonds to pay therefor or for improvement or construction provided for by the Act, authority to levy a special tax to pay for the acquisition of lands and the principal and interest on bonds received.7
Appellant challenges the finding of the legislature8 that property outside the city of Indianapolis will be benefitted by existing improvements for which bonds have been issued but not yet paid, on the basis that at the time the improvements were made and the bonds issued, the improvements were for property located within the city of Indianapolis and for the benefit of Indianapolis residents.
*468*467The contention of appellant is that a tax is there*468by imposed upon her property outside the city which is particularly of benefit to the residents of the city of Indianapolis. Appellant’s contention, however, is not supported by sufficient evidence that we may conclude the trial court abused its discretion in refusing to upset the legislative determination to the opposite effect. Moreover, it appears that the property of taxpayers in the annexed area is benefitted by all the park improvements previously made in the county, and such taxpayers should assume their share of the burden of paying for such improvements which benefit their property.
This Court has consistently applied this rule to annexations to municipal corporations and political subdivisions of the state: The Lake Shore and Michigan Southern Railway Co. v. Smith, Treasurer (1892), 131 Ind. 512, 519, 31 N. E. 196, 198; Stilz v. The City of Indianapolis (1882), 81 Ind. 582; The City of Logansport et al. v. Seybold (1877), 59 Ind. 225, and in our judgment it is applicable here. See also: Kocsis v. Chicago Park District (1935), 362 Ill. 24, 32, 198 N. E. 847, 852, 103 A. L. R. 141, 147; Barnes v. Kansas City (1949), 359 Mo. 519, 523, 222 S. W. 2d 756, 758, 10 A. L. R. 2d 553, 557; Gernert v. City of Louisville (1913), 155 Ky. 589, 590, 159 S. W. 1163, 1164, 51 L. R. A. (N. S.) 363, 366.
Appellant has also contended the Act is unconstitutional for the reason that the board of park commissioners remains principally an administrative body of the city of Indianapolis, and that while it does give appellant indirect representation upon the board, it also gives the mayor of the city of Indianapolis the power to decide any question upon *469which a tie vote has been cast by the board.9 When the legislature in the Act of 196310 provided a change in the membership of the board of park commissioners (increasing the board from four [4] to five [5] members) so as to provide representation on such board of all of the taxpayers of Marion County, we believe it removed any basis upon which appellant could properly here make complaint.
We are unable to find any merit to this contention of appellant.
Appellant has finally contended that the title to ch. 279 of the Acts of 1961 is defective in failing to express the subject of the Act and that §§1, 2, 7 and 8 of that Act and §§1 and 2 of ch. 397 of the Acts of 1963 fail to identify the original Act, as last amended, contrary to Art. 4, §19 of the Constitution of Indiana.11
The title to the 1961 Act (p. 641) is:
*470“AN ACT to amend the law concerning the department of public parks in cities of the first class and in cities of the second class that adopt the first class city law in relation to extending the boundaries of the park district and the jurisdiction of the department of public parks of such cities, providing for increasing the number of members of board of park commissioners in connection with such extension, broadening the powers of the board of park commissioners, and authorizing the establishment of a cumulative building fund.”
The title to the 1963 Act (p. 1101) is:
“AN ACT to amend an act entitled ‘An Act concerning the “department of public parks” in cities of the first class, defining its powers and duties, creating a taxing district for park purposes, in each city of the first class, repealing conflicting laws, and declaring an emergency,’ the same being Chapter 144 of the Acts of 1919.”
Appellant has argued that the title to the 1961 Act is not broad enough to include the additional taxing jurisdiction given to the common council of cities of the first class which under such Act becomes countywide.
The title to the 1961 Act is sufficient to indicate that the boundaries of the park district in cities of the first class and some second class cities are being extended, that the members of the board of park commissioners are being increased, that the board’s powers are to be broadened, and that the establishment of a cumulative building fund is authorized. The common council previously had the power to levy a tax on all the property in the park district. When the district was extended, the tax authority automatically was thereby extended over the larger area. A title which carries in it an item indicating the ex*471tension of a taxing district, puts those on notice who rely on such a title that as a necessary consequence, the tax area is also increased and some agency must collect the tax. There is no question in this Act of establishing a new court or a new common council or a new legislative or administrative body. State, P. R. R. Co. et al. v. Iroq. Cons. Dist. Ct. et al. (1956), 235 Ind. 353, 133 N. E. 2d 848, is not applicable. We have frequently held a title need not be a complete index or a compendium, but that it sufficiently expresses a subject when upon a liberal construction it gives such notice as to apprise the legislators and the public of the general subject matter of the legislation. Orbison v. Welsh, Governor et al. (1962), 242 Ind. 385, 393, 179 N. E. 2d 727, 731; Wright-Bachman, Inc. v. Hodnett (1956), 235 Ind. 307, 317, 133 N. E. 2d 713, 717; Albert v. Milk Control Board of Indiana (1936), 210 Ind. 283, 288, 200 N. E. 688, 690.
Appellant has further complained that each section of the Acts of 1961 and 1963 does not cite the latest amendment to the original Act. However, each section of each Act refers to the original section as that section was last amended, thus directing the attention of any interested person to the last amendment of such section. This is actually the existing law being amended. A strict interpretation which would unnecessarily require that reference be made to some amendment to another section, which is not being amended, would not serve a useful purpose, but would only result in confusion and chaos and is not to be commended.
We find no substance to appellant’s contention that the titles of the 1961 and 1963 Acts were constitutionally defective.
Judgment affirmed.
*472Arterburn and Myers, JJ., concur. Jackson, J., not participating. Achor, C. J., dissents.
. Burns’ §48-5501a (1963 Repl.), Acts 1961, ch. 279, §1, p. 641; Burns’ §48-5504 (1963 Repl.), Acts 1961, ch. 279, §3, p. 641; Burns’ §48-5528a (1963 Repl.), Acts 1961, ch. 279, §7, p. 641, 1961, ch. 279, §8, p. 641, 1963, ch. 397, §3, p. 1101.
. Burns’ §48-5501b (1963 Repl.), Acts 1963, ch. 396, §1, p. 1100. Burns’ §48-5528a (1963 Repl.), supra, Acts 1963, ch. 397, §3, p. 1101.
. Art. 1, §23 of the Indiana Constitution provides:
“The General Assembly shall not grant to any citizen, or class of citizens, privileges or immunities which, upon the same terms, shall not equally belong to all citizens.”
. Sec. 1 of the fourteenth (14th) amendment to the U. S. Constitution provides:
“. . . No state shall make or enforce any law which shall abridge the privileges or immunities of citizens of the United States; nor shall any state deprive any person of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law; nor deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws.”
. Three members are appointed by the mayor of Indianapolis, and two by the Marion county council. Burns’ §48-5501b, 1963 Repl., (Acts 1919, ch. 144, §1C, as added by Acts 1963, ch. 396, §1, p. 1100).
. Burns’ §64-1914, 1961 Repl., (Acts 1947, ch. 275, §1, p. 1097); Burns’ §48-5528a, 1963 Repl. (Acts 1919, ch. 144, §25A, as added by Acts 1961, ch. 279, §7, p. 641; 1963, ch. 397, §3, p. 1101).
. Burns’ §48-5516, 1963 Repl. (Acts 1919, ch. 144, §16, p. 639); Burns’ §48-5525, 1963 Repl. (Acts 1919, ch. 144, §25, p. 639; 1920, Spec. Sess., ch. 42, §1, p. 140; 1927, ch. 251, §1, p. 732; 1961, ch. 279, §6 p. 641); Burns’ §48-5527, 1963 Repl. (Acts 1919, ch. 144, §27, p. 639).
. Burns’ §48-5504, 1963 Repl., (Acts 1919, ch. 144, §4, p. 639; 1933, ch. 110, §1, p. 698; 1961, ch. 279, §3, p. 641), provides:
“. . . Any area added to a park district pursuant to section 1A [§48-5501a] of this act is hereby deemed and declared to have received a special benefit from the new and existing park facilities of the park district equal to or exceeding the special taxes imposed on such area by this act in order to pay all or any part of the cost of such facilities.”
. Burns’ §48-5503, 1963 Repl., (Acts 1919, ch. 144, §3, p. 639), states in part:
“. . . A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum, and no action of such board shall be binding unless authorized by a majority of the members, at a regular or duly called special meeting thereof. But, in case of a tie vote on any question, the mayor shall decide. . . .”
. Acts 1919, ch. 144, §1C, as added by Acts 1963, ch. 396, §1, p. 1100 (Burns’ §48-5501b, 1963 Repl.).
. Art. 4, §19 of the Constitution of Indiana (as amended Nov. 8, 1960), provides:
“Every act, amendatory act or amendment of a code shall embrace but one subject and matters properly connected therewith; which subject shall be expressed in the title. But if any subject shall be embraced in an act, amendatory act or amendment of a code, which shall not be expressed in the title, such act, amendatory act or amendment of a code shall be void only as to so much thereof as shall not be expressed in the title. The requirements of this paragraph shall not apply to original enactments of codifications of laws.
“Every amendatory act and every amendment of a code shall identify the original act or code, as last amended, and the sections or subsections amended shall be set forth and published at full length. The identification required by this paragraph may be made by citation reference.”
Supplemental footnote to majority opinion.
A dissenting opinion by Achor, C. J., on July 1, 1964, has been filed in this case placing reliance on the cases of Cerajewski v. McVey (1947), 225 Ind. 67, 72 N. E. 2d 650, 171 A. L. R. 723; and Rappaport v. Dept. of Public Health (1949), 227 Ind. 508, 87 N. E. 2d 77, 88 N. E. 2d 150, which held the additional taxing and hospital districts there created to be unconstitutional. The dissent further states such decisions . . are landmark cases which have been cited and relied upon in nearly every case wherein the constitutionality of a newly created taxing and bonding authority has been established . . .”, specifically referring to: Datisman, etc. v. Gary Public Library (1960), 241 Ind. 83, 170 N. E. 2d 55; Book v. Board of Flood Control Comrs. etc. et al. (1959), 239 Ind. 160, 156 N. E. 2d 87; Martin v. Ben Davis Conservancy Dist. (1958), 238 Ind. 502, 153 N. E. 2d 125; Protsman v. Jefferson-Craig Consol. School Corp. (1953), 231 Ind. 527, 109 N. E. 2d 889; Dept. of Pub. Sanitation v. Solan (1951), 229 Ind. 228, 97 N. E. 2d 495.
(See note 5 of dissent.)
The facts however are otherwise as the Datisman, Book, Martin, and Dept. of Pub. Sanitation cases instead of relying on Cerajewski and Rappaport, distinguished them and held them not applicable. And in the remaining case, Protsman, reference is made to an interesting article appearing in 25 Indiana Law Journal at page 325, pointing up the problems posed by Cerajewski and Rappaport, and expressing criticism of those decisions.
Fortunately the well reasoned opinions of most Indiana decisions for many years have refused to extend the meaning of the debt limitation provision of the Indiana Constitution to prohibit the creation of new political subdivisons or the financing of local public improvements by bond issues paid for by assessments or special taxes. The common law imposed no debt limitation whatever, and we should not at this late date attempt to turn the clock backward by engrafting additional words into the debt limitation provision of the Indiana Constitution to make it more restrictive than at the time of its enactment.

=== CASE 9738673 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:00:23.753337+00 ===

Dissenting Opinion.
Achor, C. J.
— In my opinion neither the parties nor this court in its majority opinion considered the really significant grounds upon which the statutes here placed in controversy [ch. 144 of the Acts of 1919, as amended by ch. 279 of the Acts of 1961, and ch. 397 of the Acts of 1963] would necessarily be considered unconstitutional if the issues were presented.
*473This circumstance poses a serious question. Shall this court ignore the fact that appellant has failed to present these constitutional defects and hand down an opinion which presumptively sustains the constitutionality of the acts, or is there an obligation, under all the circumstances of this case, to recognize these constitutional deficiencies and remand the case to the trial court for a determination based upon these further considerations ?
It is my opinion that, for the reasons hereafter stated, when considered together, this latter course of action is appropriate.
I. It seems apparent that this was a “friendly action” in which there was not a complete adversity of interest. The following facts which appear of record lead to this conclusion.
1. The plaintiff-appellant was a non-urban resident of Marion County, and, therefore, although she may have legally represented “all others similarly situated,” as stated in her complaint, she did not in all respects represent the residents of the cities and towns in Marion County outside of the city of Indianapolis, who, in my opinion, have the greater cause to challenge the constitutionality of the act.
2. The appellant gave only partial consideration to the major grounds for challenging the constitutionality of the act in her brief, and gave no consideration to other grounds which might have been asserted.
3. The appellant did not file a reply brief to controvert the contentions asserted by appellees’ brief.
4. Neither has appellant filed a petition for re*474hearing,1 even though the majority opinion expressed the views of only three of the five members of this court.
II. This is not merely a controversy between private. parties. Rather, the action is filed in the name of a single person as a class action. Thus it purports to present a valid and bona fide case on behalf of hundreds of thousands of people who presumably become bound by the judgment entered therein. Thus we here have a case of great public interest.
Admittedly amicable actions are generally to be encouraged, but “An amicable action in the sense in which these words are used . . . presupposes that there is a real dispute between the parties. ...” 1 Anderson, Actions for Declaratory Judgments (2nd ed. 1951) §104, at 169. 1 Freeman on Judgments (5th ed. 1925) §511 at 1101 states:
“ . . . And it has been held that the judgment in a ‘friendly’ mandamus suit by certain taxpayers and officers against town officers to compel the issuance of bonds is not conclusive upon taxpayers not parties thereto. . . .” [Citing People ex rel Childress v. Illinois Cent. R. Co. (1921), 298 Ill. 516, 131 N. E. 624.]
In the case of Illinois Cent. R. Co., supra, the court stated:
“ ‘While it is proper and just that even the rights of the public . . . should be concluded by one fair litigation, in which the matters involved were faithfully presented and considered, it should be *475emphasised that the litigation must be bona fide, fair and honest from the beginning to the end. . . . ’” [298 Ill. 516, 518-19, 131 N. E. at 625 (1921), portions of the court’s quotation from Lindsay v. Allen (1904), 112 Tenn. 637, 82 S. W. 171.]
In what manner are the statutes in controversy violative of the constitutions of the State of Indiana and of the United States? The majority opinion of this court does not consider the fact that, under the statutes in question, the residents of the several municipal corporations within Marion County would be obliged to pay taxes for the operation of the enlarged city of Indianapolis park system; whereas, the residents of Indianapolis were not obligated to pay taxes for the separate park systems of the other several municipal corporations in the county.
Because of this very apparent unequal treatment which the statute would cause to be imposed upon the residents of these other cities and towns, which issue was not considered by the parties or in the majority opinion, I am of the opinion that the statute is violative of Art. 1, §23 of the Indiana Constitution2 and the 14th Amendment to the U. S. Constitution.3
Furthermore, neither the parties nor this court gave consideration to the fact that statutes providing for the city of Indianapolis-Marion County park system purported to establish a taxing and bonding authority *476which overlaps, and is in addition to, the park systems of the other municipal corporations in the county which are also authorized to tax and issue bonds, for the operation of their municipal park systems. This court has on two separate occasions been asked to rule on the validity of such statutes, and in each instance this court has held them to be in violation of the constitutional limitation upon bonded indebtedness as contained in Art. 13, §1 of the Indiana Constitution.4 Cerajewski v. McVey (1947), 225 Ind. 67, 72 N. E. 2d 650; Rappaport v. Dept. of Public Health (1949), 227 Ind. 508, 87 N. E. 2d 77. These are landmark cases which have been cited and relied upon in nearly every case wherein the constitutionality of a newly created taxing and bonding authority has been established.5 The failure of appellant to cite and rely upon these cases, which are directly in point, can be explained only in the light of the amicable character of this action.
The acts of the legislature creating new taxing and bonding authorities as devices to avoid the above constitutional debt limitation, the prior decisions of this court construing such acts, and the decision of this court in the instant case, present an interesting commentary.
*477Device One-. For the purpose of avoiding this constitutional prohibition, the legislature, with the approval of this court, has created many new municipal corporations, which have been authorized to perform a governmental function which had previously been performed by a then existing municipal corporation. Since there was no prohibition in the constitution against the creation of new municipal corporations each with taxing and bonding authority, this device provided a ready vehicle by which to avoid the constitutional limitation upon the bonded indebtedness of a municipal corporation, even though the tax burden and bonding authority upon the people within the municipality was increased with the creation of each such new corporation. Thus, school corporations, hospital corporations, library corporations, public building corporations, and others, were created, each with separate taxing and bonding authority.
However, the characteristic of all such corporations was that, in the geographical area over which they had control, each was exclusive in the performance of the particular function for which it was created. As previously noted, this distinguishing aspect of .such corporations, as compared with the park system with which we are here concerned, was not presented in appellant’s brief, nor was it considered in the majority opinion.
Device Two: The legislature has also authorized the creation of many “boards,” “commissions,” “departments,” and “authorities,” within the corporation structure of a single existing municipal corporation, and invested each such agency with authority to perform one of the governmental functions of a municipal corporation, and authorized each to separately issue bonds and levy taxes.
*478This court, with dubious logic and remarkable legal dexterity, has upheld the validity of such statutes. See: Archer, Jr., etc. et al. v. City of Indpls., etc. et al. (1954), 233 Ind. 640, 122 N. E. 2d 607, and cases cited therein. The evil of this practice has been compounded by the fact that under it the legislature has created a multiplicity of taxing and bonding authorities which perform segments of what was formerly considered a single governmental function. Thus, it follows that within a single city the “street department” could be authorized separately to tax and issue bonds. Furthermore, that department, performing a single function of government within a municipality, could be subdivided into subsidiary “authorities,” with each assigned a segment of the function of providing streets and thoroughfares, and each authorized to tax and issue bonds.
Personally, I find no rationalization in support of these additional taxing and bonding authorities within the structure of a single municipal corporation. To do so is comparable to an attempt to defend a man charged with forgery on the ground that the offense was not really committed by him, but only by thumb and forefinger of his right hand. Even the Bible has something to say about all members of the same body being one (I. Cor. 12:14-20); yet for the purpose of imposing taxes and additional bonded indebtedness within a single municipal corporation we have said they are not one.
I do not recommend that we disturb the existing implementing taxing authorities, the constitutionality of whose existence has been considered and approved by this court, however, I am strongly of the opinion that the legislature should exercise great caution as to any further extension of the practice.
*479Device Three: We are now asked to extend the above practice into new and additional areas of municipal law by authorizing the creation of additional “districts” which perform the same governmental function, with overlapping administrative taxing and bonding authority, within the same geographical area wherein the same function is being performed by other municipal corporations within the ascribed area.
In this case we are asked to approve a law which purports to authorize the park department of the city of Indianapolis, in conjunction with a park district consisting all of Marion County, to operate parks throughout Marion County, and to levy taxes and issue bonds for the operation of such parks. In my opinion, the act which purports to establish this creature is unconstitutional, for two reasons:
First, it is not a municipal corporation in itself, authorized under the constitution to separately levy taxes and issue bonds of indebtedness. Rather, it is merely an implementing authority within the framework of existing governmental authority. Secondly, because as a municipal body, it does not have exclusive authority or responsibility for the operation of parks within the area for which it is established. If put into operation the result will be that city-county park district has authority to operate parks throughout the county, including the several cities and towns within the county, which have the same authority within their several distinct corporate boundaries. Thus, a situation would exist where the several cities and towns in Marion County [other than Indianapolis] would continue to operate their separate parks and to levy taxes and issue bonds for their operation; whereas, the newly created Indianapolis-Marion County park district might exercise the same authority and tax and issue bonds there*480for. The result would be that the taxpayers of the several cities and towns in Marion County [other than Indianapolis] would be burdened with a double taxing and bonding authority, for the performance of a single governmental function — the operation of public parks by municipal government. For this additional reason, I believe the law to be unconstitutional, in that it purports to authorize double taxation and bonding authority where such authority is not authorized. To attempt to do so is to pervert the fundamental law of the state. This court so held in the cases of Cerajewski v. McVey and Rappaport v. Dept. of Public Health, p. 4, supra.
This practice of making end runs around and through the constitution, with special authority from the legislature for such maneuver on the basis of expediency, should be stopped. It is a mockery to the basic concept of constitutional government which assures us government by law and not by men. If municipal corporations require additional bonding authority for the purpose of carrying out the necessary functions of government, as may be true in this case, they can and should acquire this authority by a direct and clearly stated amendment to the constitution.
In the meantime, in my opinion, it is the responsibility, of this court, as the guardian of the constitution, to hold the line by saying, we have permitted you to go this far, but hence forth in all instances where the practice has not been approved it is and will be condemned.
Note. — Reported in 198 N. E. 2d 755. Dissenting Opinion reported 199 N. E. 2d 699.
. Had a petition for rehearing been filed, and the same denied, this opinion would ordinarily have been addressed to the denial of such petition for rehearing. However, under present circumstances, this opinion is written belatedly, in support of my dissent — my intention to do so having been originally indicated.
. “The General Assembly shall not grant to any citizen, or class of citizens, privileges or immunities which, upon the same terms, shall not equally belong to all citizens.” Art. 1, §23 Indiana Constitution.
. “. . . No state shall make or enforce any law which shall abridge the privileges or immunities of citizens of the United States; nor shall any state deprive any person of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law; nor deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws.” Sec. 1, 14th Amendment to the U. S. Constitution.
. “No political or municipal corporation in this State shall ever become indebted in any manner or for any purpose to an amount in the aggregate exceeding two per centum on the value of the taxable property within such corporation, to- be ascertained by the last assessment for State and county taxes, previous to the incurring of such indebtedness; and all bonds or obligations in excess of such amount, given by such corporations,, shall be void: Provided, That in time of war, ... .” Art. 13, §1, Indiana Constitution.
. Datisman etc. v. Gary Public Library (1960), 241 Ind. 83, 170 N. E. 2d 55; Book v. Board of Flood Control Comm’rs etc. (1959), 239 Ind. 160, 156 N. E. 2d 87; Martin v. Ben Davis Conservancy District (1958), 238 Ind. 502, 153 N. E. 2d 125; Protsman v. Jefferson-Craig Consolidated School Corp. (1953), 231 Ind. 527, 109 N. E. 2d 889; Department of Public Sanitation, City of Hammond v. Solan (1951), 229 Ind. 228, 97 N. E. 2d 495.

=== CASE 9738674 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:00:24.317645+00 ===

MR. JUSTICE FRIEND delivered the opinion of the court: Michael McDonald, plaintiff, was injured on November 28, 1954, as the result of a collision of his car with a car driven by Alvin Trampf. In Count I, of his complaint, McDonald sued Trampf, and in Count II he named John Skovanek and Orley C. Hopper as codefendants under the Dram Shop Act for having caused the intoxication of Trampf. The jury returned a verdict for McDonald and against Trampf, Skovanek and Hopper and assessed the damages at $18,000. Execution issued against Trampf in the amount of $18,000 plus $48.80 for costs and charges. The execution was personally served on Trampf and returned by the Sheriff showing no part satisfied. Garnishment proceedings were then instituted against Trampf’s insurer, Michigan Mutual Liability Company on May 17,1962. Michigan Mutual filed a third-party complaint on June 12, 1962, wherein it identified itself as the insurance carrier of Trampf to the extent of $20,000 and named as third-party defendants John Skovanek and Lincoln Casualty Company, his insurance carrier, to the extent of $15,000, and Orley C. Hopper and Highway Insurance Company, his insurance carrier, to the extent of $15,000. The third-party complaint conceded liability for only one-third of the judgment and asked that the third-party defendants pay the balance of $12,000. On June 21, 1962, the court rendered judgment for $6,000 against Michigan Mutual on its answer, and it was paid. On September 19, 1962, judgment was entered in favor of Michael McDonald, judgment creditor (plaintiff-appellee), and against Michigan Mutual Liability Company, garnishee-defendant (appellant) in the amount of $12,250. On September 21, 1962, judgment was entered in favor of John Skovanek, Lincoln Casualty Company, Orley C. Hopper and Highway Insurance Company, third-party defendants (appellees) and against Michigan Mutual Liability Company, third-party plaintiff (appellant), dismissing the third-party complaint on motion of the third-party defendants. The September 19th and September 21st judgments are the basis of this appeal. The third-party defendants contend that the judgment of the trial court dismissing the third-party complaint was correct because (a) the third-party complaint in this case is specifically barred by the statute which creates the third-party remedy; (b) the garnishment proceedings do not permit third-party practice of the kind sought by the third-party plaintiff in this case; and (c) the third-party plaintiff, who is the subrogee of a tort-feasor, cannot obtain contribution from the other joint tort-feasors.  The statute which creates the third-party remedy is sec 25, chap 110 (Ill Rev Stats 1961). The last sentence in paragraph 2 states: “Nothing herein applies to liability insurers or creates any substantive right to contribution among tortfeasors or against any insurer or other person which has not heretofore existed.” The third-party defendants contend that this sentence precludes the plaintiff, a liability insurer, from initiating a third-party proceeding in order to secure contribution. Such a construction, they say, would be contrary to good sense and to cases interpreting sec 25. Paragraph 2 of section 25 was designed to allay any fears that the substantive law of contribution was sought to be changed or that the question of liability insurance could be injected into an action. The recent case of Coffey v. ABC Liquor Stores, Inc., 13 Ill App2d 510, 142 NE2d 705 (1957), makes this clear. In that case the complaint charged the tavern owners with selling liquor to and causing the intoxication of an individual who injured the complainants. The tavern owners in turn, filed a third-party complaint pursuant to sec 25 against the individual who injured the complainants. Although the Appellate Court sustained a dismissal of the third-party complaint, it was on the theory as to the nature of a tavern owner’s liability under the Dram Shop Act, and not on the ground that this section precludes the filing of a third-party proceeding for the purpose of securing contribution. Blaszak v. Union Tank Car Co., 37 Ill App2d 12, 184 NE2d 808 (1962) and Holcomb v. Flavin, 37 Ill App2d 359, 362, 185 NE2d 716 (1962), also support this position.  The third-party defendants’ second contention is that the Garnishment Act does not permit third-party proceedings. According to the third-party defendants, the deductions, set-offs and other rights that the garnishee is entitled to assert in a garnishment matter are specifically provided for by the Garnishment Act (Ill Rev Stats 1961, c 62) and these do not include the right to file third-party proceedings under sec 25, chap 110 (Ill Rev Stats 1961). In addition, the third-party defendants point out that garnishment proceedings are excluded from operation of the Civil Practice Act by sec 1, chap 110 (Ill Rev Stats 1961). •These objections are not well taken. Section 1, chap 110 (Ill Rev Stats 1961), provides that: “In all those proceedings (including garnishment) the separate statutes control to the extent to which they regulate procedure, but this Act applies as to matters of procedure not so regulated by separate statutes.” The Garnishment Act makes it clear that the Civil Practice Act applies “except as otherwise expressly provided.” Paragraph (b), sec 43, chap 62 (Ill Rev Stats 1961) reads as follows: “The provisions of the Civil Practice Act, and all existing and future amendments thereto and the rules adopted pursuant thereto, shall apply to proceedings under this Act except as otherwise expressly provided.” By this paragraph, third-party proceedings under sec 25, chap 110 (Ill Rev Stats 1961) can he used in a garnishment action unless it can he shown that the Garnishment Act expressly provides otherwise. The Garnishment Act nowhere excludes the filing of a third-party complaint in a garnishment proceeding, nor is any provision of that Act repugnant to the nature of a third-party proceeding. The Civil Practice Act, and specifically the right to file a third-party complaint, applies to a garnishment action because it is not a matter of procedure “regulated by separate statutes.” We hold that a third-party complaint may properly be filed in a garnishment proceeding.  The remaining contention of the third-party defendants is that the driver of a car who causes an accident and is required to satisfy a judgment which arises out of the accident, cannot get contribution from two tavern operators who caused the intoxication of the driver or from the operators’ insurers. On the basis of Economy Auto Ins. Co. v. Brown, 334 Ill App 579, 79 NE2d 854 (1948), this contention must be sustained. Except for a difference in the theory chosen for the recovery, that case and the case at bar involve identical fact situations. The reason for sustaining the third-party’s contention, which is usually reduced to a rule against contribution among joint tortfeasors who are in pari delicto, is not based solely on the holding of the Economy Auto case. In addition it is based on a review of prior Illinois decisions which provide the rationale for the rule. Recent Illinois decisions reflect a willingness to question the meaning of the rule and, in the case of Wright v. Royse, 43 Ill App2d 267, 193 NE2d 340 (1963), to explore its origins. As that case indicates, the meaning of the rule was obscured as the result of the failure to note that procedural changes which enlarged the scope of joinder of defendants should not have been allowed to change substantive rules of tort liability. As was said in that case, at page 276: “At common law, the original meaning of a ‘joint tort,’ in the substantive sense, was that of vicarious liability for concerted action. The common-law rule was that all persons who acted in concert to commit a wrong in pursuance of a common design were held, jointly and severally, liable for the entire result. Each participant was considered to be the agent of the other, engaged in a joint enterprise, and each was, therefore, considered to be liable for the entire damage done to the injured party which was commonly, indivisible. At common law, in a procedural sense, ‘joint action’ meant simply that two or more persons might be joined, properly, as defendants in the same action. The common-law procedural rules as to joinder were extremely strict. Joinder of two or more defendants was limited to cases of concerted action. At common law, if concert of action was not involved, there could be no joinder. These common-law concepts were carried forward into our jurisprudence and continued to be present until the adoption of modern procedural codes. As corollary to these rules, and consistent with the strong policy against joinder, the common law consistently held that when defendants did not act in concert and/or the case did not involve the doctrine of respondeat superior, the defendants could not be sued jointly even though the acts that they had committed were identical in character and the combined effect of their acts was to canse a single, indivisible injury to the plaintiff. See: Prosser on Torts, Second Edition, 1955, Pages 234-237.” (Emphasis in the original.) As the opinion points out, the drafters of modern practice codes changed the procedural aspects of the common law to provide for the complete settlement of all questions connected with the transaction in a single suit. They did this by adopting liberal rules regarding the joinder of parties. Page 278: “This change (to liberal rules of joinder), which is solely procedural in nature, and which had as its sole jnstification the elimination of the multiplicity of suits and the permitting of a determination of all aspects of a single wrong in a single suit did not, and was not intended to, change the substantive, law regarding ‘joint torts.’ ” (Emphasis in the original.) The common law provided, then, that parties were held jointly and severally liable only when they acted in concert to commit a wrong in pursuance of a common design. The early Illinois cases set forth this view. In Farwell v. Becker, 129 Ill 261, 21 NE 792 (1889), the court considered, at length, the problems of contribution among joint tortfeasors. The case involved an intentional tort committed under mistake. Several attaching creditors sued out writs, with no intention of committing a trespass or injuring anyone, but with the honest belief that a transfer of goods made by their debtor was fraudulent. Their actions, however, were unlawful. The court held that each creditor would be compelled to pay his just proportion of the judgment against them. The tort was thus free of malice and without an intentional violation of the law. The opinion, indicated that the rule of no contribution was to be limited to cases in which willfulness or malice was present, saying at pages 269, 270: “There are cases which hold that no right of contribution exists between wrongdoers .... (W)e do not think the weight of authority sustains the doctrine that no right of contribution exists between wrongdoers as it is broadly stated in Merry-weather v. Nixon. Indeed, the later English cases do not, in our opinion, sustain the doctrine as it is laid down in that case . . „ . ‘(T)he rule that wrongdoers can not have redress or contribution against each other, is confined to cases where the person seeking redress must be presumed to have known that he was doing an unlawful act.’ . . .” The purpose of the court seems to have been, by way of strong dictum, to isolate the common-law no contribution rule as one whose essential requirement was intentional wrongdoing. See: Contribution Between Joint Tortfeasors, Paul O. Proehl, 49 IBJ 880 (1961). Subsequent decisions, for the most part, have followed the principles set forth in Farwell v. Becker. In Chicago Rys. Co. v. R. F. Conway Co., 219 Ill App 220 (1920), the court, at page 223, states the rule in the same terms as the court in the Farwell case. The court said, “This rule (against contribution or indemnity among joint tortfeasors) is only applied to cases of intentional or conscious wrongdoing.” In the Conway case, a street car company, which by agreement with the city was required to make repairs on its tracks, employed an independent contractor to make them. On a dark night, a motorcyclist was injured by excavations made during the repairs by the contractor and, as a result, recovered against the street car company. In finding for the street car company, in their action over against the contractor, the court said, at page 223: “If the parties are not equally criminal, the principal delinquent máy he held responsible • to his codelinquent for damages incurred by their joint offense. In respect to offenses, in which is involved any moral delinquency or turpitude, all parties are deemed, equally guilty, and courts will not inquire into their relative guilt. But where the offense is merely malum prohibitum, and is in no respect immoral, it is not against the policy of the law to inquire into the relative delinquency of the parties and to administer justice betwéen them, although both parties are wrongdoers.” (Emphasis in the original.) Since the street car company was not guilty of any moral delinquency or turpitude, the court inquired into the relative delinquency of the parties and administered justice between them by allowing the street car company a complete recovery against the contractor. Both the plaintiff and defendant were negligent and therefore liable to the motorcyclist for his injuries. But the court displayed a willingness to adjust the burden of liability — in other words — to determine who was the active and the passive tortfeasor. The above quotation from the Conway case was incorporated into the opinion of the court in John Griffiths & Son Co. v. National Fireproofing Co., 310 Ill 331, 141 NE 739 (1923). The court went on to say, at page 339: “The general rule is that where two parties acting together commit an illegal or wrongful act the party injured may hold both responsible for the damages resulting from their joint act and neither can recover from the other the damages he may have paid or any part of them. The further general principal is announced, however, in many cases, that where one does the act which produces the injury and the other does not join in the act but is thereby exposed to liability and suffers damage the latter may recover against the principal delinquent, and the law will inquire into the real delinquency and place the ultimate liability upon him whose fault was the primary cause of the injury.” The court was stating, in other words, that contribution or indemnity would be denied only among joint tortfeasors who acted concertedly and intentionally. In Pennsylvania R. Co. v. Roberts & Schaefer Co., 250 Ill App 330 (1928), the court allowed full recovery by a railroad from a contractor of a judgment paid by the railroad to one of its employees injured as a result of a faulty machine installed by the contractor on the premises of the railroad. The court, in quoting Union Stock Yards Co. of Omaha v. Chicago, B. & Q. R. Co., 196 US 217, 25 Sup Ct 226 (1905), said, at page 336: “When two parties, acting together, commit an illegal or wrongful act, the party who is held responsible . . . for the act cannot have indemnity or contribution from the other, because both are equally culpable or particeps criminis, and the damage results from their joint offense. This rule does not apply when one does the act or creates the nuisance, and the other does not join therein, but is thereby exposed to liability and suffers damage. He may recover from the party whose wrongful act has thus exposed him. In such case the parties are not in pari delicto as to each other, though, as to third persons, either may be held liable.” (Emphasis in the original.) If the parties are not in pari delicto as to each other, then they are not equally at fault and the passive tortfeasor can. collect against the active tortfeasor. They are not equally at fault because they have not acted together and committed an illegal or wrongful act. The court in Skala v. Lehon, 343 Ill 602, 175 NE 832 (1931), uses pari delicto in this same way, at page 605: “It is true, as a general rule, that the right of contribution does not exist as between joint tort feasors where there is concerted action in the commission of the wrong. Where, however, there is no concerted action the rule does not apply, as the parties in such case are not m pari delicto as to each other, and as between themselves their rights may be adjusted in accordance with the principles of law applicable to the relation in fact existing between them.” (Emphasis in the original.) As long as the parties have not acted concertedly and intentionally to commit an illegal act or wrong and therefore are not in pari delicto, their rights may be adjusted in accordance with the principles of law applicable to the relation in fact existing between them. In Gulf, M. & O. R. Co. v. Arthur Dixon Transfer Co., 343 Ill App 148, 98 NE2d 783 (1951), the court, after listing four or five exceptions to the general principle of noncontribution between tortfeasors, and after noting that the case of Pennsylvania R. Co. v. Roberts and Schaefer Co., 250 Ill App 330 (1928), was strongly in point, went on to characterize the exceptions as situations in which negligence of one defendant was passive and therefore situations in which that defendant should not be held liable for damages when the negligence of the other defendant was active. At page 156, the court said: “The vast growth of negligence law has markedly changed the characteristics of negligence actions. Legal negligence no longer embodies a concept of misbehavior just short of the criminal or the immoral. The courts have, therefore, had to find a way to do justice within the law so that one guilty of an act of negligence — affirmative, active, primary in its character — will not escape scot-free, leaving another whose fault was only technical or passive to assume complete liability. In dealing with the question, the courts have had before them the problem stated in Booth-Kelly v. Southern Pacific, supra, that in practically all cases the indemnitee has himself been guilty of legal negligence. This led to some confusion in terms used .... What is meant is that plaintiff by act of defendant was made liable for failing to discharge a responsibility even though he, plaintiff, was not guilty of any active negligence.” In such a situation as the above, the defendants are obviously not acting intentionally and in concert, and therefore, the rule of no-contribution does not apply. To the same effect are the decisions in Palmer House Co. v. Otto, 347 Ill App 198, 106 NE2d 753 (1952); Moroni v. Intrusion-Prepakt, Inc., 24 Ill App 2d 534, 165 NE2d 346 (1960); Shulman v. Chrysler Corp., 31 Ill App2d 168, 175 NE2d 590 (1961); and Blaszak v. Union Tank Car Co., 37 Ill App2d 12, 184 NE2d 808 (1962). Wright v. Royse, supra, is a logical extension of the prior case law which provided for recovery by the passive tortfeasor over against the active tortfeasor. The Wright case allows the question of the liability of the defendants to be decided by a jury’s special verdict. The decision in Mutual Service Cas. Ins. Co. v. Prudence Mut. Cas. Co., 25 Ill App2d 429, 166 NE2d 316 (1960) is not in conflict with prior case law. In that case, an insurance company which was the insurer of one of the two joint tortfeasors settled a suit for damages arising out of an accident in Wisconsin. The settlement was in the amount of $3,500. The insurer then sued for half, by way of contribution, from the insurer of the other tortfeasor, an Illinois resident, in an Illinois court. The court denied contribution on two grounds: first, the plaintiff was seeking to enforce a special statutory remedy under the Uniform Joint Obligations Act, and this remedy would not be enforced in Illinois where such procedure is unknown. The second reason was that plaintiff could not maintain an action against the insurer because the public policy of the State of Illinois does not permit direct actions against liability insurers. This line of cases indicates that the rule of no contribution among joint tortfeasors applies only when the tortfeasors are acting concertedly and intentionally, Farwell v. Becker, supra; that when the joint tortfeasors have not acted concertedly and intentionally, the court will inquire into the relative delinquency of the parties, whether they have a prior contractual relationship, Chicago Railways Co. v. R. F. Conway, supra; Griffiths & Son v. National Fireproofing Co., supra; Pennsylvania R. Co. v. Roberts & Schaefer Co., supra, or do not have a prior contractual relationship, Gulf, M. & O. R. Co. v. Arthur Dixon Transfer Co., supra; and that when the courts say that the parties are not in pari delicto as to each other, and therefore the passive tortfeasor can collect against the active tortfeasor, it means that the parties have not intentionally and concertedly committed a wrongful act, Pennsylvania R. Co. v. Roberts & Schaefer Co., supra, and Skala v. Lehon, supra. If the joint tortfeasors have acted concertedly and intentionally there is no contribution between them. If they have not so acted, then recovery is allowed by one tortfeasor against the other by inquiring into the relative delinquency of the parties — that is — by determining who was the active and the passive tortfeasor. In the instant proceeding, Alvin Trampf, the driver of the car which injured plaintiff, Michael McDonald, and John Skovanek and Orley C. Hopper, each of whom operated a tavern and caused the intoxication of Alvin Trampf, were joint tortfeasors. However, Trampf, Skovanek and Hopper did not act concertedly and intentionally to cause the injury to the plaintiff, McDonald. As the driver of the car that injured the plaintiff, Trampf is the active tortfeasor and therefore cannot seek reimbursement from the tavern operators or their insurers. This conclusion is based on the prior case law and the holding of the Economy Auto Ins. Co. v. Brown case. It is not inconsistent with the decision in Coffey v. ABC Liquor Stores, 13 Ill App2d 510, 142 NE2d 705 (1957). In that case, tavern operators, who were sued under the Dram Shop Act, sought to recover, by way of a third-party action, against the person who injured the original plaintiff. The court said that the tavern owners had no right of recovery over against the person who injured the original plaintiff because liability under the Dram Shop Act is penal in nature and the liability is one which the liquor dealers agree to accept and be bound by upon entering the liquor business. That case merely makes it clear that it is public policy of this State that those who are sued under the Dram Shop Act can not diminish their responsibility by being allowed recovery over against a joint tortfeasor. The right to collect under the terms of the Act is given only to the person injured or the personal representative of the deceased, sec 135, chap 43 (Ill Rev Stats 1961). Therefore, in the case at bar, satisfaction could have been obtained from either the active tortfeasor or the tavern operators. The order of the Superior Court of Cook County dismissing on the merits the third-party complaint of Michigan Mutual Liability Co. against John Skovanek, Lincoln Casualty Company, Orley C. Hopper and Highway Insurance Company is affirmed. The order in favor of Michael McDonald and against Michigan Mutual Liability Co. in the amount of $12,250 is also affirmed. Orders affirmed.

=== CASE 9738676 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:00:24.326427+00 ===

BURKE, P. J., concurs in part and dissents in part: Plaintiff, as a third-party beneficiary upon obtaining judgment against the three policy holders had the right to sue the insurers as effectively as though he had been named a beneficiary. Ill Rev Stats 1963, chap 73, § 1000. See Simmon v. Iowa Mut. Cas. Co., 3 Ill2d 318, 121 NE2d 509; Slavens v. Standard Acc. Ins. Co. of Detroit, Mich., 27 F2d 859 (p 324); New Amsterdam Cas. Co. v. Murray, 242 F2d 549. Lincoln and Highway admitted that plaintiff is a beneficiary under their policies. These two insurers to the extent of the terms of the policies are admittedly liable for plaintiff’s claim. Neither has advanced a valid reason why it should not contribute its share. Plaintiff admits that he is beneficiary under the policies issued by these three insurers. Michigan in its answer as garnishee said that it has “outstanding an insurance policy under which it was obligated to pay on behalf of Alvin Trampf one-third of the $18,000 judgment in favor of Michael McDonald.” The third-party complaint alleges that Highway issued its policy which covered the claim of McDonald to the extent of $15,000; that Lincoln issued its policy which covered the claim of McDonald to the extent of $15,-000 and that it (Michigan) had issued a policy with a limit of $20,000. The burden was and is on the judgment creditor to prove the liability of the garnishee. Kores Mfg. Co. v. Western Office Supply, 349 Ill App 208, 110 NE2d 461; Ancateau v. Commercial Cas. Ins. Co., 318 Ill App 553, 48 NE2d 440; Wold for Use of Wegener v. Glens Falls Indemnity Co., 269 Ill App 407; Reid, Murdoch & Co. v. First Nat. Bank, 135 Ill App 49. Plaintiff did not produce any evidence to overcome the allegations in the garnishee’s answer that it was obligated to pay only one-third of the judgment. The third-party complaint alleged that Lincoln was obligated to pay one-third and that Highway was obligated to pay one-third of the judgment. Without the policies we are unable to determine the obligations of the respective insurers. We have held that under the Coffey ease because of the public policy manifested in the Dram Shop Act those who are sued under that Act are not allowed to recover against a joint tortfeasor. Michigan asserts that there is a prorata clause in every standard automobile policy issued in Hlinois. These policies are required to be filed with the Commissioner of Insurance. Ill Rev Stats 1963, chap 73, § 755(2). We decide, following the Coffey case, that there may not be contribution between Trampf, Skovanek and Hopper, the original defendants. Without the policies we cannot determine the liability of any of the insurers, including Michigan. The rights and obligations of the three insurers between themselves may be based on a different conception than the rights of the plaintiff against the three original defendants and against any or all of the insurers. These third-party defendants are in the insurance business and therein are licensed and regulated by the State. A stipulation of the policies to prorate the loss between the insurers does not offend against any theory of public policy inhibiting contribution between the individual tortfeasors. The cases holding that an insurance carrier of the tortfeasor stands in the shoes of the tortfeasors do not affect the rights and obligations of the insurers among themselves. The judgment against Michigan should be reversed and the cause remanded with directions to reinstate the third-party complaint against Lincoln Cas. Co., and Highway Ins. Co., and for further proceedings not inconsistent with this opinion.

=== CASE 2217260 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:24.140138+00 ===

347 Mass. 440 (1964)
198 N.E.2d 413
HOLYOKE STREET RAILWAY COMPANY
vs.
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC UTILITIES & another.
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Suffolk.
April 9, 1964.
May 4, 1964.
Present: WILKINS, C.J., SPALDING, WHITTEMORE, CUTTER, & REARDON, JJ.
Eliot P. Brooks (John S. Begley with him) for the Holyoke Street Railway Company.
Frank Daniels for the intervener, Peter Pan Bus Lines, Inc.
Samuel Adams, Assistant Attorney General, for the Department of Public Utilities.
CUTTER, J.
This is an appeal by Holyoke Street Railway Company (Holyoke Company) from an order of the Department of Public Utilities (D.P.U. 12,620) dated October 25, 1960, granting a petition (dated June 12, 1958) of Peter Pan Bus Lines, Inc. (Peter Pan) for amendment of a certificate (No. 3089, see D.P.U. 11,137) of public convenience and necessity permitting Peter Pan's predecessor, one Picknelly (doing business as Peter Pan Bus Lines), to operate between Springfield and Northampton over routes in these two communities and in West Springfield, Chicopee, Holyoke, *442 and Easthampton. At the request of the parties, a single justice reported the case without decision for determination by the full court.
Picknelly in 1933 began interstate bus operation, under authority granted by the Interstate Commerce Commission, serving points between Northampton and Boston, via Springfield and Stafford Springs, Connecticut. Picknelly also had an intrastate route between Springfield and Boston. Prior to 1955 he could not carry passengers between Springfield and Northampton nor could he carry passengers between Northampton and Boston without going through Stafford Springs. In 1954 (D.P.U. 11,137) Picknelly sought leave to operate (1) through service between Northampton and Springfield and (2) without going through Connecticut, service between Northampton and points east of Springfield, including Boston. Prior to 1955, through service had been provided between Northampton and Springfield by a joint operation of Holyoke Company and either another street railway or another bus company. This involved a transfer at the Northampton-Easthampton boundary.
In 1952, the department had denied four bus companies permission to give service between Northampton and Holyoke. This was done in order to protect Holyoke Company, as a local carrier, against "competition which might impair ... [its] operating revenue." The department then also dismissed a petition by Picknelly to give such service because he did not have the necessary local licenses. See G.L.c. 159A, § 1, as amended through St. 1956, c. 99. See also G.L. (Ter. Ed.) c. 159A, § 3.
In late 1954 Holyoke Company and Picknelly came to an agreement under which the former withdrew its opposition to granting Picknelly a local license in Holyoke. Such a local license was issued and Picknelly then filed his application (D.P.U. 11,137), mentioned above, for leave to carry passengers between Springfield and Northampton via Holyoke.
While the 1954 application (D.P.U. 11,137) was pending, Holyoke Company and Picknelly entered into a written contract, *443 dated December 2, 1954, (1) that Holyoke Company would not object to the granting of the application if the certificate should "be subject to the agreements" in the contract, and (2) that if Picknelly should be granted a certificate he (and his successors) would pay to Holyoke Company stated amounts (either fifteen cents or twenty cents depending upon the place of pick up or discharge) per passenger carried by his line to or from certain territories served by Holyoke Company. The contract also provided that if the department "should issue a certificate ... to ... Picknelly, and ... if such certificate ... should be amended by the [d]epartment ... [thereafter], then ... [the contract] shall remain in full force."
The department, by its order of January 21, 1955, in D.P.U. 11,137, issued to Picknelly a certificate, subject to certain restrictions not now relevant and to a condition relating to the contract of December 2, 1954.[1] The record reveals no appeal by Holyoke Company from this decision (D.P.U. 11,137). Picknelly made the payments called for by the contract for about one year.
On June 12, 1958, Peter Pan filed its present petition (D.P.U. 12,620) to be relieved of the proviso (fn. 1) in the certificate. The director of the department's division of railway and bus utilities presided as hearing officer at a public hearing (held September 10, 1958) on this petition and on October 5, 1960, recommended that it be dismissed. On October 25, 1960, the department disregarded this recommendation (cf. Norwood Ice Co. v. Milk Control Commn. 338 Mass. 435, 441), struck the proviso from the certificate, and ordered that the contract of December 2, 1954, "be ... canceled."
*444 Holyoke Company now contends (1) that the contract of December 2, 1954, remains valid and cannot be controlled by the department without taking Holyoke Company's property without due process of law; (2) that the Legislature has not given the department authority over that contract; and (3) that, in any event, certain aspects of the department's decision (D.P.U. 12,620) were incorrect.
1. The department has been given "general supervision and regulation of, and jurisdiction and control over, the following services, when ... rendered for public use within the commonwealth, and all persons ... [and] corporations ... rendering ... such ... services," as common carriers, including the "carriage of passengers for hire upon motor vehicles as provided in" G.L.c. 159A. See G.L.c. 159, § 12 (as amended through St. 1945, c. 175). See also Newton v. Department of Pub. Util. 339 Mass. 535, 541. General Laws c. 159A, § 7 (as amended through St. 1956, c. 329), provides in part, "No person shall operate a motor vehicle under a license issued ... [by local authorities for the carriage of passengers for hire as a common carrier] unless he has also obtained from the department a certificate declaring that public convenience and necessity require such operation. The department may ... issue or refuse to issue such a certificate, or may issue the same for the partial exercise only of the privilege sought. Such certificate shall specify the ... routes over which the motor vehicles ... may operate ... and may attach to the exercise of said rights such terms and conditions as the department shall deem that public convenience and necessity may require. The department, after notice and hearing, may revoke any such certificate for cause, and may, in like manner, revise any provisions thereof and any of the terms and conditions of such certificate or license...." (emphasis supplied). Section 7 thus gives to the "department ... continuing power ... to revise the provisions of a certificate." See Fortier v. Department of Pub. Util. 342 Mass. 728, 731.
The contract of December 2, 1954, between Picknelly and Holyoke Company dealt with a matter which under § 7 was *445 subject to the determination of the department, viz. the terms upon which a certificate of public convenience and necessity should be issued. The department in its order of January 21, 1955 (D.P.U. 11,137), took notice of the contract, but did not make its order subject to it, for the department expressly reserved (in a manner consistent with, if not required by, § 7) the right to review, modify or cancel the contract "at any time ... or in any respect as ... [the department] may find ... to be in the public interest." Picknelly and Holyoke Company could not bind the department to adhere to and enforce their contract, and, in any event, the department properly refused so to be bound. The department had power under § 7 to strike from the certificate the proviso concerning the payments to Holyoke Company, if, upon substantial evidence, it found that to require those payments was no longer in the public interest. See the Fortier case, 342 Mass. 728, 731-732.
Holyoke Company seems to have recognized the department's continuing power to amend the certificate. The department, however, has done more than that. It has ordered that the contract be canceled despite the provision that the contract was to remain in effect even if the certificate should be amended. This provision plainly was an attempt by Holyoke Company to guard against the possibility of a change of mind on the part of the department.
We think that in its inception the contract was not void as against public policy, even though it dealt with intercompany competition which, in at least many aspects, was subject to regulation by the department. The contract contemplated its submission to the department. Cf. Montana-Dakota Util. Co. v. Williams Elec. Coop. Inc. 263 F.2d 431, 433-436 (8th Cir.); Restatement: Contracts, § 564; Corbin, Contracts, § 1452; Williston, Contracts (2d ed.) § 1733; annotation, 70 A.L.R.2d 1326. There was to be no concealment of its provisions and of Holyoke Company's conditional commitment not to oppose the granting of a certificate to Picknelly. Cf. also New York City Transit Authy. v. Jamaica Buses, Inc. 16 App. Div.2d (N.Y.) 959; New York *446 City Transit Authy. v. Green Bus Lines, Inc. 16 App. Div.2d (N.Y.) 959. The department not only knew about the contract, but it included most of its terms in D.P.U. 11,137.
The provision that, despite an amendment of the certificate, the contract was to remain in effect stands upon a different basis. It purported to make the contract enforceable notwithstanding any later departmental amendment of the certificate. The contract dealt directly with the terms of the public service operations of two carriers in their relation to each other. It purported to impose a term of their continuing competition. This aspect of these carriers' competition with one another was a matter so directly affecting the public interest as to be subject to the department's regulatory powers. See G.L.c. 159, § 12, and c. 159A, § 7, both as amended. Such a contract between the carriers cannot be permitted to defeat the purpose of any proper subsequent exercise of the department's powers. It cannot be enforced while in conflict with the department's orders. See New England Tel. & Tel. Co. v. Brockton, 332 Mass. 662, 665-668. See also Louisville & Nashville R.R. v. Mottley, 219 U.S. 467, 485; Union Dry Goods Co. v. Georgia Pub. Serv. Corp. 248 U.S. 372, 375-377; Norfolk So. Bus Corp. v. Virginia Dare Transp. Co. Inc. 159 F.2d 306, 311 (4th Cir.), cert. den. 331 U.S. 827; Tulsa v. Midland Valley R.R. 168 F.2d 252, 254-255 (10th Cir.); Producers Transp. Inc., Extension-Asphalt Emulsion, 86 M.C.C. 323, 324-326 (I.C.C.); Corbin, Contracts, § 1515. Cf. Scott Paper Co. v. Marcalus Mfg. Co. Inc. 326 U.S. 249, 256-257. Compare also cases of unreasonable department interference with the details of a regulated company's performance of its public service functions or with its prerogatives of management. New England Tel. & Tel. Co. v. Department of Pub. Util. 262 Mass. 137, 146-151.
2. The department, in striking out the condition in Peter Pan's certificate, appears to us to have rested its decision (D.P.U. 12,620) very largely on the losses incurred by Peter Pan on the Springfield-Northampton route. The decision stated, "The important consideration ... is the evidence *447 of the substantial losses being incurred by ... [Peter Pan] on... [this] route.... The volume of traffic which was originally expected to develop on this route has not materialized. We do not find any evidence of any diversion of traffic from the lines of ... Holyoke ... Company. Accordingly, the condition ... does not accomplish the purpose for which it was intended, namely, to preclude ... [Peter Pan] from profiting at the expense of ... Holyoke ... Company by means of diverting patronage from the latter. On the contrary, it now appears that ... [Peter Pan's] other customers are subsidizing the riders on this route." These findings must stand if they are based on substantial evidence.
The evidence shows that the bulk of Peter Pan's passengers ride between Springfield and Boston and intermediate points. Through passengers picked up between Northampton and Springfield, of course, tend to add to the volume of traffic, and to reduce the cost of operation per mile, between Boston and Springfield. That is "one of the reasons" Peter Pan is "operating between Northampton and Springfield." The Northampton-Springfield service is "a local service in conjunction with a through service."
Various exhibits were introduced indicating that Peter Pan was losing money on its Springfield-Northampton service.[2] That loss by 1958 seemed to be decreasing slightly and *448 revenues per bus mile were increasing. The figures in evidence concerning the traffic on the Springfield-Northampton segment indicate no attempt to credit to the segment any part of the net revenues derived by the balance of Peter Pan's system (Boston-Springfield) from passengers originating or terminating their travel on the feeder line segment.
The hearing officer asked Peter Pan for an exhibit which would show the additional passengers picked up as a result of the permission to operate to Northampton. The request was by no means wholly clear but we interpret it as calling for some indication of the additional passengers obtained for Peter Pan on a broader basis than the exhibits summarized in the first part of fn. 2. Counsel for Peter Pan undertook to furnish such an exhibit. No such exhibit is in the record. It is not unusual in determining the losses or earning capacity of a feeder line to take into account the contribution to system net earnings of traffic originating and terminating on the feeder line, and to regard a carrier's operations "not piecemeal by the [particular] certificate but rather comprehensively according to the entire range of ... [the carrier's] activities viewed as a whole." See Department of Pub. Util. v. Eastern Mass. St. Ry. 327 Mass. 450, 453. See also Southern Ry. v. North Carolina, 376 U.S. 93, 103-105; Sharfman, Interstate Commerce Commission, vol. III-A, pp. 327-346; Cherington, Regulation of Railroad Abandonments, 159, 163-166; annotation, 10 A.L.R.2d 1121, 1130-1149. Cf. G.L.c. 159, § 16A (inserted by St. 1938, c. 243). Peter Pan's system net earnings have been increasing in recent years (fn. 2).
*449 There is little evidence bearing upon whether Peter Pan diverted from Holyoke Company any substantial amount of traffic after Picknelly received the Northampton-Springfield certificate. The payment by Picknelly in the twelve months ended January 31, 1956, of $3,228.02 to Holyoke Company indicates that in those twelve months Picknelly in fact carried a significant number of passengers picked up or discharged in the portions of Holyoke Company's territory specified in the agreement of December 2, 1954. Whether these passengers were diverted from Holyoke Company cannot be ascertained with precision. It is reasonable, however, to infer that many of these would have used Holyoke Company's service if the Peter Pan service had not been available. In any event Picknelly and Holyoke Company had agreed in their contract that these passengers should "be considered a diversion of traffic from Holyoke Company for the purpose of reimbursement." Even if it be assumed that these passengers were all at the twenty cent reimbursement rate, $3,228 would represent 16,140 passengers in twelve months (cf. Picknelly's total regular route passengers, fn. 2), a substantial diversion (if all were diverted) from Holyoke Company, a bus carrier engaged in local public mass transportation service in a city of moderate size. Other evidence of the extent of Peter Pan's diversion of traffic from Holyoke Company does not appear. That type of evidence was peculiarly within Peter Pan's control for it had, or could have had, the records of the fares it collected and of where it picked up and discharged its passengers.
It thus appears that the department, in disregarding the recommendation of its hearing officer and in revising Peter Pan's certificate, made one of its principal findings upon incomplete evidence because of Peter Pan's failure to furnish material which it had promised to furnish. We cannot say that the department's conclusion would not have been affected by that evidence, or that its absence was not prejudicial to Holyoke Company. Such meager evidence as underlay the department's other principal finding suggested a different conclusion, so that the second finding is not supported *450 by substantial evidence. Peter Pan had the best opportunity to make such evidence available if it existed.
The department had power to revise Peter Pan's certificate without regard to the contract of December 2, 1954. In doing so it could exercise a wide range of discretion in appraising the public interest and in adopting reasonable policies, principles, and standards for its guidance. It could apply such principles where the action was justified by substantial evidence, and could determine what weight should be given to the various relevant considerations. See Newton v. Department of Pub. Util. 339 Mass. 535, 546-548. The department's decision does not expressly state any change in its policy (referred to by the hearing officer in his recommendations) "to protect ... existing local carriers [like Holyoke Company] against competition which would injuriously affect their revenues and possibly result in increased fares and inferior service to the public within the municipalities which they serve." That policy apparently led to the department's insertion (see D.P.U. 11,137) of the proviso in Peter Pan's certificate. As we have already indicated, it was within the department's regulatory power to adopt that policy after weighing all aspects of the public interest. We assume (cf. Schaffer Transp. Co. v. United States, 355 U.S. 83, 91) that, after like consideration of the public interest, the department was free to change that policy. If it had decided to adopt new principles for its guidance and had based that action upon findings of fact supported by substantial evidence, a very different situation would have been presented to us.
We view the department's new decision (D.P.U. 12,260) as purporting to apply the same principles and policy which led to inserting the proviso in the certificate and as resting upon the principal findings already quoted. Because those findings do not meet the standards laid down in G.L.c. 30A, § 14 (8), we return the case to the department for further consideration, and, if necessary, for the taking of further evidence. It may be that, upon clarification of the decision, it will appear that the department intended to apply principles *451 somewhat different from those which led to its earlier action (D.P.U. 11,137) and that it relied upon evidence not clearly referred to in its decision. Upon the decision and record before us, no such intention or reliance has been made manifest.
3. A final decree is to be entered annulling the order (D.P.U. 12,620) of the department. The case is recommitted to the department for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
So ordered.
NOTES
[1]  This condition read, "Further provided, [t]hat the [d]epartment hereby makes as a condition of this certificate, a written agreement dated December 2, 1954 between ... Picknelly... and ... Holyoke ... Company ... insofar as it treats with the payment of certain sums of money to ... Holyoke Company by ... Picknelly as recompense for losses of revenue which would result, through the intrastate operation of buses by said Picknelly over said route, in the diversion of traffic from said Holyoke Company in the territory now served by ... [it], reserving, however, to the [d]epartment the right to review, modify or cancel said agreement at any time in whole or in any respect as it may find such action to be in the public interest" (emphasis supplied).
[2]  Exhibits indicated the following experience of Peter Pan on the Springfield-Northampton service.
Revenue per   Cost per     Loss per
Bus miles    bus mile     bus mile     bus mile
(1) 12 months ended
Jan. 31, 1956[*]         129,480      $  .091       $  .329      $  .238
(2) 11 months ended
Dec. 31, 1956[[**]       120,240         .137          .351         .214
(3) 12 months ended
Dec. 31, 1957[[***]      129,520         .184          .385         .201
(4) 8 months ended
Aug. 31, 1958             81,760         .195          .388         .193
[*] figures after $3,228.02 deduction for payments to Holyoke Company
[**] figures after $ 245.35 deduction for payments to Holyoke Company
[***] no deduction for payments to Holyoke Company
The president of Peter Pan testified to some of the following results of Peter Pan's overall operations. Others appear in Peter Pan's annual reports which were in evidence.
Net Income or
Regular Route   Operating       loss (before
Passengers     Revenue       income taxes)          Net worth
1954        177,851     $300,245       LOSS    $ 7,893       $96,317  (a)
1955        188,342      318,803       INCOME    6,825        98,078  (a)
1956        199,739      338,666       INCOME    2,807        71,724  (b)
1957        267,255      458,411       INCOME   31,348        91,001  (b)
(a) partnership operation              (b) corporate operation
In 1957 Peter Pan had a net income after all taxes of $19,551, and in 1959 the comparable figure was $50,198. Peter Pan incurred no overall loss after 1954.

=== CASE 2217264 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:24.205817+00 ===

47 Ill. App.2d 436 (1964)
198 N.E.2d 170
People of the State of Illinois, Defendant in Error,
v.
Ronald Franciere, Plaintiff in Error.
Gen. No. 49,397.
Illinois Appellate Court  First District, Fourth Division.
April 15, 1964.
*437 Julius Lucius Echeles, of Chicago, for plaintiff in error.
Daniel P. Ward, State's Attorney, of Chicago (James Thompson, Assistant State's Attorney, of counsel), for defendant in error.
MR. PRESIDING JUSTICE ENGLISH delivered the opinion of the court.
This is a combined appeal from a revocation of defendant's probation and dismissal of his post-conviction petition.
After a sanity hearing, defendant was permitted to plead guilty to three indictments charging auto theft, and on March 27, 1961 he was placed on probation for five years. In addition to the usual statutory conditions of probation (e.g., that the probationer not violate any criminal law; that he report periodically to his Probation Officer), the court also provided, among other conditions, the following:
(1) To submit to psychiatric care until cured. Report monthly.
(3) To be gainfully employed.
(4) Monthly church attendance.
On May 7, 1962, on petition of the Probation Officer, a rule was issued on defendant to show cause why his probation should not be revoked. The bases for the rule were that:
(1) Defendant was charged with burglary in the Municipal Court of Chicago. The charge was *438 nolle prossed as defendant was in the Illinois State Psychopathic Institute.
(2) Two months later defendant was discharged from the Institute and a Social Worker there advised the Probation Officer that defendant "had failed in their program"; that he had had sexual relations with female patients.
(3) "The defendant was a poor Catholic but accepted help from St. Vincent DePaul."
(4) An employee at the Welfare Commission advised the Probation Officer that "defendant had gone to the Bethany Lutheran Church, Thorndale and Magnolia asking for help and berating the Catholic Church."
(5) An ambiguous charge from which it might be inferred that defendant had failed to report properly to the Probation Officer.
Another Behaviour Clinic examination of defendant was ordered and the rule to show cause came on for hearing on May 28, 1962. Defendant was present but without counsel as he had expected to be represented by the Public Defender who was absent. A lawyer friend of defendant's family was in court as a spectra, but had not been retained to represent defendant. Apparently on the misunderstanding that this lawyer was acting as counsel for defendant, the court proceeded with the hearing. At its conclusion defendant's probation was revoked in all three cases, and he was sentenced to the penitentiary for concurrent terms of two to six years.
In the light of this court's decision in People v. Burrell, 334 Ill. App. 253, 258, 79 NE2d 88; other decisions, including Gideon v. Wainwright, 372 U.S. 335; Douglas v. California, 372 U.S. 353; and the language of the statute governing such a hearing, which provides that the probationer's "right to have counsel shall be the same as in the action which resulted in such probation" *439 (Ill Rev Stats, c 38, § 789.1); the State's Attorney has filed in this court a Confession of Error that the hearing in question was "conducted in violation of [defendant's] statutory and constitutional rights to counsel."
[1, 2] Defendant has raised a second point, however, which is not expressly covered by the Confession of Error and which we feel obliged to consider. That point is that, regardless of the absence of counsel, there was nothing which transpired at the hearing which justified revocation of defendant's probation. We agree.
Again referring to the statute controlling this type of hearing, we find that the discretionary authority of the court to revoke probation and impose sentence arises only "when the court determines from a preponderance of the evidence that probation has been violated." (Emphasis supplied.) Ill Rev Stats, c 38, § 789.1. In the instant case no testimony was taken and no evidence of any kind was introduced. We are, therefore, compelled to hold that since the revocation order lacks an evidentiary basis, it cannot stand.
[3] From the colloquy among court, state's attorney, probation officer and defendant, as shown by the record, we gather that there was no real concern over the possibility that defendant might have committed a burglary. Nor could it be said that defendant's reporting to the probation officer was anything worse than irregular or sporadic, due perhaps to his wanting to avoid loss of time from work. We sense, however, a conscientious and genuine concern on the part of the court that defendant might have violated the discretionary conditions of probation which were included in the original order and which are set forth in the second paragraph of this opinion. We feel we should point out that the paragraph of the statute which authorizes the imposition of such conditions provides also that their violation "shall not be ground *440 for revoking the order admitting the defendant [to probation], but shall be deemed in contempt of the Court and defendant may be proceeded against as in other cases of contempt." Ill Rev Stats, c 38, § 787. While this provision has been repealed as of January 1, 1964 and it has no counterpart in the new Code of Criminal Procedure (see c 38, §§ 117-2 and 117-3) it is our opinion that the repealed statute controlled this case. Ill Rev Stats, c 38, §§ 125-3 and 125-4.
[4] Defendant has also filed a petition for writ of error to review dismissal of his post-conviction petition which pertains exclusively to matters involved in the proceedings which resulted in revocation of probation. Since these were not the "proceedings which resulted in his conviction" the Post-Conviction Hearing Act is not applicable and the petition was properly dismissed. Ill Rev Stats, c 38, §§ 826, 122-1; Supreme Court Miscellaneous Order No. 3460, People v. Freeman. Writ of error in the post-conviction proceeding is, therefore, denied.
The orders revoking defendant's probation and sentencing him to the penitentiary are reversed.
Reversed in part, writ of error denied in part.
DRUCKER and McCORMICK, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 2217265 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:24.220838+00 ===

297 N.W.2d 429 (1980)
Delton HUST and Holly Hust, Plaintiffs and Appellants,
v.
NORTHERN LOG, INC., a Minnesota Corporation, Defendant and Appellee.
Civ. No. 9792.
Supreme Court of North Dakota.
October 6, 1980.
Mackenzie & Jungroth, Jamestown, for plaintiffs and appellants; argued by James A. Reisnour, Jamestown.
Lundberg, Conmy, Nodland, Rosenberg, Lucas & Schulz, Bismarck, for defendant and appellee; argued by A. William Lucas, Bismarck.
PAULSON, Justice.
Delton and Holly Hust, the plaintiffs and appellants, appeal from a judgment rendered *430 by the Stutsman County District Court which denied the Husts' motion to strike an allegation in the answer of Northern Log, Inc., the defendant and appellee, and granted Northern Log's motion to dismiss for lack of jurisdiction over the person. We affirm the judgment of the district court.
The Husts viewed a log home in Minnesota constructed from Northern Log's materials in 1975. They wrote to the corporation's headquarters in Remer, Minnesota, and requested information concerning log homes. In response to the Husts' inquiry, Northern Log sent a brochure to them which explained the history of the corporation and the procedure used to purchase logs from the corporation. The Husts then traveled to Remer, Minnesota, and viewed buildings constructed from the corporation's materials. After the Husts deposited $200.00 for the purchase of logs, Northern Log sent them a purchase contract and floor plans. The Husts signed the contract and returned it to Northern Log. The parties disagree as to where the contract was accepted and as to where the sale of the logs occurred.
In July of 1976 the Husts transported the logs from Remer, Minnesota, to Jamestown. At the time that they took delivery of the logs, the Husts paid the balance of the purchase price. Northern Log represented in its brochure that it would provide on-site construction aid and an agent of Northern Log did assist in the construction of the Husts' home for a two-day period. Because of the uneven notching in the logs, the corners of the log home being constructed were uneven and Northern Log shipped replacement logs into North Dakota. Northern Log's agent assisted in replacing the faulty logs and compensated the carpenter hired by the Husts for the extra work that had been done on the home.
In the fall of 1976, large cracks developed in the replacement logs used and water leaked through such cracks and into the Husts' home. Although Northern Log inspected the home and discussed the problem with the Husts, the relationship between the parties deteriorated and the Husts filed suit. In their amended complaint, the Husts alleged that Northern Log had breached its implied warranty of fitness for a particular purpose, as well as its express warranties on the building materials. The Husts also alleged that Northern Log sold a pre-cut log package in a defective condition unreasonably dangerous to the Husts and their property.
The Husts alleged that the district court had personal jurisdiction over Northern Log by virtue of contacts with the State which met the requirements of Rule 4(b)(2)(A), (B), and (C) of the North Dakota Rules of Civil Procedure. Northern Log, in its answer, specifically denied the allegation that the district court had personal jurisdiction and alleged that the defects in the replacement logs as well as the damages sustained by the Husts were the result of improper handling and erection of the building materials by the Husts. Pursuant to Rule 12(f), N.D.R.Civ.P., the Husts made a motion to strike the allegation contained in Northern Log's answer. Northern Log resisted the motion to strike and presented a motion to dismiss for lack of personal jurisdiction under Rule 12(b)(2), N.D.R.Civ.P. The district court denied the Husts' motion to strike the allegation of lack of personal jurisdiction and granted Northern Log's motion to dismiss for lack of jurisdiction, without prejudice. The Husts appeal from the judgment of the district court.
The sole issue presented for our determination on appeal is whether or not the trial court erred in ruling that Northern Log is not subject to personal jurisdiction under Rule 4(b)(2), N.D.R.Civ.P. Rule 4(b)(2) and subparagraphs (A), (B), and (C) thereof, N.D.R.Civ.P., which the Husts contend are applicable to the instant case, are set out below:
"RULE 4-PERSONS SUBJECT TO JURISDICTION-PROCESS-SERVICE
.... .
"(b) Jurisdiction of person.
.... .
*431 "(2) Personal jurisdiction based upon contacts. A court of this state may exercise personal jurisdiction over a person who acts directly or by an agent as to any claim for relief arising from the person's having such contact with this state that the exercise of personal jurisdiction over him does not offend against traditional notions of justice or fair play or the due process of law, under one or more of the following circumstances:
"(A) transacting any business in this state;
"(B) contracting to supply or supplying service, goods, or other things in this state; [and]
"(C) committing a tort within or without this state causing injury to another person or property within this state;..."
Rule 4(b)(2), N.D.R.Civ.P., is an attempt to codify the principle announced by the United States Supreme Court in International Shoe Co. v. State of Washington, 326 U.S. 310, 316, 66 S.Ct. 154, 158, 90 L.Ed. 95 (1945), where the Supreme Court held "that in order to subject a defendant to a judgment in personam, if he be not present within the territory of the forum, he have certain minimum contacts with it such that the maintenance of the suit does not offend `traditional notions of fair play and substantial justice'". The Supreme Court has examined the International Shoe "minimum contacts" principle in several factual situations. See McGee v. International Life Insurance Company, 355 U.S. 220, 78 S.Ct. 199, 2 L.Ed.2d 223 (1957); Hanson v. Denckla, 357 U.S. 235, 78 S.Ct. 1228, 2 L.Ed.2d 1283 (1958); Ohio v. Wyandotte Chemicals Corp., 401 U.S. 493, 91 S.Ct. 1005, 28 L.Ed.2d 256, 57 Ohio Ops.2d 351 (1971); Shaffer v. Heitner, 433 U.S. 186, 97 S.Ct. 2569, 53 L.Ed.2d 683 (1977); Kulko v. Superior Court, 436 U.S. 84, 98 S.Ct. 1690, 56 L.Ed.2d 132 (1978); World-Wide Volkswagen Corp. v. Woodson, 444 U.S. 286, 100 S.Ct. 559, 62 L.Ed.2d 490 (1980); Rush v. Savchuk, 444 U.S. 320, 100 S.Ct. 571, 62 L.Ed.2d 516 (1980).
The history of North Dakota's "long-arm" provisions is recited in Hebron Brick Co. v. Robinson Brick & Tile Co., 234 N.W.2d 250 (N.D.1975), and we will not reiterate the history surrounding the development of such provisions. In Hebron Brick, supra, we defined the scope of Rule 4, N.D.R.Civ.P., to encompass the exercise of personal jurisdiction by the state courts to the fullest extent permitted by due process. We also stated that each question of personal jurisdiction must be decided on a case-by-case basis depending upon the particular facts and circumstances of each case.
The determination that must be made in resolving the question of personal jurisdiction is two fold.[1] First, it must be determined if the requirements of the applicable subparagraphs contained in Rule 4(b)(2), N.D.R.Civ.P., have been satisfied. Secondly, it is necessary to determine whether or not the nonresident party has had such contact with the forum State that the exercise of personal jurisdiction over the nonresident does not offend against the traditional notions of justice and fair play under the concept of due process of law. We now examine Northern Log's contacts with the Husts in North Dakota.
The Husts allege that Northern Log sent an advertising brochure into North Dakota in response to the Husts' inquiries concerning the purchase of logs. It is also alleged that Northern Log utilized North Dakota banking systems when it cashed the checks given by the Husts for the purchase of the logs. Northern Log contacted the Husts in North Dakota by telephone on several occasions and sent its agent into North Dakota for the purpose of rendering on-site construction aid. The Husts also allege that Northern Log committed a tort in North Dakota, breached implied and express warranties, and supplied a service under a contract accepted in North Dakota.
*432 Northern Log contends that it is a corporation organized and existing under the laws of Minnesota and that it has not applied for a certificate of authority to transact business in North Dakota. Northern Log also contends that it has no agents or employees in North Dakota, nor does it advertise its products in North Dakota. Finally, Northern Log contends that the contract was accepted and the sale of the logs occurred in Remer, Minnesota.
Unfortunately, the contract between the Husts and Northern Log, as well as the brochure sent by Northern Log to the Husts, are not in evidence and therefore are not available for examination. Thus, we cannot determine where the purchase contract was finally accepted. In Lumber Mart, Inc. v. Haas International Sales and Service, 269 N.W.2d 83 (N.D.1978), we held that the nonresident party must have minimal contacts in the forum State which are directly related to the cause of action involved in the case in order to allow the forum State to acquire personal jurisdiction over the nonresident party. This rule applies unless the contacts in the forum State are of such scope, nature, and sufficiency as to confer general jurisdiction upon the forum State. In Lumber Mart, supra, we noted that granting jurisdiction to North Dakota courts based upon the facts present in that case would be tantamount to penalizing the nonresident party for attempting to settle a dispute. Similarly, we cannot include within the contacts subject to examination for the minimum-contacts analysis those contacts by Northern Log with North Dakota which resulted from the attempt to furnish replacement logs to the Husts.
In World-Wide Volkswagen Corp. v. Woodson, 444 U.S. 286, 100 S.Ct. 559, 62 L.Ed.2d 490 (1980), the Supreme Court held that an Oklahoma trial court could not exercise in personam jurisdiction over a New York automobile retailer and wholesale distributor. The plaintiffs and respondents had purchased a new car in New York and used that car to travel to Arizona. As they drove through Oklahoma, another car struck the respondents' car and caused severe injuries to the respondents. The respondents brought suit in an Oklahoma district court and alleged that their injuries resulted from the defective design and placement of the car's gas tank and fuel system. The petitioners sought a writ of prohibition from the Supreme Court of Oklahoma and alleged that they had no minimal contacts with the State of Oklahoma. The Oklahoma Supreme Court denied the writ and based its decision on the argument that the petitioners could have foreseen that the car would be used in Oklahoma.
The Supreme Court reversed the decision of the Oklahoma Supreme Court and listed several facts which were dispositive of the issue of minimum contacts for jurisdictional purposes. In World-Wide Volkswagen, supra 444 U.S. at 295, 100 S.Ct. at 566, 62 L.Ed.2d at 500, the United States Supreme Court stated:
"... we find in the record before us a total absence of those affiliating circumstances that are a necessary predicate to any exercise of state-court jurisdiction. Petitioners carry on no activity whatsoever in Oklahoma. They close no sales and perform no services there. They avail themselves of none of the privileges and benefits of Oklahoma law. They solicit no business there either through salespersons or through advertising reasonably calculated to reach the State. Nor does the record show that they regularly sell cars at wholesale or retail to Oklahoma customers or residents or that they indirectly, through others, serve or seek to serve the Oklahoma market. In short, respondents seek to base jurisdiction on one, isolated occurrence and whatever inferences can be drawn therefrom: the fortuitous circumstance that a single Audi automobile, sold in New York to New York residents, happened to suffer an accident while passing through Oklahoma."
Some of the facts viewed as important by the United States Supreme Court in World-Wide Volkswagen, supra, are also present in this case: Northern Log closes no sales in *433 North Dakota; the Husts submitted all payments to Northern Log in Remer, Minnesota; the Husts transported the original set of logs to North Dakota; Northern Log solicits no business in North Dakota through salespersons or through advertising reasonably calculated to reach the State; Northern Log sent the brochure displaying its products after the Husts inquired about building a log home; Northern Log sent its agent for the sole purpose of overseeing the construction of the home in its initial stages; Northern Log does not directly serve the North Dakota market. Thus, Northern Log's contacts with North Dakota can be equated to the "fortuitous circumstance" alluded to by the United States Supreme Court in World-Wide Volkswagen, supra.
We do not find it necessary to determine if the conditions of the applicable subparagraphs of Rule 4(b)(2) have been satisfied[2] We are satisfied that Northern Log cannot be made subject to the exercise of personal jurisdiction for the reason that exercising personal jurisdiction would offend against the traditional notions of justice and fair play under due process. The activities of Northern Log were not those of a corporation which "purposefully avails itself of the privilege of conducting activities within the forum State". Hanson v. Denckla, supra 357 U.S. at 253, 78 S.Ct. at 1239. While it may have been foreseeable that Northern Log's products could be used in North Dakota, the United States Supreme Court discounted the foreseeability test in World-Wide Volkswagen, supra 444 U.S. at 297, 100 S.Ct. at 567, 62 L.Ed.2d at 501:
"This is not to say, of course, that foreseeability is wholly irrelevant. But the foreseeability that is critical to due process analysis is not the mere likelihood that a product will find its way into the forum State. Rather, it is that the defendant's conduct and connection with the forum State are such that he should reasonably anticipate being haled into court there."
The minimum-contacts principle lends a degree of predictability to the legal system in order to assist potential defendants in structuring their conduct with some degree of assurance that some conduct will not render them liable to suit. The principle also acts to ensure that the States do not reach beyond the limits imposed on them by their status as coequal sovereigns in a federal system. For reasons set forth in the opinion, we affirm the judgment of the district court.
ERICKSTAD, C. J., and PEDERSON, VANDE WALLE and SAND, JJ., concur.
NOTES
[1]  The 1979 amendment to Rule 4(b)(2), N.D.R. Civ.P., added the following language: "having such contact with this state that the exercise of personal jurisdiction over him does not offend against traditional notions of justice or fair play or the due process of law, under one or more of the following circumstances:".
[2]  Generally, we first determine if the facts satisfy the requirements of Rule 4(b)(2), but in this instance, because the constitutional requirements cannot be met, it serves no purpose to do so.

=== CASE 9738677 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:00:33.166715+00 ===

ERICKSTAD, Chief Justice.
This is an appeal by the plaintiff, Dennis Samuels, from the summary judgment of the McLean County District Court, entered December 28, 1979, dismissing with prejudice Samuels’ action against the defendant, White Shield Public School District No. 85 (hereinafter School District). We reverse and remand for a trial on the merits.
Samuels held a teaching position with the School District during the 1977-78 school year. Prior to April 15, 1978, Samuels received written notice of nonrenewal of his contract, and a hearing was held on April 6, 1978, which culminated with the School District confirming its decision to nonrenew Samuels’ contract. On April 27, 1978, Sam-uels sent the School District a letter stating that he accepted the offer of reemployment arising under the provisions of Section 15-47-27 N.D.C.C., and on May 10, 1978, he received a letter from the School District informing him that his contract would not be renewed for the 1978 1979 school year. On September 11, 1978, Samuels commenced an action for damages against the School District alleging that his contract had been wrongfully nonrenewed by the School District’s failure to comply with the statutory requirements for nonrenewal of a teacher’s contract. Upon motion of the School District, the district court entered a summary judgment on December 28, 1979, dismissing Samuels’ action with prejudice on the ground that Samuels had failed to request the equitable relief of reinstatement and was therefore precluded from bringing an action for damages. The district court reasoned that because Samuels failed to bring his action prior to the commencement of the school year the court could not order his reinstatement, and, as a consequence, Samuels should be precluded from bringing an action for damages.
In his appeal from the summary judgment, Samuels has raised the following issues:
(1) Whether or not the district court erred in granting a summary judgment dismissing Samuels’ action on the ground that a teacher, alleging wrongful nonrenewal of his contract, is precluded from bringing an action for damages unless he first seeks the equitable relief of reinstatement?
(2) Whether or not the district court improperly taxed certain costs against Samuels?
On more than one occasion this Court has held that there are circumstances under which a wrongfully nonrenewed teacher may be entitled to the equitable relief of mandamus compelling reinstatement of his teaching position. Baker v. Minot Public School District No. 1, 253 N.W.2d 444 (N.D.1977); Henley v. Fingal Public School District No. 54, 219 N.W.2d 106 (N.D.1974).
In Baker the school board asserted that a teacher, alleging wrongful nonrenewal, *423should only be allowed the remedy of damages and should not be allowed to seek reinstatement. This Court disagreed, concluding that under certain circumstances the teacher should not be limited to a recovery of compensatory damages but should be entitled to seek and obtain equitable relief compelling the school board to reinstate the teacher’s contract. In so concluding, this Court cited circumstances under which a teacher may be entitled to reinstatement:
“We recognize that there will be instances in which the traditional rationale supporting the refusal of courts of equity to enforce personal service contracts will exist, and the forcing of a school board to rehire a teacher or to renew the contract of a teacher would not be for the best interests of a school district; but in the instant case, where the school year has not yet commenced, where a position is open within the school board’s school system for which position a wrongfully dismissed teacher is qualified, where the school district is one that is large enough to absorb the dismissed teacher into its system without creating a disruptive situation, where there is no showing that friction exists between the wrongfully dismissed teacher and his administrators, and where the wrongfully dismissed teacher has a good record as a teacher it is proper for the district court to require a school board to offer a teaching position to the wrongfully dismissed teacher in cases in which the district court determines that it would be in the best interests of the wrongfully dismissed teacher and the school district.” 253 N.W.2d at 451-52.
This Court has also held that a wrongfully nonrenewed teacher may be entitled to compensatory damages. Selland v. Fargo Public School District No. 1, 285 N.W.2d 567 (N.D.1979); Pollock v. McKenzie County Public School District No. 1, 221 N.W.2d 521 (N.D.1974).
However this Court has never held that a teacher, alleging wrongful nonrenewal, must seek equitable relief of reinstatement and that his failure to do so will preclude him from receiving relief by way of damages.
In the instant case the trial court, upon construing this Court’s decision in the recent ease of Dobervich v. Central Cass Public School District No. 17, 283 N.W.2d 187 (N.D.1979), concluded that a teacher alleging wrongful nonrenewal is precluded from bringing an action for damages if the teacher has sufficient time to bring a suit in equity to compel reinstatement of his teaching contract but fails to do so. It was not our intent in Dobervich to require such a result.
In Dobervich, a teacher, alleging wrongful nonrenewal of his contract for the ensuing school year, brought an action seeking to restrain the school board from hiring another teacher to fill his position and to compel the school board to issue him a renewed contract, and, in the alternative, for damages. The teacher was awarded a jury trial, and upon the jury verdict, he was awarded a judgment for damages in the amount of $10,000.00. The school board appealed, and on appeal the issue determined by this Court was whether or not Dobervich was entitled to a jury trial. This Court, holding that Dobervich was not entitled to a jury trial, reversed the judgment and remanded for preparation of findings of fact and conclusions of law by the trial court. We determined that Dobervich was not entitled to a jury trial because the school board’s determination to nonrenew his contract was not subject to being set aside by a jury substituting its judgment for that of the board. The issue of whether or not the school board had failed to comply with Sections 15 47-38, N.D.C.C., and 15-47 -27, N.D.C.C., in nonrenewing Dober-vich’s contract presented only questions of law and of statutory interpretation for the trial court to decide. The question of whether or not a teacher, alleging wrongful nonrenewal, must seek reinstatement or else be precluded from seeking damages was not presented to this Court in Dober-vich ; thus, our opinion in that case should not be construed to foreclose a teacher’s right to bring an action for damages for *424wrongful nonrenewal in the absence of a request for reinstatement. It is our view that our law does not foreclose a teacher from so doing.
A request for summary judgment should be granted only if, after reviewing the evidence most favorably to the party against whom summary judgment is sought, it appears that there is no genuine issue of material fact and that the party seeking summary judgment is entitled to it as a matter of law. Rule 56, North Dakota Rules of Civil Procedure; Albers v. NoDak Racing Club, Inc., 256 N.W.2d 355 (N.D.1977). We conclude that the district court erred in its determination that Samuels was precluded from bringing an action for damages by his failure to seek the equitable relief of reinstatement. Consequently, we hold that the School District was not entitled to judgment as a matter of law and that the district court erred in granting the School District’s request for a summary judgment.
Upon remanding this case for a determination on the merits, we believe it is necessary to address the assertion made by Sam-uels on appeal that the decisions of this Court subsequent to Baker involving teacher nonrenewal actions, have left unclear which party has the burden of proof in such actions.
In Baker this Court recognized that the legislature has imposed certain procedural and substantive requirements upon a school board in nonrenewing a teacher’s contract for the ensuing school year. Pursuant to Section 15-47-38(5), N.D.C.C., a teacher is entitled to written notice of the contemplated nonrenewal, of the reasons for such nonrenewal, and of the time and place at which a special school board meeting will be held for discussion of and action upon the contemplated nonre-newal. Although both the teacher and the school board “may” produce witnesses to confirm or refute the reasons given for nonrenewal, this Court held in Rolland v. Grand Forks Public School District No. 1, 279 N.W.2d 889 (N.D.1979), that the legislature intentionally avoided placing an evi-dentiary burden of proof upon the school board to prove justification for its contemplated nonrenewal. At the close of the special school board meeting, if the school board decides to follow through with its contemplated nonrenewal it must “confirm” its decision by a vote to nonrenew. Rolland v. Grand Forks Public School District No. 1, 279 N.W.2d at 893. However, the school board need not introduce testimony or other evidence in support of its decision to nonre-new because the law does not place an evidentiary burden upon the school board to justify its nonrenewal determination. Rather, the teacher, who brings an action against the school board alleging wrongful nonrenewal, has the burden in such action to prove that the nonrenewal was not accomplished in compliance with the requirements of Sections 15 - 47 -38, N.D.C.C., and 15 47- 27, N.D.C.C.
As this Court has stated in Selland v. Fargo Public School District No. 1, 285 N.W.2d 567 (N.D.1979),
“A school board’s decision not to renew a teacher’s contract is no longer a discretionary act. Rather, it is an act subject to the requirements of Section 15-47-38, N.D.C.C. Baker v. Minot Public School District No. 1, supra.” 285 N.W.2d at 574.
Among such requirements is the provision that the school board’s reasons for nonre-newal must not be “frivolous or arbitrary.” Also, the school board must be able to articulate a reason for nonrenewal which relates to the ability, competence, or qualifications of the teacher as a teacher or to the needs of the district. Rolland v. Grand Forks Public School District No. 1, 279 N.W.2d 889, 894, note 7 (N.D.1979); Dathe v. Wildrose School District No. 91, 217 N.W.2d 781 (N.D.1974).
Samuels’ assertion that the decisions following Baker, supra, do not clearly interpret the standards to be applied in teacher nonrenewal actions is simply unsupported by a fair interpretation of those decisions. If a need exists to change the requirements for nonrenewal of teachers’ contracts, such change must be made by the legislature and not this Court.
*425Samuels has also asserted that certain costs should not have been taxed against him. Although Samuels filed an objection to the clerk of court’s retaxation of costs, he failed to file a notice of appeal from the clerk’s action to the district court under Rule 54(e), N.D.R.Civ.P., or to otherwise secure, by motion under Section 28-26-16, N.D.C.C., a review in the district court of the clerk’s action in taxing costs. Under such circumstances, Samuels would not ordinarily be entitled to a review of the taxation of costs by this Court on appeal. Curns v. Martin, 193 N.W.2d 214 (N.D. 1971); Schue v. Jacoby, 162 N.W.2d 377 (N.D.1968). However, as we have set aside the judgment, the costs taxed in conjunction with that judgment must also be set aside.
For the reasons stated in this opinion, the summary judgment is reversed, the award of costs is set aside, and the case is remanded for trial on the merits.
SAND, PAULSON and VANDE WALLE, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9738678 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:00:33.17087+00 ===

VANDE WALLE, Justice,
concurring specially.
I concur in the opinion written by the Chief Justice. However, I write to add my own thoughts to the Chief Justice’s statement that “If a need exists to change the requirements for nonrenewal of teachers’ contracts, such change must be made by the legislature and not this Court.”
A review of the opinions written by this court, many of which are cited in- the opinion written for the court by the Chief Justice, immediately reveals the controversy which has resulted from the enactment of the statutes governing this matter. Although those statutes provide no appeal from a decision of a school board to not renew a teacher’s contract, this has not prevented a teacher wishing to challenge the decision of the school board from obtaining a review of that decision in the courts. Where the challenge is based on a procedural irregularity the only issue has been the construction of the applicable statutes. Here, the challenge is based on that portion of Section 15-47-38(2), N.D.C.C., which requires that the reasons given by the school board for the nonrenewal of a teacher’s contract must “be sufficient to justify the contemplated action of the board and shall not be frivolous or arbitrary.” That allegation necessarily raises more than a procedural matter. It involves to a considerable degree the discretionary powers of the school board. The board’s discretion is, however, not unlimited. The school board’s determination that the reasons given by it for the nonrenewal of a teacher’s contract are sufficient to justify its action and are not frivolous or arbitrary does not foreclose a further review of that matter. On the other hand, that review should not permit another body to substitute its judgment and discretion for that of the school board. The question of whether or not a school board complied with our statutes in determining the reasons assigned by it for the nonre-newal of a teacher’s contract is a question of law rather than a question of fact.
In Baker this court recognized that the determination of the school board to not renew a teacher’s contract was not conclusive but was subject to review by the courts. Because the trial court sat without a jury in that case the issue of whether the reasons given by the school board for nonre-newal complied with our statutes was a question of law for the court or a question of fact for the jury was not a direct issue and was not answered by this court. However, in Dobervicb a jury trial had been demanded by the teacher. Because we realized the review of the decision of the school board in assigning reasons for nonre-newal of the teacher’s contract involved a question of law rather than a question of fact, and because a jury might very well substitute its judgment for that of the school board, we held in Dobervich there was no right to a jury trial on this issue. We further indicated that a court, on review, must exercise restraint and should not substitute its judgment for that of the *426school board.1 In this respect Dobervich establishes a basis for review which is akin to that provided by statute in South Dakota. See Busker v. Board of Ed. of Elk Point, 295 N.W.2d 1 (S.D.1980).
The issue in this appeal is whether damages is an available remedy to Samuels or whether he is limited to a remedy requiring the school board to reinstate him if the board is found to have improperly refused to renew Samuels’s contract. Inherent in this issue, as delineated by counsel for the school board at oral argument, is the question of the effect on the school district if an action to review the decision of the school board is not filed until after the school board has hired a new teacher and the ensuing school term has already begun. It is not inconceivable that a school board, in good faith, may have thought its reasons justified its refusal to renew a teacher’s contract only to have a court find, as a matter of law, the reasons inadequate to meet the requirements set forth in Section 15-47-38(2), N.D.C.C. Baker may well represent such a situation. If, however, a teacher waits to institute his action to review the decision of the school board until it is too late for the board to reverse its action in the face of a court decision finding it acted improperly, damages appears to be the only available remedy. In fact, such a procedure leaves the choice of remedy to the teacher. Perhaps this seems justified because the court has, although after the fact, ruled that the school board has improperly refused to renew the teacher’s contract. For a school board which believes it acted in good faith and within the purview of the statute this may have serious financial repercussions.
In Baker it was the school district which argued that Baker’s only available remedy was damages and the teacher who argued that reinstatement was the proper remedy. In Baker the teacher instituted action prior to the beginning of the ensuing school year and the trial court’s decision was issued prior to the beginning of the school year. This court held that although damages was the traditional remedy for breach of personal service contracts, it was proper for the district court to require the school board to offer a teaching position to the wrongfully dismissed teacher under the circumstances outlined therein.
Here, Samuels did not institute action until after the school district had hired- another teacher and the school term had begun. Here, it is the school district which is arguing that reinstatement should be the proper remedy and it is the teacher who is arguing that damages is the appropriate remedy. At least a portion of Samuels’s 'argument is that reinstatement would not be a satisfactory remedy because the school district is small, he could not be absorbed into the system without creating a disruptive situation, and there is existing friction between himself and the administrators. These are all factors which were not present in Baker and the absence of these factors was persuasive in this court’s determination to sustain the trial court’s decision to order reinstatement in Baker.
Our procedure governing this matter has been established by court decision, on a case-by case basis, and it appears to me that under the procedure specified in those previous cases both Samuels and the school district have considerable merit to their arguments. As reflected by the decision of the South Dakota Court in Busker, supra, the South Dakota procedure, in those instances in which a school board determines to not renew a teacher’s contract, is similar to that of our State.2 There is one area in which the South Dakota statutes contain significant provisions which ours do not. In South Dakota the procedure for an appeal from a decision of the school board to not renew the teacher’s contract is statutory. Sec. 13-46 -6, S.D.C.L. The procedure in*427corporates not only the time within which an appeal may be taken (ninety days) but also establishes the standard of review upon appeal. Sec. 1-26-36, S.D.C.L.3 That review is similar to that provided in North Dakota for review of administrative agency decisions. See Sec. 28-32-19, N.D.C.C. Because in South Dakota the appeal is from a decision to not renew a teacher’s contract, I presume a reversal of the school board’s decision on appeal would result in reinstatement of the teacher’s contract.
Whether or not our Legislature enacts similar legislation or legislation providing for different remedies is, for the moment, immaterial. What is material is that the Legislature, having decided to provide North Dakota teachers with certain protections by enacting statutes regulating the manner in which a school board may refuse to renew a teacher’s contract, should also specify by legislation the procedures available to a teacher who believes a school board has not adhered to those provisions. Such legislation, if enacted, would serve as notice to teachers and school boards alike of their rights, obligations, and remedies in these matters. Legislation which prescribes the procedure prior to legal action would better serve teachers and school boards than will opinions of this court which, by necessity, are issued after the fact on a case-by-case basis.
The procedure and remedies available in these matters have heretofore been made less than clear, either in the statutes or our opinions. It would be unfair to deny Samu-els relief should the reasons given by the school board for its decision to refuse to renew his contract not comply with the statutes. For this reason I agree that the summary judgment should be reversed and the case remanded to the trial court for a review on the merits. Should that review result in a determination that the school board’s decision was not in compliance with the statutes, I believe the district court may then consider all the factors presented by Samuels and the school board in determining the relief to which Samuels would be entitled, including but not limited to the time Samuels commenced his action.
. Counsel for Samuels stated in oral argument that it was not his intent that the court should become a “super” school board and that it is a question of law whether or not the facts before the school board justify the board in refusing to renew a teacher’s contract.
. Compare Section 15-47-38, N.D.C.C., Sections 13-43-9.1 through 13-43-10.1, S.D.C.L.
. Although South Dakota’s procedure governing an appeal by a teacher from the decision of the school board refusing to renew the contract appears to be clear, the application of the standard of review on appeal apparently still causes difficulty as applied to the facts. See Schnabel v. Alcester School Dist. No. 61-1, 295 N.W.2d 340 (S.D.1980).

=== CASE 9738679 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:00:33.174702+00 ===

PEDERSON, Justice,
dissenting.
Although I agree with much that is said by Chief Justice Erickstad and Justice Vande Walle, I do not agree with the conclusion. This court misleads litigants when it provides admittedly inadequate “band-aid” type remedies when major legislative surgery is required.
The scope of the judicial review of a noncontractual administrative determination made by a school board, which is available to a teacher claiming to be aggrieved by that determination, seems to be a dark mystery both in' North Dakota and elsewhere. It serves no good purpose to point fingers the teachers are hurting for sure, but so are the school boards and the judicial system. All have to admit to some fumbling. I read Dobervich v. Cent. Cass Pub. Sch. Dist. No. 17, 283 N.W.2d 187 (N.D.1979), as distinguishing breach of contract suits from nonrenewal suits, but it is evident that the majority of this court does not read it that way. Until there is some understanding at a slightly higher plane than has been heretofore displayed, there is no reason to expect that relief can be forthcoming.
It is my position that the courts cannot provide the remedy. To that extent I agree with the concurring opinion of Justice Vande Walle. Nevertheless, to remand for a consideration on the merits is not warranted. The issue goes beyond the abolishment of the distinction between law and equity, Rules 1, 2 and 3, NDRCivP, and liberal interpretation of pleadings. All of the facts necessary are in the record-we can make the decision as well as the trial court.
*428Time constraints and judicial workload prevent an exhaustive research analysis of the matter, but it is basic to jurisprudence in general and the laws of this state that suits against the state, or any of its arms, must be by consent of the legislative assembly. See § 22, North Dakota Constitution; Wirtz v. Nestos, 51 N.D. 603, 200 N.W. 524 (1924); State v. Lowe, 54 N.D. 637, 210 N.W. 501 (1926); Watland v. North Dakota Workmen’s Comp. Bureau, 58 N.D. 303, 225 N.W. 812 (1929); 81A C.J.S. States § 300. Further insight into the problem can be garnered from Davis, Administrative Law Treatise, 2d Ed. Supp. (Unreviewable Administrative Actions).
“... in the absence of a legislative expression indicating a purpose to subject administrative or executive judgment to judicial review or control, the officers in question were not subject to suit.” Watland v. North Dakota Workmen’s Comp. Bureau, 225 N.W. at 814.
“Express authority given claimants to prosecute appeals to the courts, in certain instances where claims have been denied, is not a consent to suit.” Watland v. North Dakota Workmen’s Comp. Bureau, Syllabus 3, 225 N.W. at 812.
Actions “respecting the title to property, or arising upon contract” are authorized by § 32-12-02, NDCC. This applies to the arms of the state, Little v. Burleigh County, 82 N.W.2d 603 (N.D.1957), and to implied as well as express contracts, Stark County v. State, 160 N.W.2d 101 (N.D.1968).
“Any power to create a liability against the State must be derived from specific statutes. Courts have no inherent power to create such liability.” Stark County v. State, Syllabus 1, 160 N.W.2d at 102.
The interest of a teacher under §§ 15-47-38 and 15-47-27, NDCC, often referred to as “a continuing contract,” is not a contract right, either express or implied. See discussion in Dobervich, supra, and Bottineau Public Sch. Dist. # 1 v. Currie, 259 N.W.2d 650, 654 (N.D.1977). Samuels has not argued that § 32-12-02, NDCC, authorizes this suit. If nonrenewal were a breach-of-contract matter, under Henley v. Fingal Public School District # 54, 219 N.W.2d 106 (N.D.1974), Samuels would be entitled, apparently, to specific performance and he might also be entitled to an injunction pursuant to § 32-05-05(5), and Chapter 32-06, NDCC. Another remedy available might be declaratory judgment, Chapter 32-23, NDCC.
If there is a claim of tort or negligence, apparently a damage suit remedy is available against subdivisions of the State of North Dakota pursuant to Kitto v. Minot Park District, 224 N.W.2d 795 (N.D.1974). Samuels’ complaint fails to make a claim within that authority.
The Legislature, in §§ 32-33-01, 32-34-01, and 32 -35-01, NDCC, authorizes writs of certiorari, mandamus and prohibition against arms of the state. Samuels seeks none of those remedies in his complaint. If he had, the trial court would know that arbitrary action must be alleged and proved before the school board’s decision could be set aside. And this court would know its scope of review.
Even though “no one should suffer by the act of another,” § 31-11-05(11), NDCC, and “for every wrong there is a remedy,” § 31 -11 -05(14), NDCC, the general rule is that:
“It is well settled that for every right or wrong there is a legal remedy, except in the case of the rights of an individual against a state . . ..” 1 C.J.S. Actions § 4a.
The record before us contains evidence that Samuels was not punctual in attendance and that this was the basis of his nonrenewal. There is also evidence that Samuels’ morals did not meet the standards of the community. Without substituting its judgment for that of the school board, but giving some “deference” to the school board, the trial court will find it difficult to conclude that either, or both, of the above grounds fail, as a matter of law, to be sufficient to support the nonrenewal. I presume that the definition of good faith in § 1-01-21, NDCC, would apply if Samuels contends that good faith was lacking. Teachers are required by state law to teach *429temperance and morals, §§ 15-38-05 and 15-38-10, NDCC. A teacher who is tardy on any regular basis should not expect renewal, even after reading Baker v. Minot Public School Dist. No. 1, 253 N.W.2d 444 (N.D.1977).
In my opinion the trial court was entirely correct in pointing out that the only claim for damage available is incidental to a writ of mandamus as indicated in § 32-34-06, NDCC, and as pointed out in Dobervich, supra.
The judgment should be affirmed.

=== CASE 2217275 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:24.422726+00 ===

48 Ill. App.2d 455 (1964)
198 N.E.2d 743
Betty Jean Thorpe and Charles E. Thorpe, Petitioners-Appellants,
v.
Barbara Loraine Thorpe and Mickey Rae Thorpe, Defendants-Appellees.
Gen. No. 10,507.
Illinois Appellate Court  Fourth District.
May 7, 1964.
Rehearing denied June 6, 1964.
*456 Pree & Pree, of Springfield, for appellants.
Casey & Casey, of Springfield, for appellees.
SPIVEY, J.
This is an appeal from a decision of the County Court of Sangamon County wherein a petition for adoption was denied. The child sought to be adopted, Mickey Rae Thorpe, was returned to her natural *457 mother, Barbara Loraine Thorpe, also known as Barbara Loraine Wild.
In the petition for adoption filed on July 24, 1962, it is alleged that the petitioners acquired custody of Mickey Rae Thorpe from Barbara Loraine Wild on February 14, 1961; that the child is the niece of Charles E. Thorpe, co-petitioner; that the name of the child's father is unknown; that the mother of the child is an unfit person to have custody because of abandonment and desertion for more than three months preceding the commencement of the proceeding.
The defendant-appellee answered denying that she had abandoned or deserted the child and further alleging that petitioners have wrongfully withheld custody of Mickey Rae Thorpe.
Defendant was married to one Jack Wild in 1946 and was separated from him in 1953. They have not since lived as husband and wife and have never been divorced.
Petitioners assert that Barbara Loraine Wild had from the inception of their discussions with reference to the care of Mickey Rae Thorpe promised to consent to petitioners adopting the child and that she would never ask to have the child returned to her care.
Defendant on the other hand states that she had never discussed adoption with the petitioners and had never intended at any time not to resume the care and custody of her child.
The remaining facts are largely uncontroverted.
Some time in November, 1960, a discussion took place in DuQuoin, Illinois, at the home of the maternal grandmother regarding the disposition of the child which defendant was about to bear. At this conversation the defendant stated that she didn't know what she would do with the baby; that she did not have a job and no means with which to support the child; and that she was to soon undergo major surgery which *458 might require convalescence of a year to a year and a half.
In the course of this conversation it was agreed between the petitioners and defendant that the petitioners would take the child when it was born.
The child in question was born on February 5, 1961, in DuQuoin, Illinois, and brought by defendant to the home of petitioners in Pawnee, Illinois, on February 11, 1961. On that occasion defendant left with petitioners the baby's formula, some clothing, and a hospital birth certificate which stated that Mickey Rae Thorpe was born on February 5, 1961, and that the mother's maiden name was Barbara Loraine Thorpe.
When defendant left DuQuoin on this occasion to return to Pawnee she was in tears and was told by her brother either that, "If you get down the road a piece and see you can't get along without it come back and get it," or, "Sis, she will be all right, you can come and get her any time you want if you can't do without her."
One of the petitioners, Betty Jean Thorpe, testifying as to the occasion, stated that she understood the defendant was not relinquishing her claim to the baby.
Defendant was operated on on April 20, 1961, and remained in the hospital until May 11, 1961. She was required to take it easy for the next six weeks. She re-entered the hospital in August, 1961, and again on February 20, 1962.
From February 11, 1961, until the middle of March of 1963, the petitioners brought Mickey Rae to DuQuoin to visit her mother two or three times each month. The defendant, when able to find transportation, visited the child in Pawnee on several occasions. On the occasions of those visits the defendant would care for her child, sometimes for a few hours and at least on one occasion as much as two or three days.
*459 The defendant furnished some clothing and sent Christmas and birthday presents to Mickey Rae. In July of 1962, she took out a small life insurance policy on the child. The petitioners kept defendant advised as to the child's welfare and sent photographs. Defendant also on occasion took photographs of Mickey Rae.
According to the petitioner Betty Jean Thorpe nothing was said about "custody" until about three to five months before the filing of the petition. She further states that in June or July of 1962, upon learning that the defendant intended to take Mickey Rae with her, she no longer provided any visitation to the mother. Defendant had previously, in April of 1962, written to the petitioner, Charles E. Thorpe, that she wished to have Mickey Rae back with her.
From these facts the trial court determined that defendant had neither abandoned nor deserted her child, Mickey Rae Thorpe, as alleged in the petition.
[1] In adoption proceedings clear and convincing proof of the unfitness of a natural parent must be supported by evidence. (Oeth v. Erwin, 6 Ill. App.2d 18, 126 NE2d 526; In re Petition of Dickholtz, 341 Ill. App. 400, 94 NE2d 89.)
[2] Likewise in such proceedings the correctness of the trial court's determination should not be disturbed unless it is palpably against the manifest weight of the evidence. (Houston v. Brackett, 38 Ill. App.2d 463, 187 NE2d 545; Campbell v. Fisher, 28 Ill. App.2d 454, 171 NE2d 810.)
The courts of this State have recognized that the General Assembly evidenced a legislative intent to distinguish between abandonment and desertion under the Adoption Act. (Stalder v. Stone, 412 Ill. 488, 107 NE2d 696; In re Petition of Ekendahl v. Topol, 321 Ill. App. 457, 53 NE2d 302.)
*460 The accepted definition of abandonment under the cases is as follows: Abandonment under the adoption statute means any conduct on the part of a parent which evinces a settled purpose to forego all parental duties and relinquishes all parental claims to the child. (In re Adoption of Walpole, 5 Ill. App.2d 362, 125 NE2d 645; Hill v. Allabaugh, 333 Ill. App. 602, 78 NE2d 127.)
[3] Abandonment would thus imply an intention on the part of a parent to forego all parental claims by leaving a child entirely to the mercy of someone else without regard to the welfare of the child.
To our knowledge the courts of this State have not heretofore made a clear distinction between abandonment and desertion as contemplated by the Adoption Act. It would seem that any abandonment of a child by a parent would amount to desertion but every desertion of a child would not necessarily amount to an abandonment.
[4] Desertion as contemplated by the Adoption Act would indicate an intention by the parent to permanently terminate custody over the child but not to relinquish all parental duties and all claims to the child.
One similarity between desertion and abandonment is that there must be an intent to desert or an intent to abandon. (Campbell v. Fisher, 28 Ill. App.2d 454, 171 NE2d 810; In re Adoption of Walpole, 5 Ill. App.2d 362, 125 NE2d 645.)
[5] We cannot say from the aforesaid facts that the decision of the trial court was contrary to the manifest weight of the evidence.
[6, 7] During the course of the petitioners' evidence in chief the defendant, testifying under section 60 of the Civil Practice Act, was interrogated about other children to whom she had given birth. There was an objection to this line of questioning and in *461 chambers petitioners offered to prove that the defendant had given birth since her separation from Jack Wild to some five or six children and that none were born of this marital relationship. Further offer was made to show that the defendant had consented to the adoption of these children. No ruling was requested nor made on this offer of proof.
Petitioners then asked leave to amend their petition to charge depravity to which defendant objected. There was no ruling on this objection in that the motion to amend the petition was withdrawn.
On cross-examination of defendant's testimony given on direct examination in chief she stated that she had given birth to four children in the last eleven years. That she consented to their adoptions in the years of 1955, 1956, 1958, and as to one of the four she was not sure of the time that she consented to his adoption.
At the close of petitioners' evidence they asked leave to amend their petition to include as grounds for unfitness, depravity and open and notorious adultery or fornication. This motion for leave to amend was denied.
Petitioners assign as error the Court's refusal to permit them to amend their petition to include the additional ground of unfitness.
Section 20 of the Adoption Act, chap 4, sec 9.1-20, provides that the Civil Practice Act shall apply to all adoption proceedings except as otherwise specifically provided in that Act.
Section 46(1) of the Civil Practice Act permits of amendments at any time before final judgment by adding new causes of action to enable plaintiff to sustain the claim for which it was intended to be brought.
Amendments to adoption petitions have been condoned by our Supreme Court in Stalder v. Stone, 412 Ill. 488, 107 NE2d 696.
*462 The question of paramount importance in any adoption proceeding is what will be in the best interests of the child. (Stalder v. Stone, 412 Ill. 488, 107 NE2d 696; Petition of Perl, 38 Ill. App.2d 430, 187 NE2d 303; Section 15 of the Adoption Act, Ill Rev Stats c 4, § 9.1-15.)
In view of the fact that the welfare of Mickey Rae Thorpe was the prime consideration in the instant proceeding we find that the Court abused its discretion in not permitting an amendment to the petition to charge depravity and open and notorious adultery or fornication and to consider evidence upon those two charges of unfitness.
The offer of proof and the evidence adduced on cross-examination of the defendant should have compelled the trial court to permit the amendment and the introduction of any evidence in that respect so that a complete determination of the best welfare of Mickey Rae Thorpe could be had.
This cause is reversed and remanded with directions to permit petitioners to amend their petition for adoption and for a new trial.
Reversed and remanded with directions.
CROW, P.J., concurs in the result but not in all that is said in the opinion. SMITH, J., concurs.

=== CASE 2217279 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:24.505722+00 ===

297 N.W.2d 401 (1980)
207 Neb. 206
HARTFORD ACCIDENT & INDEMNITY COMPANY, Appellant,
v.
John BURMEISTER, doing business as New Star Silo Company et al., Appellees.
No. 42979.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
October 10, 1980.
R. M. Dustin, Omaha, for appellant.
Wyman E. Nelson of O'Hanlon & O'Hanlon, Blair, for appellee, Burmeister.
Heard before KRIVOSHA, C. J., and BOSLAUGH, McCOWN, CLINTON, BRODKEY, WHITE, and HASTINGS, JJ.
KRIVOSHA, Chief Justice.
The appellant insurance carrier, Hartford Accident & Indemnity Company (Hartford), appeals from a judgment of the District Court for Washington County, Nebraska, which found that Hartford was obligated under a policy of insurance issued by Hartford to John Burmeister, doing business as New Star Silo Co. (Burmeister). By its order, the court directed Hartford to pay any sum within the policy limits which Burmeister might be required to pay by reason of a suit filed by Harold McGowan and Shirley McGowan against Burmeister for personal injury sustained by Harold McGowan (McGowan) while constructing a residence on which Burmeister had previously performed some work and to defend that suit. Our review of the record in this case, however, convinces us that the policy in question did not provide coverage and, therefore, we must reverse the action of the trial court.
Some time in 1967, or 1968, Burmeister purchased from Hartford a casualty insurance policy which contained a manufacturers' and contractors' liability coverage addendum. The policy was renewed from time to time, including a renewal for the period from January 1, 1976, to January 1, 1979. The policy is of the type generally referred to as a manufacturers' and contractors' liability policy, 1966 revision form. The policy specifically provides that Hartford will pay on behalf of the insured all sums which the insured shall become legally obligated to pay as damages because of either bodily injury or property damage to which the insurance applies. The policy contains certain specific exclusions-among them, a disclaimer of liability for property damage to the named insured's products arising out of such products or any part of such products; an exclusion which applies to property damage to work performed by or on behalf of the named insured arising *402 out of the work or any portion thereof or out of materials, parts, or equipment furnished in connection therewith; and an exclusion of liability for bodily injury or property damage included within the "completed operations hazard" or the "products hazard."
Under the terms of the policy, an operation is deemed completed at the earliest of the following times: "(1) when all operations to be performed by or on behalf of the named insured under the contract have been completed, (2) when all operations to be performed by or on behalf of the named insured at the site of the operations have been completed, or (3) when the portion of the work out of which the injury or damage arises has been put to its intended use by any person or organization other than another contractor or subcontractor engaged in performing operations for a principal as a part of the same project." (Emphasis in original.) The policy specifically provides that "Operations which may require further service or maintenance work, or correction, repair or replacement because of any defect or deficiency, but which are otherwise complete, shall be deemed completed."
The evidence in the case discloses that on or about March 8, 1977, the McGowans contracted with Burmeister to do some concrete work on a subterranean house which McGowan was constructing. Burmeister, pursuant to the contract, poured the walls, pillars and roof. The contract between Burmeister and the McGowans provided that the total contract price was to be paid upon completion of the structure and that the contract did not include complete erection of the structure. There were no written specifications, designs, or blueprints involved in the performance of the contract.
The record reflects that, on March 26, 1977, McGowan paid the full contract price of $3,531.50 to Burmeister. Burmeister testified that the total price was paid "when I got through with it." McGowan maintained that he paid Burmeister because Burmeister needed the money right then and because of a friendship between the two rather than because of completion of the contract.
After Burmeister poured the structure, cracks appeared in the exterior side of the roof concrete. The concrete was tested and the cracks reportedly resulted from the concrete having dried too fast. After some excavation was performed, it was disclosed that the interior of the structure likewise contained certain cracks in the ceiling and at locations at the meeting place of the walls and ceiling that did not join. McGowan retained a contractor to erect interior block walls to support the settling roof. Also, a concrete block face was put on as the fourth side of the structure by a masonry contractor. On June 10th or June 17th, 1977, while McGowan was putting dirt on the roof of the structure, the structure collapsed causing both property damage to the structure and personal injury to McGowan. In the interval, after pouring the structure, Burmeister had returned to the job before excavation under the structure and had applied sealer to cracks on the exterior roof. All of the parties agreed that Burmeister was to return again to fill the gaps between the ceiling and the walls, though the evidence indicates a dispute between Burmeister and McGowan as to whether the filling of those gaps was necessary to complete the contract or to correct defects.
Following his injury, the McGowans filed a petition against Burmeister for damages for the contract sum, and consequential damages for structure expenses and loss of rents, and for personal injury. On June 2, 1978, Hartford filed its petition for declaratory judgment as to its liability with regard to the claim set out in the McGowans' petition. On September 12, 1979, the trial court found that under the terms of the policy, Hartford was not obligated to defend or pay damages with regard to any injury to the property itself. The court's journal entry indicates that the court reached its conclusion because of exclusions (n) and (o) of the policy. Those provisions specifically exclude coverage to "property damage to the named insured's products arising out of such products or any part of such products" or "to property damage to *403 work performed by or on behalf of the named insured arising out of the work or any portion thereof, or out of materials, parts or equipment furnished in connection therewith." (Emphasis in original.)
The trial court did, however, conclude and declare that Hartford was obligated to defend and pay damages, if any, in connection with the alleged bodily injury.
In reaching its conclusion, the trial court concluded that exclusion (p), the completed operations exclusion, did not apply if the work was turned over to another contractor or subcontractor engaged in performing operations for the principal as a part of the same project. We think that, in this regard, the trial court misconstrued the provisions of the policy and committed error.
The exclusion of paragraph (p) provides that "This insurance does not apply: . . . (p) to bodily injury or property damage included within the completed operations hazard or the products hazard." (Emphasis in original.) That is to say, if it may be found that the bodily injury or property damage occurred from a completed operation, there is no coverage.
To determine whether or not there is a completed operation, we are required to turn to the definition in the policy.
The policy defines completed operations hazard, in part, as follows: "Operations shall be deemed completed at the earliest of the following times: (1) when all operations to be performed by or on behalf of the named insured under the contract have been completed, (2) when all operations to be performed by or on behalf of the named insured at the site of the operations have been completed, or (3) when the portion of the work out of which the injury or damage arises has been put to its intended use by any person or organization other than another contractor or subcontractor engaged in performing operations for a principal as a part of the same project." (First emphasis supplied; other emphases in original.) As noted earlier, the mere fact that an operation may need further service or maintenance work or require correction, repair, or replacement because of any defect or deficiency, does not preclude the project from being deemed completed if, otherwise, it is completed.
The trial court apparently concluded that, if any one of the three events noted above existed, a completed operation did not exist. The policy, however, clearly provides that an operation is deemed completed, not when all the named events occur, but rather, at the first occurrence of any of the three named events. That is to say, if all the operations to be performed by and on behalf of the named insured under the contract have been completed, either at the insured's place of business or at the site of the operations, the operations shall be deemed completed and the exclusion of paragraph (p) must apply, even though the work is turned over to a contractor or subcontractor on behalf of the principal. Therefore, the only question to be determined here is whether the work to be performed by Burmeister was completed prior to the injury that was incurred by McGowan. We believe that the record compels a finding that the work had been completed and that, therefore, exclusion (p) must apply.
The parties are generally in agreement on most of the facts in this case, though obviously in disagreement as to how they should be viewed. The parties concede that on or about March 8, 1977, the McGowans contracted with Burmeister to do certain concrete work on a subterranean "dugout house" which McGowan was building. There were no written specifications, designs, or blueprints involved in the performance of the contract. The contract simply provided for digging the trenches and for the labor and material in pouring three concrete walls, pillars, and a ceiling on the subterranean home structure, as well as digging a waterline for the structure. The total contract price was to be paid on completion of the structure. Burmeister started the work on March 8, 1977, and completed it on or about March 26, 1977, when McGowan paid him the full contract price of $3,531.50. Burmeister testified that the total price was paid "when I got through *404 with it." McGowan, on the other hand, maintained that he paid Burmeister before the work was completed because Burmeister needed the money and they were friends. There is no evidence to support that view other than McGowan's own assertions.
In the interval between pouring the structure and McGowan's excavation under it, Burmeister had returned to the job and applied sealer to cracks on the exposed exterior roof. Burmeister further testified that when he initially talked to McGowan about the pouring, McGowan told him he did not care about any rough spots or separations between the wall and ceiling because he was going to put a finished ceiling in the house. It was not until the work by Burmeister was done that McGowan said something about the spaces and asked Burmeister to fix them. Burmeister specifically testified that after he had completed the pouring, the only thing that he was going to do in the future after he left the job was to correct the deficiencies. The corrections that were to be made were not in any way structural but were for cosmetic purposes. There can be little question that the evidence clearly establishes that the work was completed within the definition of "completed operations hazard" when the pouring was finished and payment made. Therefore, coverage was excluded under the specific language of the policy which provided that the insurance did not apply "to bodily injury or property damage included within the completed operations hazard or the products hazard." The fact that it was turned over to someone else is not significant for our purposes; nor do we need to consider the question of whether the principal may also be the contractor. That specific provision has no application if the work has, in fact, been completed as the facts in this case reveal. The clause citing the turning over of the work is applicable only if the work product has not yet been completed but has been put to its intended use. In this case, however, it was completed and, therefore, we need not go further.
We have frequently held that where there is no ambiguity in the language of an insurance policy and the policy specifically excludes completed operations coverage, there is no obligation on the part of the company to defend. See, Steinheider & Sons, Inc. v. Iowa Kemper Ins. Co., 204 Neb. 156, 281 N.W.2d 539 (1979); Kansas-Nebraska Nat. Gas Co., Inc. v. Hawkeye Security Ins. Co., 195 Neb. 658, 240 N.W.2d 28 (1976). The language of the completed operations hazard is indeed clear and unambiguous. Hartford specifically contracted to be relieved of liability for accidents occurring after completion of the project. The evidence in this case leads to the inescapable conclusion that the work was completed and clearly, therefore, within the exclusion of the policy. The judgment of the trial court, therefore, must be reversed and the cause remanded with directions to enter judgment in accordance with this opinion.
REVERSED AND REMANDED WITH DIRECTIONS.
CLINTON, J., not voting.

=== CASE 2217288 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:24.693304+00 ===

297 N.W.2d 315 (1980)
STATE of North Dakota, Plaintiff and Appellee,
v.
Larry J. KOEHMSTEDT, Defendant and Appellant.
Cr. No. 719.
Supreme Court of North Dakota.
October 6, 1980.
Cameron D. Sillers, State's Atty., Langdon, for plaintiff and appellee.
Garcia & Garcia, Devils Lake, for defendant and appellant; argued by Kirk Garcia, North Dakota.
SAND, Justice.
The defendant, Larry J. Koehmstedt, was convicted in county justice court of driving while under the influence of intoxicating beverages, a violation of § 39-08-01, North Dakota Century Code. This was his second conviction of DUI within eighteen months. He was fined $150.00, ordered to attend DUI school, and sentenced to three days' imprisonment in the county jail with one day credit for time served, and two days suspended for six months.
He appealed the conviction to the district court as permitted by § 33-12-34. NDCC, and Rule 37 of the North Dakota Rules of Criminal Procedure and received a trial *316 anew in the district court. He was found guilty by a jury of six and was sentenced to 30 days in the county jail and fined $400.00. Twenty of the thirty days were suspended on the condition that the defendant attend a DUI school within two months and otherwise conduct himself in a law-abiding manner for one year. The sentence was within the limits prescribed by law.
The defendant appealed to this court contending that it was improper for the trial court in a trial anew to impose a harsher sentence than was imposed by the county justice court on the original conviction, and that the trial court erred in considering the defendant's juvenile record in determining the sentence imposed. He contended that a defendant may be reluctant to appeal and obtain a trial anew in district court if he may draw a harsher sentence than was imposed at the original trial in county justice court.
We will consider the sentencing in a trial anew first.
Section 33-12-34, NDCC, as pertinent to the issue here, provides in part:
"An appeal may be taken from a judgment of a county justice or a municipal judge sitting as a county justice, to the district court ... by the defendant upon both questions of law and fact ...."
Rule 37(g), NDRCrimP, in pertinent part, provides as follows:
"An appeal to the district court or to the county court with increased jurisdiction, when perfected, transfers the action to such court for trial anew."
This court has held that in an appeal from a justice court to the district court for a trial anew, the district court is charged with the duty and has the power to try the case as if no former trial had been had. The district court makes an independent examination and determination of the issues of the law and fact that are involved. In re Guon, 76 N.D. 589, 38 N.W.2d 280 (1949).
In an appeal from a judgment of a police magistrate court to the district court for a trial anew, the district court in conducting a trial anew is not exercising its original jurisdiction but is exercising its appellate jurisdiction. City of Minot v. Davis, 84 N.W.2d 890 (N.D.1957). In an appeal from a county justice court to the district court in a criminal action, the accused may move to dismiss the complaint on the grounds that the facts stated therein do not constitute a public offense. State v. Bauer, 153 N.W.2d 895 (N.D.1967).
The validity of imposing a harsher sentence in a trial de novo[1] was considered and upheld by the United States Supreme Court in Colten v. Kentucky, 407 U.S. 104, 92 S.Ct. 1953, 32 L.Ed.2d 584, decided in 1972. The Court observed that many states have a two-tier system, and in a footnote included North Dakota as one of those states. The Court in Colten also took into consideration its ruling in North Carolina v. Pearce, 395 U.S. 711, 89 S.Ct. 2072, 23 L.Ed.2d 656 (1969), in which it considered the question whether or not a defendant may be given a harsher sentence on retrial after having successfully appealed a former conviction. In Pearce:
"... the court concluded that such untoward sentences occurred with sufficient frequency to warrant the imposition of a prophylactic rule to ensure `that vindictiveness against a defendant for having successfully attacked his first conviction... [would] play no part in the sentence he receives after a new trial ...' and to ensure that the apprehension of such vindictiveness does not `deter a defendant's exercise of the right to appeal or collaterally attack his first conviction ....'" 407 U.S. at 116, 92 S.Ct. at 196.
The Colten court, however, observed that the record did not indicate that there existed a hazard of the defendant being penalized for seeking a new trial, as was the case in Pearce, which prompted the holding in Pearce. The court said:
"The possibility of vindictiveness found to exist in Pearce is not inherent in the Kentucky two-tier system." 407 U.S. at 116, 92 S.Ct. at 1960.
*317 Neither is there any evidence of vindictiveness in the North Dakota two-tier system. The Colten court observed the court which imposed the sentence upon the defendant in the trial de novo was not the court whose work the defendant had found unsatisfactory, warranting his efforts to seek a different result on appeal, and neither was it the same court that was asked to do over what it thought it had already done correctly. Furthermore, the court to which the appeal is taken under the North Dakota two-tier system is not even asked to look at the proceedings in the other court.
The Colten court said:
"Nor is the de novo court even asked to find error in another court's work. Rather, the Kentucky court in which Colten had the unrestricted right to have a new trial was merely asked to accord the same trial, under the same rules and procedures, available to defendants whose cases are begun in that court in the first instance.... We see no reason, and none is offered, to assume that the de novo court will deal any more strictly with those who insist on a trial in the superior court after conviction in the Quarterly Court than it would with those defendants whose cases are filed originally in the superior court and who choose to put the State to its proof in a trial subject to constitutional guarantees." 407 U.S. at 117, 92 S.Ct. at 196.
These observations apply fully to the North Dakota two-tier system.
Case law, as well as the statutes and rules of procedure of this State, set out earlier herein, clearly establish that an appeal taken to the district court from a judgment of the county justice court is a trial anew as to questions of law and fact and is not the same as a trial de novo on the record. In an appeal to the district court, the court or jury, as the case may be, will take into consideration only that evidence which is introduced in the district court. The evidence introduced at the county justice court will not be considered unless it is properly introduced as evidence in the district court. As the term implies, a new trial is new in every respect, including new sentencing.
The legal principle involved in the instant case is not analogous to the legal problem that was involved in Pearce, supra. We believe it is a recognized fact that judges on the same level will impose different sentences. This has prompted efforts on the part of the legal profession to develop more uniform sentencing. The fact that judges are not uniform in sentencing has given rise to what is known as "judge shopping." Also, efforts are being made to eliminate unwarranted discrepancies. Be that as it may, we cannot on that basis conclude that constitutional rights have been violated. In the instant case we find it significant that the new trial was before a different court and a different judge.
No reason has been presented, and we are not aware of any, why a different judge at a trial anew, for vindictive reasons, would impose a harsher sentence simply because the defendant appealed and obtained a trial anew. The evidence at the new trial may bring to light facts which would indicate a greater need for a harsher sentence than the facts that were presented at the initial or original trial. In this case no record or transcript of the original trial was made or presented to the district court and consequently no comparison could be made. We are not suggesting that such be done. The state's attorney, in oral argument before this Court, indicated that additional evidence damaging to defendant was presented at the trial anew. However, our opinion does not rest upon this factor.
The defendant also contended that the imposition of the harsher sentence by the district court than the sentence given by the county justice court was in derogation of his guaranteed constitutional right to a jury trial. He argued that the imposition of a harsher sentence places a chill upon the jury trial right. The defendant, however, stated in his brief that he waived the right to a jury trial in the county justice court but demanded a jury trial in the district court. We have difficulty in following this argument because the defendant could have *318 had a jury trial in the county justice court upon demand. Section 33-12-19, NDCC. However, this question was put to rest in Ludwig v. Massachusetts, 427 U.S. 618, 96 S.Ct. 2781, 49 L.Ed.2d 732 in which the United States Supreme Court in 1976 held that the two-tier system, which is what we are concerned with here, did not violate the defendant's Fourteenth Amendment right to a trial by jury nor did it violate the double jeopardy clause of the Fifth Amendment.
After a careful review of the principles of law involved, including the constitutional challenges, we conclude that the district court did not abuse its discretion in the sentence it imposed, nor did the court violate the defendant's constitutional rights.
We now consider the propriety of using the defendant's juvenile record for sentencing purposes.
The juvenile record was not sealed, as authorized by § 27-20-54, NDCC, and consequently will not be involved as an issue in this case.
The judge did not examine the juvenile record but the state's attorney, in his presentence presentation, made reference to the defendant's juvenile record.
An examination of the pertinent statutory provisions is essential and will be helpful.
Section 27-20-33(2), NDCC, in pertinent part, provides as follows:
"2. The disposition of a child and evidence adduced in a hearing in juvenile court may not be used against him in any proceeding in any court other than a juvenile court, whether before or after reaching majority, except in dispositional proceedings after conviction of a felony for the purposes of a presentence investigation and report."
Section 27-20-51, NDCC, provides in part as follows:
"All files and records of the court in a proceeding under this chapter shall not be disclosed to the public and are open to inspection only by:
.... .
4. A court and its probation and other officials or professional staff and the attorney for the defendant for use in preparing a presentence report in a criminal case in which the defendant is convicted and who prior thereto had been a party to the proceeding in juvenile court."
Section 27-20-52, NDCC, provides, as pertinent to the issue here, as follows:
"Law enforcement records and files concerning a child shall be kept separate from the records and files of arrests of adults. Unless a charge of delinquency is transferred for criminal prosecution under section 27-20-34, the interest of national security requires, or the court otherwise orders in the interest of the child, the records and files shall not be open to public inspection or their contents disclosed to the public; but inspection of the records and files is permitted by:
.... .
4. Law enforcement officers of other jurisdictions when necessary for the discharge of their official duties; and
5. A court in which he is convicted of a criminal offense for the purpose of a presentence report or other dispositional proceeding, or by officials of penal institutions and other penal facilities to which he is committed, or by a parole or pardon board in considering his parole or discharge or in exercising supervision over him."
We do not believe that the term "evidence" as found in § 27-20-33(2), NDCC, has the same meaning as records and files, as those terms are found in §§ 27-20-51(4) and 27-20-52(4) and (5). We do not believe a conflict exists but if one were to exist § 1-02-08 would become operative, which provides as follows:
"Except as otherwise provided in section 1-02-07, whenever, in the same statute, several clauses are irreconcilable, the clause last in order of date or position shall prevail."
*319 In support of his position that the juvenile record may not be used or considered in sentencing the defendant relied upon People v. Wilson, 43 Mich.App. 459, 204 N.W.2d 269 (1972), in which the court of appeals (an intermediate court of appeals) held that it was impermissible to use the defendant's juvenile record for sentencing following his conviction in an adult court. The defendant's reliance upon this case is not well founded because the Michigan statutory provisions, except for § 27-20-33(2), NDCC, are not similar to the North Dakota provisions. In addition, Wilson was in effect overruled.
The Wilson case was buttressed on the holding in People v. McFarlin, 41 Mich.App. 116, 199 N.W.2d 684 (1972), which was appealed to the Michigan Supreme Court and was overruled in 208 N.W.2d 504 (1973). The Supreme Court of Michigan, in People v. McFarlin, 389 Mich. 557, 208 N.W.2d 504 (1973), specifically decided that the presentence report should include information concerning juvenile history, including any disposition by the juvenile court and that it is proper to consider such information as a factor in sentencing an adult offender. McFarlin, in effect, overruled the Wilson case. Consequently, any reliance upon People v. Wilson would be misplaced. This issue, according to the cases reaching different results, had a stormy voyage in the Michigan Court of Appeals until the Michigan Supreme Court ruled that the defendant's juvenile record may be used in sentencing a defendant who has been convicted of a crime in an adult court. The Michigan Supreme Court reached this result under its statute which prohibited the use of evidence presented at a juvenile hearing at any other trial except juvenile proceedings. North Dakota has a similar statute. It also has other statutes quoted earlier herein, which provide that the files and records may be used for other lawful purposes. The concepts of these statutes are further supported by § 39-06-29 NDCC, which provides as follows:
"Every court or juvenile commissioner having jurisdiction over offenses committed under this title or any other law of this state or equivalent ordinance regulating the operation of motor vehicles on highways, shall forward within ten days to the commissioner a record of the conviction of any person in said court, or a report of the action of the juvenile court in the case of a juvenile, for a violation of any of said laws other than regulations governing standing or parking."
Judges do not, and should not, operate in a vacuum in sentencing. The presentence report which has become routine in most instances goes into the history and episodes of the offender which can be obtained from friends, acquaintances, family, and victims, of the accused and other persons. This presents the question: Why should this information not be presented directly with greater accuracy from the juvenile records, rather than the indirect method which may not be as reliable as the direct method from the record? We are not concerned here in presenting any evidence in the record to a jury which might be misled in its use, but we are merely concerned with informing the judge adequately to help him determine the appropriate sentence to be imposed.
We conclude that the trial court did not commit error in considering the defendant's juvenile record in its imposition of sentence.
The judgment, including the sentence of the district court, is affirmed.
ERICKSTAD, C. J., and PAULSON, PEDERSON and VANDE WALLE, JJ., concur.
NOTES
[1]  The term "trial de novo" in the Colten case is the equivalent of a trial anew in North Dakota.

=== CASE 9738680 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:00:42.353415+00 ===

*73Pfaff, J.
This is an appeal from a judgment of the Superior Court of Marion County, Room 2, in an actioh for divorce filed by the appellee husband, in which cause the appellant wife had also filed a cross-complaint for divorce. The finding and judgment wefe entered for the appellant and against appellee, and the appellant was granted a divorce, together with, certain real and personal property. However, the trial, court also granted judgment against the appellant and in favor of appellee for and in the amount of $5,200.00 supported by a lien on. the real estate awarded the wife, in addition to certain personal- and real property.
Errors relied upon by appellant for reversal are as follows: .
1. The court erred in overruling and denying apr pellant’s motion for new trial inasmuch as (a) the decision of the court was not sustained by sufficient evidence and was contrary to law; (b) the finding of the court was incon-. sistent with the evidence submitted; and (c) the court’s decision concerning the money judgment ordered to be paid by appellant to appellee, and the. attorney fees ordered to be paid by appellant for her prosecution of said cause were in error. '
2. The court erred in overruling appellant’s motion to modify the judgment.
Appellant in this action is not contending that the granting to her of the divorce is in error. She does; contend, however, that the trial court abused its dis-j cretion by making settlement of property rights be-’ tween the parties without ascertaining the value of all the property in question.
It is well established that the trial court has the! right and duty to settle and determine the property rights of the parties in an action for divorce. Furthermore, the trial court under our statutes I has broad powers in adjusting property rights.; *74Its action in such matters will not be disturbed on appeal unless it is apparent that there has been an abuse of discretion. Seward v. Seward (1956), 126 Ind. App. 607, 134 N. E. 2d 560; Rosenberg v. Rosenberg (1961), 131 Ind. App. 437, 171 N. E. 2d 829.
Therefore, in the case before us the issue is narrowed to whether or not a trial court is guilty of an abuse of discretion, as a matter of law, if such court orders a property settlement. without having full knowledge of the value of all the property.
In reviewing the proceedings of the trial court we find that evidence was admitted concerning the value of some of the property. However, no evidence whatsoever was introduced concerning a major part of the physical-assets acquired by the parties during their marriage. No evidence can be found establishing the value of a truck used in appellee’s business. There was no. evidence concerning the value, if any, of the plumbing business, including equipment, tools, fixtures, etc., which business was owned by the appellee. This .property was given to the appellee by the court as his sole and separate property subject to any liens and encumbrances thereon. Each party was declared to be' entitled to have and retain their personal effects. Again no evidence was submitted establishing the valúe of such property: The testimony establishing the value of the household goods was conflicting, the appellee stating the value to be $2,000.00 and the appellant stating the value to be $400.00 to $500.00.
A judgment, for $5,200.00 was entered against the appellant by the trial court. The, evidence fails to establish how the trial court arrived at this figure. Therefore, we conclude'the trial court Tacked khowl*75edge concerning the valuation of a considerable amount of property owned by the parties in determining the property rights of the parties.
Our attention has been directed to the case of Shula v. Shula (1956), 235 Ind. 210, 132 N. E. 2d 612, which we considér as a controlling precedent in the present controversy. The language of the Shula case indicates that it is necessary to have evidence in the record relative to the total valuation of all property of the parties before this court can affirm the trial court’s decision. In this case the trial court awarded a judgment for alimony when there was no evidence in the record as to the value of some of the property awarded. Judge Achor, speaking for our Supreme Court, stated:
“. _. . before the amount of alimony can be fixed, evidence must be introducted of facts and circumstances from which the court can determine "the amount which is just and proper.”
Here the court held that under a judgment so eiitéred an abuse of discretion is shown.
In the case of Seward v. Seward, supra, it was inferentially held that the trial court should have entered either a money judgment or in the alternative awarded him a part of the physical assets. The court stated at page 613 of said opinion:
"In adjusting the property rights of the parties, the court, under the circumstances, had the authority to enter a money judgment in appellee’s favor or to set off and award to him a part of the physical assets....” (Emphasis supplied)
The only basis this court might have for reversal of the trial, court’s judgment would be upon a determination that it abused its judicial discretion, and .conversely we may only affirm if there was no abuse of judicial discretion. For a determination of this ques-. *76tion we must have a record of the evidence of the valuation of all the property. This record of the evidence of valuation was not presented to this court.
In view of the cases of Shula v. Shula, supra, and Seward v. Seward, supra, we are of the opinion that the trial court, so far as we can determine from the record, abused its judicial discretion.
Therefore, for the reasons set forth above, the judgment of the trial court insofar as it relates to an adjudication of the property rights of the parties is hereby reversed and the cause remanded to the trial court to receive evidence on the valuation of the property herein questioned, and thereupon either award to the appellee a certain designated sum of money or in the alternative set off to him a fair and equitable share of the physical assets.
Carson, C. J., Hunter, P. J., Cooper and Ryan, JJ., concur.
Mote, J., dissents with opinion in which Fauleoner, X, concurs.
Kelley, J., not participating.

=== CASE 9738681 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:00:42.357389+00 ===

Dissent.
Mote, J.
I hereby dissent to the main opinion and decision herein. It is desirable to point to the facts as shown by the evidence that there were two tracts of real estate involved in the property settlement and decree of the court, both of which, previous to the commencement of the divorce action herein, were owned by the parties as tenants by the entireties, and it appears reasonable to infer from the record, as the trial court evidently did infer, that appellee divested himself from any title to both tracts of said real estate and vested the title in appellant at the time of an attempted reconciliation of the parties. The first men*77tioned tract, located at 6105 Guilford Avenue, Indianapolis, was stipulated to be of the fair market value of eighteen thousand, seven hundred' and fifty ($18,750.00) dollars, with a mortgage against't in the sum of four thousand, sixty dollars and ■ eighty-one cents ($4,060.81), leaving a net fair market value of fourteen thousand, six hundred eighty nine dollars and nineteen cents ($14,689.19). The other property, located at 934-936 West 31st Street, Indianapolis, was sold by the parties on a conditional sales contract, and' was stipulated to have a fair market value of three thousand, four hundred ninety three dollars and twenty-five cents ($3,493.25), with a mortgage against it of one thousand, two hundred thirty four dollars and eighty-seven cents ($1,234.87), leaving a net fair market value of two thousand, two hundred fifty eight dollars and thirty-eight cents ($2,258.38). The payments on this property, under the conditional sales contract, were at the rate of one hundred ten ($110.00) dollars per month.
By the decree of the court appellant was awarded the property on Guilford Avenue and the appellee was awarded the property on West 31st Street, subject to the mortgages thereon. A commissioner was appointed to transfer the title of the latter mentioned property to appellee and transfer, according to the record, was effected.
Concerning the real estate, calculation discloses that appellant received real estate of the stipulated net value of fourteen thousand, six hundred • eighty nine dollars and nineteen cents ($14,689.19) and appellee received property of the stipulated net value of two thousand, two hundred fifty eight dollars and thirty-eight cents ($2,258.38). By such award appellant received in real property values twelve thousand, four hundred thirty dollars and eighty-one cents ($12,430.81) more than appellee.
*78By the award of the court appellant received the following personal property: a 1957 Chrysler Saratoga Two-Door Hardtop with air conditioning which, according to the evidence, had a net fair market value of six hundred fifty- ($850.00) dollars and was titled in her name. She also received household goods and furniture which she testified had a value of four hundred ($400.00) dollars or five hundred ($500.00) dollars. Appellee testified that it had a value of two thousand ($2,000.00) dollars. By adopting the testimony most favorable to appellee concerning the value of the household goods, using the net fair market-value of the Chrysler automobile and the stipulated net fair market value of the real estate on Guilford Avenue, appellant received property of the valúe of seventeen thousand, three hundred thirty nine dollars and nineteen cents ($17,839.19); whereas appellee réceived real estate of the stipulated net value of two' thousand, two hundred fifty eight dollars and thirty-eight cents ($2,258.38) and a judgment against appellant for five thousand, two hundred ($5,200.00) ' dollars. The evidence then discloses that appellant received property of the value of seventeen thousand, three hundred thirty nine dollars and nineteen cents ($17,339.19) and the appellee received property and money judgment totalling seven thousand, three hundred fifty-eight dollars and thirty-eight cents ($7,358.38), a difference of nine thousand, nine hundred eighty dollars and eighty-one cents ($9,980.81) in favor of appellant.
The record in this cause discloses that one of the parties hereto had titled in his or her name a 1961 Ford Galaxy automobile which had been purchased new about a year before, and against which there .was a lien of two thousand, six hundred ($2,600.00) dollars or two thousand, seven hundred ($2,700.00). dollars, *79with monthly payments thereon of ninety ($90.00) dollars.
In the decree of the court appellee was awarded the Econoline Ford truck, used in his business as . hereinafter mentioned, together with any other automobile titled in his name. Whether appellee or appellant by the award of thé court received this automobile is not clear, since the evidence on the subject is in conflict. However, we think that the evidence would support an inference that the net fair market value of such vehicle was insignificant and it .would make little, if any, difference as to whom the automobile was awarded. If appellant was the recipient under the decree of said vehicle she certainly would be in no position to complain about the lack of established net value in relation thereto.
We have been unable to ascertain from the evidence any testimony concerning the fair market value of the plumbing business operated By appellee and of the truck used in such business. However, from the whole record it fairly may be inferred, as the trial court doubtless did infer, that the said plumbing business and the said truck used theréin had little, if any, significant value, and particularly would this be true with respect to fair market value. The trial court doubtless could, and did, infer from the entire evidence before him-that the said plumbing business arid the truck used in connection therewith had little, if any,' significant value, particularly in the control and ownership of anyone other than appellee. The trial court could, and doubtless did, infer that the said plumbing business was a one-man operation, calling almost exclusively for labor to be performed on business subsequently to be obtained, which in the immédiaté past was on the decline'and produced an income *80to appellee of but five thousand ($5,000.00) dollars to six thousand ($6,000.00) dollars per year. .
There is no evidence in the record that appellant sought the plumbing business' or the truck used in connection therewith, and there is no evidence in the record that appellant placed any value on these items. As a matter of fact, by her own testimony, appellant asserted an interest only in the real estate, household goods and the 1957 Chrysler automobile, all of which, except the property on West 31st Street, was awarded to her. • If appellant wished the court to consider any ascribed value to the plumbing business, the truck used in connection therewith, and the personal effects of the parties, I consider that it was her duty to produce evidence concerning values thereof. Having failed to do so, she cannot now complain of an award to the appellee of property without ascribed value, which she did not seek, and which the trial court was entitled to infer had little, if any, significant value.
. The majority opinion completely ignores the doctrine of burden of proof. The decision, in effect, places the burden of proof upon the appellee in an appeal, regardless of whether the appellee was the complaining party or the defending party at the trial level.
In the instant case, the appellant filed a cross-complaint which requested the divorce and a determination of property rights. The appellant prevailed in the trial court, and was granted the relief she requested in the said cross-complaint. She now brings this appeal and complains that the trial court erred for the reason that evidence as to the value of certain property was not introduced at the trial. I think it is a contravention of precedent to allow appellant to complain, on appeal, of this lack of evidence.
The majority opinion strongly relies on Shula v. *81Shula (1955), 235 Ind. 210, 132 N. E. 2d 612, which, in turn, relied on the case of Glasscock v. Glasscock (1883), 94 Ind. 163. The Glasscock case held that where a cross-petition for divorce and alimony is filed by a wife, the burden of proof as to the alimony is upon her, and if proof is not introduced upon that question, she cannot complain. I think the principle of the Glasscock case should apply to the instant case.
It should be noted that neither Shula v. Shula, supra, nor Seward v. Seward (1956), 126 Ind. App. 607, 134 N. E. 2d 560, which was also relied on in the majority opinion, considered the issue of burden of proof, which was expressly raised by the appellee in the instant case.
The. majority opinion states that there is no evidence to support the judgment of five thousand, two hundred ($5,200.00) dollars entered in favor of appellee. However, the decree expressly provided that the judgment was rendered “as and for his determined share of the real estate . . .” The evidence established the value of the said real estate.
As to the failure of the trial judge to award attorney fees for appellant’s attorney, the record discloses that appellant consented to a reduction of normal fees ordinarily allowed to the wife in the divorce action, for the reason that said appellant had employed a number of different lawyers in the case now on appeal and we consider, under all the facts and circumstances as shown by the record, that the trial court did not abuse his discretion in disallowance of any fees for appellant’s lawyer in the tidal of the divorce action.
In arriving at our conclusion and dissent, we may say that the entire testimony and evidence has been carefully read, considered and analyzed. Although we cannot and do not weigh the evidence, we recall no principle of law which prohibits us from remarking *82upon the strength or lack of motivating influence thereof. As practical lawyers and judges, it seems appropriate to suggest that although the statutes in force in Indiana in respect to divorce, as well as the adopted public policy, do not appear to make divorces very difficult to obtain, oftentimes some overemphasis regarding chivalry actually is employed in the determination of the successful party in an action for divorce. It must follow, therefore, that a trial judge, in attempt at chivalry on the one hand, to some extent corrects his decision on the main issue, that is the divorce issue, by adjudicating, on the other hand, a fair, just and equitable property settlement. In other words, the adjudicated property settlement in a given divorce action, will bear a direct, and we think appropriate bearing upon the evidence as to the wrong or laek of wrong inflicted. If this is true, it should follow, a fortiori, that the two issues, intertwined as they are, generally should be determined by one judge in one action. A retrial of the single issue of the property settlement between the parties will not necessarily accomplish such purpose, as a consequence of which we express the opinion that courts of appeal should approach the solution of such matters with some reluctance, thus to prevent a miscarriage of justice. .
In the instant case, it appears to be quite likely that a retrial of the single issue concerning property settlement will be had before a judge other than the one who granted the divorce. Hence, such issue possibly, if not probably, will be presented in light of the . assumption of a determined fact that appellee was the •sole and only offending party; that. appellant herself was completely without fault. Such', assumption- is not supported by the record herein.
With these observations in mind' we' express the *83opinion that the decision of the trial court should not be disturbed.
Faulconer, J., concurs with this dissent.
Note. — Reported in 198 N. E. 2d 8. Transfer denied with opinion in 205 N. E. 2d 159.

=== CASE 9738682 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:00:47.693581+00 ===

REYNOLDSON, Chief Justice.
This appeal requires us to determine whether the disclosure rules governing agency and fiduciary relationships apply in the real estate broker and seller situation. Trial court, rendering judgment for plaintiff H. L. (Harold) Miller in his law action for commission on the sale of defendants Berkoskis’ farm, held Miller’s hidden financial transactions with the buyer would not forfeit his right to the commission. We reverse on plaintiff’s claim and affirm on defendants’ counterclaim and cross-petition.
Plaintiff Harold Miller is an Iowa-licensed real estate broker in Baring, Missouri. At the time of these events his son, cross-petition defendant Larry Miller, worked for him as a salesman. Defendants Pete J. Berkoski and his wife Thelma owned a 560-acre Davis County farm on which the John Hancock Life Insurance Company held a mortgage. Other defendants Berkoski may have had interest in the farm but it is clear Pete J. Berkoski had authority to act for- all the defendant owners.
*336In 1970 Pete, wanting to retire from farming, listed the 560 acres for sale with Harold Miller at a selling price of $196,000. The contract called for a five percent commission. Although the Millers showed the farm to several persons, no sale resulted and the exclusive listing expired. Pete would not extend the listing contract, but he told Millers in July or August of 1972 that he would pay the five percent commission if they sold the farm.
Millers ultimately obtained a $200,000 written offer from Robert Harsh, a Louisa County landowner. Pete rejected this offer after talking to his attorney, Carl McMur-ray. September 5, 1972, Millers brought to Berkoskis a second written offer from Harsh for a sale price of $210,000.
These offers provided for purchase price payments extending over a fifteen-year period. There is no dispute in the record that Harold Miller was knowledgeable in the income tax aspects of real estate transactions. He had put together a sophisticated tax-free exchange ten or twelve years before, involving Berkoskis’ Indiana farm and the Davis County farm. When Pete and his wife considered selling, Harold Miller advised them extensively concerning the tax savings aspects of an installment contract. He formulated the terms of the initial list- ■ ing agreement and the two subsequent offers to comply with tax law installment sale requirements.
The Millers told Pete that Harsh was a “good as gold” purchaser who owned 1200 acres of land and who had money for land investment. They did not tell Pete that Harsh had refused to give them a written property statement and that he had only $2500 in cash to pay down on a $210,000 real estate purchase. The offer called for a $7500 payment on November 1, 1972. Before presenting the second offer to Pete, Millers had arranged to loan this money to Harsh. They later took his promissory note in this amount, with interest at 7½ percent, secured by shares of Hynes & Howes stock that Harsh held. They did not tell Berkosk-is about this transaction when presenting the second offer, and they isolated Harsh from Berkoskis until after the contract had been drafted in attorney McMurray’s office and it had been signed separately by the contracting parties.
On September 6, 1972, Harold Miller and Berkoskis went to McMurray’s office where the contract was drawn on Iowa State Bar Association official form number 21 “Real Estate Contract-Installments.” McMurray was Berkoskis’ lawyer. There is no dispute that until this point Pete consistently wanted the tax advantages of an installment sale. A substantial part of this controversy centers around a prepayment clause that was inserted in the contract and ultimately aborted the installment sale tax advantage. The clause provided: “Buyers may make prepayments, at their discretion, without penalty.”
While the contract was being prepared, Pete, his wife Thelma, and Harold Miller were present at all times. Larry Miller came down from the main floor bank (where he also worked) to the basement law office for part of the time. McMurray may have been absent for an interval. Harsh and his wife were never there. Larry testified his father “ramrodded” the contract preparation. Neither the Berkoskis nor McMurray recalled any conversation about the prepayment provision. Harold Miller and Larry Miller testified that Harold launched the question whether Ber-koskis would accept all the money if Harsh wanted to prepay and that Pete replied “he would never object to taking a man’s money.”
On the crucial aspect of the potential tax consequences of inserting the prepayment clause, no one testified McMurray cautioned Berkoskis the provision might void their installment sale benefit, or that they sought or received any advice from him at that time. McMurray did not prepare Berkoskis’ tax returns. Harold Miller, in response to a question as to what, if anything, he then told Berkoskis about the tax consequences, testified only that he “said to Pete what would happen.” The other three persons in the room had no recollection of this claimed tax-related conversation.
*337Berkoskis wanted to include a contract provision reserving storage on the premises for the 1972 crop, but Harold Miller suggested this should be handled in a separate arrangement. A few days following execution of the contract Pete called Harsh to make arrangements for grain storage. Harsh said he would require full possession on March 1, 1973, in accordance with the contract. Pete claimed this caused him to sell his 1972 soybeans from the field in September at a reduced price. He complained to Larry Miller, who on December 11,1972, obtained a written extension from Harsh for grain and hay storage until August 1, 1973.
Within a few days of the Berkoski transaction Millers had sold the adjoining Ayl-ward and Gooden tracts to Harsh on contracts with small down payments, and Larry Miller was negotiating with a prospective tenant, suggesting an option to buy or at least a “first refusal” right. A later written listing that Millers prepared for Harsh’s signature in February 1973 disclosed the latter had a $190,000 loan or loan commitment on the Berkoski tract. Harold Miller testified he told Harsh the land could be sold at a profit. By January 1973 the combined 800-acre farm was being advertised by an Illinois broker, who listed the farm in the name of Harold Miller.
The record is plain that Berkoskis, unsophisticated in real estate sales matters, were worried and insecure throughout the transaction. Berkoski testified he would not have signed the offer to buy if it had recited Millers were loaning Harsh $7500 of the down payment. In January 1973 Pete was so concerned about selling his livestock and machinery with so little paid down on the farm that Millers secretly loaned Harsh $10,000 more, accepting his promissory note secured by the Hynes & Howes stock. This was paid to Berkoskis to apply against the $30,000 March 1 possession date payment. Of course when Millers made this loan they were attempting to resell the farm for Harsh. Millers did not tell Berkoskis of this second loan or that Harsh had been turned down for an operating loan at the Davis County Savings Bank.
By at least July 1973 Millers had obtained for Harsh a profitable sale of the 800-acre tract. This sale required Berkoskis to be paid off, which the contract prepayment clause allowed. Berkoskis incurred a $2728 prepayment penalty on the John Hancock mortgage, and were required to pay additional 1973 income tax because the installment feature of their sale was lost.
Berkoskis initially refused to pay a commission to Millers because of their concern about Harsh’s ability to perform the contract. Harold Miller sued for the commission on April 19,1973. Defendants’ answer, inter alia, alleged Millers violated their duty of candor and good faith and failed to make “full disclosure in respect to all sales prospects . . . thereby causing these defendants to accept the contract proposal offered by Robert A. Harsh.” A separate, extensive affirmative defense alleged Harsh was an accommodation buyer for Millers. Berkosk-is also counterclaimed against Harold Miller and cross petitioned against Larry Miller for actual damages arising out of the prepayment provision and the additional income tax payment, for failing to advise them of their farm’s true value, for loss on beans sold for lack of storage, and for punitive damages.
Trial court found Millers did not disclose to Berkoskis the two loans to Harsh, but did find that Harsh owned approximately 1000 acres around Morning Sun and had Hynes & Howes stock worth approximately $30,-000 at that time. Trial court found Ber-koskis “relied on the broker to sell the farm but relied on their attorney for protection.” The court further found Berkoskis paid additional income tax and the prepayment penalty. Nonetheless, the court considered its decision controlled by Murphy v. Brown, 252 Iowa 764, 108 N.W.2d 353 (1961), a decision we discuss below.
I. In this law action the fact-findings of trial court have the force of a jury verdict and will not be disturbed if supported by substantial evidence. Iowa R.App.P. 14(f)(1). However, this principle of law does not preclude our inquiry into *338whether trial court applied erroneous rules of law that materially affected its decision. See Linge v. Ralston Purina Co., 293 N.W.2d 191, 195 (Iowa 1980); Knauss v. Kemin Industries, Inc., 267 N.W.2d 56, 57 (Iowa 1978); Farmers Insurance Group v. Merryweather, 214 N.W.2d 184, 186 -87 (Iowa 1974).
A realtor’s relationship with the seller is that of agent and principal. See 12 Am.Jur.2d Brokers § 83, at 835 (1964). The rules of agency apply here, including the duty of undivided loyalty and disclosure:
Unless otherwise agreed, an agent is subject to a duty to use reasonable efforts to give his principal information which is relevant to affairs entrusted to him and which, as the agent has notice, the principal would desire to have ....
Restatement (Second) of Agency § 381, at 182 (1958) (emphasis supplied). See Swift v. White, 256 Iowa 1013, 1015, 129 N.W.2d 748, 750 (1964) (“If we assume defendant was plaintiff’s agent, his duty as a real estate broker can be no more than a full, fair and prompt disclosure of all facts within his knowledge which are or may be material.”); R. A. Poff & Co. v. Ottaway, 191 Va. 779, 785, 62 S.E.2d 865, 868 (1951) (“Because of the confidential relationship between them it is the broker’s duty ... to give [the seller] fully and frankly such information as he . . . may have of the prospective purchaser’s financial situation.”); Mersky v. Multiple Listing Bureau of Olympia, Inc., 73 Wash.2d 225, 229, 437 P.2d 897, 899 (1968) (“[Tjhere flows from this agency relationship . . . the legal, ethical, and moral responsibility on the part of the listing broker ... to make, in all instances, a full, fair, and timely disclosure to the principal of all facts . . . which are, or may be, material in connection with the matter . . . which might affect the principal’s rights and interests or influence his actions.”); 12 Am.Jur.2d Brokers § 89, at 843 (1964) (“It is the broker’s duty to give the principal such information as he may have of the prospective purchaser’s financial situation.”).
The American Law Institute’s comment (a) under the above-quoted section 381 (“Duty to Give Information”) pertinently states, “The duty exists if he [the agent] has notice of facts which, in view of his relations with the principal, he should know may affect the desires of his principal as to his own conduct or the conduct of the principal . . . . ” Illustration 2 provides the following example:
A, a real estate broker acting for P, introduces to P as the real purchaser one whom he knows to be acting for a person with whom P would be unwilling to deal. A commits a breach of duty by so doing and is not entitled to commission for conducting the transaction.
It should be noted this principle of law does not turn on damage to the seller, but on breach of the broker’s duty to disclose information.
In the case before us, the record is clear that Berkoskis would have been interested in knowing that Harsh would not provide a written property statement, that he was “thin” on liquidity and had only $2500 to pay down on a $210,000 purchase, and that Millers were going to loan him $7500 at interest for an early payment on the farm. Because their sale price understanding with Millers was indefinite, Berkoskis would have, and could have, refused to sign the contract had they known as much about Harsh’s lack of financial liquidity as Millers did. This point is underscored by Millers’ maneuvers to keep that knowledge from them. If Pete had known Harsh was that short of cash, he might have concluded Harsh could not have operated the farm and consequently would resell. This in turn would have caused Pete to examine critically Harold Miller’s suggestion the prepayment provision be added to the contract.
Although trial court found Berkoskis “relied on their attorney for protection,” there is no indication in the record they relied on him for protection from nondisclosure by their own agent, and it would be a strange rule that would require a lawyer for that service. It is true, of course, that Berkosk-is’ ultimate damage arrived through events they did not anticipate. Nonetheless, that damage, in the form of income taxes and *339mortgage prepayment penalties, would have been avoided but for the contract Harold Miller “ramrodded.” The fact that Berkoskis were paid off because Millers promptly secured a new, higher-price listing from Harsh and resold the land for him at a profit should have no weight in an analysis of Millers’ prior duties to their principals, the Berkoskis.
An agency relationship is confidential and fiduciary in character, Darling v. Nineteen-Eighty Corp., 176 N.W.2d 765, 768 (Iowa 1970), requiring a high degree of honesty. Miller v. Iowa Real Estate Commission, 274 N.W.2d 288, 292 (Iowa 1979).
In this appeal Millers do not contest the above legal concepts and principles. Rather, they argue (as trial court found) this situation is controlled by Murphy v. Brown, 252 Iowa 764, 108 N.W.2d 353. But in Murphy the duty to disclose was not an issue:
The only errors assigned were that the court erred in ruling as a matter of law (1) that the plaintiff had procured a buyer who was ready, willing and able to go through with the contract as set forth in the listing contract and in the offer to buy, and (2) that plaintiff had earned his commission immediately on submission of the offer to defendant.
Id. at 766, 108 N.W.2d at 354. The seller merely claimed the buyer was not “able” because the broker provided $1000 of the $6000 down payment. Id. at 768, 108 N.W.2d at 355. The seller conceded the buyer’s financial responsibility. Id., 108 N.W.2d at 355. The Murphy court noted carefully there was no detriment to the seller and no gain to the agent, and limited its holding to the circumstances disclosed by that record. Id. at 769-71, 108 N.W.2d at 356-57. That decision has no direct application to the situation before us and is not controlling.
Section 391, Restatement (Second) of Agency, entitled, “Acting for Adverse Party without Principal’s Consent,” provides: “Unless otherwise agreed, an agent is subject to a duty to his principal not to act on behalf of an adverse party in a transaction connected with his agency without the principal’s knowledge.” So structured, it is wholly consistent with section 381, “Duty to Give Information,” quoted above. But the Murphy court misapplied, as an exception to both sections, comment (b) under section 391:
An agent can properly deal with the other party to a transaction if such dealing is not inconsistent with his duties to the principal. Thus, an agent employed to sell can properly lend money to the buyer to complete the purchase or he may “split” his commission with the buyer, unless because of business policy or otherwise it is understood that he is not to do so.
(Emphasis supplied.) This comment does not state the agent is not obligated to inform his principal of such transactions with the adverse party. In fact, it limits the agent’s dealings with the other party to those “not inconsistent with his duties to the principal.” One of those duties is the section 381 obligation to provide his principal with relevant information “the principal would desire to have.” The sunshine requirements of the latter section therefore must be read into comment (b).
Follow up comment (c), section 391, further illuminates the basic requirement of disclosure:
Not only must an agent not act in the interests of other parties without the consent of all concerned, but he must not enter into transactions with agents of other principals, the effect of which may give the agent a self-interest in improperly advising his principal.
(Emphasis supplied.) The first provision of comment (c) reinforces the disclosure requirement. The second provision, prohibiting transactions with agents of other principals that might influence the agent to improperly advise his principal, clearly prohibits such transactions with the other principals.
In the case before us the brokers’ loan transaction (for profit) with the buyer, and their potential resale (for another com*340mission), may have influenced them to improperly advise the seller by suggesting the prepayment provision. Millers’ secret transactions with Harsh violated sections 381, 391, and comment (c) of section 391, Restatement (Second) of Agency.
A rule of law that a broker has no duty to disclose to the seller his arrangement with a prospective purchaser to furnish most of the proposed down payment for the property would generate an inconsistency between comment (b) and sections 381 and 391 that is neither required by, nor in conformity with, prevailing rules of construction. Unless these provisions are in direct conflict they should be considered together and harmonized if possible. See Southeast Warren Community School District v. Department of Pubiic Instruction, 285 N.W.2d 173, 178 (Iowa 1979). Such harmony is easily achieved by requiring that the broker (1) apprise the seller of comment (b) transactions with the buyer when these dealings would provide relevant information “the principal would desire to have” (section 381), and (2) avoid secret transactions with the buyer that might give the broker a self-interest in improperly advising his seller, as section 391 and comment (c) under that section suggest.
II. Just as we have dislodged the encrusted concepts of the ancient doctrine of caveat emptor in the years since Murphy, this court has rejected the old predatory philosophies of business relationships. Our decisions have enhanced the obligations of agents and fiduciaries, functioning in positions of trust and confidence, to perforrrj their duties in complete candor, honesty, loyalty and good faith. See, e. g., Linge, 293 N.W.2d at 193-94 (fiduciary duty of officers, directors, and majority stockholders); In re Estate of Herm, 284 N.W.2d 191, 200 (Iowa 1979) (relatives in confidential relationship); Rowen v. LeMars Mutual Insurance Co., 282 N.W.2d 639, 649, 654 (Iowa 1979) (fiduciary duties of corporate managers and attorney); Miller, 274 N.W.2d at 292 (“Real estate brokers and salesmen represent their clients in the capacity of agent. This is a fiduciary relationship which requires a high degree of honesty and trust between the parties.”); Holi-Rest, Inc. v. Treloar, 217 N.W.2d 517, 525 (Iowa 1974) (duty of corporate officers and directors to corporation and minority stockholders); Holden v. Construction Machinery Co., 202 N.W.2d 348, 358 (Iowa 1972) (duty of officers and directors to corporation and shareholders); First National Bank in Lenox v. Brown, 181 N.W.2d 178, 182 (Iowa 1970) (bank’s duty to disclose encumbrance on property borrower was buying); Smith v. Peterson, 282 N.W.2d 761, 767 (Iowa App. 1979) (duty of realtor with superior knowledge to disclose those material facts that may be favorable to him and unfavorable to the other party).
This case does not present a situation justifying a retreat from these modern decisions that lift the ethics of honest agents and fiduciaries to the benchmark of legal obligations.
To condone the Millers’ failure to divulge their secret transactions with Harsh would blunt those standards of honesty, forthrightness and fair dealing promulgated by the profession itself. Thus in the Iowa Real Estate Commission’s manual under “Duties” is the warning that “[t]he broker can also be held accountable for misconduct, such as secretly buying property from the principal or not disclosing material facts to the principal ... he must deal fairly and honestly with both his client and customer/buyer at all times.” Iowa Real Estate Commission, Real Estate Manual 70-71 (1980).
In addition to the duties imposed by the listing contract, the agent is subject to the following legal duties:
1. To be loyal, faithful and promote the best interests of his principal;
4. To account to and notify the principal of all transactions, or material facts, involving the agency or the principal’s property;
6. Not to represent both contracting parties at the same time, unless each *341has been informed and each has consented to the agent’s acting for the other party;
7. Not to engage in any transaction conflicting with the interests of his principal, without the consent of his principal;
8. Not to profit from the agency over and above the agreed commission
Id. at 72.
The antiquated legal analysis that approached the relationship of brokers and sellers as one between arms-length adversaries cuts against the grain of our recent decisions. Murphy is overruled to the extent it is inconsistent with the legal principles applied in this decision.
III. Opinions from other jurisdictions support the decision we reach in this appeal. Although factual settings may differ, the logic and reason of these authorities are persuasive:
The appellant brokers, by secretly pledging both the sizeable commission due on the sale and a large amount of personal funds to the purchasers in an apparent effort to ensure the consummation of the sale and their eventual remuneration, inextricably entwined their interests with those of the purchasers. The brokers thus placed themselves in a position where, at the very least, they were vulnerable to a temptation to betray the sellers whose interests they had been hired to protect, and are, we conclude, as a matter of law, precluded from recovering any compensation
The appellant brokers protest, however, that the sellers, who were to receive a purchase price in excess of the listed selling price from the sale, have failed to demonstrate any injury occasioned by the brokers’ breach of their fiduciary duties, and that, in the absence of such a showing, the sellers may not assert such a breach as a defense to the brokers’ claims for the real estate commission. We disagree. Based upon considerations of public policy, the rule precluding the recovery of a commission by a broker who has violated his duty of loyalty to his employer was intended not solely to remedy actual wrongs caused by such misconduct, but to discourage the occurrence of such misconduct altogether. Thus this court has declared that “the rule does not depend upon whether or not the principal is injured by the conduct of the agent. The wholesome rule is that the agent shall not put himself in a position where he may be tempted to betray his principal, or to serve himself at the expense of his principal.” Pagel v. Creasy, supra, 6 Ohio App. [199] at 206, 363 N.E.2d at 780-81, (Citations.)
Greenberg v. Meyer, 50 Ohio App.2d 381, 383-84, 363 N.E.2d 779, 780 -81 (1977). See Crosby v. Ashley, 291 So.2d 12, 14 (Fla.App.1974) (“[A] finding of nondisclosure by the broker of a fact material to the sale would be sufficient to bar recovery of the commission without regard to whether loss to the seller resulted therefrom.”); Case v. Business Centers, Inc., 48 Ohio App.2d 267, 270, 357 N.E.2d 47, 49 (1976) (“[A] broker is a fiduciary who owes his principal the duties of disclosure, good faith and loyalty as to all matters within the scope of his employment. . . . [Concealment of facts, or other breach of trust . . . will preclude recovery of a fee by a broker for services rendered to that principal.”); Mersky, 73 Wash.2d at 231, 437 P.2d at 900 (“It is of no consequence .. . that the broker may be able to show that the breach of his duty of full disclosure and undivided loyalty did not involve intentional or deliberate fraud, or did not result in injury to the principal, or did not materially affect the principal’s ultimate decision in the transaction.”); 3 Am. Jur.2d Agency § 200, at 581-82 (1962) (“The duty of an agent to make full disclosure to his principal of all material facts relevant to the agency is fundamental to the fiduciary relation of principal and agent. ... If it appears that an agent has been guilty of any concealment . . . the transactions will not be allowed to stand.”); 12 Am.Jur.2d Brokers § 89, at 842 (1964) (“A neglect [to make full disclosure of all facts which *342might affect his principal’s rights and interests or influence his action in relation to the subject matter of the employment] precludes recovery of commissions for his services.”).
Pursuant to the above legal rationale, and in light of Millers’ admitted concealment, we hold as a matter of law and as a matter of public policy “to keep the agent’s eye single and clear to the rights and welfare of his principal,” Meek v. Hurst, 223 Mo. 688, 698,122 S.W. 1022, 1024 (1909), that Millers are not entitled to a commission, and reverse for entry of judgment for Berkoskis on plaintiff’s petition. We hold there is substantial evidence to support trial court’s findings on the counterclaim and cross-petition. No erroneous application of law as to those claims is apparent. We therefore affirm trial court’s ruling on the counterclaim and cross petition. We remand for judgment in conformance with this opinion.
REVERSED ON PLAINTIFF’S CLAIM; AFFIRMED ON DEFENDANTS’ COUNTERCLAIM AND CROSS-PETITION, AND REMANDED WITH DIRECTIONS.
All Justices concur except McCORMICK, J., who concurs specially, UHLENHOPP, LeGRAND and ALLBEE, JJ., who dissent, and McGIVERIN and SCHULTZ, JJ., who take no part.

=== CASE 2217844 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:35.824171+00 ===

119 N.W.2d 298 (1963)
174 Neb. 753
Charles FOUGERON and Maye Fougeron, Appellants,
Impleaded with Augustus M. Fougeron, Appellee,
v.
The COUNTY OF SEWARD and the State of Nebraska, Appellees.
No. 35352.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
February 1, 1963.
*300 Ivan A. Blevens, Seward, for appellants.
Clarence A. H. Meyer, Atty. Gen., Harold S. Salter, Asst. Atty. Gen., Lincoln, Russell A. Souchek, Seward, for appellees.
Heard before WHITE, C. J., and CARTER, MESSMORE, YEAGER, SPENCER, BOSLAUGH, and BROWER, JJ.
*301 CARTER, Justice.
The plaintiffs brought this suit against the State of Nebraska and the County of Seward to enjoin the closing of a county road at a point where it intersects Interstate Highway No. 80 in Seward County, and for damages. The trial court found for the defendants and dismissed plaintiffs' petition. Plaintiffs have appealed.
At the time the petition was filed in the district court the Department of Roads of the State of Nebraska was engaged in the construction of a new interstate highway across Seward County. At the section of the interstate highway giving rise to this litigation the interstate highway is being constructed in an east and west direction on the half section line through Sections 21, 22, 23, and 24, more specifically described in the petition. The plaintiffs complain of the barricading of the north and south county road at its intersection with the interstate highway between sections 22 and 23. The county roads 1 mile east and 1 mile west of the closed road will cross the interstate highway right-of-way. U. S. Highway No. 6 lies along the south side of Sections 21, 22, 23, and 24, and is therefore one-half miles south of Interstate Highway No. 80.
Plaintiffs are the owners of 240 acres of land in the north half of Section 23 which is adjacent to the north side of Interstate Highway No. 80. It lies one-quarter mile east of the barricaded county road intersection herein involved. Plaintiffs also own 240 acres of land in Sections 26 and 27 immediately south of U. S. Highway No. 6. The two tracts are separated by both highways No. 6 and No. 80, and the half mile that lies between them. It is the contention of plaintiffs that they have been seriously inconvenienced and damaged by the barricading of the county road in that they will be required to travel by a long and circuitous route in moving vehicles and farm machinery from one tract of land to the other. Plaintiffs contend that they were entitled to notice of the barricading of the county road, which was not given. They contend further that the barricading of the road was done pursuant to an unconstitutional law and, even if it be constitutional, that the defendants failed to comply with its provisions.
The plaintiffs state also that it was necessary for the State to take some of their lands along their south line by condemnation; that they understood the county road along the east side of Section 23 would be kept open across the interstate, but they were not informed about the barricading of the county road along the west side of Section 23; that any possible damage for barricading this county road was not taken into consideration by the appraisers in the condemnation proceeding; and that a want of notice prevented any such consideration. On the basis of these facts plaintiffs sought to enjoin the barricading of the county road.
Plaintiffs allege that section 39-1728, R.R.S.1943, by virtue of which the county road was barricaded, is violative of Article III, section 18, of the Constitution of Nebraska, prohibiting the passage of special laws for vacating roads, and Article I, section 3, of the Constitution of Nebraska, providing that no person shall be deprived of property without due process of law. The questioned statute provides: "A county or township road may be barricaded by the road department of the state for the purpose of regulating, restricting, or prohibiting ingress and egress to a state highway upon which the department has established a limited or controlled access facility; Provided, that prior thereto the written notice has been given by the department to the county or township board having jurisdiction of the road to be barricaded and that within thirty days from the date such notice was given, the county or township board, as the case may be, has not adopted by unanimous vote of all its members and delivered to the department a resolution opposing the barricading of such road; and provided further, that *302 road crossings shall be provided along such controlled or limited access facilities at intervals of not to exceed five miles unless the consent of the county board has been obtained for the establishment of fewer crossings." Section 39-1728, R.R.S. 1943.
The section was enacted as a part of an act recodifying the county road laws of this state. Laws 1957, c. 155, p. 508. In 1953 the Legislature gave the Department of Roads authority by condemnation or with the consent of the owner to deny access to and from the abutting lands. Laws 1953, c. 140, p. 460. In 1955 the Legislature rewrote the state highway laws and provided also for the construction of limited or controlled access facilities. Laws 1955, c. 148, p. 413. It is evident that as the need grew for the establishment of controlled or limited access roads, the Legislature extended the authority of the Department of Roads in order to provide for them. By sections 39-1722 to 39-1727, R.R.S.1943, the method of relocating, vacating, or abandoning county roads generally is set out. By the controversial section 39-1728, R.R.S.1943, the Legislature dealt with the method to be followed in dealing with a limited or controlled access road. Interstate Highway No. 80 is concededly such a road.
It is the contention of the plaintiffs that for the Legislature to provide a different method for the barricading of county roads in constructing a limited or controlled access facility than is provided for county roads generally is to act specially rather than generally within the purview of Article III, section 18, of the Constitution. We do not concur in this view. Section 39-1728, R.R.S.1943, applies to limited or controlled access facilities which provide problems altogether different than the ordinary road. It is within the legislative prerogative to place limited or controlled access facilities in a separate class for purposes of legislation. The law operates alike upon all within the class. The Legislature may make reasonable classifications of the objects of legislation for the purpose of legislating with reference thereto. The power of classification rests with the Legislature and it will not be interfered with by the courts if real and substantial differences exist which afford a rational basis for classification. The act is not special if it operates uniformly upon a classification reasonably made. Livingston Loan & Bldg. Assn. v. Drummond, 49 Neb. 200, 68 N.W. 375; McFadden v. Denter, 118 Neb. 38, 223 N.W. 462; Bauer v. State Game, Forestation & Parks Commission, 138 Neb. 436, 293 N.W. 282; Dorrance v. County of Douglas, 149 Neb. 685, 32 N.W.2d 202; Omaha Parking Authority v. City of Omaha, 163 Neb. 97, 77 N.W.2d 862.
Plaintiffs rely upon State ex rel. County of Dawson v. Dawson County Irr. Co., 125 Neb. 836, 252 N.W. 320, in support of their position. In that case the Legislature relieved irrigation companies of the burden of maintaining bridges over their canals, ditches, and laterals while drainage districts, mill race owners, and others constructing artificial waterways across roads and highways were not so relieved. The act did not operate uniformly upon the class of persons affected and it came within the prohibition against special legislation. The act before us operates uniformly upon a reasonable classification of highways and does not fall within the prohibition of Article III, section 18, of the Constitution.
It is further contended that section 39-1728, R.R.S.1943, should be considered in pari materia with sections 39-1722 to 39-1727, R.R.S.1943. This would mean that the latter sections would have to be complied with in addition to the former in barricading a county road to deny access to a limited or controlled access facility. We think that sections 39-1722 to 39-1727, R.R.S.1943, were intended to deal with the establishment, alteration, and vacation of public roads generally while section *303 39-1728, R.R.S.1943, was intended to deal with the barricading of county roads as it related to limited or controlled access highways. Section 39-1728, R.R.S. 1943, deals with a specified class of highways and sections 39-1722 to 39-1727, R.R. S.1943, are to apply to all other county roads. They are independent, one from the other. The intent of the Legislature is clear in this respect and it is the only logical interpretation that can be put upon the meaning of these statutes. Section 39-1728, R.R.S.1943, was passed to facilitate the construction of limited or controlled access facilities and takes precedence over the general provisions of sections 39-1722 to 39-1727, R.R.S.1943, as does a special provision over a general one.
The plaintiffs contend that they were not accorded due process of law in that notice of the barricading of the county road was not afforded them. The fundamental question presented is whether or not they had such an interest as to require the giving of notice. The present statute requires no notice. Admittedly the statute would be constitutionally defective if it did not meet the requirements of due process.
The Legislature has plenary powers over the public roads and highways of this state. They may be created by statute, either directly or through power delegated to proper subdivisions of the state. They may be altered or discontinued in the same manner in which they were created. Two methods are available to the Legislature in the accomplishment of this purpose; by the exercise of the police power, or by eminent domain. It is evident that the method employed in the statute before us to prevent entry from a county road to a limited or controlled access facility, in this instance an interstate highway, is by the exercise of its police power. Even though the exercise of the police power is reasonable, it must not amount to a taking of private property without due process of law. Warren v. Iowa State Highway Commission, 250 Iowa 473, 93 N.W.2d 60.
If the barricading of the county road amounted to a taking of private property without notice, plaintiffs could properly resort to injunction even though they have an alternative remedy for damages for the taking or damaging of private property for public use under Article I, section 21, of the Constitution.
Was the closing of the county road, under the circumstances shown, a taking or damaging of plaintiffs' property that would entitle them to compensatory damages? The evidence shows that neither of plaintiffs' tracts of land abuts the intersection at which the county road is being barricaded. Plaintiffs' home place in Section 23 is more than one-quarter mile east of the county road barricade. It is obvious that the barricade will prevent the use of the county road as plaintiffs have used it in the past. It will be necessary for the plaintiffs to use a more lengthy and circuitous route to move vehicles, farm machinery, and livestock from one tract to the other. Their immediate access to the county road is not impeded, but they assert that the right of ingress and egress to their two tracts of land has been unlawfully interfered with and that they are entitled to have the barricading of the road enjoined until due process if afforded and steps taken to have the damages determined and paid.
This court has determined that a property owner suffers a compensable damage on account of the construction or vacation of a public road when egress and ingress to his property are cut off or interfered with and he has no other reasonable means of access. The right of access under such circumstances is property which cannot be taken from him without compensation. But plaintiffs' access to the county road was in no way impeded. It was barricaded some distance from plaintiffs' property. They can still reach their lands by the public road system, *304 although the distance will be greater and the route circuitous. The inconvenience sustained is the same as that sustained by the general public, although it may be greater in degree. One cannot enjoin the barricading of a public road where he suffers only such inconvenience or injury as is suffered by the public generally, even though his inconvenience may be greater in degree. It follows also that plaintiffs have no cause of action for damages where they have not been specially damaged. They have no claim for compensatory damages and, consequently, they were not entitled to notice in the absence of statutory requirement. Section 39-1728, R.R.S.1943, is not invalid in failing to afford due process to the plaintiffs and is not subject to attack for unconstitutionality on that ground. Hanson v. City of Omaha, 157 Neb. 403, 59 N.W.2d 622; Tomazewski v. Palmer Bee Co., 223 Mich. 565, 194 N.W. 571; Warren v. Iowa State Highway Commission, supra; Department of Highways v. Jackson (Ky.), 302 S.W.2d 373.
Plaintiffs further contend that defendants did not comply with section 39-1728, R.R.S.1943, in that they failed to give the notice to the county board required by that section. The facts are not in dispute. The State through its Department of Roads sent the required notice to the county board by certified mail. An employee in the county clerk's office receipted for the letter at the post office but for some reason it was never brought to the attention of the county board. It is clear that the notice was given in accordance with the statute and it came into the hands of an employee in due course of handling. The notice having come into the hands of a person entitled to accept it, the failure of the county board to give consideration to it is the fault of county board and its agents and employees, and not the State. Even though the postal service was the agent of the State in delivering the notice, it made the delivery and the county board is bound thereby. Under the facts shown, the county board is charged with notice within the time provided by the statute.
The trial court evidently arrived at these same conclusions. Its judgment being in all respects correct, the judgment is affirmed.
Affirmed.