=== CASE 2210282 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:50.667462+00 ===

194 Cal. App. 2d 84 (1961)
THE PEOPLE, Respondent,
v.
ROY MAGGART, Appellant.
Crim. No. 7338.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. Three.
July 21, 1961.
Kenny, Morris & Ibanez and Robert W. Kenny for Appellant.
Stanley Mosk, Attorney General, William E. James, Assistant Attorney General, Norman H. Sokolow and Vincent W. Thorpe, Deputy Attorneys General, for Respondent. *87
FORD, J.
In a nonjury trial, the appellant was found to be guilty of grand theft (Pen. Code,  487, subd. 1) as charged in an indictment. He was sentenced to the state prison for the term prescribed by law. His appeal is from the judgment  [fn. 1] and from the order denying his motion for a new trial.
Each of the three counts of the indictment contained an allegation that the appellant took money belonging to Frank A. Pachmayr. In the first count, $750.50 was alleged to have been taken on or about July 15, 1957; in the second count, $10,250 on or about July 16, 1957; and in the last count, $46,000 on or about July 24, 1957. The principal contention of the appellant is that the evidence was insufficient to support the conviction with respect to any of the counts. Consequently, a summary of the pertinent evidence will be stated.
The transactions between the appellant and Mr. Pachmayr related to the purchase by the latter of land scrip.  [fn. 2] The prosecution conceded that the scrip was worth what it cost Mr. Pachmayr.
Edward Mayhew testified that in July 1957, he was acting as a senior clerk at the Los Angeles main office of the Bank *88 of America. An item was received by the bank for collection. It had come from the Collins Land Company in Helena, Montana, and was for $249.50, upon payment of which by the appellant scrip for 4.99 acres was to be delivered to him. The sight draft was presented to the appellant; it was paid on July 15, 1957, by the use of a check for $1,000 issued by the Pachmayr Gun Works. That amount was used as follows: $248 was deposited to the account of the appellant; $500 was used for a cashier's check to the order of the appellant; $249.50 for a cashier's check in that amount in favor of the Collins Land Company; and $2.50 was retained by the bank as its collection charge. The witness said that the scrip was "probably" delivered to the appellant at or about that time, after the bank had received the money.
Mr. Mayhew testified that another item had been received from Stanley C. Benson for collection on October 4, 1955. Thereafter, a letter bearing the date of July 16, 1956, was received from Mr. Benson as to that item which amended the instructions to the bank. Thereunder, the bank was authorized to deliver certain documents to the appellant upon payment of the net amount of $10,240. Such documents included Valentine scrip bearing the designation E-272 and Valentine scrip designated as E-292.  [fn. 3] In payment of the draft, two certified checks in the total amount of $20,500 were presented. One check was for $10,000 and the other for $10,500, each being dated July 16, 1957, and being drawn on the account of Pachmayr Gun Works. The sum of $20,500 was disbursed by the bank as follows: $10,240 was used in payment of the collection item; $10 was retained by the bank in payment of its collection charges; and $10,250 was deposited to the account of the appellant. In response to a question as to the reason why both checks were handled in the course of the collection since the check for $10,500 was more than sufficient to satisfy the collection demand and the collection charge, the witness said: "I think that as a matter of routine I just included the whole thing as part of the payment. ... it may have been that I understood that the collection represented two different sources of money. ... I don't know."
Mr. Mayhew further testified that on July 24, 1957, the appellant placed with the bank for collection a draft on Frank A. Pachmayr for $48,000, the appellant depositing Forest Lieu scrip for 162.487 acres to be delivered upon payment *89 of that amount of money. In payment the bank received a cashier's check for $2,000, dated July 24, 1957, issued by the Bank of America payable to the order of K. A. H. Christian and bearing an endorsement in that name, and a cashier's check for $46,000 issued by the Union Bank and Trust Company. The witness thought that Mr. Pachmayr came into the bank at the time the check for $46,000 was presented. The proceeds of the collection were disbursed as follows: $39,370 was deposited on July 24, 1957, to the appellant's account; $10 was retained by the bank as its collection charge; one cashier's check was issued to the order of one Richards for $6,120 and two other cashier's checks in the total amount of $2,500 were issued to the order of one Stack.
Mr. Benson testified to a transaction with the appellant, which started in 1955, with respect to Valentine scrip number E-272 and number E-292. The appellant said that he would buy the scrip, which he had previously sold, for $15,000, but he did not pay that amount. In 1955, the transaction was placed in the Bank of America as a collection item. The witness Benson said: "At that time he [the appellant] was buying the corporation and all the stock, and this was the principal asset, this scrip, and that was the $15,000 price." Ultimately, $10,240 was received for the scrip. The check was received by the witness directly from the Bank of America.
Margaret Chivers, who lived in Helena, Montana, testified that she was an officer of the Collins Land Company. In June 1957, she sent scrip for 4.99 acres to the Bank of America for delivery to the appellant upon payment of $249.50. In a letter of transmittal it was stated that if payment was not made by July 15, 1957, all papers were to be returned to the Collins Land Company. She did not recall how the transaction originated "but very likely it was by long distance telephone." It was her company's practice to send scrip to a bank for the collection of the sales price thereof. In 1955, she sold to the appellant scrip for 162.487 acres; she came to Los Angeles and delivered that scrip to the Bank of America. This was done pursuant to the appellant's request. The price of that scrip was $4,800, together with expenses of $208.52. That scrip was the scrip of the same acreage concerning which Mr. Mayhew testified.
Frank A. Pachmayr testified that he first met the appellant between July 5 and July 10, 1957. They were introduced by Karel Christian. The three men discussed the subject of scrip. Mr. Pachmayr testified as to his conversations with the *90 appellant, prior to his purchase of scrip, as follows: "A. Well, Mr. Maggart stated that he knew how some land scrip could be purchased at $300.00 an acre and he had some land located up in the Portland, Oregon area that could be, if we purchased this land scrip, had at $300.00 an acre. We could file on it in Washington, get title to the land scrip and then file on this land that he had located in the Portland, Oregon area and get back a minimum of $3,000.00 an acre. I asked him why he didn't file on this property up there himself and he said that he didn't have the money to purchase this land scrip and he told me that his part of the deal would be 50 percent of the proceeds after the timber was sold on this land. He also stated that he had three different companies up there that would buy the timber off of the land and there was over 700 acres of land up there available and that he had received a minimum offer of $3,000.00 per acre for the timber off of this land. ... A. I do not believe at the very first conversation of the introduction of Mr. Maggart to myself through Karel Christian that the ownership of the scrip was discussed at all, merely that Mr. Maggart knew where there was some scrip that was for sale and it was owned by some people up in Montana. ... A. At the first meeting I questioned Mr. Maggart as to why he didn't place the scrip on this land in Oregon himself and he said he didn't have the money to purchase the scrip, and he stated that his part of the deal was that he was to get 50 percent of the proceeds of the timber after it was sold and that it was part of the deal; Karel Christian was to put up a certain amount of the money and I was to put up the balance on the 4.99 acres; he was to put up $500.00 and I was to put up $1,000.00; when this land was sold it was our assumption or, I should say Mr. Maggart stated he would get a minimum of $3,000.00 an acre and then I felt if I would get back five times what I had put in it was a good deal." Mr. Pachmayr testified further that on July 13, 1957, the appellant "explained about this 5-acre piece of scrip and the immediate action that would have to be taken on it"; so Mr. Pachmayr communicated with his attorney, Maynard Henry, and arranged a meeting for Monday, July 15, 1957. At the meeting in Mr. Henry's office, the appellant said that the deal with respect to the 5 acres of scrip and the 40 acres of scrip at $300 an acre would have to be consummated on that day because, if that was not done, the scrip would have to be returned to Montana. As a result of this conversation, Mr. Pachmayr had *91 a check for $1,000 prepared and he gave the check to the appellant on July 15, 1957, "for my two-thirds share, payment against 4.99 acres of scrip." (The remaining one-third share was to be purchased by Mr. Christian.) In reply to a question as to whether he knew, at the time he delivered the check, that any part of the proceeds was to go to the appellant personally, Mr. Pachmayr answered: "No, the proceeds of this check was to go to the purchase of the scrip completely." While the witness could not say definitely that the statement was made that the scrip was in the Bank of America, he testified that: "... our checks were made out to the Bank of America for the scrip. ..." The appellant told him how to make out the check for $1,000. Thereafter on the same day he received the scrip for 4.99 acres from the appellant. He believed that the appellant did not have the money to purchase the scrip for 4.99 acres. He believed the appellant's representation that lumber companies had bid $3,000 an acre on Oregon timberland when he delivered the check for $1,000 to the appellant.
Mr. Pachmayr further testified as follows: "Well, during that time he would tell me about the 40 acres of Valentine and another 40 acres of Valentine and the discussion held on that, at $300.00 an acre, and that he would have to have immediate action or he would have to send it back to Montana." On July 16, 1957, he had another meeting with the appellant. Mr. Christian was present. He gave the appellant two checks, one for $10,500 and another for $10,000, "to pick up the scrip at the Bank of America," being Valentine scrip E-272 and E-292. At the time he delivered these checks to the appellant, he continued to believe and rely on the earlier statements which the appellant had made to him as to the scrip. Mr. Pachmayr received the scrip E-272 and E-292 on the afternoon of July 16, 1957.
The third transaction which Mr. Pachmayr had with the appellant occurred on July 24, 1957. Before that transaction, the appellant stated that he had Forest Lieu scrip for 162.487 acres for sale at $300 an acre. The appellant never told Mr. Pachmayr that he owned any of the scrip himself. He said the scrip for 162 acres was in the main office of the Bank of America. Mr. Pachmayr was to pay $46,000 and Mr. Christian $2,000. A cashier's check for $46,000 was obtained by Mr. Pachmayr from the Union Bank on July 24, 1957, and was taken by him to the main office of the Bank of America and given to Mr. Mayhew. He had looked at the *92 scrip the day before with Mr. Christian and the appellant. He believed that, in his examination of the documents on that occasion, he noted the name of the appellant on one page as the president of the Funston Land Company, but he had no conversation with anyone about that. As to a conversation with the appellant in Mr. Pachmayr's office on July 23, 1957, and his reliance thereon, Mr. Pachmayr testified as follows: "A. Mr. Maggart stated that he had the scrip in escrow with the Bank of America, Main Office, and that we could make the same deal on it that we did on the rest of the scrip, namely, that we would get our proportional share; he would get 50 percent of the proceeds after the sale of the land and that he could place the scrip on forests in the Portland, Oregon area because there was over 700 acres of land up there, that he already had cruised and he had an offer by the different lumber companies of over $3,000.00 an acre. Q. Did you believe and rely on these statements at the time you gave him $46,000.00? A. Yes, I did." As to what occurred at the bank on July 24, 1957, Mr. Pachmayr testified: "A. As Mr. Mayhew, after he had met Mr. Maggart and Mr. Christian, my wife and myself at the counter, Mr. Maggart asked Mr. Mayhew to get this 162.487 acres of Forest Lieu scrip and Mr. Mayhew started to walk away to pick up the scrip and he was about twenty feet from us and Mr. Maggart called after him and he said, 'Isn't it $48,000.00 that they want for this scrip.' Mr. Mayhew half turned and looked at him ... and he said, 'Yes, that is right. ...' " The scrip was then delivered. Mr. Pachmayr also related efforts to place the scrip on land.
Three agreements were prepared in which the parties were Mr. and Mrs. Pachmayr, Mr. Christian and the appellant. One related to the scrip for 4.99 acres and Valentine scrip E-272 for 40 acres and was dated July 15, 1957. Another, bearing the date of July 15, 1957, was as to Valentine scrip E-292 for 40 acres. The third was dated July 24, 1957, and related to the last transaction. The agreement first mentioned is set forth in the footnote,  [fn. 4]*93 portion added to the body of the document submitted by the appellant as hereinafter related. The other two agreements contained provisions similar to those in that agreement except that there was no specific designation of the property to be selected. Mr. Pachmayr testified: "A. Mr. Maggart had this document prepared in substance although my attorney, he made some changes in the document and I believe this document was typed up in my attorney, Mr. Maynard Henry's office. I will say that it was prepared before any check was made. The reason for my belief is that we had a meeting in Mr. Maynard Henry's office Monday morning, I am sure it was, and I believe this check for $1,000.00 was made in the afternoon." Mr. Pachmayr testified that the third agreement *94 was prepared in the appellant's office because Mr. Christian said that they preferred that it be done that way since Mr. Christian and the appellant knew a Bud Parr and Mr. Henry was the attorney for both Parr and Mr. Pachmayr. In April 1958, the Pachmayrs, Christian and the appellant executed an agreement terminating the prior agreements except insofar as the respective rights of the Pachmayrs and Christian to the scrip were concerned.
On cross-examination, Mr. Pachmayr testified: "None of the money at all was to go to Mr. Maggart. The only interest was after the sale of the property." With respect to the last transaction, he testified: "Q. All right, in looking at it did you notice that the Funston Land Company was selling this to you and had signed on this substitute power of attorney ... signed by the President, Roy Maggart? A. I probably noticed that but that wouldn't have made any difference as the President wouldn't hold it. The corporation would own it." At the bank he did not see the name and address of the appellant on a particular collection record; he made no inquiry as to who owned that particular scrip (for 162.487 acres). He further testified: "I never questioned who owned the scrip. I would believe that it would be correct that it wouldn't make any difference to me who owned the scrip." Mr. Pachmayr testified further that the scrip had been placed on property in Apple Valley. *95
Maynard B. Henry, an attorney at law, testified to a meeting in his office on July 15, 1957, at which the appellant, Mr. Christian, and Mr. Henry and his client, Mr. Pachmayr, were present. He stated in part as follows: "Mr. Maggart explained to me that he and Mr. Christian had been discussing for a period of over a week about the possible purchase by Mr. Pachmayr of two parcels of land scrip or two pieces of scrip representing parcels of land. ... He further stated ... that there was a Mr. Mayhew with the Bank of America in the Collection Department that had two parcels of scrip, one certificate representing approximately five acres and the other scrip being 40 acres of Valentine. ... He stated that these were placed there for collection by the owners, that the owners of the scrip were individuals who resided in Montana and I think he identified the 4.99 as in lieu scrip or scrip for the 1898 Act I believe it was. The demand or the collection on the first parcel of 4.99 was in the sum of $1500.00, and that the collection or demand on the 40 acres of Valentine scrip was some $12,000.00. He explained to me that there [were] deadlines that Monday, the 15th, and that that day was the last day the scrip could be picked up and, in other words, it had a return as of that afternoon and that unless it was so purchased that it would be returned. ... Mr. Maggart further amplifying the transaction and the reason he wanted Mr. Pachmayr to purchase both of these scrips was that he had found some 45 acres of land in the State of Oregon, land that was heavily timbered. ... He stated that the land should average out, the value of the timber about $3,000.00 an acre. ... Mr. Maggart stated that he thought that he might be able to get the extension of time as far as the 40-acre parcel until the next day and there was no further discussion on that. Mr. Pachmayr at one point in the conversation asked Mr. Maggart why he didn't buy this scrip and place it on the land. Mr. Maggart stated that he didn't have enough money to do so. Mr. Maggart stated to Mr. Pachmayr that he expected to show a profit out of this deal and that his profits were to be derived from the ultimate sale of either the timber or the land. ... He stated that he expected to make no profit out of the deal unless the land could be obtained, the timber and/or the land sold at a profit. He had prepared and submitted a form of contract which I went over and subsequently made a few changes in that day. ... The document was retyped in my office with some minor variations or changes from the original document as presented by Mr. Maggart." *96
Mr. Henry also testified as follows: "Mr. Maggart stated that his only interest was to receive a share of the profit from the sale of the land and the timber thereon to be derived through the use of this scrip and that for his services in having this scrip recorded in Washington, after it was obtained and purchased, for locating the land and for having the land cruised and timber cruised, for processing and selection thereof and finding where title was obtained, that he would receive his profit out of that." The witness did not know of the purchase of the scrip for 162.487 acres and did not discuss it with Mr. Pachmayr before it occurred.
At a later point in his testimony, Mr. Henry supplemented his testimony as to the first conversation in his office, stating: "I think I was to the point where the deadline for the purchase of the Valentine scrip, E-272, had been agreed that it could be put over until the next day. Mr. Maggart then told Mr. Pachmayr that there was an additional 40 acres of Valentine scrip in the bank also which could be acquired for $12,000.00. ... Mr. Pachmayr stated that if it was available that he would like to buy this also. ... Mr. Christian said that he wanted to put $1500.00 in and it was at that point the same agreement was orally agreed to, pertaining to the placing of this scrip on land either in Oregon or elsewhere and that this also was owned and placed by others other than Mr. Maggart and that it was in the bank for collection for the same $12,000.00 and that Mr. Maggart was, he was on the first forty and on the 4.99 acres and that he was to receive his profits out of the sale of land or timber that were to be selected and that way get acquisition of title. ..."
Nanitta Pachmayr, the wife of Frank A. Pachmayr, testified as to the conversation on July 15, 1957, at which the appellant, the Pachmayrs, Mr. Christian and Mr. Henry were present. She said that the forest lieu scrip for 4.99 acres and the Valentine scrip E-272 for 40 acres were discussed. Later in the conversation Valentine scrip E-292 was discussed. Mrs. Pachmayr testified in part as follows: "Well, Mr. Maggart was discussing forest lieu scrip of the 4.99 acres at that time that could be applied to timber land up in Oregon and I believe it was 700 acres of timber land. ..." In response to a question as to whether the appellant said anything with respect to whether he would receive any profit from the purchase of the scrip, she stated: "A. Not at this particular meeting. It was held at Mr. Maggart's office. We discussed the 50 percent if we applied the forest lieu scrip on property *97 or profits and Mr. Maggart was to receive 50 percent of the sale. Q. After the scrip was applied to the particular land, is that correct? A. Yes, sir. ... Q. Was there anything as to whether or not Mr. Maggart was to receive any of the money you and your husband delivered to him? A. No."
With respect to the purchase of the scrip for 162.487 acres on July 24, 1957, Mrs. Pachmayr testified that the appellant, Mr. Christian, she and Mr. Pachmayr went to the Bank of America; the Pachmayrs had their check for $46,000. As to the occurrence at the bank, she testified: "We waited quite a while. Finally a clerk, Mr. Mayhew, arrived, and Mr. Maggart asked him, introduced us to Mr. Mayhew and told him we would like to have the scrip and then when he returned, as he left, he returned with the scrip. ... At that time my husband presented the check and it was supposed to be for--we only had a check for $46,000.00 because Mr. Christian was supposed to give us the $2,000.00. It would make up to $48,000.00 and at that time Mr. Maggart asked that his check be [sic] $48,000.00 and Mr. Mayhew turned and hesitated and then said, 'Yes.' "
The appellant testified in his own behalf. As to his first meeting with Mr. Pachmayr, at which Mr. Christian was present, on July 13, 1957, he testified in part: "I said this would be their chance to get in on this scrip picture reasonably and I said my price on this scrip is $300.00 an acre; I have made two trips to Helena, Montana and I have to go to Washington directly, however I see a few people are buying it and I would like to follow through with the location and I have a very desirable location in Oregon which had been checked and proved and it looked very good from an airplane and it looked very good on the map." As to the discussion in Mr. Henry's office on July 15, 1957, the appellant testified in part: "Well, I told them that this 4.99 could take this land up in Oregon. I gave them a little description if they wanted to check it. ... That was in Linn County of Oregon and I located the tract. ... The property looked good as a potential spot to use scrip and I said that in my opinion that the land was good. I told them that I had talked to Mr. Fox, the President of the Cascade Plywood Company in Portland, and he had put a value of $3,000.00 an acre on it which is so. ... Anyway I told them that the price for sale of that scrip was $300.00 an acre and that was the price I was charging for all scrip--I never varied. It was the same. I told them that it was the same price and if they wanted to buy it the price *98 was $300.00 an acre for every piece of scrip that I had. ... I said I had 40 acres of Valentine scrip and that was very usable." He further testified that none of the checks was handed to him personally. As to the check for $1,000, he said he "was present at the Bank of America when Mr. Christian presented the money." With respect to the "two $10,000.00 checks," he did not recall being present when those checks were presented to the bank. But he was at the bank when the $46,000 check was given to the bank.
With respect to the transaction as to scrip for 162.487 acres, the appellant testified as to a meeting at the Pachmayr home as follows: "Well, Mr. Christian said, 'Mr. Maggart has some additional scrip if you people are interested,' and Mr. Pachmayr expressed a desire to talk about additional scrip, and I said that I have a very, very valuable 162 acres of scrip that I had three or four months before and that I had personally gone up and inspected the base land. ... The select rights were at the bank, that my price was $300.00 an acre and if they were interested in buying that scrip they could go to the bank and pay for it. I also told them at that time, and I forgot to tell you, that at a later meeting if they wanted assistance in their select rights that I would be glad to do it for a 50 per cent interest in the land to be obtained but that this dealing had nothing to do with the purchase of the scrip--that is a separate transaction. 'If you want my services, then that is what I charge.' " Another meeting was held "just prior to going over to the bank on the 24th of July" at an office in the Bartlett Building. The appellant, Mr. Christian and the Pachmayrs were present. They then went to the bank and the appellant, after calling Mr. Henry's office and ascertaining that he was out of town, prepared the contract, "using the form of what we did for the other deal."
The appellant further testified: "No one at any time at any of these meetings asked me what I was paying for the scrip." On cross-examination, his testimony was that he did not say that the scrip for 4.99 acres belonged to him. He further testified: "... as a matter of fact, the scrip was at my collection at the bank and, being my collection, I had control over who had it; what was paid for it, and the use. ... I said I had the scrip for sale which is the usual course of selling scrip by all scrip brokers in the United States." With respect to the figure of $300 an acre, he said: "This is my sales price." He also testified as follows: "Q. ... You let it be known to the Pachmayrs that you were going to be working *99 with them as a group to locate the timber land? A. Yes, absolutely. ... After the purchase of the scrip." He denied that he made a profit of $750 on the $1,000 transaction, stating: "I made two trips to Helena, Montana, that cost $250.00 each, and one trip to Washington." When he talked to the Pachmayrs about the Valentine scrip, he told them that he "controlled and had the scrip." He was "to have an interest for processing the scrip through Washington, locating the scrip, and then when it was all done and the property had gone to patent," he "would get 50 per cent interest." He further testified: "Q. Did you ever tell them you were a broker in this or you were making a profit in this particular transaction? A. I did not discuss it one way or the other. Q. You led them to understand that your profit was to accrue at such time as the scrip was exercised, didn't you? A. Yes. Q. Right. You intended they rely on that? A. Correct, yes; ..."
[1] As this court said in People v. Bateman, 175 Cal. App. 2d 69, at page 76 [345 P.2d 334]: "It was the function of the trial judge in this nonjury case to determine what facts were established by the evidence. Before his conclusion can be set aside on review on the ground of insufficiency of the evidence, it must be made clearly to appear that on no hypothesis whatever is there sufficient substantial evidence to support the conclusion reached in the court below. [2] We must assume in favor of the finding of guilt the existence of every fact which the trial judge could have reasonably deduced from the evidence, and then determine whether such facts are sufficient to support the finding. [3] If the circumstances reasonably justify the finding of the trial judge, our opinion that those circumstances might also reasonably be reconciled with the innocence of the defendant will not warrant interference with the determination of the trial judge. (People v. Newland, 15 Cal. 2d 678, 681 [104 P.2d 778].)"
[4] The felonious taking of property which is not one's own constitutes theft. [5] Under section 484 of the Penal Code, a defendant may be convicted of grand theft upon proof of either larceny, embezzlement or obtaining property by false pretenses. (People v. Martin, 153 Cal. App. 2d 275, 281 [314 P.2d 493].) [6] "Although the crimes of larceny by trick and device and obtaining property by false pretenses are much alike, they are aimed at different criminal acquisitive techniques. Larceny by trick and device is the appropriation of property, the possession of which was fraudulently acquired; *100 obtaining property by false pretenses is the fraudulent or deceitful acquisition of both title and possession." (People v. Ashley, 42 Cal. 2d 246, at p. 258 [267 P.2d 271].)
The appellant contends that the facts of the present case do not fit into any of the forms of grand theft. He asserts that "an ordinary innocent vendor-vendee transaction was erroneously construed to be a felony by the court below." On the other hand, the People assert that the evidence was sufficient to sustain the conviction under both the theory of false pretenses and the theory of larceny by trick and device. It is, accordingly, necessary to determine whether the evidence was sufficient to sustain the determination of the trial court on either theory.
In Fricke, California Criminal Law (7th ed.), it is said, at pages 288- 289: "That form of larceny in which the taking is in secret and without the knowledge of the owner is easily identified, but larceny by trick and device and obtaining property by false pretenses are frequently so similar in the modus operandi employed by the swindler that, depending upon the conclusion which may be formed as to the intent of the parties, the crime may be viewed as either larceny or obtaining property by false pretenses and a verdict of conviction of either offense may be sustained. (People v. Von Badenthal, 8 Cal. App. 2d 404 [48 P.2d 82]; People v. Miles, 19 Cal. App. 223 [125 P. 250].) In both offenses the victim is deceived into parting with his property by the fraud and deceit practiced by the defendant. ... The basic test, however, is found in the intent of the owner. In false pretense cases the owner of the property turns it over to the defendant intending that the defendant shall become the unconditional and unrestricted owner thereof. In larceny by trick and device, however, the owner never intends that the property shall belong to or become the property of the defendant; he never intends to part with title to the defendant but merely turns the possession of the property to the defendant to be used by the latter in accordance with and for the purposes expressed in the conversations and agreement between the parties. The expression in some opinions that in larceny the owner never intends to part with title to the property is not strictly accurate; the rule is that he does not intend to part with the title to the defendant but this is not affected by the fact that he usually does intend that title to his property shall pass according to the plan or scheme proposed by the defendant and which he believes will be carried out. The larcenist, having obtained *101 possession of the property by representing a purely fictitious or misrepresented venture as real, at all times intends to steal the property for himself."
In People v. Barnett, 31 Cal. App. 2d 173 [88 P.2d 172], the defendant represented to a widow that he, the widow and one Amigo could buy a certain lease of 40 acres for $1,000 under an arrangement where each would furnish one-third of the cost. The land was to be bought in the names of the widow and Amigo and a separate agreement was to be executed to evidence the defendant's interest. In delivering her share of the money to the defendant, the widow intended and understood that the money was to be used in payment to a third person of the joint purchase price of the lease. She testified that she did not intend to part with the title to her money to the defendant. Prior to his meeting with the widow, the defendant had purchased the lease from another person for $40 and had caused the title to appear in the name of one Starr without the latter's knowledge or consent. He later secured Starr's signature to an assignment in blank and filled in the names of the widow and Amigo as assignees. In affirming the conviction of grand theft upon the theory of larceny by trick and device, the court said, at pages 176-177: "The defendant and his codefendant represented that each of them was investing the sum of $333 together with Mrs. Hill as part of the purchase price of said lease, when in truth and in fact they already owned said lease, and instead of the purchase price being $1000, it was only $40. From a statement of the evidence which we have set forth it is clear and unequivocal that Mrs. Hill parted with the possession of the money to the defendant with the understanding that he would use her money in connection with money advanced by himself and his codefendant for the purchase from some third person of the oil lease. She did not purchase the lease from the defendant or Amigo and therefore never passed title of such money to the defendant or to Amigo."
In People v. Delbos, 146 Cal. 734 [81 P. 131], the evidence tended to show that the defendant undertook to buy a lodging-house for her cousin; defendant learned that one could be bought from one Stalford for $90, but represented to her cousin that the price was $500; the cousin had the defendant obtain $400 from another person who was in possession of some money belonging to the cousin; the defendant obtained the money, but retained for herself the amount above the actual *102 purchase price. The court said, at pages 736-737: "In the case at bar, at the time Mrs. Marquet delivered the money, or caused it to be delivered to the defendant, she did not intend then to part with her property in the money to any one. Her intention was that the defendant should receive the money from Mrs. Janzi for her, carry it to Mr. Stalford, the seller, and then pay it to Mr. Stalford on behalf of Mrs. Marquet. If this had been done as intended, the money would have remained in law the property of Mrs. Marquet until its final delivery to Mr. Stalford in payment of Mrs. Marquet's debts on the purchase price of the house. The title thus remaining in Mrs. Marquet, it was subject to larceny as of her property, and the fraudulent appropriation by the defendant to her own use, she having had the intention from the beginning to obtain it for that purpose, constituted, in law, an act of larceny."
In the light of the applicable law, the trial court in the present case was warranted in reaching the conclusion that, as to each transaction, the appellant was guilty of larceny by trick and device. [7] Inherent in that crime is the employment of fraud and trickery in the obtaining of possession of property by one who has a preconceived design to appropriate such property to his own use. (See People v. Bartges, 126 Cal. App. 2d 763, 770 [273 P.2d 49]; People v. McCabe, 60 Cal. App. 2d 492, 496 [141 P.2d 54]; People v. Sing, 42 Cal. App. 385, 391 [183 P. 865].) [8] The requisite intent is rarely susceptible of direct proof and ordinarily must be inferred from a consideration of all the facts and circumstances shown by the evidence. (People v. Collins, 172 Cal. App. 2d 295, 299 [342 P.2d 370]; People v. Edwards, 72 Cal. App. 102, 117 [236 P. 944].) [9] If the evidence is sufficient to justify a reasonable inference that such intent existed, a finding thereof by the trier of fact cannot be disturbed on appeal. (People v. Lyles, 156 Cal. App. 2d 482, 486 [319 P.2d 745].)
[10a] In the first transaction, the appellant represented to Mr. Pachmayr that scrip for 4.99 acres was for sale for the price of $1,500, whereas in fact the scrip was held in the collection department of the Bank of America to be delivered to the appellant upon payment of $249.50 and collection charges of $2.50. The appellant submitted a document to be signed by all of the parties which lent support to his assertion that his only financial interest was in the profits which would result from the obtaining of land by use of the scrip. The fact *103 was that he was to obtain for himself $748 of the $1,000 supplied by Mr. Pachmayr. The fraudulent statements and representations as to the price for which the property could be obtained and of the nature of the appellant's interest in the transaction, and the document purporting to define such interest, constituted the devices used by him to carry out his scheme. (See People v. Lafka, 174 Cal. App. 2d 312, 314-315 [344 P.2d 619].) [11] It is, of course, true that the misrepresentations of the accused must have induced action in reliance thereon. (See People v. Lafka, supra, at p. 315.) But it is not essential that there be express testimony by the victim that he was induced to part with his money by the false representations of the accused as long as the inference of such reliance can be drawn by the trier of fact from the evidence. (See People v. Schmidt, 147 Cal. App. 2d 222, 228 [305 P.2d 215].) [10b] However, in the present case Mr. Pachmayr testified that at the time he gave the appellant the checks for the second transaction, he continued to believe and rely on the earlier statements as to the scrip which the appellant had made to him. The evidence clearly warranted the inference that Mr. Pachmayr did not know or intend that the appellant would be the recipient of any part of his money.
The fact that the check for $1,000 was made to the order of the Bank of America is of no aid to the appellant. Even though the check went into the bank, the proceeds were in large part under the control of the appellant. (Cf. People v. Schmidt, supra, 147 Cal. App. 2d 222, 228.) It is obvious that it was part of the appellant's scheme that while the bank should appear to be merely an agent for collection (as it was to the extent of the amount of the draft of the Collins Land Company on the appellant), it would in fact be used by him as the instrument or means by which to accomplish the diversion to him personally of the major portion of the proceeds of the check.
Even if the scrip had a value commensurate with the cost thereof to Mr. Pachmayr, the trier of fact was warranted in finding that the appellant had committed the crime of larceny by trick and device. (People v. Robertson, 167 Cal. App. 2d 571, 576 [334 P.2d 938].) [12] Whether the offense take that form or be the related crime of obtaining property by false pretenses, as stated in People v. Pugh, 137 Cal. App. 2d 226, at pages 232-233 [289 P.2d 826]: "Even if property is worth the consideration paid therefor, this is not a defense *104 where there is substantial evidence, as in the present case, that defendant knowingly made false representations with the intent to defraud and with the purpose and effect of inducing the prosecuting witness to part with something of value. (People v. Raines, 66 Cal. App. 2d 960, 962 [153 P.2d 424].)"
[10c] The evidence was sufficient to support an inference that the fraudulent representations made by the appellant during the course of the first transaction were of such a nature that they continued to operate upon the mind of Mr. Pachmayr and induced action on his part with respect to the other transactions. (People v. Ashley, supra, 42 Cal. 2d 246, 273; People v. Rabe, 202 Cal. 409, 413 [261 P. 303].) The second transaction was of the same nature as the first; by his scheme the appellant personally obtained $10,250 of Mr. Pachmayr's money. The third transaction varied from the other two in that the Pachmayr check was delivered directly to the bank. But, as heretofore noted, the appellant so arranged the matter with the bank that the proceeds were entirely under his control and the bank was merely his instrumentality for the obtaining of possession of Mr. Pachmayr's money. While the scrip for 162.487 acres appears to have been owned by the appellant, he did not disclose that this transaction was of a nature different from the represented nature of each of the previous transactions. To have done so would have thwarted his scheme. It is true that Mr. Pachmayr noticed that the appellant's name appeared as the president of the transferor of the scrip, but Mr. Pachmayr was reasonably justified in his assumption that, as he testified, the "corporation would own it" and "the President wouldn't hold it." Moreover, the false picture was maintained when at the bank the appellant called after Mr. Mayhew and said, "Isn't it $48,000.00 that they want for this scrip," and Mr. Mayhew replied, "Yes, that is right. ..." The representation that the appellant had no financial interest in the transaction, except a share of any profits resulting from the use of the scrip in obtaining land, remained in full force and effect, and was reemphasized by the written agreement prepared as to the scrip for 162.487 acres. (Cf. People v. Barnett, supra, 31 Cal. App. 2d 173.)
[13] No corroboration is necessary to sustain a conviction of grand theft by trick and device. (People v. Lafka, supra, 174 Cal. App. 2d 312, 316.) Since the evidence in the present case was sufficient to prove the commission of that form of grand theft, it is not necessary to determine whether it was *105 also sufficient under the theory of obtaining property by false pretenses. However, it may be noted that under the latter theory there was ample corroboration of the pretenses of the appellant as to the nature of the purchases and of his interest therein. (Cf. People v. Andrews, 165 Cal. App. 2d 626, 639-640 [332 P.2d 408].)
[14] The conclusions which have been stated herein are not affected by a further contention of the appellant which remains for discussion. During the cross-examination of Mr. Pachmayr he testified that Bud Parr had been a personal friend of his since 1935, but he did not know in what business Parr was engaged. He further testified that Parr was also a client of his attorney, Mr. Henry. But Mr. Pachmayr did not know that Parr was interested in litigation between the state of California and the county of Orange. He did not know that Mr. Henry was interested in the outcome of that litigation. Thereafter, Mr. Pachmayr was asked: "Now did you know that Mr. Maggart was called as a witness by the Attorney General of California for a deposition on July 6 and 7, just two days before he was arrested on your complaint in this case?" The objection of the People was sustained after counsel for the appellant had stated that his purpose was "to show through this witness and others that two days after the Attorney General had called Mr. Maggart as a witness against Bud Parr that Mr. Pachmayr, Mr. Henry's client, had Mr. Maggart arrested and I am trying to develop this through this witness ... to show the bias of this witness and Mr. Henry and others because Mr. Maggart took the State's side and testified about Mr. Bud Parr's activities. ..." The ruling is alleged to have been erroneous.
In determining the merits of such contention, it is necessary to note certain testimony of Mr. Henry while under cross-examination. He testified that Bud Parr was his client but he did not know whether Parr was a stockholder in the American Marine Exploration Company. He did not know that the appellant "was a witness in a deposition taken in the litigation" between the county of Orange and the State of California or that he had mentioned Bud Parr or Orange County officials in the course of that deposition. He had never heard of the deposition although he had heard of the litigation. He was then asked the following question: "Have you heard that Mr. Maggart was a witness for the State?" The People voiced an objection; during the course of the argument with respect *106 thereto, statements were made as disclosed in the following excerpt from the record: "Mr. Kenny [counsel for the appellant Maggart]: I am trying to show bias of this witness ... that he had a client, a Mr. Parr ... and that Mr. Maggart took a position in the litigation antagonistic to his client, Mr. Parr, and that this witness' testimony is stimulated by a desire to get a conviction of Mr. Maggart; that Mr. Maggart could not be used in the trial to testify as effectively against Mr. Parr and others with whom he was associated and that is what I am trying to show. ... The Court: Well, I ruled that out yesterday but I have been looking at it since and I am going to overrule it. I ruled it out in Mr. Pachmayr's testimony. Mr. Kenny: I think that is right on Mr. Pachmayr. ..." The objection was overruled. The witness, Henry, answered: "Your Honor, to answer that, I must qualify. I have seen numerous reports and have heard that Mr. Maggart was subpoenaed for an appearance before the Grand Jury. Now whether that is an answer that I knew and whether that pertains to this action civilly or not, I do not know but that is the only knowledge that I have or had had concerning Mr. Maggart's appearances in any litigation."
The nature of the situation presented in this case is similar to that discussed in People v. Schmitt, 155 Cal. App. 2d 87 [317 P.2d 673], wherein the defendant sought to show that he was being persecuted for his scientific beliefs and that the American Cancer Society and others were conspiring to put him out of business. This court said, at page 104: "Certainly great latitude should be allowed in cross-examination for the purpose of showing the state of mind of a witness, his interest in the case and his bias and prejudice. However, the court may and should limit the cross-examination of witnesses in order to confine it within reasonable bounds and curtail digressions which serve no purpose as proof of any disputed material fact in the case. (People v. Lantz, 120 Cal. App. 2d 787, 791 [262 P.2d 19].) Since the witnesses denied knowing Mrs. Reed and denied having any control over the funds of the cancer society, we do not believe that the line of questioning proposed by defendant, if permitted, would have been advantageous to him, or that he suffered any disadvantage or prejudice through the rulings of the court." In the present case, it is difficult to see how the trial court's ruling, even if erroneous, caused any prejudice to the appellant in view of the testimony of Mr. Pachmayr which preceded the unanswered question and in the light of the testimony of Mr. Henry. *107
The judgment and the order denying the appellant's motion for a new trial are affirmed.
Shinn, P. J., and Bishop, J. pro tem.,  [fn. *] concurred.
"Agreement"
"This Agreement, made and entered into this 15th day of July, 1957, by and between Frank A. Pachmayr and Nanitta G. Pachmayr, hereinafter known as Trustees, and Frank A. Pachmayr and Nanitta G. Pachmayr, husband and wife, Karel A. H. Christian, and Roy Maggart, hereinafter known as Beneficiaries:"
"Witnesseth:"
"That Whereas, the Trustees and Karel A. H. Christian, as stated below, have purchased forty (40) acres of Valentine land scrip #E-272, issued under Act of Congress of April 5, 1872 (17 Stat. 649) and 4.99 acres of Lieu Selection Rights, under Act of Congress of July 1, 1898 (30 Stat. 620), and as such Trustees are entitled to select lands which are unoccupied, unappropriated public lands, non-mineral in character,"
"And Whereas, the Beneficiaries are desirous of having said scrip result in a selection of public lands,"
"Now Therefore, in consideration of the above, it is agreed as follows:"
"1. Said Valentine scrip shall be owned as follows: Frank A. Pachmayr and Nanitta G. Pachmayr 83-1/3% and Karel A. H. Christian 16- 2/3%; and the 4.99 acres of Lieu Selection Rights shall be owned as follows: Frank A. Pachmayr and Nanitta G. Pachmayr 66-2/3% and Karel A. H. Christian 33-1/3%; which said ownership shall exist until the Department of the Interior has approved in writing the land to be selected which the parties hereto designate as the following property located in the State of Oregon:"
Lot 1, Sec. 31, T. 12 S., R. 4 E., W. M., Oregon, consisting of 45.84 acres, more or less; or such other land or lands which Trustees may decide upon;
and after such written approval the beneficial interests in such land so approved shall be as follows: Frank A. Pachmayr and Nanitta G. Pachmayr, an undivided 18.62 acres, Karel A. H. Christian, an undivided 4.30 acres, and Roy Maggart, an undivided 22.92 acres;
"2. The Trustees shall be the applicants of the selection rights represented by said scrip and at all times shall have the unbridled right to operate and manage any and all real property acquired by reason of said scrip, with the further right at any time, in their sole discretion, to sell the same at a fair and reasonable price. Upon such sale and realization of the sales price thereof, Trustee shall disburse the said moneys to the Beneficiaries as their interest may appear and, thereupon, the said trust shall terminate.*"
*The italicized portion of paragraph 2 was in lieu of the following language in the document submitted by the appellant: "and thereafter shall represent said beneficiaries in the operation and management of the said acquired real property."
"3. Roy Maggart guarantees legal title of scrip to be good in Trustees; otherwise, cost price of $12,000.00 for Valentine scrip and $1,500.00 for the Lieu Selection Rights will be refunded, the cost being $10,000.00 to the Pachmayrs and $2,000.00 to Karel A. H. Christian for the Valentine Scrip, and $1,000.00 to the Pachmayrs and $500.00 to Karel A. H. Christian for the Lieu Selection Rights."
"In Witness Whereof, the parties have set their hands and seals the day and year first above written."
Trustees: Frank A. Pachmayr
Frank A. Pachmayr
Nanitta G. Pachmayr
Nanitta G. Pachmayr
Beneficiaries: Frank A. Pachmayr
Frank A. Pachmayr
Nanitta G. Pachmayr
Nanitta G. Pachmayr
Karel A. H. Christian
Karel A. H. Christian
Roy Maggart
Roy Maggart""
[Acknowledgment]
NOTES
[fn. 1]  1. The determination that the appellant was guilty was made on March 11, 1960. Judgment was pronounced on June 14, 1960. The notice of appeal states in part that the defendant "appeals from the judgment of conviction rendered against him on March 11, 1960." But "a notice of appeal will be liberally construed to permit a hearing on the merits and avoid a dismissal because of some technical defect or irregularity." (People v. Robinson, 43 Cal. 2d 143, at p. 145 [271 P.2d 872].) It is obvious that the appellant intended to appeal from the judgment; the mistake in the date will be disregarded. (Cf. Woods v. Kern County Mutual Bldg. & Loan Assn., 34 Cal. App. 2d 468, 473-474 [93 P.2d 837]; see also Verdier v. Verdier, 118 Cal. App. 2d 279, 283 [257 P.2d 723].) In any event, the contentions of the appellant herein are within the scope of the review under his appeal from the order denying his motion for a new trial. (See People v. Burch, 118 Cal. App. 2d 122, 125 [257 P.2d 44].)
[fn. 2]  2. In a publication of the United States Department of the Interior, Bureau of Land Management, which was received in evidence when offered by the appellant, it is said in part: "Scrip is a paper or document issued under authority of an act of Congress, or a right acquired under an act of Congress such as soldier's additional rights, which authorized or entitled the legal owner or holder thereof to acquire public lands of the United States. ... No scrip is issued today, nor has any scrip been issued since the Isaac Crow Scrip of 1907. ... Scrip has been sold by the owners thereof, and by the dealers in scrip, for various prices per acre. No fixed or definite value can be placed on a particular piece of scrip because of many variable factors, such as the current demand for scrip, the possible place of locating the scrip, etc. The sale of scrip is strictly a private transaction between the buyer and the seller, and the Government has no interest therein, nor any control over the sales or the prices paid."
[fn. 3]  3. E-272 was for 40 acres as was E-292.
[fn. 4]  4
[fn. *]  *. Assigned by Chairman of Judicial Council.

=== CASE 2210286 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:50.731879+00 ===

194 Cal. App. 2d 218 (1961)
STANLEY WAYNE EDRINGTON, Appellant,
v.
WHITEY STONG et al., Defendants; RAYMOND LAWRENCE FOWLER et al., Respondents.
Civ. No. 19266.
California Court of Appeals. First Dist., Div. One.
July 25, 1961.
Belli, Ashe & Gerry for Appellant.
Cooley, Crowley, Gaither, Godward, Castro & Huddleson, Augustus Castro, Charles S. Hoppin, Hoge, Fenton, Jones & Appel and Charles H. Page for Respondents.
HOYT, J. pro tem.  [fn. *]
Appellant, Stanley Wayne Edrington, brought an action for personal injuries and for damages to his truck received in a highway accident on December 14, 1956.
The accident happened about 3 a. m. one-half mile south of San Lucas, California. A lumber truck owned by respondent Stong, and being driven in a southerly direction by respondent Fowler, "jackknifed," crashed through a guard rail, and came to rest, on fire, in an open field. Lumber was scattered over the highway. Shortly thereafter a truck driven and owned by appellant Edrington approached the scene from the north. At the same time, a truck owned by plaintiff and respondent Tatum was approaching from the south. As Edrington rounded a curve, he observed the flames from Fowler's truck ahead of him and to the right. He then observed lumber on the highway ahead, but was unable to stop his truck before hitting the lumber. Meanwhile, the Tatum truck had nearly stopped about 300 feet short of Fowler's blazing truck. Edrington's truck went out of control when it hit the lumber on the highway. It veered into the oncoming traffic lane, continued down the highway for about 200 feet, then struck and took out approximately 80 feet of guard rail before striking Tatum's truck with an impact that demolished both trucks. It came to rest, headed northward, beyond Tatum's truck. After appellant Edrington began to apply his brakes he traveled 100 feet to the lumber, and went about 280 feet further before striking Tatum's truck.
Edrington sued Stong and Fowler; Tatum sued Edrington, Stong, and Fowler. The actions were consolidated for trial. Tatum recovered a judgment against Edrington, Stong and Fowler; Stong and Fowler obtained a verdict against Edrington. This appeal is by Edrington only.
[1] Appellant Edrington urges that the court committed *222 error in failing to instruct on res ipsa loquitur. The jury returned a verdict for plaintiff Tatum against defendants Edrington, Fowler and Stong; and for defendants Fowler and Stong, as against Edrington. The jury must have found, therefore, that Edrington, Fowler and Stong were each negligent; that their negligence concurrently caused Tatum's damage; and that Edrington was barred from recovery by his contributory negligence. Under the court's instructions, which the jury must be presumed to have understood and followed, no other explanation of the verdicts is possible. Appellant argues that the refusal of the requested instruction on res ipsa loquitur was prejudicial because, "if given, they might have led the jury to infer that Fowler was negligent." Since the jury did find Fowler negligent, no prejudice can have occurred. Edrington's recovery was barred by the jury's finding of contributory negligence and an additional instruction as to Fowler's negligence could not have altered the result. [2] When a defense verdict could only have been based on a finding that plaintiff was contributorily negligent, error in instructing on defendants' negligence does not warrant reversal. In Salvo v. Market Street Ry. Co., 116 Cal. App. 339, 345 [2 P.2d 585], the court said: "The instruction which advised the jury that it was not negligence on the part of the motorman to fail to sound a warning signal when the approach of the car was seen by appellant is not generally a correct statement of the law. But in view of the record which discloses that the jury found both parties negligent and returned their verdict on the basis of appellant's contributory negligence, we cannot say that this instruction was prejudicial." It follows that it is unnecessary to decide whether the res ipsa loquitur instructions should have been given.
[3] It is also contended that Stong's counsel was guilty of prejudicial misconduct. In his opening statement, counsel for Stong said that Edrington "testified under oath in the deposition that he observed it [the flames] a half a mile away and at that time he was only going forty-two miles an hour and that he was bringing his truck down to a stop--that he could certainly have brought his truck to a stop within a half a mile's distance or reduce it [to] such a speed that nothing would have bothered him in stopping when he saw the Haley [Tatum's] truck. To the contrary, that the evidence will show he came at an excessive rate of speed and that he did slide sideways and did lose control of his truck before he saw any lumber." The above statement was an error in that Edrington *223 did not so testify in his deposition, and there was no evidence that he lost control of his truck before he saw the lumber. The excessive speed is supported by the physical facts. The truck started to veer to the left and appellant had no control of it from the time it struck the lumber.
Appellant did not at the trial object to these statements, did not request a curative admonition, and did not cite respondent's counsel for misconduct. He may not now on appeal assign them as prejudicial misconduct. [4] "A party should not be permitted to remain quiet and take the chance of a favorable verdict, and then, if the verdict is unfavorable, raise the objection [of prejudicial misconduct] on appeal." (Aydlott v. Key System Transit Co., 104 Cal. App. 621, 628 [286 P. 456]. See also Lee v. Hackney, 110 Cal. App. 2d 444, 449 [242 P.2d 933].) Moreover, the court did instruct the jury that the statements of the attorneys are not evidence in the case unless made as admissions or stipulations.
[5a] Appellant testified as a part of his proof of damage, that for some time after the accident he could not drive a truck. Under these circumstances, it was competent to prove that his driver's license was suspended during portions of this time. [6] Evidence admissible for one purpose must be received even if improper for some other purpose. (Wagner v. Atchison etc. Ry. Co., 210 Cal. 526, 531 [292 P. 645]; Daggett v. Atchison T. & S.F. Ry. Co., 48 Cal. 2d 655, 660-661 [313 P.2d 557]; Johnson v. Matson Navigation Co., 163 Cal. App. 2d 336, 338 [329 P.2d 375].)
[5b] In this connection, Edrington testified that he was unable to work from December 1956, to about July 1957, because of his injuries. On cross-examination Edrington admitted that in April 1957, he was not allowed to drive a truck because his license was suspended. Appellant disclaimed knowledge of when or how long it was suspended. He was asked if it had been suspended since September 5, 1956, to which he replied, "I do not think it had, no." The portion of this evidence which relates to a time subsequent to the accident was relevant to the question of why appellant had not returned to work sooner. As to whether the license was suspended before the accident, appellant's answer was in the negative. This should, therefore, have resulted in no prejudice.
[7] On direct examination Edrington testified that as a result of the accident he was unable to drive a truck until August 1957. In connection with this testimony he was asked *224 on cross-examination whether he received a traffic citation in April 1957, and whether he was driving a truck at this time. His answer was that he received the citation but was not driving a truck. There was no objection to this question and the answer being in the negative no harm could have resulted.
[8] Edrington testified that he stopped driving in July 1958, because, "I lost a rear end on my truck going to Omaha." Stong's counsel asked immediately after this, "And just ahead of losing your rear end of the truck in July hadn't your license been suspended by the State of California as a negligent operator?" An objection by appellant was sustained to this question. Counsel for appellants recognize the general rule that the injurious effect of a prejudicial question can usually be cured by proper action by the trial court, but points out that this rule does not apply "... where the improper remarks, conduct and questions are of such a character and the purpose of their injection so apparent that they could not be erased from the minds of the jury by any form of admonition." In support of this qualification of the rule appellant cites Mangino v. Bonslett, 109 Cal. App. 205 [292 P. 1006]; Keena v. United Railroads, 197 Cal. 148 [239 P. 1061]; Squires v. Riffe, 211 Cal. 370 [295 P. 517]; McDonald v. Price, 80 Cal. App. 2d 150 [181 P.2d 115]; Gackstetter v. Market Street Ry. Co., 130 Cal. App. 316 [20 P.2d 93]. However, in each of the cases cited the conduct was much worse than in the instant case. Respondent was entitled to examine appellant as to whether it was actually the injury to his arm in the accident which kept him from working, or the lack of a driver's license. Respondent should not have added the last four words, "as a negligent operator" to his question. However, objection was sustained promptly, appellant did not answer the question, and the jury was admonished to disregard it. This should have prevented any prejudice.
[9] Respondent Stong's counsel asked Edrington whether his vehicle was insured against collision damage, to which he answered "yes." On direct examination Edrington had testified that he put in a salvage bid on his equipment, and bought it back. He then resold it at a small profit. Since Edrington was suing for property damage to his vehicle, respondents were entitled to show its salvage value to establish the amount of the loss. Counsel's question as to whether Edrington was insured for collision damage was a proper foundation for evidence that Edrington paid his insurance company $950 for *225 the salvage of his truck. In fact, appellant himself had already put in evidence concerning this insurance.
[10] On appellant's motion for a new trial, the trial court considered the instances of alleged misconduct on the part of respondent and concluded that a new trial should not be granted. "... the matter of prejudice was passed on by the trial court in denying a motion for a new trial. Although this conclusion of the trial court is not conclusive on appeal it is entitled to much consideration (Citti v. Bava, 204 Cal. 136, 140 [266 P. 954]) and his conclusion in the matter should not be disturbed unless it is plainly wrong." (Jonte v. Key System, 89 Cal. App. 2d 654, 659 [201 P.2d 562].)
The judgment is affirmed.
Tobriner, Acting P. J., and Duniway, J., concurred.
NOTES
[fn. *]  *. Assigned by Chairman of Judicial Council.

=== CASE 9737228 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:19:28.310259+00 ===

*412Justice SAYLOR,
dissenting.
Although a historical basis exists within the Court’s Article I, Section 7 jurisprudence for extending greater protection to communication than that provided under the First Amendment, such enhanced protection has previously been applied to forms of pure speech as opposed to the communicative aspects of conduct or symbolic speech. See, e.g., Commonwealth v. Tate, 495 Pa. 158, 168-171, 432 A.2d 1382, 1387-88 (1981). I am thus reluctant to accord the prior cases controlling significance where, as here, the regulation at issue facially applies to conduct. Moreover, I would give some weight to the stated purpose of the ordinance, namely, to combat the negative secondary effects of crime caused by the presence of adult entertainment establishments, and evaluate the ordinance under the intermediate scrutiny test articulated in United States v. O’Brien, 391 U.S. 367, 377, 88 S.Ct. 1673, 1679, 20 L.Ed.2d 672 (1968).
Nevertheless, as the majority notes, there are legitimate concerns with “unmentioned purposes” of regulations such as the one at issue here and the extent to which protected expression may be impacted. Rather than extending the strict scrutiny test to this area, however, I would adopt as a matter of our constitutional jurisprudence under Article I, Section 7, the more stringent application of the O’Brien test proposed by Mr. Justice Souter in his concurring opinion in City of Erie v. Pap’s A.M., 529 U.S. 277, 310-13, 120 S.Ct. 1382, 1402-04, 146 L.Ed.2d 265 (2000) (Souter, J., concurring), and require an evidentiary basis for the alleged secondary effects and the remedial effect of the proposed regulation. Such requirement, in my view, adequately accommodates the historic concerns of Article I, Section 7, and appropriately balances legitimate governmental interests with the points articulated by the majority. As the record in this case is insufficiently developed under this standard, I would remand to the trial court for an evidentiary hearing. Accord City of Erie v. Pap’s A.M., 529 U.S. at 310-13, 120 S.Ct. at 1402-04 (Souter, J., concurring).

=== CASE 2209465 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:39.924942+00 ===

593 N.W.2d 517 (1999)
STATE of Iowa, Appellee,
v.
David James O'MALLEY, Appellant.
No. 98-667.
Supreme Court of Iowa.
April 28, 1999.
Carter Stevens of Roberts & Stevens, P.L.C., Waterloo, for appellant.
Thomas J. Miller, Attorney General, David A. Ferree, Special Assistant Attorney General, Noel C. Hindt, Assistant Attorney General, Thomas J. Ferguson, County Attorney, and Anthony Janney, Assistant County Attorney, for appellee.
Considered by HARRIS, P.J., and CARTER, LAVORATO, NEUMAN, and CADY, JJ.
PER CURIAM.
The defendant, David O'Malley, was convicted of third-offense operating while intoxicated (OWI), in violation of Iowa Code section 321J.2 (1997). On appeal, he challenges only the sentencing court's order directing that his license be revoked for six years pursuant to section 321J.4(3)(a). He contends the district court erred in ordering the revocation because one of his prior OWI convictions is an out-of-state conviction, which, in his view, cannot count as a prior conviction for purposes of section 321J.4(3)(a). We find the district court properly ordered the revocation, and therefore affirm.
I. Facts and Prior Proceedings.
On June 6, 1997, the State charged the defendant by trial information with third-offense OWI. The predicate offenses used to enhance the level of the offense were a 1993 Iowa conviction and a 1994 Illinois conviction. The defendant entered a guilty plea to the offense, and did not challenge the use of the Illinois conviction. See Iowa Code § 321J.2(3) (out-of-state conviction under substantially similar statutes is counted as previous offense for charging purposes). On *518 January 13, 1998, the district court filed its judgment and sentencing order. Because this was defendant's third lifetime conviction, the court ordered the Iowa Department of Transportation to revoke his driving privileges for a period of six years. See Iowa Code § 321J.4(3)(a).
Thereafter, the defendant filed a motion to reconsider, asserting the court inadvertently ordered the six-year revocation. He believed that at the sentencing hearing the court determined the six-year revocation did not apply because the Illinois conviction could not be used as a basis for the revocation under section 321J.4(3)(a). Upon reconsideration, the court amended its sentencing order to delete the six-year revocation.
In response, the department communicated to the court its disagreement with the reconsideration. The district court again reconsidered the issue and reinstated the revocation. Although it found section 321J.4(3)(a) required three violations of section 321J.2 to trigger the six-year revocation and the Illinois conviction was not a section 321J.2 violation, it concluded the legislature intended to include out-of-state convictions under section 321J.4(3)(a). It relied upon our reasoning in an analogous situation in State v. Peterson, 347 N.W.2d 398 (Iowa 1984), in which we determined out-of-state convictions could be used as predicate offenses under the habitual offender statute.
The defendant appeals. He argues he does not have the three section 321J.2 convictions necessary to invoke the six-year license revocation of section 321J.4(3)(a) because the Illinois conviction is not a conviction under section 321J.2. He also contends Peterson is not applicable. The State asserts section 321J.4(3)(a), read in conjunction with section 321J.2(3), clearly indicates that out-of-state convictions can be used to revoke a defendant's license for six years. Alternatively, it asserts Peterson provides sound authority to uphold the district court decision.
II. Analysis.
Our review of the interpretation of section 321J.4(3)(a) is at law. See State ex rel. Lankford v. Allbee, 544 N.W.2d 639, 640 (Iowa 1996). Our ultimate goal in interpreting statutes is to determine legislative intent. State v. Schlemme, 301 N.W.2d 721, 723 (Iowa 1981). "Statutory construction is properly invoked when a statute contains such ambiguities or obscurities that reasonable minds may disagree or be uncertain as to their meaning." Id. We look to the object to be accomplished, the evils sought to be remedied, or the purpose to be subserved, and will employ a liberal construction which will best serve the statute's purpose rather than one which will defeat it. See Schmoldt v. Stokes, 275 N.W.2d 209, 210 (Iowa 1979).
The two statutes at issue are sections 321J.2(3) and 321J.4(3)(a). Section 321J.2(3)[1] provides in pertinent part:
For the purpose of determining if a violation charged is a second, third, or subsequent offense, ... convictions or the equivalent of deferred judgments for violations in any other states under statutes substantially corresponding to this section shall be counted as previous offenses. The courts shall judicially notice the statutes of other states which define offenses substantially equivalent to the one defined in this section and can therefore be considered corresponding statutes. Each previous violation on which conviction or deferral of judgment was entered prior to the date of the violation charged shall be considered and counted as a separate offense.
(Emphasis added.) Section 321J.4(3)(a) provides in part:
Upon a plea or verdict of guilty of a third or subsequent violation of section 321J.2, the court shall order the department to revoke the defendant's motor vehicle license... for a period of six years.
Under section 321J.2(3), an out-of-state OWI conviction, entered pursuant to statutes which substantially correspond to *519 Iowa Code chapter 321J, is counted as a previous offense of section 321J.2 for charging purposes. The defendant was convicted of third-offense OWI under section 321J.2, due, in part, to his Illinois conviction. He has never challenged the use of that out-of-state conviction to enhance the level of the offense, and voluntarily entered a guilty plea to the enhanced offense. Therefore, we assume that the Illinois conviction was premised upon similar statutes to our own and is equivalent to a previous offense of section 321J.2 pursuant to section 321J.2(3).
Section 321J.4(3)(a) requires a six-year revocation of a defendant's driver's license upon a plea or verdict of guilty of a third or subsequent violation of section 321J.2. The defendant's Illinois conviction is a violation of section 321J.2 via section 321J.2(3). We find no reason that the Illinois offense should not also be treated as a prior violation for purposes of applying section 321J.4(3)(a). There is no indication the legislature intended to treat an out-of-state conviction differently for charging purposes than for license revocation purposes. The enhanced punishment prescribed in Iowa Code section 321J.4(3)(a) is not directedcertainly not entirelyat the cumulative effect of successive affronts to Iowa law. The main focus is on the last offense here in Iowa. We think the legislature called for the enhancement because, notwithstanding ample experience, the accused simply was not getting the point. This interpretation promotes the legislative purpose of section 321J.4(3), which is to protect the public by removing repeat-offenders from our roadways. See State v. Blood, 360 N.W.2d 820, 822 (Iowa 1985).
III. Conclusion.
Because the out-of-state conviction constituted a previous offense under section 321J.2, it could be considered to revoke the defendant's driving privileges for six years under section 321J.4(3)(a). Although the district court rested its decision on a different ground, we may affirm the decision for any reason appearing in the record. See State v. McCowen, 297 N.W.2d 226, 227 (Iowa 1980). For the reasons we have already explained, we conclude the district court did not err in ordering the department to revoke the defendant's driving privileges.
AFFIRMED.
NOTES
[1]  Effective July 1, 1997, the legislature renumbered and amended § 321J.2(3), now § 321J.2(4), to specifically provide that its provisions apply to determine license revocations under Iowa Code chapter 321J. See Iowa Code § 321J.2(4) (Supp.1997). Because the amendment was not in effect at the time of the defendant's arrest and neither the defendant nor the State raised its applicability before the district court, we will not consider the amended provision.

=== CASE 9737229 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:19:35.71204+00 ===

HUDOCK, J.
¶ 1 This is an appeal by Leo Blumenthal and Anne B. Proffit, residuary beneficiaries and executors of the Estate of Bern-hard S. Blumenthal, deceased, from the order of the orphans’ court that dismissed their exceptions to the final accounting and confirmed the adjudication. For the rea*1282sons that follow, we affirm in part, reverse in part and remand for proceedings consistent with this memorandum.
¶ 2 The orphans’ court has ably summarized the facts and procedural history of this action, as well as the positions of the parties, as follows:
Bernhard S. Blumenthal, died February 22, 1998, leaving a Will dated August 16, 1995, which was duly probated. He was married to Ellin S. Blumenthal at the time of his death, and, was also survived by his two children, namely Leo D. Blumenthal and Anne B. Proffit. He was also survived by his only two grandchildren, namely Connie S. Blu-menthal and Wendy J. Blumenthal. His two said children are not children of his surviving spouse.
Letters Testamentary were granted to the accountants on March 5, 1998; proof of publication of the grant of same was submitted[.] ...
By the terms of his Will ... the testator gave the sum of Twenty-five Thousand Dollars ($25,000.00) to each of his grandchildren who should survive him for a period of thirty (30) days. He directed that his automobiles should be sold, and, that the proceeds of sale should be distributed as a part of the residue of his estate. He gave his household effects, works of art, furniture and jewelry to his wife, Ellin S. Blumen-thal, with a request that she give certain articles of his jewelry to his children, Leo D. Blumenthal and Anne B. Proffit. Items FOURTH and FIFTH of the Will read as follows:
“Cash Bequest to Wife
FOURTH: I give to my wife, EL-LIN S. BLUMENTHAL, pursuant to the provision of an Antenuptial Agreement entered into with her on April 29, 1974, a sum of money equal to the amount, if any, by which the fair market value (as finally determined for Federal Estate Tax purposes) of the assets comprising my gross estate, exclusive of insurance on my life and real or personal property owned by my wife and me as tenants by the entireties, shall be greater than Eight Hundred Thousand Dollars ($800,-000.00).
Distribution of Residue
FIFTH: I give the rest of my estate in equal shares to my son, LEO D. BLUMENTHAL, and my daughter, ANNE B. PROFFIT. If my son does not survive me for a period of thirty (30) days, however, his share shall be distributed per stirpes, to his issue who do so survive me. If my daughter does not so survive me her share shall be added to the share going to my son or his issue as the case may be.”
The testator appointed his children, Leo D. Blumenthal and Anne B. Proffit, to serve as executors of his estate.
It is stated that the family exemption has been claimed by Ellin S. Blumen-thal, surviving spouse of the testator, but, has not been allowed.
The instant “Interim” account has been filed in an effort to resolve certain questions arising out of Paragraph 5 of an “Antenuptial Agreement”, and, Items FOURTH and FIFTH of the decedent’s Will.
The testator and his surviving spouse, hereinafter referred to as “Bernhard” and “Ellin”, entered into an “Antenup-tial Agreement” which was dated April 29, 1974. Ellin signed the Agreement on April 26, 1974. Bernhard signed the Agreement on April 29, 1974. Ellin and Bernhard were married on May 1, 1974. They remained married, and, lived to*1283gether until Bernhard died on February-22, 1998.
Ellin has made a claim against Bern-hard’s estate under Subparagraph 5(b) of the aforementioned Antenuptial Agreement, which reads as follows:
“(b) Bernhard agrees that on or before his marriage to Ellin she shall be irrevocably designated as beneficiary of his life insurance policy which is identified as the Ward Foods policy on Exhibit “A”, which is attached to this Agreement, in the face amount of $200,000.00. If for any reason- that policy is not in force and payable to Ellin at the time of Bernhard’s death, Ellin shall be entitled to receive the sum of $200,000.00 from Bernhard’s estate in lieu of such insurance proceeds, * (See below)
Bernhard retired from Ward Foods in 1981, and chose not to pay the premiums on the “Ward Foods” policy after his retirement. Accordingly, the face amount of the “Ward Foods” policy dropped from $200,000.00 to $88,700.00. Ellin collected $38,700.00 on the ‘Ward Foods” Policy at Bernhard’s death. She now claims the sum of $161,300.00 from Bernhard’s estate under Subparagraph 5(b) of the Antenuptial Agreement. In addition, Ellin takes the position that her claim of $161,300.00 should be paid from the residue which passes to Bern-hard’s children under item FIFTH of the Will.
Bernhard’s children deny that Ellin is entitled to any monies from the estate under the language of Subparagraph 5(b) of the Antenuptial Agreement. In the alternative, they note that Ellin has collected $152,715.91 in life insurance proceeds under policies other than the “Ward Foods” policy, and, assert that she should not receive more than $8,584.09 from the estate [the difference between $200,000.00 and the sum of the Ward Foods policy and the $152,715.91 collected from the other existing life insurance policies]. Bernhard’s children also assert affirmative defenses of estop-pel, waiver and unjust enrichment. They assert that any ambiguity in Sub-paragraph 5(b) of the Antenuptial Agreement must be construed against Ellin because her attorney drew the Agreement. Finally, they take the position that any payment to Ellin, under Subparagraph 5(b) of the Agreement, should be paid out of the gift to Ellin under Item FOURTH of Bernhard’s Will, and, not out of the residue which passes to them under Item FIFTH of the Will.
Ellin’s four children, namely Eric Michelson, Gary Michelson, Mark Michelson and Larry Michelson, have made a claim against Bernhard’s estate under Subparagraph 5(d) of the aforementioned Antenuptial Agreement, which reads as follows:
“(d) In any calendar year in which Bernhard makes a gift or gifts to a child or grandchild of Bernhard, he shall also make gifts to each of Ellin’s sons. The gift or gifts made in any year to a child or grandchild of Bern-hard shall not exceed in amount or fair market value the gift or gifts to any child of Ellin in that year. Bern-hard’s obligation, under the provisions of this subparagraph (d) to make gifts to Ellin’s children shall continue only during such time or times as Bern-*1284hard and Ellin are married and living together.”
Bernhard made a total of $368,917.00 in gifts to his children and grandchildren during his marriage to Ellin. He made a total of $14,917.00 in gifts to Ellin’s children and grandchildren during his marriage to Ellin. Ellin’s children now claim the sum of $354,000.00 from Bern-hard’s estate under Subparagraph 5(d) of the Antenuptial Agreement. In addition, Ellin’s children take the position that their claim of $354,000.00 should be paid from the residue which passes to Bernhard’s children under Item FIFTH of the Wih.
Bernhard’s children deny that Ellin’s children are entitled to any monies from the estate under the language of Sub-paragraph 5(d) of the Antenuptial Agreement: because Bernhard and El-lin did not intend that EUin’s chüdren should be third party beneficiaries of the Agreement; and, because Ellin’s children have not proven the amount of gifts which Bernhard made to them. Bernhard’s children also assert affirmative defenses of estoppel, waiver, novation and unjust enrichment. They assert the bar of the statute of limitations. Finally, they take the position that any payment to Ellin’s children, under Sub-paragraph 5(d) of the Agreement, should be paid out of the gift to Ellin under Item FOURTH of Bernhard’s Will, and, not out of the residue which passes to Bernhard’s children under Item FIFTH of the Will.
As noted the parties take conflicting positions as to the source of payment of the claims which have been made by Ellin and her children. In this regard, it should be noted that item FOURTH of Bernhard’s Will is taken from Sub-paragraph 5(f) of the Antenuptial Agreement, which Subparagraph 5(f) reads as follows:
“(f) Bernhard agrees to give Ellin, by appropriate provision in his will, free of all inheritance and estate taxes, a sum of money equal to the amount, if any, by which the fair market value (as finally determined for federal estate tax purposes) of the assets comprising Bernhard’s gross estate, exclusive of insurance on Bern-hard’s life and real or personal property owned by Bernhard and Ellin jointly or as tenants by the entireties, shall be greater than $800,000.00[.]”
Bernhard’s children assert that their father wanted them to receive no less than $800,000.00 from his estate. They assert that said intention is reflected in Items FOURTH and FIFTH of the Will. And, they assert that any ambiguity in Item FOURTH of the Will must be construed against Ellin and her children because Ellin’s attorney drew the Ante-nuptial Agreement, and, because Sub-paragraph 5(f) of the Agreement is incorporated into Item FOURTH of the Will.
The claimants offered the testimony of Ellin, and, fifteen Exhibits in support of their claims. Bernhard’s children offered the testimony of Frank E. Hahn, Jr., Esquire, and Paul C. Heintz, Esquire, as well as five Exhibits, in defense against the claims.
Orphans’ Court Opinion, 1/23/01, at 2-7.
¶ 3 On January 23, 2001, the court filed its adjudication confirming the account. As part of its adjudication, the court found in favor of Ellin Blumenthal, Eric Michelson, Gary Michelson, Mark Michelson and Larry Michelson on their objections to the account. The court then awarded the sum of $161,300.00 from the estate to Ellin Blumenthal under subparagraph 5(b) of the antenuptial agreement and to her sons, $354,000.00 pursuant to subparagraph 5(d) *1285of the agreement. All payments were ordered to be paid out of the residue of the estate, which monies would have otherwise passed through the residuary estate to Bernhard’s children, Leo D. Blumenthal (Blumenthal) and Anne B. Proffit (Proffit). Blumenthal and Proffit, in their capacities as executors, filed exceptions to the court’s adjudication on February 12, 2001. On May 25, 2001, the orphans’ court dismissed the exceptions and confirmed the account absolutely. This timely appeal followed.1
¶ 4 On appeal, Blumenthal and Proffit present the following issues:
1. If a court holds that a contract or will provision is clear and unambiguous, does the court commit an error of law by relying upon extrinsic evidence to interpret the terms thereof?
2. If a court holds that a contract or will provision is clear and unambiguous, does the court commit an error of law by failing to give full effect to the plain, ordinary meaning of the words chosen to express the intent of the parties?
3. Where no provision of a contract or will provides a bequest to a claimant or creates a debt against the estate, does the court commit an error of law in ordering payment from the estate?
4. Where a will provides for a residuary estate of a specific amount, is it an error of law for the court to reduce that amount by permitting additional claims against that portion of the estate?
5. Is it an error of law for a court to permit payment of a claim barred by the statute of limitations?
6. If a court commits a plain error of law in its adjudication, may [Blu-menthal and Proffit] rely upon arguments regarding the court’s error to support reversal of the decision if such contentions were not raised prior to the adjudication?
Blumenthal and Proffit’s Brief at 3.2
¶ 5 Initially, we note our standard of review of the findings of an orphans’ court:
When reviewing a decree entered by the Orphans’ Court, this Court must determine whether the record is free from legal error and the court’s factual findings are supported by the evidence. Because the Orphans’ Court *1286sits as the fact-finder, it determines the credibility of the witnesses and, on review, we will not reverse its credibility determinations absent an abuse of the discretion.
In re Estate of Geniviva, [450 Pa.Super. 54, 675 A.2d 306, 310 (1996) ] (internal citations omitted). However, “we are not constrained to give the same deference to any resulting legal conclusions.” Id. “[Wjhere the rules of law on which the [court] relied are palpably wrong or clearly inapplicable, we will reverse the [court’s] decree.” Horner v. Horner, 719 A.2d 1101, 1103 (Pa.Super.1998) (discussing standard of review for courts of equity).
In re Estate of Harrison, 745 A.2d 676, 678-79 (Pa.Super.2000), appeal denied, 563 Pa. 646, 758 A.2d 1200 (2000).
¶ 6 Blumenthal and Proffit first argue that the orphans’ court erred in concluding that “Ellin Blumenthal is due the additional sum of $161,300 from the residuary estate to compensate her for the difference between the $200,000.00 face amount of the “Ward Foods’ life insurance policy on May 1, 1974 and the $38,700 face amount of the policy on the date of Bernhard’s death[.]” Blumenthal and Proffit’s Brief at 15. They contend that “the [c]ourt’s factual finding that the Ward Foods policy had not lapsed during Bernhard’s life, as well [as] the language of Subparagraph 5(b) of the antenuptial agreement” was irreconcilable with the court’s award to Ellin Blumenthal. Id. Moreover, Blumen-thal and Proffit assert that the court erred in reviewing and relying upon extrinsic evidence pertaining to the Ward Food policy provision when the court expressly found the language of the provision unambiguous.
¶ 7 Antenuptial agreements are contracts and should be interpreted using contract principles. Raiken v. Mellon, 399 Pa.Super. 192, 582 A.2d 11, 13 (1990). ‘When interpreting a prenuptial agreement, the court, as in dealing with an ordinary contract, must determine the intention of the parties. When the words of a contract are clear and unambiguous, the intent of the parties is to be discovered from the express language of the agreement.” Id. “The court must construe a contract as written and may not modify the plain meaning of the contract under the guise of interpretation.” Tuthill v. Tuthill, 763 A.2d 417, 420 (Pa.Super.2000), appeal denied, 565 Pa. 675, 775 A.2d 808 (2001). However, where an ambiguity exists, “the courts are free to construe the terms against the drafter and to consider extrinsic evidence in so doing.” Raiken, 582 A.2d at 13. If a contract “is fairly susceptible of different constructions and capable of being understood in more than one sense[,]” it will be found to be ambiguous. Tuthill, 763 A.2d at 420. “It is the function of the court to decide, as a matter of law, whether the contract terms are clear or ambiguous. The fact that the parties have different interpretations of a contract does not render the contract ambiguous.” Id. (citations omitted).
¶ 8 In the present case, the language of Subparagraph 5(b) provides that Ellin “shall be irrevocably designated as beneficiary of [Bernhard’s] life insurance policy which is identified as the Ward Foods policy on Exhibit ‘A’, which is attached to this Agreement, in the face amount of $200,000.00. If for any reason that policy is not in force and payable to Ellin at the time of Bernhard’s death, Ellin shall be entitled to receive the sum of $200,000.00 from Bernhard’s estate in lieu of such insurance proceeds[.]” This provision remained valid so long as “Ellin and Bern-hard [were] married and living together at the time of Bernhard’s death.” The paragraph further provided that if, during the *1287marriage and while living together, the insurance policy lapsed prior to Bernhard’s death, Bernhard then agreed to give to Ellin an inter vivos gift of $200,000.00 in cash or securities having that value. The orphans’ court determined that the language of this subparagraph “shows Bern-hard’s clear intent that Ellin should receive $200,000.00 from his estate if she did not receive that amount under the ‘Ward Foods’ policy.” Orphans’ Court Opinion, 1/23/01, at 15. The court thus interpreted the phrase, “that policy” to mean “a policy having a face amount of $200,000.00, which face amount is to be paid to Ellin from the estate if it is not paid to her under the policy.” Id. at 16. In arriving at this interpretation, the court relied upon extrinsic evidence, primarily in the form of testimony from Ellin that “Bernhard assured her that she would get $200,000.00 from that policy.” Id.
¶ 9 We disagree with the trial court that the language of subparagraph 5(b) is clear and unambiguous. We do agree, however, with the court’s interpretation of the language contained therein. The paragraph clearly provides that upon Bernhard’s death, Ellin is entitled to the proceeds of the Ward Foods policy as the designated beneficiary of the policy. The paragraph also provides for the contingency that, in the event the policy should lapse during Bernhard’s lifetime, Ellin would be compensated in the sum of $200,000.00. The policy further provides for the contingency that if the policy was not in force and payable at the time of Bernhard’s death, Ellin would be entitled to receive from Bernhard’s estate the sum of $200,000.00 in lieu of the insurance proceeds. The ambiguity arises in the interpretation of the phrase “that policy.” The words “that policy” could reasonably be interpreted to mean the Ward Foods policy, not a specific amount payable from the policy, or the phrase could be interpreted to mean a policy having a face amount of $200,000.00. Thus, because the terms of the paragraph were ambiguous, the orphans’ court’s reliance upon extrinsic evidence to aid in its interpretation of the phrase was proper.
¶ 10 The court considered and found credible Ellin Blumenthal’s testimony that Bernhard had assured her that she would receive $200,000.00 from that policy. The court further found the October 8, 1980, correspondence written by Bernhard and addressed to his attorney, Mr. Hahn, supported Ellin’s testimony. The correspondence provided that, notwithstanding other insurance policies in which Bernhard had named Ellin beneficiary, “[t]he fact that the ‘Ward’ policies won’t total 200,000, as agreed, [led him] to feel [he] should transfer 100,000 in some sort of security to Ellin.” The court, thus, reasoned that because “Bernhard recognized that he still had an obligation to pay $200,000.00[,]” after the face amount of the policy dropped to $38,700.00, and because he acknowledged that his other life insurance policies would not alleviate this obligation, Bernhard had intended, at the time of entering into the antenuptial agreement, that, in the event that the face amount of the policy fell below $200,000, upon his death, Ellin would be reimbursed the difference from his estate. Orphans’ Court Opinion, 1/23/01, at 16. Therefore, the court concluded that the phrase “that policy” meant a policy with a face value of $200,000.00. This interpretation is supported by the evidence presented at trial. Accordingly, we affirm the order of the court to the extent that it awarded Ellin Blumenthal the sum of $161,300.00 from the residuary estate as reimbursement for the difference between $200,000.00 and the $38,700.00 that she received from the Ward Foods policy.
*1288¶ 11 Next, Blumenthal and Proffit challenge the court’s award of the sum of $854,000.00 to Eric Michelson, Gary Michelson, Mark Michelson and Larry Michelson from the estate under subpara-graph 5(d) of the antenuptial agreement. In support of their position, they provide four arguments: (1) the plain language of subparagraph 5(d) of the antenuptial agreement provides that Bernhard’s obligation to equalize gifts to Ellin’s children was extinguished by his death; (2) no provision of the probated will contemplates a gift to Ellin’s children from the estate; (3) Bernhard’s purported representation to Ellin that gifts to her children would be equalized upon his death was not only improper extrinsic evidence but also cannot reasonably be interpreted as anything other than a revocable promise to provide for them in his will; and (4) it was an error of law for the court to fail to dismiss the Michelsons’ claims as barred by the statute of limitations.
¶ 12 As set forth above, subparagraph 5(d) of the antenuptial agreement provides that “[i]n any calendar year in which Bern-hard makes a gift or gifts to a child or grandchild of Bernhard, he shall also make gifts to each of Ellin’s sons. The gift or gifts made in any year to a child or grandchild of Bernhard shall not exceed in amount or fair market value the gift or gifts to any child of Ellin in that year.” With regard to the duration of the gift equalization, the agreement states, “Bern-hard’s obligation, under the provisions of this subparagraph (d) to make gifts to Ellin’s children shall continue only during such time or times as Bernhard and Ellin are married and living together.”
¶ 13 At trial, Ellin testified that she never told her children of the existence of the antenuptial agreement. She further testified that at the time the gifts were given to Bernhard’s children and grandchildren she was aware of the disparity and, as such, questioned Bernhard about the disparity. She stated that Bernhard told her “it would be far better if he invested the money, he controlled the money, because he knew that [her] children would get it on his death, when they would need it.” N.T., 10/10/00, 61. She explained that her children did not need it at that time because two of her children are physicians, one is a lawyer and the other one was in graduate school studying to become a psychologist. She further acknowledged that, based on Bernhard’s assurances, she did not feel it necessary to formally challenge the gift disparities. Blumenthal and Proffit’s counsel had earlier objected to the testimony of Ellin as to Bernhard’s alleged conversations with her on the basis of the Dead Man’s Statute. The court ruled that such testimony was admissible because the estate had taken Ellin’s deposition during the discovery process. N.T., 10/10/00, at 42. See generally, Perils v. Kuhns, 202 Pa.Super. 80, 195 A.2d 156 (1963). The orphans’ court thus relied exclusively on this evidence in its determination that the Michelsons, as third party beneficiaries to the antenuptial agreement; were entitled to recover $354,000.00 from the estate to compensate for gifts received by Bernhard’s family between the years 1980 and 1995. Specifically, in finding that the statute of limitations did not bar the Michelsons’ claims, the court reasoned:
During Bernhard’s lifetime, Ellin never told her children of the existence of the Antenuptial Agreement, or, of Bern-hard’s obligations to them under Sub-paragraph 5(d) of the Agreement. Bernhard told Ellin that her children would get their money on his death. Even if Ellin’s knowledge of the disparity in gifts is imputed to her children, her justifiable reliance upon Bernhard’s statements leads to the inescapable con-*1289elusion that his estate is estopped from asserting that the statute of limitations began to run in his lifetime. Since the statute of limitations did not begin to run until Bernhard’s death on February 22, 1998, Ellin’s children have brought their claim well within the applicable four year period of limitations on contract claims. See 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 5525.
Orphan’s Court Opinion, 1/28/01, at 21.
¶ 14 While Blumenthal and Proffit are correct in their assertions that the obligation of Bernhard to equalize gifts ceased upon his death and that the will did not provide for any bequests or devises to the Michelsons, the court was likewise correct that the Michelsons, as third-party beneficiaries, could file a claim against the estate for Bernhard’s breach of the ante-nuptial agreement. The court, however, erred in determining that Ellin’s testimony was sufficient to estop Blumenthal and Proffit from asserting the statute of limitations as a defense to the Michelsons’ claims.
¶ 15 It is well established that the rights of a donee beneficiary who obtains rights as a third-party beneficiary of a contract may arise no higher than the rights of the promisor to the contract. Zimnisky v. Zimnisky, 210 Pa.Super. 266, 231 A.2d 904, 907 (1967). See also Johnson v. Pennsylvania National Insurance Companies, 527 Pa. 504, 508, 594 A.2d 296, 299 (1991) (same); General Accident Insurance Company of America v. Parker, 445 Pa.Super. 300, 665 A.2d 502, 504 (1995) (same); Jewelcor Jewelers and Distributors, Inc. v. Corr, 373 Pa.Super. 536, 542 A.2d 72, 80 (1988) (same). Moreover, the third-party beneficiary is subject to the same limitations which may be asserted between the promisor and promisee. Id. Accordingly, because Ellin was aware of the disparity in gift giving at the time the gifts were made to Bernhard’s children and grandchildren, her decision to not enlighten her children to the provision until a time remote to the agreement does not toll the statute of limitations for the children.
¶ 16 In addition, Ellin’s testimony that she refrained from enforcing the gift equalization provision of the antenuptial agreement because Bernhard had told her that “it would be far better if he invested the money, ... because he knew that [her] children would get it on his death, when they would need it[,]” is insufficient to toll the statute of limitations. This one vague statement by Bernhard, without more, cannot reasonably be interpreted to have lulled Ellin into a false sense of security and to abandon her rights under the terms of the antenuptial agreement by inaction. As such, Ellin’s alleged reliance on this statement is unfounded. See Novelty Knitting Mills, Inc. v. Siskind, 500 Pa. 432, 436, 457 A.2d 502, 503-04 (1983) (providing that “[t]he two essential elements of equitable estoppel are inducement and justifiable rebanee on that inducement”; “the burden rests on the party asserting the estoppel to establish such estoppel by clear-, precise and unequivocal evidence”). Thus, Blumenthal and Proffit are not es-topped from asserting the statute of limitations. Consequently, because the end of each calendar year starts the running of the statute of limitations on the gifts received by Bernhard’s children and grandchildren in that year, we find that the Michelsons’ claims which are based on gifts prior to 1995 are barred by the statute of limitations. Any claims by the Mi-chelsons regarding a disparity in gift equalization in the year 1995 are viable since their claim was filed with the estate in July 1999. Therefore, we reverse the orphan’s court’s decision to the extent that it awarded monies to the Michelsons for giffc equalization in the years prior to 1995. We, however, affirm the court’s award for *1290the Michelsons’ claim for the disparity in gifts given in the calendar year 1995.
¶ 17 Next, we must determine out of which part of the estate Ellin’s award, compensating her for the depletion of the Ward Foods policy, and the Michelsons’ award for gift disparity shall be deducted. Blumenthal and Proffit contend that any awards should come out of Ellin’s bequest and not the residuary estate of which they are the named beneficiaries. In support of this position, they assert that paragraphs FOURTH and FIFTH of the will provides for a specific residuary amount of $800,000.00 to which they are guaranteed. In paragraph FOURTH of the will, Bern-hard gives to Ellin, “pursuant to the Ante-nuptial Agreement ... a sum of money equal to the amount ... by which the fair market value ... of the assets comprising [his] gross estate ... shall be greater than Eight Hundred Thousand Dollars ($800,-000.00).” In paragraph FIFTH, Bernhard gives the remainder of his estate in equal shares to Blumenthal and Proffit.
¶ 18 It is well settled that “ ‘[t]he will must control the distribution of the estate, and when [its] language is clear and explicit, [its] intention thus plainly expressed must be obeyed regardless of any apparent or real inequalities produced among the legatees-.’” In re Estate of Jones, 796 A.2d 1003, 1007 (Pa.Super.2002) (quoting In re Brown’s Estate, 208 Pa. 161, 163-64, 57 A. 360, 361 (1904)). Similarly, it is well established that when “ ‘a testator in his will gives specified property or a share of his estate in exact or substantial compliance with the terms of his obligations under an inter vivos property settlement [or antenuptial agreement] made with his wife, that wife is a creditor of his estate and not a legatee under his will.’ ” In re Estate of Zeitchick, 426 Pa. 171, 231 A.2d 131, 133 (1967) (quoting In re Estate of Pratt, 422 Pa. 446, 450, 221 A.2d 117, 119 (1966)). “[Consequently, the wife’s claim is superior to the claims of other legatees and devisees.” In re Estate of Mathay, 463 Pa. 486, 495, 345 A.2d 623, 628 (1975) (citing Estate of Zeitchick, supra ). Moreover, “property devised or bequeathed in a residuary clause or property disposed of in the form of a general bequest must abate before a specific devise or bequest in the payment of the decedents] debts, funeral expenses and the cost of administering the estate.” In re Woolett’s Estate, 461 Pa. 703, 707, 337 A.2d 837, 839 (1975). See also 20 Pa.C.S.A. § 3541 (entitled “Order of abatement”).
¶ 19 Applying these principles to the facts of the instant case, it is apparent that item FIFTH of the will is a residuary clause and that Blumenthal and Proffit’s devise is within that clause. Thus, their “devise was to be fulfilled only to the extent possible from assets remaining after satisfaction of all other non-residuary legacies, debts and administrative costs.” In re Estate of Mathay, 463 Pa. at 494, 345 A.2d at 627. Because Ellin’s devise, in paragraph FOURTH, originates in the antenuptial agreement, she is a creditor of the estate and not a legatee whose devise cannot be abated in payment of other creditors. Thus, the orphans’ court properly awarded payment of the claims from the residuary estate.
¶ 20 In summary, we affirm the adjudication of the court to the extent that it awarded Ellin the sum of $161,300.00 from the residuary estate. We reverse the orphans’ court’s decision to the extent that it awarded monies to the Michelsons for gift equalization in the years prior to 1995. We, however, affirm the court’s award for the Michelsons’ claim for the disparity in gifts given in the calendar year 1995 and its deduction of this amount from the residuary estate. '
*1291¶ 21 Order affirmed in part, reversed in part, and matter remanded for proceedings consistent with this memorandum. Jurisdiction relinquished.
¶ 22 KLEIN, J., files a Concurring and Dissenting Opinion.
provided that Ellin and Bernhard are married and living together at the time of Bernhard's death. If Ellin and Bernhard are married and living together at the time this insurance policy may lapse, for whatever reason, prior to Bernhard’s death, Bernhard agrees to give to Ellin $200,000.00 in cash or securities having that value.”
. We note that while Blumenthal and Proffit did not have standing to file their exceptions and appeal in their capacities as co-executors, this error is not fatal in that they do have standing to take such actions in their individual capacities as affected beneficiaries of the estate. See In re Cheponis’ Estate, 148 Pa.Super. 515, 25 A.2d 779, 781 (1942) (providing that where orphans’ court dismissed an executrix’s exceptions to a claim by the widow for the widow's exemption and to the widow’s election to take against her deceased husband’s will, the executrix as such had no standing to take an appeal from the order of dismissal as affecting distribution of the estate, but where it appeared that the executrix was also a legatee, she would be permitted to continue the appeal on her individual capacity if she were affected by the bar).
. While Blumenthal and Proffit have set forth six issues in their statement of questions on appeal, these issues can be grouped into three claims: (1) the orphan's court erred in awarding Ellin Blumenthal $161,300.00 from the estate pursuant to subparagraph 5(b) of the antenuptial agreement; (2) the court erred in awarding the sum of $354,000.00 to Eric Michelson, Gary Michelson, Mark Michelson and Larry Michelson from the estate under subparagraph 5(d) of the antenuptial agreement; and (3) because the will provides for a residuary estate of a specific amount, it was error of law for the court to reduce that amount by ordering Ellin and her sons be paid from the residuary estate. We will address these claims accordingly.

=== CASE 9737230 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:19:35.716867+00 ===

KLEIN, J.,
Concurring and Dissenting.
¶ 1 I join in that part of the majority’s decision that affirms the orphans’ court order awarding Ellin the difference from the reduced face value of the life insurance policy issued by Ward Foods. I disagree, however, with the majority’s determination of the Michaelsons’ claims.
¶ 2 The orphans’ court had determined that Ellin’s testimony was sufficient to es-top Blumenthal and Proffit from asserting the statute of limitations as a defense to the Michaelsons’ claims. I agree with this. I also agree with the majority’s recognition that the Michaelsons, as intended third-party beneficiaries, are limited to Ellin’s rights under the contract. What the majority fails to recognize, however, is that Ellin’s testimony established that there was a modification of the agreement, that is, that “equalization” would occur at Bern-hard’s death. Clearly, Ellin knew of the disparity and was reassured by her husband that, relative to her children, he was in the better position to invest the money and that “[her] children would get it on his death, when they would need it.” N.T., 10/10/00, p. 61. What the majority also fails to recognize is that its decision implies that Ellin should have pursued legal action during Bernhard’s lifetime, while they were married, to enforce Bernhard’s obligation under the antenuptial agreement. It is certainly not the policy of this Commonwealth to encourage intra-family litigation, and neither should it be a byproduct of this decision.
¶ 3 Ellin’s deposition testimony establishes that she never told her children of Bernhard’s obligation under the agreement, that when she talked with Bernhard about the disparity in gifts, he reassured her that her children would receive the money upon his death. Relying upon that, and likely upon her desire to avoid splintering her family, Ellin’s reliance was justified.
¶4 This is not to suggest that Bern-hard’s statement was intended to deceive Ellin. The law of estoppel does not require a fraud in the strictest sense. Our Supreme Court stated in Schwab v. Cornell, 306 Pa. 536, 160 A. 449, 450 (1932):
If the circumstances are such that a man’s eyes should have been open to what is occurring, then the statute begins to run from the time when he could have seen, but if by concealment, through fraud or otherwise, a screen has been erected by his adversary which effectually obscures the view of what has happened, the statute remains quiescent until actual knowledge arises, (emphasis in original).
I would find, therefore, as the orphans’ court did, that the estate was estopped from asserting that the statute of limitation commencing in Bernhard’s lifetime. See Nesbitt v. Erie Coach Co., 416 Pa. 89, 204 A.2d 473 (1964) (in order for doctrine of estoppel to be applicable in bar of statute of limitations, it suffices that fraud in the broadest sense, including an unintentional deception, be proved; the criterion is not the intention of the party estopped, but the natural effect upon the other party).
¶ 5 Bernhard died in February, 1998; Ellin’s children brought their claim against the estate well within the four year limitation period. 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 5525. I would affirm the orphans’ court order.

=== CASE 2209482 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:40.083359+00 ===

267 Cal.App.2d 672 (1968)
ERWIN BONDI, Plaintiff and Appellant,
v.
JEWELS BY EDWAR, LTD. et al., Defendants and Respondents.
California Court of Appeals.
Nov. 26, 1968.
Lippitt & Billet and Alan G. Buckner for Plaintiff and Appellant.
Morris D. Coppersmith and Frederick J. Glassman for Defendants and Respondents.
FRAMPTON, J. pro tem.  [fn. *]
preliminary Statement
Plaintiff filed his complaint herein on January 13, 1967. The named defendants, on January 26, 1967, filed a general and special demurrer to each cause of action of the complaint and a motion to strike. Upon hearing, the court sustained the general demurrer as to each of the three causes of action set forth in the complaint, with 10 days leave to amend. The *674 special demurrers and motion to strike were placed off calendar. On March 20, 1967, plaintiff having failed to amend his complaint, defendants moved for an order dismissing the action pursuant to subdivision 3 of section 581 of the Code of Civil Procedure. The motion was granted and the written order of dismissal was signed and filed the same day. The appeal is from the judgment (order dismissing the action).
Plaintiff's complaint sets forth three causes of action. The facts set forth in the first cause of action are in substance as follows: Defendant, Jewels by Edwar, Ltd., hereinafter Jewels, is a California corporation; defendants, Edward Kalpakian, hereinafter Edward, and Lucy Kalpakian, hereinafter Lucy, were officers and directors of Jewels and acted as agents of the corporation within the scope of the agency; Edward and Lucy dominated and controlled Jewels and its officers, as well as its business affairs and property; unity of interest and ownership exists between Edward, Lucy and Jewels; the individuality and separateness of said individuals and the corporation has ceased, and the corporation is a mere shell which said individuals have used and now use as a conduit of their personal business; Jewels was created and is being continued pursuant to a fraudulent plan conceived by Edward and Lucy whereby the income of the corporation is diverted to them; adherence to the fiction of the corporate entity would sanction a fraud against plaintiff. In October 1965, Edward asked plaintiff to close the latter's jewelsmith business and become a manager and jewelsmith for Jewels; after repeated requests and on or about January 3, 1966, plaintiff and defendant Edward, acting on behalf of his codefendants, entered into an oral agreement of employment under which defendants agreed to employ and to continue to employ plaintiff for so long as plaintiff should satisfactorily perform as manager of and jewelsmith for Jewels, and under which plaintiff agreed to close his manufacturing jewelsmith business upon entering the employ of defendants.
The complaint, in the first cause of action, alleged further, in substance, that under the terms of the agreement plaintiff was to receive $250 per week plus 2 percent of the yearly gross income of Jewels; that on or about January 10, 1966, pursuant to the oral agreement, plaintiff closed his manufacturing jewelsmith business and entered the employ of Jewels; thereafter plaintiff duly performed all of the conditions and obligations of the oral agreement on his part to be performed; he has at all times been and he is now ready and willing to *675 perform the contract and has offered to perform the same; on about February 1, 1966, defendants and each of them refused, and have since refused to allow plaintiff to perform his duties under the contract and have refused to pay plaintiff thereunder; but for the unlawful termination of plaintiff's employment by defendants, he could have and would have continued satisfactorily to perform his duties for a period of five years. Damages were claimed as a result of the wrongful breach of the oral agreement.
The second cause of action incorporates the first 14 paragraphs of the first cause of action, and alleges in substance that in October 1965, the defendants knew that plaintiff was engaged in business in the City of Beverly Hills as a manufacturing jewelsmith; on about January 3, 1966, Edward, acting on behalf of his codefendants, promised plaintiff that if he would close his business and enter the employ of Jewels, the defendants would employ and continue to employ plaintiff so long as he should satisfactorily perform the duties of manager of and jewelsmith for Jewels; at the time said promise was made the defendants did not intend to perform it; such promise was made by defendants with the intent on their part to induce plaintiff to close his business and thereby remove him as a competitor of defendants and to induce plaintiff to enter into and remain in their employ until such time as they should, at their will, elect to terminate such employment; plaintiff was ignorant of the defendants' intention not to perform their promise, and could not, by the exercise of reasonable diligence, have discovered their secret intent; in reliance on said promise, plaintiff was induced to, and did close his business and enter the employ of defendants; had plaintiff known the true facts, he would not have so acted; defendants failed to abide by their promise and on or about February 1, 1966, terminated plaintiff, and have refused to allow plaintiff to perform his duties and have refused to pay him under the agreement; plaintiff satisfactorily performed his duties under the contract of employment; but for the unlawful termination, plaintiff could have and would have continued to satisfactorily perform his duties under the contract; subsequent to February 1, 1966, plaintiff learned that the acts of the defendants hereinabove alleged were part of a fraudulent scheme devised by them and utilized on several occasions for the purpose of eliminating other jewelsmith businesses operating in competition with the corporate defendant. Actual damages, *676 damages under section 972 of the Labor Code, and punitive damages were sought.
The third cause of action incorporates certain allegations of the first cause of action and paragraph 34 of the second cause of action, which relates to the alleged fraudulent scheme on the part of defendants used on several occasions to eliminate jewelsmith businesses operating in competition with the corporate defendant, and alleges that from September 1965 to January 1966, the defendants entered into a conspiracy to prevent the competition of plaintiff's jewelsmith business with that of the corporate defendant; the purpose of the conspiracy was to eliminate plaintiff as a competitor of the corporate defendant in the manufacture and sale of fine jewelry; plaintiff was eliminated as a competitor on or about January 10, 1966, when at the special instance and request of the defendants he closed his business to enter the employ of the corporate defendant; defendants' acts in entering into the oral contract of employment with plaintiff were in furtherance of their common scheme and plan to prevent competition of plaintiff's jewelsmith business with that of the corporate defendant in violation of section 16700 et seq. of the Business and Professions Code (the Cartwright Act). Treble damages were sought.
[1] Upon demurrer, the material allegations of a pleading are assumed to be true. (39 Cal.Jur.2d, Pleading,  155.)
[2a] The first cause of action pleads an oral contract of employment for so long as the plaintiff should satisfactorily perform his duties. [3] When one who has been employed for such time as his services are satisfactory is discharged, it is well settled that the employer must act in good faith, and where there is evidence tending to show that the discharge was due to reasons other than dissatisfaction with the services the question is one for the jury. (Petermann v. International Brotherhood of Teamsters, 174 Cal.App.2d 184, 189 [344 P.2d 25].) [2b] The complaint alleges that the plaintiff satisfactorily performed all of the obligations under the contract on his part to be performed, and that the defendants wrongfully discharged him. This allegation raises a question of fact as to whether the discharge of the plaintiff was proper or improper, and such question may not be determined as a matter of law upon demurrer. Such an oral agreement is not subject to the defense of the statute of frauds as contained in section 1624, subdivision 1, of the Civil Code, (Mangini v. Wolfschmidt, Ltd., 192 Cal.App.2d 64, 75-76 [13 Cal.Rptr. 503]; Hollywood *677 Motion Picture Equipment Co. v. Furer, 16 Cal.2d 184, 187 [105 P.2d 299].) The complaint as to the first cause of action was sufficient, and it was error to sustain the general demurrer thereto.
[4] The trial court sustained the general demurrer to the second cause of action on the erroneous assumption that the contract pleaded in the first cause of action was terminable at the will of the defendants.  [fn. 2] This cause of action is predicated upon a promise made without any intention of performing it. A complaint seeking to allege such a cause of action should contain facts showing the following essential elements: (1) A promise made regarding a material fact; (2) the absence of intent on the part of the defendant at the time the promise was made to perform it; (3) intent on the part of the defendant to induce action by plaintiff; (4) justifiable reliance on the promise by plaintiff; (5) nonperformance of the promise by the defendant, and (6) injury and damage proximately resulting to the plaintiff. (2 Chadbourn, Grossman and Van Alstyne, California Pleading,  991.) Gauging the complaint as to the second cause of action by these standards, we are of the opinion that it is sufficient to state a cause of action sounding in fraud.
[5] Section 16702 of the Business and Professions Code provides that "As used in this chapter 'person' or 'persons' includes corporations, firms, partnerships and associations existing under or authorized by the laws of this State or any other State, or any foreign country."
Section 16720 of the Business and Professions Code defines a trust as "... a combination of capital, skill or acts by two or more persons for any of the following purposes. ..." The proscribed purposes are set forth in the section which generally prohibits combinations in restraint of trade.
Plaintiff's third cause of action, in summary, alleges that the defendant corporation entered into a combination or conspiracy with its officers and directors, who were at all times acting as the agents of the corporate defendant, to prevent the competition of the plaintiff's jewelsmith business with that of the corporate defendant.plaintiff has cited no authority and we have been unable to find authority in this jurisdiction which would support the plaintiff's position that the combination or conspiracy alleged to have existed between the corporation *678 and its officers, acting as the agents of the corporate defendant, would constitute a combination in restraint of trade proscribed by the Cartwright Act. The courts of other jurisdictions having laws prohibiting combinations in restraint of trade, which laws contain language similar to that contained in section 16720 of the Business and Professions Code, have held that a combination means a concert of action by individuals or entities maintaining separate and independent interests. It is also held that an individual acting alone through his agent or a corporation acting alone through its officers is not a combination in restraint of trade proscribed by the statute. The rationale of these decisions is that the acts of the agents or employees in the operation of the business are the acts of the principal. (See Udelavitz v. Idaho Junk House (1928) 46 Idaho 441 [268 P. 15]; Light Corrugated Box Corp. v. Southern Kraft Corp. (N.Y. 1940) 20 N.Y.S.2d 66; Blaustein v. Pan American Petroleum & Transport Co. (N.Y. 1940) 174 Misc. 601 [21 N.Y.S.2d 651, 728], modified other grounds 263 App.Div. 97 [31 N.Y.S.2d 934], affirmed 293 N.Y. 281 [56 N.E.2d 705], motion denied 293 N.Y. 763 [57 N.E.2d 841]; Padgitt v. Lone Star Gas Co. (Tex. Civ.App. 1948) 213 S.W.2d 133, 136; State v. Fairbanks-Morse & Co. (Tex. Civ. App. 1951) 246 S.W.2d 647, 658-659.)
We are of the opinion that the language of section 16720 of the Business and Professions Code contemplates concert of action by separate individuals or entities maintaining separate and independent interests, and that the third cause of action in plaintiff's complaint charges only wrongful conduct on the part of a single entity acting through its officers and agents.
The judgment is reversed with directions to overrule the demurrer to the first and second causes of action and to allow the defendants a reasonable time in which to answer.
Ford, P. J., and Moss, J., concurred.
NOTES
[fn. *]  *. Retired judge of the superior court sitting under assignment by the Chairman of the Judicial Council.
[fn. 2]  2. The minutes of the trial court, in ruling upon the demurrer, contain the following remark: "How can plaintiff be injured, even if all elements of fraud are present, if defendant had the right to terminate him."

=== CASE 9737231 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:19:37.344154+00 ===

PRESIDING JUSTICE SULLIVAN delivered the opinion of the court: Defendant appeals from a directed verdict for plaintiff in an action brought under section 2 of the Federal Safety Appliance Act (45 U.S.C.A. sec. 2 (1970)), to recover for injuries sustained during the course of his employment, contending that the trial court erred in (a) excluding certain evidence which contradicted plaintiff’s version of the occurrence and rebutted his claim that his injuries proximately resulted from violations of the Act, and (b) directing a verdict for plaintiff on the issue of liability. The record discloses that on the night of the occurrence plaintiff was working as a switchman at defendant’s South Yard in Lansing, Michigan. It was the responsibility of plaintiff and the other members of the night crew to separate a train of 40 or 50 cars they had transported from another yard, switch the cars from the main track and then connect them to various outgoing trains located on tracks 1 through 8. Plaintiff testified that he was in the vicinity of tracks 3 and 4 at about 12:30 a.m. when the conductor, Mark Wise, instructed him to couple the cars on track 2. He gave a signal to the brakeman on the engine — which was located on the southern end of track 2 facing north — to “tie in,” i.e., push the cars together, but as he walked toward the train he noticed that two cars, located approximately five to six car lengths (350 to 360 feet) north of the engine, had not coupled. In order to effect a coupling, it is necessary that the drawbars on both cars be centered and that at least one knuckle be open. Under normal circumstances, when the cars are pushed together the knuckles close and a pin drops, locking the coupling mechanism. Inspecting the two cars which had not coupled, he observed that they were about 4 to 5 feet apart, that both drawbars were centered and that both knuckles were open. Stepping off the track, which curved eastward, he signalled the engineer, who was seated on the right (east) side of the engine to push ahead so as to join the cars. Upon impact, he heard the clash of the metal making contact, which was normal, but saw that the cars had still failed to couple. He signalled the engineer to pull the southern car — the B & O boxcar — back about 30 feet, the minimum distance prescribed by the safety rules, and then stepped onto the track between the cars to determine the cause of the failed coupling. At that point, he saw that the drawbar on the north — or “B” — end of the B & O boxcar had skewed about one foot to the east and that the knuckle was still open. The drawbar on the north car was centered but the knuckle thereon was closed. He walked back to the B & O car and, placing his left foot inside the rail and his right foot outside, he took hold of the drawbar and attempted, by exerting force with his shoulder, to realign it. As he did so, his right knee “popped,” and he felt a very sharp pain. He then fell to the ground, striking his knee on the top of the rail. A few seconds later Wise arrived, and after helping him off the track, Wise also attempted to adjust the drawbar but was unable to move it. Wise then assisted him to the yardmaster’s tower where he (plaintiff) completed an accident report after which he was transported to the hospital by the trainmaster. After a lengthy examination regarding the nature and extent of his injuries and the treatment he received therefor, plaintiff stated, on cross-examination, that although the engine traveled only a few feet at about two miles per hour, based on his experience, the jolting of the cars when the slack between them ran out was sufficient, due to the amount of weight being pushed forward, to have caused the drawbar to move off center; and that the knuckle on the north car may have closed when it was struck by the drawbar that had become misaligned. Mark Wise testified that he was near tracks 7 and 8 when he noticed that plaintiff was having difficulty making a coupling on track 2. Plaintiff had signalled the engine forward, but when the cars did not join, he stepped eastward so as to direct the engineer to back up and then went between them. As he (Wise) walked across the tracks to assist, he saw that the drawbar on the B-end of the southern car was off center to the east and that plaintiff was attempting to push it back on center when he fell between the rails. After assisting plaintiff off the track, he attempted to adjust the drawbar so as to complete the coupling procedure on that track, but it would not move. He then helped plaintiff walk to the yardmaster’s tower, after which he returned to work. Although the B & 0 remained on track 2 that night, he saw that it had been pushed further down the track by the time he left the yard at about 5 a.m. In support of its theory that the injury did not happen as plaintiff claimed, defendant sought to introduce the testimony of three of its employees who inspected the B & 0 car at about 10 o’clock in the morning after the accident and found the drawbar in question to be in good working order. Specifically, Trainmaster John Schall testified that he went home after taking plaintiff to the hospital for treatment and did not return to the yard until about 3 a.m. He reported back to work several hours later and, together with the yardmaster and the equipment foreman, performed an inspection of the B & 0 boxcar and the area around it. He tested the drawbars on both ends of the car and found that they both moved freely from side to side. He also observed that there were no fresh scratch marks on the rusted surface of the metal as would likely be present if the knuckle had slid over the bar or the drawbars had crossed during an attempted coupling. The B & 0 car was still on track 2 at the time of the inspection and, to his knowledge, had not been repaired or modified since the accident. On cross-examination, Schall acknowledged that the inspection took place approximately 9V2 horn's after plaintiff was injured; that he did not know whether the car had been moved during that time because he was not at the yard; that although at the time of the inspection it was situated about three to four car lengths north of the office at the southern end of track 2, he could not recall which way it was facing; and that while he considered the absence of scratch marks significant, he had not noted that finding in his report. In an evidence deposition, John Workman, the equipment foreman, testified that when he inspected the drawbars on both ends of the B & 0 car involved they worked normally and could be moved from side to side with one hand. On cross-examination, Workman stated that it was his understanding that plaintiff was injured adjusting the drawbar on the A-end of the ear, which at the time of the inspection was facing north on track 2; that although some cars are equipped with self-centering drawbars which automatically realign when uncoupled, the ones on the B & 0 car in question were not of that type; and that when he first saw it, the drawbar was off center. Yardmaster Stanley Michel testified that at the time of the inspection, the B-end of the car was facing south on track 2 and that the drawbar thereon moved from left to right with no difficulty. Plaintiff then renewed his motion, made prior to trial, to exclude all evidence relating to the inspection, arguing that it was (a) incompetent because defendant had failed to establish that the condition of the car and the coupling mechanism thereon was the same as at the time of the accident, maintaining that, in fact, the testimony of Workman and Michel established that the car had been turned in the opposite direction on the track, and (b) immaterial because under the Safety Appliance Act, a railroad is absolutely liable for injuries resulting from the failure of a coupler to couple automatically regardless of whether it functioned properly before or after the accident. After argument by counsel, the. trial court granted plaintiff’s motion to exclude the post-accident inspection evidence, specifically ruling that such evidence is not material in an action alleging a violation of the Safety Appliance Act but also noting that defendant had not conclusively established in its offer of proof that the location and condition of the car had not been changed in the 9V2 hours between the accident and the inspection. John Schall then testified that assuming that the two cars involved were 4 to 5 feet apart on a straight track with their drawbars centered and knuckles open and that the engine reached a speed of no more than two miles per hour before being signalled to stop, it was his opinion, based on his experience in having inspected thousands of railroad cars, that the drawbars would not “bypass” or become misaligned as plaintiff had described even if they failed to couple but, instead, would either bounce back apart or remain together, but unlocked. Schall also stated, however, that the force of the weight of the engine together with that of the four or five cars in front of it could knock a drawbar out of alignment depending on the rate of acceleration and braking, and he acknowledged that drawbars are supposed to couple automatically. Following Schall’s testimony, the trial court granted plaintiff’s motion for a directed verdict on the issue of liability, submitted the question of damages to the jury, and subsequently entered judgment of $1.1 million for plaintiff on the jury’s verdict. Defendant’s motion for a new trial was denied, and this appeal followed. Opinion  Defendant first contends that the trial court erred in excluding all evidence it sought to introduce relating to the post-accident inspection of the railroad car at issue. We disagree Initially, we note that section 2 of the Safety Appliance Act, upon which this action is predicated, provides: “It shall be unlawful for any common carrier engaged in interstate commerce by railroad to haul or permit to be hauled or used on its line any car used in moving interstate traffic not equipped with couplers coupling automatically by impact, and which can be uncoupled without the necessity of men going between the ends of the cars.” 45 U.S.C.A. sec. 2 (1970). This section was enacted to obviate the risks to employees by reason of their going between railroad cars to manually couple and uncouple them. (United Transportation Union v. Lewis (D.C. Cir. 1983), 711 F.2d 233; McGee v. Burlington Northern, Inc. (1977), 174 Mont. 466, 571 P.2d 784.) Courts interpreting section 2 have uniformly held that the failure of cars to couple automatically because of a misaligned drawbar constitutes a violation of the Safety Appliance Act and renders the carrier absolutely liable for injuries resulting therefrom (Reynolds v. Alton & Southern Ry. Co. (1983), 115 Ill. App. 3d 88, 450 N.E.2d 402; Buskirk v. Burlington Northern, Inc. (1982), 103 Ill. App. 3d 414, 431 N.E.2d 410; Coleman v. Burlington Northern, Inc. (8th Cir. 1982), 681 F.2d 542; Kansas City Southern Ry. Co. v. Cagle (10th Cir. 1955) 229 F.2d 12, cert. denied (1956), 351 U.S. 908, 100 L. Ed. 1443, 76 S. Ct. 697), without regard to negligence and irrespective of whether the coupler functioned properly before and/or after the malfunction, the duty being an absolute one requiring proper performance on the occasion in question (Affolder v. New York, Chicago & St. Louis R.R. Co. (1949), 339 U.S. 96, 94 L. Ed. 683, 70 S. Ct. 509; O’Donnell v. Elgin, Joliet & Eastern Ry. Co. (1949), 338 U.S. 384, 94 L. Ed. 187, 70 S. Ct. 200; Carter v. Atlanta & St. Andrews Bay Ry. Co. (1949), 338 U.S. 430, 94 L. Ed. 236, 70 S. Ct. 226; Coleman v. Burlington Northern, Inc. (8th Cir. 1982), 681 F.2d 542; see also Atlantic Coast Line R.R. Co. v. Dunivant (1956), 265 Ala. 420, 91 So. 2d 670; Atlantic Coast Line R.R. Co. v. Brown (1956), 93 Ga. 805, 92 S.E.2d 874). Thus, to recover under section 2, a plaintiff need only establish that his injuries were caused, in whole or in part, by a violation thereof (Crane v. Cedar Rapids & Iowa City Ry. Co. (1969), 395 U.S. 164, 23 L. Ed. 2d 176, 89 S. Ct. 1706; Metcalfe v. Atchison, Topeka & Santa Fe Ry. Co. (10th Cir. 1974), 491 F.2d 892; McCalley v. Seaboard Coast Line R.R. Co. (1972), 265 So. 2d 11; see also Reynolds v. Alton & Southern Ry. Co. (1983), 115 Ill. App. 3d 88, 450 N.E.2d 402; Buskirk v. Burlington Northern, Inc. (1982), 103 Ill. App. 3d 414, 431 N.E.2d 410; Bardo v. Chicago River & Indiana R.R. Co. (1967), 87 Ill. App. 2d 445, 231 N.E.2d 713). It is plaintiff’s position that these authorities hold that where, as here, an action is based solely on an alleged violation of section 2 and the complaint contains no allegations of negligence, post-accident inspection evidence showing that the coupler functioned properly on a later occasion is immaterial and, therefore, inadmissible. Defendant disagrees, asserting that these cases stand for the limited proposition, based upon the factual situations involved, that post-occurrence inspection evidence is immaterial where it is uncontested that plaintiff’s injuries resulted from a violation of the Safety Appliance Act, and that they do not preclude the introduction of such evidence to attack the plaintiff’s credibility and to rebut allegations (1) that a violation occurred, i.e., that the cars failed to couple, and/or (2) that his injuries were proximately caused thereby, where, as in this case, those assertions were contested. Relying primarily on Lewis v. Baker (2nd Cir. 1975), 526 F.2d 470, Texas & Pacific Ry. Co. v. Griffith (5th Cir. 1959), 265 F.2d 489, and Texas & New Orleans R.R. Co. v. Underhill (5th Cir. 1956), 234 F.2d 620, defendant maintains that the testimony of Schall, Workman and Michel, that the drawbar moved freely and operated properly when they tested it at 10 a.m., and Schall’s additional testimony as to the absence of fresh scratch marks on the rusted surface, which, he opined, would likely be present had the drawbar been misaligned when it made contact with the other car, was admissible to challenge plaintiff’s credibility and to refute his allegations that the drawbar malfunctioned, that the cars failed to couple and, hence, that his injuries were proximately caused by a violation of section 2 of the Safety Appliance Act. Initially, we note that while it is true that post-accident inspection evidence was allowed in both Lewis and Griffith, neither action was predicated on section 2 of the Safety Appliance Act relating to automatic couplers as is the case at bar. Rather, recovery was sought under section 51 of the Federal Employers’ Liability Act (FELA) (45 U.S.C.A. sec. 51 (1970)), dealing with the liability of common carriers for negligence resulting in injuries to their employees, and under section 11 of the Safety Appliance Act (45 U.S.C.A. sec. 11 (1970)), which imposes liability upon railroads for failure to equip their cars with “efficient hand brakes.” Because a finding as to inefficiency requires a showing either that the brake was defective or that it failed to function properly when operated by the brakeman in the normal and customary manner (Selby v. Chesapeake & Ohio Ry. Co. (1956), 11 Ill. App. 2d 395, 137 N.E.2d 657; Woods v. New York, Chicago & St. Louis R.R. Co. (1949), 339 Ill. App. 132, 88 N.E.2d 740, cert. denied (1950), 340 U.S. 831, 95 L. Ed. 610, 71 S. Ct. 48), post-accident inspection evidence offered to show the absence of defects or that the malfunction occurred as a result of improper operation of the brake by the brakeman is both relevant and admissible in actions brought under section 51 of FELA. As recognized in both Lewis and Griffith, however, where there is a failure of the brake owing to some unexplained malfunction, under the Supreme Court holdings in Affolder v. New York, Chicago & St. Louis R.R. Co. (1949), 339 U.S. 96, 94 L. Ed. 683, 70 S. Ct. 509, O’Donnell v. Elgin, Joliet & Eastern Ry. Co. (1949), 338 U.S. 384, 94 L. Ed. 187, 70 S. Ct. 200, and Carter v. Atlantic & St. Andrews Bay Ry. Co. (1949), 38 U.S. 430, 94 L. Ed. 236, 70 S. Ct. 226, evidence that it functioned properly before and after the accident is immaterial. (Lewis v. Baker (2nd Cir. 1975), 526 F.2d 470, 475; Texas & Pacific Ry. Co. v. Griffith (5th Cir. 1959), 265 F.2d 489, 492-93.) Thus, while Lewis and Griffith do not contradict defendant’s argument here, neither do they resolve, or even consider the issue raised thereby. The only one of the three cases cited by defendant involving an alleged violation of section 2 was Texas & New Orleans R.R. Co. v. Underhill (5th Cir. 1956), 234 F.2d 620. There, plaintiff alleged that he was injured when the boxcar on which he was riding uncoupled from another car and struck the engine, causing him to be thrown from it. In support of its defense theory that the sole proximate cause of plaintiff’s injuries was his failure to make a proper coupling in the first instance, the railroad introduced evidence that when inspected after the accident the couplers in question functioned properly. Although the evidence was admitted at trial1 the court thereafter instructed the jury that since the action was not brought on the theory of negligence, the condition of the couplers before and after the accident was immaterial, the only questions being whether or not the cars had uncoupled and, if so, whether such uncoupling was the direct and proximate cause of plaintiff’s injuries. The railroad appealed, arguing that the instruction improperly removed the inspection evidence from the jury’s consideration. The Underhill court agreed, stating: “As the real question for the jury’s determination was whether a coupling was in fact made, it could not be the law that the evidence offered by the defendant to the effect that the couplers were not defective immediately after the event was immaterial. It was quite material in enabling the jury to decide whether the plaintiff’s testimony that he had made a good coupling was credible. It was, of course, immaterial as bearing on the question of negligence, which is undoubtedly the thought the trial court sought to express. On the question whether a good coupling had in fact been made, it was quite material. The jury was called on to determine whether the plaintiff had placed the parts in proper alignment for effecting a coupling. He testified that he had done so. From the proof that, when properly aligned, they functioned properly immediately after the accident, the jury could infer that he had not done so.” (234 F.2d 620, 623.) Defendant argues, in essence, that here, as in Underhill, the post-occurrence inspection evidence was improperly withheld from the jurors, positing that they could have inferred, from the testimony of its employees who tested the drawbar after the accident and found both its appearance and performance to be normal, that the cars did not fail to couple and/or that the drawbar did not stick, as he claimed, and that, therefore, his injuries could not have been caused by a violation of the Safety Appliance Act. Plaintiff urges us to disregard Underhill, asserting that it constitutes a misreading of the Safety Appliance Act and the cases interpreting it and was, in fact, declared to be “not controlling” in its own circuit by the Court of Appeals in Texas & Pacific Ry. Co. v. Griffith (5th Cir. 1959), 265 F.2d 489—one of the two other cases relied upon by defendant as support for the same proposition. He argues that in any event, the facts in Underhill render it inapplicable to the case at bar. Preliminarily, we note that while the Griffith court did indeed state, in a footnote, that it did not regard Underhill as controlling, it did not declare that the reasoning therein was unsound and, in fact, did not include any explanation for its determination. From a reading of the case, however, we think it reasonable to infer that the court did not consider Underhill controlling for either or both of two reasons. First, as noted earlier, Underhill was brought under section 2 of the Safety Appliance Act dealing with automatic couplers whereas Griffith was brought under section 11 requiring that railroads equip their cars with “efficient” hand brakes. Second, because Underhill was reversed on other grounds, the Griffith court’s discussion of the propriety of the instruction at issue was not essential to the opinion, but was merely inserted, as the court itself explained, as guidance for the trial court upon remand.  Moreover, we do not agree with plaintiff’s assertion that the reasoning expressed in Underhill reflects a misinterpretation of the law or that it is contrary to the weight of the authority. As stated previously, the cases hold that to recover under section 2 of the Safety Appliance Act, it is necessary for the plaintiff to show not only that a violation occurred, but also that there was a causal connection between the violation and the subsequent injury;2 and while a finding of a violation is not dependent upon proof that the coupler was defective — but only that it failed to couple — where the plaintiff specifically alleges that such a defect was the cause of his injuries, evidence that an immediate inspection disclosed that the appliance was not defective is material, not to show a lack of negligence by the railroad, but on the issue of causation, i.e., whether the injury occurred as plaintiff claimed it had. (See Bardo v. Chicago River & Indiana R.R. Co. (1967), 87 Ill. App. 2d 445, 231 N.E.2d 713; Coleman v. Burlington Northern, Inc. (8th Cir. 1982), 681 F.2d 542; McGee v. Burlington Northern, Inc. (1977), 174 Mont. 466, 571 P.2d 784.) As stated in Dobson v. Grand Trunk Western R.R. Co. (7th Cir. 1957), 248 F.2d 545, 547, “even if there was a defective appliance, if the jury found from the evidence that the defect *** had no causal connection with the accident, then, the jury could not properly find a verdict in plaintiff’s favor insofar as the Safety Appliance Act was concerned.”  Here, since the theory of plaintiff’s case was, in essence, that the drawbar was somehow defective in that it became stuck in a misaligned position after the unsuccessful coupling maneuver and that it was during his attempt to dislodge the bar from that position that he was injured, we see no reason why competent evidence offered for the limited purpose of rebutting plaintiff’s testimony as to how his injury occurred should not be presented for jury consideration. We emphasize, however, that while such evidence may be material to the issue of causation, it must nevertheless be competent in the first instance. In our view, the post-occurrence inspection evidence offered by defendant in this case lacked proper foundation and was, therefore, properly excluded. A review of the record reveals that in addition to his argument that the inspection findings were irrelevant under the Safety Appliance Act, plaintiff also argued that defendant had failed to show that the condition of the boxcars and the coupling mechanisms thereon were the same at the time of the inspection as they were at the time of the accident, DVa hours earlier, and that for this reason the evidence lacked any probative value. Defendant suggests that it was precluded from presenting such evidence, asserting in its brief that “when [its] trial counsel specifically sought a ruling on any foundation point (so that any foundation lack perceived by the plaintiff could be cured), the trial court made it clear that he would allow the evidence over a foundation objection [but] adhered to his ruling that regardless of foundation, the evidence was still inadmissible because of the [Safety Appliance Act] cases cited in plaintiff’s motion in limine,” and that “plaintiff’s foundation argument is therefore contrary to the trial court’s own ruling on that issue.” In our opinion, this argument of plaintiff is wholly without merit. First, we do not agree that the trial court “made it clear” that it would allow the inspection evidence over plaintiff’s foundation objection had it not found it to be inadmissible under the Safety Appliance Act. To the contrary, the court expressed numerous concerns during the discussion on defendant’s offer of proof regarding the absence of evidence showing that the conditions on track 2, including the location and condition of the cars, had not changed during the 91/2 hour interval between the accident and the inspection, commenting, at one point with reference to that interval, “a lot of questions arise in my mind.” In any event, it is fundamental that since the question on review is the propriety of the judgment rather than the reasons given therefor, the judgment may be sustained on any grounds warranted, whether or not they were the ones relied upon by the trial court. Material Service Corp. v. Department of Revenue (1983), 98 Ill. 2d 382, 457 N.E.2d 9.  “The general rule is that testimony based on an inspection of a physical object, after an incident involving that object resulted in injury, is not competent unless evidence is also introduced showing that the conditions inspected had remained unchanged in the interim.” Escher v. Norfolk & Western Ry. Co. (1979), 77 Ill. App. 3d 967, 972, 397 N.E.2d 8, 13, aff'd (1980), 82 Ill 2d 110, 411 N.E.2d 864; Canales v. Dominick’s Finer Foods, Inc. (1981), 92 Ill. App. 3d 773, 416 N.E.2d 303; Check v. Avco Lycoming Division (1977), 56 Ill. App. 3d 217, 371 N.E.2d 994. Here, in its best light, the testimony of defendant’s employees is inconclusive as to whether the conditions on track 2 had been altered during the 9V2 hours at issue and, in fact, two of defendant’s witnesses actually contradict its assertion that there had been no changes in the location and condition of the boxcar during that time. For example, although John Schall, the trainmaster, testified that when he inspected the boxcar at 10 a.m., it was situated about four to five car lengths from the south end of track 2 and, to his knowledge, had not been moved since the accident, he acknowledged on cross-examination that he could not be certain it was not moved since he was not at the yard the night before, having stopped there only briefly to transport plaintiff to and from the hospital, after which he went home — at about 3:30 a.m.; and that between 3:30 and 9 a.m. when he reported back to work, the night crewmen had finished their shift and two new day crews had already begun working. In contrast, Wise testified that while the B & O car remained on track 2 the remainder of that night, he noticed, when he left the yard at about 5 a.m., that it had been pushed further down the track from where it had been earlier. Schall also stated that the car was not coupled to any others at the time of the inspection and that he did not recall which way it was facing. On the other hand, both Stanley Michel and John Workman, who each confirmed Schall’s testimony that the boxcar was uncoupled when they inspected it, did recall which direction the car was facing. Stanley Michel testified that the B-end was facing south; Workman testified that it was his understanding that plaintiff was injured adjusting the A-end of the car and that, as indicated in the written report he prepared immediately after the inspection, the A-end was facing north. Although defendant now argues that “plaintiff’s testimony about which end of the car was involved in the occurrence was dependent solely on his own credibility,” we note (1) that at no time prior to this appeal did it challenge that testimony, which was fully corroborated by Wise and consistent with the information he (plaintiff) related to Schall shortly after the accident — that he was injured on the north end of the car — and with Workman’s report which, contrary to his testimony, indicates that the B-end was facing north; and (2) that regardless of which direction the car was facing at the time of the accident, the fact remains that defendant failed to establish that it was in the same position when it was inspected. Indeed, notwithstanding the numerous contradictions in the evidence on the point, the testimony of defendant’s employees that the B & 0 car was not attached to any other cars at 10 a.m. in itself indicates that an uncoupling procedure had taken place on track 2 sometime after the accident and tends to refute defendant’s assertion that the cars were not “switched” or moved until later that afternoon. Defendant further argues, however, that plaintiff’s foundation objection does not apply to Schall’s testimony regarding the absence of fresh scratch marks on the drawbar because such marks “would not have been affected by the short passage of time or any movement of the car.” We cannot agree, noting first that despite the purported significance of this finding, Schall conceded on cross-examination that he had not noted it in the report prepared at the time of the accident. Moreover, in our view, the probative value of this finding was negated by the absence of any evidence in the record as to whether the car to which the B & 0 car had allegedly failed to couple had also been inspected and what, if any, damage was or would likely have been caused to it upon impact with the B & 0 coupling mechanism. We therefore conclude that the proffered evidence relating to the post-occurrence inspection was inadmissible as lacking in proper foundation.  Defendant’s final contention is that even absent this evidence the remainder of Schall’s testimony was sufficient to rebut plaintiff’s version of the occurrence and to preclude the direction of the verdict in his favor. On direct examination, Schall testified, in response to a hypothetical question, that assuming that the two cars involved were 4 to 5 feet apart on a straight track with the drawbars centered and the knuckles open and that the engine reached a speed of no more than two miles per hour in pushing the cars together, it was his opinion that the drawbars would not “bypass” or become misaligned even if they failed to couple but, rather, would bounce back apart or remain together, but unlocked. We note, however, that according to plaintiff’s uncontroverted testimony, in order to be seen by the engineer, it was necessary for him to step a few feet away from the track because it curved eastward. Thus, contrary to defendant’s assertion, Schall’s opinion was not based on “the facts of the accident as presented by plaintiff’s own testimony.” Furthermore, nothing in Schall’s response to the hypothetical question contradicted that portion of plaintiff’s testimony in which he stated that in his experience coupling other cars, a “jolting” action caused by the enormous weight of the cars being pushed together can cause the drawbar to skew off center; and, in fact, Schall acknowledged on cross-examination that depending on the rate of acceleration and braking, the force of such weight could push the drawbar out of alignment. In sum, we do not believe that the evidence presented by defendant, even when viewed in its most favorable light, was sufficient to rebut plaintiff’s version of the occurrence or to create a question of fact for the jury and, therefore, conclude that the trial court properly directed a verdict for plaintiff. For the reasons stated, the judgment of the trial court is affirmed. Affirmed. LORENZ and PINCHAM, JJ., concur.  The opinion does not indicate whether plaintiff objected to the evidence or otherwise moved to exclude it.   Although the term “proximate cause” is frequently used in FELA and Safety Appliance Act cases, the Supreme Court has held that a plaintiff is not required to prove common law proximate causation, but only that his injuries resulted in whole or in part from a violation of the Act. Crane v. Cedar Rapids & Iowa City R.R. Co. (1969), 395 U.S. 164, 23 L. Ed. 2d 176, 89 S. Ct. 1706; see also McCalley v. Seaboard Coast Line R.R. Co. (1972), 265 So. 2d 11.

=== CASE 9737232 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:19:37.350532+00 ===

SUPPLEMENTAL OPINION ON DENIAL OF REHEARING PRESIDING JUSTICE SULLIVAN delivered the opinion of the court:  In its petition for rehearing, defendant posits that this court improperly acted as trier of fact by weighing the evidence and judging the credibility of the witnesses — accepting as true the testimony of plaintiff’s witnesses and rejecting that of the witnesses it presented. Specifically defendant argues that the fact that we found inconsistencies and contradictions “in the evidence” in itself requires reversal of this case and submission of the questions raised thereby to the jury. A closer reading of the opinion indicates, however, that, in the passages to which defendant refers, the focus of our discussion was not on inconsistencies and contradictions between the testimony of the witnesses but, rather, on the fact that, even taken as true, the testimony of its own witnesses was “in its best light *** inconclusive” and indeed, actually contradicted “its assertion,” “its theory” and “its contentions” that the conditions on the track remained unchanged during the time between the accident and the inspection. It is this matter — the absence of a sufficient foundation for the admission of the inspection evidence — which was the basis of our decision and which defendant has failed to squarely meet or overcome. For example, defendant states that its witnesses “all placed the car at the same approximate location” at the time of the occurrence and the inspection. We do not believe, however, that merely placing the car in “approximately” the same location provided sufficient foundation for admission of the inspection evidence, particularly where there was testimony that the car had been “pushed further down the track” sometime between the accident and 5 a.m. Moreover, defendant’s own witnesses also stated that at the time of the inspection, the subject car was standing alone on the track uncoupled from the cars which, it is undisputed, were present on the track at the time of the accident. This alone establishes that conditions on the track had been altered and, specifically, that the subject car had been • involved in an uncoupling process. Defendant’s argument that even plaintiff’s witness stated that “when he left the yard at 5 a.m. he was the last one to touch the coupler” is clearly without merit since the very fact that he left the yard establishes that he could not know if anyone else touched the coupler between the time of his departure and its 9 a.m. inspection. Neither do we find the photographs submitted by defendant as a supplement to the record and marked by it to show where the boxcar at issue was located, and to indicate that the track is straight at that location, to be dispositive of the issue since, inter alia, they are not photographs of the accident scene itself but merely depict that portion of the yard where the accident occurred and were introduced for demonstrative purposes and as testimonial aids for the witnesses. Furthermore, whether or not the track was straight or curved at the point where the boxcar was situated, while significant to plaintiff’s version of the occurrence, does not directly bear upon the fundamental issue of whether a proper foundation was laid for introduction of the inspection results. In summary, defendant is, in effect, asking this court to do exactly what it claims we may not do, i.e., weigh the evidence and make a determination that the numerous inconsistencies it incorrectly states we found therein require reversal and remandment. However, it is our view that there is nothing in the petition which either fills in the foundational gaps in its own evidence to show what it failed to show at trial, i.e., that neither the car nor the coupler had been altered, repaired, moved or in any other way changed from the condition they had been in at the time of the accident or overcomes the contrary evidence — presented, as we stated, through its own witnesses as well as plaintiffs’ — that activity had occurred on the track with respect to the subject car when all the other cars, including the one to which the subject car was previously coupled and the one with which it had failed to couple, had been moved from the track at some time between the accident and the inspection. We therefore adhere to our previous findings and deny the petition for rehearing. Petition for rehearing denied. LORENZ and PEMCHAM, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9737233 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:19:40.324524+00 ===

CATHELL, Judge.
Nancy R. Stansbury, petitioner, petitions this Court to reverse the decision of the Court of Special Appeals. A zoning administrator in Anne Arundel County had recommended that Ms. Stansbury be granted certain variances in respect to property owned by her in the subdivision of Pleasant Plains in Anne Arundel County, a parcel of property that petitioner had reserved to herself in the re-subdivision of a larger tract. The Anne Arundel County Board of Appeals (hereafter “Board”) had not accepted the recommendation, and had denied the variances, allegedly, on the sole ground that the claimed hardships there alleged had been self-created. Upon petition for judicial review, the circuit court had remanded the matter to the Board, directing that the Board reconsider the application considering all of the variance factors contained in the county zoning code. Randy Q. Jones, and others, respondents, appealed that decision to the Court of Special Appeals. That court reversed the decision of the Circuit Court for Anne Arundel County, holding that the hardship alleged in the case was self-created and that no other factors needed to be considered in the denial of the application.
*176The crux of the controversy at the circuit court level was, whether the Board, during an administrative appeal, should have declined to accept the recommendation of the administrative hearing officer on the sole ground that the need for the variances had been self-created by the petitioner. The Court of Special Appeals, agreeing with the Board that the hardship had been self-created, stated:
“First, it was thought by the circuit court that judicial review of the Board’s decision was governed by the APA. Second, a recent trilogy of Court of Appeals’ decisions involving critical' area variances were read by the circuit court as requiring the Board to address each variance standard. Third, the circuit court failed to recognize the fundamental nature of the principle that self-created hardships cannot justify the grant of a variance, including the concept that a self-created hardship is not merely another variance standard, but is instead an essential part of the unwarranted hardship standard that is the primary determining factor that must be met by a variance applicant.”
In her brief in this Court, petitioner presents four questions:
“1. Is the examination of just one factor alone, specifically the concept of self-created hardship, sufficient basis to deny a critical area variance request for a legally buildable lot, thereby precluding the use of the other factors in determining whether unwarranted hardship1 exists?
“2. Did the Court of Special Appeals and Anne Arundel County Board of Appeals commit reversible error by *177failing to examine all statutory factors in determining whether unwarranted hardship exists when denying a variance in the Chesapeake Bay Critical Area for a legally buildable lot created with Anne Arundel County approval?
“3. Was the Circuit Court correct in remanding the case to the Board of Appeals for further consideration because the Board of Appeals’ administrative decision incorrectly applied the law and lacked adequate findings of fact?
“4. Did the Anne Arundel County Board of Appeals effect a ‘taking’ of Petitioner’s property without just compensation by denying Petitioner the requested variances on a legally buildable lot?”2
*178Because, in the first instance, we shall hold that the facts of this case do not support the intermediate appellate court’s judgment or the Board’s findings that the hardship in this case was self-created, we shall not resolve, although we may discuss, the other issues presented. Accordingly, we shall reverse the decision of the Court of Special Appeals, and direct it to affirm the circuit court’s judgment remanding the case to the Board to reconsider the petitioner’s request for variances utilizing all of the applicable requirements of the statute. The hardship or practical difficulty here, if any, arising out of the re-subdivision, was not self-created within the meaning of the local ordinance. When a property owner does that which is permitted, or required, under a zoning code, that property owner is not necessarily creating an automatic hardship for purposes of the self-created hardship standards of variance provisions.
Facts
In 1927, petitioner’s predecessor in title, by recording a plat in the County land records, created a subdivision known as Plat No. 2 Pleasant Plains. At that time, as far as the record reflects, there was no subdivision ordinance existing in Anne Arundel County. At sometime prior to, and/or in 1986, Anne Arundel County passed an ordinance or ordinances which resulted in the lots in the then Pleasant Plains subdivision, becoming substandard size lots, i.e., non-conforming lots. The County, in 1986, enacted statutory provisions that the parties refer to as the Antiquated Lots Law (now codified in Article 28, Section 2-101 of the Anne Arundel County Code (“Code”)). Charlene Morgan, the zoning analyst for the Anne Arundel County Department of Planning and Code Enforcement, testified before the Board as to the effect of the 1986 statutory provisions on the property here at issue:
*179“I’m going to go briefly through the history the way the county has reviewed it.
“In 1924 Pleasant Plains was platted. The lots were required to [be] create[d], by recorded plat prior to the county code. The lots were considered legally created antiquated lots.
“In 1986 the Antiquated Lots Law was passed which was bill 86-86, and is now codified into article 28, section 2-101C. This required antiquated lots that are in ownership to be combined to meet lot area requirement.
“In 1986 planning and rezoning — dated March 6th, 1986, explained to the owner of this property that they needed to be combined in regard to bill 86-86.
“In 1991 an Administrative plat was signed on July 31st and the plat combined legal Pleasant Plains lots into larger building sites.
“On these particular sites a reserved parcel label was assigned to the subject lot until it could pass a perk test. To my definition, and my understanding a reserved parcel means that this lot is on hold until it can meet that criteria.
“At this time the subject site does not lose it’s underlying legal status. And as a — indicates that there are many legal lots that are not filling it, and that in the county view the words ‘parcel and lot’ are used interchangeably and don’t indicate whether the lot is legal or buildable.
“In 1997 waiver 5867 was signed on September 11th and that waiver deems a lot buildable because the lot perked at that time.
“The waiver is the subdivision approval that is needed that is referenced on the plat that waives the need to rerecord the administrative plat. Typically an administrative plat is not recorded unless there’s a change in the lot lines. In this case all that was deemed done [by] removing the term ‘reserved parcel’ and making it a lot.
“This site has always been, and is now a subject of permit review of critical area criteria and Health Department requirements, as is any legal lot. And any legal lot has the *180right to apply for a variance during the building permit review.”
The 1986 Antiquated Lots Law, as now codified as aforesaid, provides in relevant part that:
“(a) In this section ‘properly recorded lot’ means a lot:
(1) of record and created in compliance with the zoning and subdivision regulations in effect when the lot was created; or
(2) recorded on or before June 30,1952.
“(b) Notwithstanding the minimum lot area and width requirements of this title, a residential dwelling may be constructed on a properly recorded lot if:
(1) the lot was. not in the same ownership as an adjacent unimproved lot on January 1,1987; and
(2) the other requirements of this article are met.
“(c) ... [A] residential dwelling may not be constructed on a properly recorded lot that was in the same ownership as one or more adjacent unimproved lots on January 1, 1987 ... unless the adjacent lots are combined to meet or come as close as possible to meeting the area requirements for the residential district in which the lot is located.”3
*181Anne Arundel County Variance Standards
Sections 11-102.1(c) of the Anne Arundel County Code, applicable to the granting of variances, provides as to the general consideration of variances that:
“(c) A variance may not be granted unless it is found:
(1) that the variance is the minimum variance necessary to afford relief;
(2) that the granting of the variance will not:
(i) alter the essential character of the neighborhood or district in which the lot is located;
(ii) substantially impair the appropriate use or development of adjacent property;
(iii) reduce forest cover in the limited and resource conservation areas of the critical area;
(iv) be contrary to acceptable clearing and replanting practices required for development in the critical or bog protection area; or
(v) be detrimental to the public welfare; and
(3) that, for properties in the critical area or a bog protection area, the granting of a variance will not be inconsistent with the spirit and intent of the critical area program or bog protection program and will not adversely affect water quality or adversely impact fish, wildlife, or plant habitat.”
As can be seen, there is no specific provision relating to self-created hardship in the general provisions of the Anne Arundel County ordinance. There is, however, a special section in the Anne Arundel County Code, Section 11-102.1.(b), that *182relates only to properties in the “critical area or a bog protection area.” It does contain a self-created hardship type of provision. Section 11-102.1.(b)(4)(i) provides: “the variance request ... is not based on conditions or circumstances that are the result of actions by the applicant.” Petitioner indicated in the present case that the Critical Area Commission had not objected to her application. Respondents did not proffer to the contrary. Accordingly, except as noted, the extent to which self-created hardships under the general provisions of this statute would impact upon the granting of a variance outside the critical area (whether sufficient in and of itself to justify the denial of a variance, or whether merely a factor to consider along with all other factors in the consideration of the variance application) depends upon the holdings of our cases. While the critical area variance provisions contain a direct reference to self-created hardships, the statute does not attempt to define what is meant by “result of actions by the applicant.” Therefore, even in respect to property within the critical areas of the county, whether a particular situation constitutes a self-created hardship, depends, for the most part, upon our cases to the extent we have previously addressed such issues, not upon the provisions of the statute.
Standard of Judicial Review
Almost a half-century ago, in a case involving a denial of a use permit, we stated: “It is a clearly established rule in the law of zoning that a court may not substitute its judgment for that of the Zoning Board.” Dorsey Enterprises, Inc. v. Shpak, 219 Md. 16, 23, 147 A.2d 853, 857 (1959). Chief Judge Hammond wrote for the Court in State Ins. Comm’r v. National Bureau of Casualty Underwriters, 248 Md. 292, 309, 236 A.2d 282, 292 (1967), that “under ... [either] of the standards the judicial review essentially should be limited to' whether a reasoning mind reasonably could have reached the factual conclusion the agency reached (alteration added).”
Whether reasoning minds could reasonably reach a conclusion from facts in the record is the essential test. If such a conclusion is sufficiently supported by the evidence, *183then it is based upon substantial evidence. Forty years ago in Snowden v. Mayor and City Council of Baltimore, 224 Md. 443, 447-48, 168 A.2d 390, 392 (1961), we noted that:
“The substantial evidence test ‘means that the reviewing court’s inquiry is whether on the record the agency could reasonably make the finding.’ ... Substantial evidence is ‘such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion.’ The heart of the fact finding process often is the drawing of inferences from the facts. The administrative agency is the one to whom is committed the drawing of whatever inferences reasonably are to be drawn from the factual evidence. ‘The Court may not substitute its judgment on the question whether the inference drawn is the right one or whether a different inference would be better supported. The test is reasonableness, not rightness.’ ” [Citation omitted.]
Over twenty years later we opined, “if the evidence makes the issue of harm fairly debatable, the matter is one for the Board’s decision, and should not be second-guessed by an appellate court.” Board of County Commissioners for Cecil County v. Holbrook, 314 Md. 210, 218, 550 A.2d 664, 668 (1988). See also Ramsay, Scarlett & Co., Inc. v. Comptroller of the Treasury, 302 Md. 825, 490 A.2d 1296 (1985) and Comptroller of the Treasury v. World Book Childcraft International, Inc., 67 Md.App. 424, 508 A.2d 148 (1986).
In White v. North, 356 Md. 31, 44, 736 A.2d 1072, 1079 (1999), we much more recently restated the general standard of review that:
“In judicial review of zoning matters, including special exceptions and variances, ‘the correct test to be applied is whether the issue before the administrative body is “fairly debatable,” that is, whether its determination is based upon evidence from which reasonable persons could come to different conclusions.’ Sembly v. County Bd. of Appeals, 269 Md. 177, 182, 304 A.2d 814, 818 (1973). See also Board of County Comm’rs v. Holbrook, 314 Md. 210, 216-17, 550 A.2d 664, 668 (1988); Prince George’s County v. Meininger, 264 Md. 148, 151, 285 A.2d 649, 651 (1972); Zengerle v. Board of *184County Comm’rs, 262 Md. 1, 17, 276 A.2d 646, 654 (1971); Gerachis v. Montgomery County Bd. of Appeals, 261 Md. 153, 156, 274 A.2d 379, 381 (1971). For its conclusion to be fairly debatable, the administrative agency overseeing the variance decision must have ‘substantial evidence’ on the record supporting its decision. See Mayor of Annapolis v. Annapolis Waterfront Co., 284 Md. 383, 395, 396 A.2d 1080, 1087 (1979); Montgomery County v. Woodward & Lothrop, Inc., 280 Md. 686, 706, 376 A.2d 483, 495 (1977), cert. denied sub nom. Funger v. Montgomery County, 434 U.S. 1067, 98 S.Ct. 1245, 55 L.Ed.2d 769 (1978); Agneslane, Inc. v. Lucas, 247 Md. 612, 619, 233 A.2d 757, 761 (1967).”
See also People’s Counsel for Baltimore County v. Mangione, 85 Md.App. 738, 743-44, 584 A.2d 1318, 1320-21 (1991); Terranova v. Board of Trustees of the Fire and Police Employees Retirement Sys., 81 Md.App. 1, 8-9, 566 A.2d 497, 500-01 (1989), cert. denied, 319 Md. 484, 573 A.2d 808 (1990); Tennison v. Shomette, 38 Md.App. 1, 5, 379 A.2d 187, 190 (1977), cert. denied, 282 Md. 739 (1978); Fitzgerald v. Montgomery County, 37 Md.App. 148, 153, 376 A.2d 1125, 1128, cert. denied, 281 Md. 737 (1977), cert. denied sub nom. Mutyambizi v. Maryland, 439 U.S. 854, 99 S.Ct. 164, 58 L.Ed.2d 160 (1978); Anne Arundel County v. Maryland Nat’l Bank, 32 Md.App. 437, 440, 361 A.2d 134, 136 (1976).
Nonetheless, we have also indicated in our cases that where an administrative agency’s conclusions are not supported by competent and substantial evidence, or where the agency draws impermissible or unreasonable inferences and conclusions from undisputed evidence, such decisions are due no deference. In Belvoir Farms Homeowners Association, Inc. v. North, 355 Md. 259, 267-68, 734 A.2d 227, 232 (1999), we stated:
“Generally, a decision of an administrative agency, including a local zoning board, is owed no deference when its conclusions are based upon an error of law. Catonsville Nursing Home, Inc. v. Loveman, 349 Md. 560, 569, 709 A.2d 749, 753 (1998) (‘[W]e may reverse an administrative decision premised on erroneous legal conclusions.’ (citing Peo*185ple’s Counsel v. Maryland Marine Mfg. Co., 316 Md. 491, 497, 560 A.2d 32, 34-35 (1989))).”
In Maryland Marine Mfg., supra, 316 Md. at 496-97, 560 A.2d at 84-35, we said:
“As we have frequently indicated, the order of an administrative agency must be upheld on judicial review if it is not based on an error of law, and if the agency’s conclusions reasonably may be based upon the facts proven. But a reviewing court is under no constraints in reversing an administrative decision which is premised solely upon an erroneous conclusion of law.” [Citation omitted.] [Emphasis added.]
We noted in Washington National Arena Limited Partnership v. Comptroller of the Treasury, 308 Md. 370, 378, 519 A.2d 1277, 1281 (1987) (quoting Ramsay, Scarlett & Co., 302 Md. at 834, 490 A.2d at 1301), that: “ ‘a reviewing court is under no statutory constraints in reversing a Tax Court order which is premised solely upon an erroneous conclusion of law.’ ”
We said in Elliott v. Joyce, 233 Md. 76, 81-82, 195 A.2d 254, 256 (1963) that:
“We hold that ‘on the record’ before us, the Board could not ‘reasonably make’ the reclassification and grant the special exception. Therefore, its action in so doing was arbitrary and capricious in a legal sense. To permit a gasoline station in the residential surroundings of the subject property would not promote the safety, health or general welfare of the community, but would constitute, we think, invalid ‘spot zoning.’ Baylis v. City of Baltimore, 219 Md. 164, 148 A.2d 429 [1959]; Hewitt v. County Comm’rs, 220 Md. 48, 151 A.2d 144 [1959].” [Alterations added.]
The standard in respect to judicial review is, generally, the same whether the agency grants or denies relief. In Maryland Advertising Company v. Mayor and City Council of Baltimore, 199 Md. 214, 222-23, 86 A.2d 169, 173-74 (1952), a case involving the denial of permit for a billboard under the *186special provisions in that zoning code, the trial court, on judicial review, affirmed the agency. We reversed, noting:
“A zoning statute, ordinance or administrative order ... is presumed to be valid.... However, the duty of the courts not to substitute their judgment for the judgment of legislative or administrative authorities ... is not more imperative than the power and duty to set aside any purported exercise of such power which is in fact arbitrary, capricious or confiscatory. Zoning in this respect can no more escape judicial review than any other purported exercise of the police power.... ‘The governmental power to interfere by zoning regulations with the general rights of the land owner by restricting the character of his use, is not unlimited, and other questions aside, such restriction cannot be imposed if it does not bear a substantial relation to the public health, safety, morals, or general welfare.’ ... ‘Building on one’s own land is still a property right, subject to all applicable provisions of law; it is not a grant of a favor from some governmental authority.’ ” [Citations omitted.]
We have additionally found actions of zoning entities to be arbitrary and capricious, and have thus affirmed trial court reversals of zoning agency decisions in reclassification cases, albeit the reversals were generally of actions where the agency had granted relief, as opposed to the instant variance application where the Board denied relief. As indicated, in Elliott, supra, we affirmed the circuit court’s reversal of agency actions. In Zang & Sons, Builders Inc. v. Taylor, 203 Md. 628, 102 A.2d 723 (1954), the circuit court declared a zoning action (a reclassification) by Anne Arundel County authorities, ‘null and void,’ and this Court affirmed. There we said:
“There is nothing here to show that the [prior] rezoning to ‘Cottage Residential’ was error or mistake ... The preamble to the resolution and the personal knowledge of the Commissioners could not be considered [by the circuit court] as evidence of change. The power of rezoning cannot be used to ‘favor’. The Courts review the action, not the opinion, of the Commissioners. The reasonableness of such *187a resolution is to be determined by the facts from which the conclusion is drawn, rather than from the conclusion itself.” Id. 203 Md. at 636-37, 102 A.2d at 727. [Citations omitted.] [Emphasis added.] [Alterations added.]
Price v. Cohen, 213 Md. 457, 463, 463, 132 A.2d 125, 128 (1957), was another case where the courts reversed a zoning entity’s granting of a reclassification. There, we stated:
“The courts will reverse only where there are no grounds for reasonable debate and where the action of the Board is capricious, arbitrary, discriminatory, or illegal. The Board here based its opinion partly on an inspection of the property by its members. The personal knowledge of the Board cannot be considered on appeal. The review of the courts is made from the facts from which the conclusion is drawn and not from the conclusion itself” [Citation omitted.] [Emphasis added.]
In the case sub judice, the Board erroneously construed a property owner’s legal attempt to comply with provisions authorized by a new county law as a self-created hardship. Compliance with a statute ordinarily is not self-created hardship and is not such in the present case.
Self-created Hardship
We stated in White, 356 Md. at 48-49, 736 A.2d at 1082, quoting from our earlier case of Aspen Hill Venture v. Montgomery County Council, 265 Md. 303, 313-14, 289 A.2d 303, 308 (1972), that:
“ ‘we must not forget the underlying principle that, “Such ordinances [zoning ordinances] are in derogation of the common law right to use private property as to realize its highest utility, and while they should be liberally construed to accomplish their plain purpose and intent, they should not be extended by implication to cases not clearly within the scope of the purpose and intent manifest in their language.” Landay v. Board of Zoning Appeals, 173 Md. 460, 466, 196 A. 293 (1938).’ [Alteration in original.]
“In Landay, 173 Md. at 465, 196 A. at 295-96, we noted that ‘[i]n a constitutional sense, the only justification for the *188restrictions ... on the use of private property is the protection of the public health, safety, or morals.’ ”
In a case somewhat similar to the case sub judice, Richard Roeser Professional Builder, Incorporated v. Anne Arundel County, 368 Md. 294, 297 n. 3, 793 A.2d 545, 547 n. 3 (2002), decided after the Board’s and the lower court decisions in the present case, we initially noted in a footnote:
“It is a relatively common practice throughout the State, and has been for decades, that buyers contract to buy properties with contingencies that make consummation of the contract conditioned on the granting of variances.... Additionally, in such instances in respect to ‘area’ variances, we have never held that such a practice, by itself, constitutes a ‘self-created’ hardship.”
Then, in Roeser, 368 Md. at 303-04, 793 A.2d at 551, quoting from Arden H. Rathkopf & Daren A. Rathkopf, The Law of Zoning and Planning § 58.22, 141-48 (Edward H. Zeigler, Jr. revision, vol. 3, West 1991), we stated:
“ ‘In other words, because a purchaser of property acquires no greater right to a variance than his predecessor, he should not be held to acquire less.
‘It should not be within the discretion of a board of appeals to deny a variance solely because a purchaser bought with knowledge of zoning restrictions.... ’ ” [Emphasis in original.] [Footnotes omitted.]
We subsequently opined in Roeser that:
“The types of hardships that are normally considered to be self-created in cases of this type do not arise from purchase, but from the actions of the land owner ... that create the hardship, rather than the hardship impact, if any, of the zoning ordinance on the property.”
Id. at 314, 793 A.2d at 558.
While we do not rely on the impact, if any, of the Antiquated Lots Law in our decision for the case sub judice, it is clear that the purpose of the Antiquated Lots Law ordi*189nance is to induce owners of adjacent non-conforming undersized lots to combine them into lots that conform to present area requirements, or to combine them into lots that are less non-conforming than prior to combination, in order to develop the property. Clearly, any person or persons that want to build a residential dwelling on an undersized, but legal, parcel 4 or lot of land adjacent to other land owned by them, is, at the least, encouraged to comply with this ordinance. Compliance with the provisions of the Anne Arundel County Antiquated Lots Law5 would not be self-created hardship. In the present case the petitioner was merely doing what she had a *190right to do, and what the Antiquated Lots Law encouraged her to do, re-subdivide the property and in the process, meet the current requirements of the statute so that the lots would be in conformity.
Respondents rely in part on Randolph Hills, Inc. v. Montgomery County Council, 264 Md. 78, 285 A.2d 620 (1972), for the proposition that problems created by a developer in creating a subdivision can be considered self-created. The facts in Randolph Hills were substantially different than the facts in the present case. The owners in Randolph Hills were not requesting a variance. In Randolph Hills, the owner was merely requesting a reclassification of its property under preexisting law. Prior to the request for reclassification, the developer had voluntarily subdivided a large portion of the overall property under the provisions of the same ordinance, leaving a certain portion of the property it owned entirely outside of the subdivision. It was the property left outside the subdivision that was the subject of the zoning reclassification request, not, as in the present case, property within the subdivision for which variance relief was sought. Generally, reclassifications involving Euclidean zones, such as involved in Randolph Hills, are controlled by the “change/mistake rule,”6 a rule not applicable in variance cases. Nonetheless, the administrative body in Randolph Hills, perhaps as dicta, opined that the developer had created its own hardship by *191leaving the subject tract outside the subdivision. In the case sub judice, the Reserved Parcel 2 is included within the re-subdivision that meets the requirements of current statutes and the only issues are whether the re-subdivision that combined sub-standard lots into the conforming “Reserved Parcel 2” was done in compliance with the applicable statutes.7 As we have clearly indicated, the re-subdivision, i.e., the combination of substandard lots, is not only permitted and encouraged by the statute anytime adjacent non-conforming lots are under the same ownership, regardless of how the property became so titled,8 it is, generally, permitted for substandard lots to be re-subdivided into standard or closer-to-standard lots.
In Randolph Hills the property outside of the subdivision ended up in the situation solely because the developer *192desired it. In the present case the recombination of lots, and thus a re-subdivision, was permitted by statute. In the process of re-subdivision the tract at issue here ended up in a subdivision with a condition imposed by the county not imposed on the other lots. The parcel,, to the extent it would reflect the old subdivision, would be a nonconforming parcel and its status would have resulted from the statute increasing dimension requirements, and, thus, any hardship resulting from the statute making the lots non-conforming, would not have been self-created. To the extent, if any, it reflects a status derived from the combination re-subdivision, its status would have resulted from the operation of the new “lot-combining” statute, and any hardship was not self-created. More important, subdividing property in accordance with all applicable statutes does not, generally, constitute a self-created hardship in respect to the property within the subdivision. Randolph Hills does not apply here.
Respondents next rely on the Court of Special Appeals decision in Cromwell v. Ward, 102 Md.App. 691, 651 A.2d 424 (1995). The facts of Cromwell are completely dissimilar to the facts in the present case. Cromwell involved an after the fact application for a variance to legalize an illegally constructed building. First, and primarily, there was no subsequent statute that permitted the landowner, Ward, to do what he did. He merely constructed a building that violated the provisions of the existing zoning code, as well as the provisions of the plans upon which his building permit was issued. He was caught. He then requested a variance approving retroactively what he had already illegally built. The intermediate appellate court held that he was not entitled to a variance because his hardship was entirely self-created. Cromwell represents the traditional application of self-creáted hardship principles in the variance context and is a far cry from the present situation, where a statute permitted to be done, what was done.
Our case of Ad + Soil, Inc. v. County Comm’rs of Queen Anne’s County, 307 Md. 307, 513 A.2d 893 (1986), is also factually dissimilar. Ad + Soil, without prior proper approvals, constructed a facility that violated the county’s zoning *193ordinance, including the setback requirements of the ordinance. After the fact, Ad + Soil applied for variances of the setback (and other) requirements. We held that the setback violations had been self-created. Again Ad + Soil, like Cromwell, was a traditional application of sell-created hardship principles in a zoning context — an attempt to legalize an illegal structure.
Montgomery County Council v. Kacur, 253 Md. 220, 252 A.2d 832, 838-39 (1969), also relied upon by respondents, is likewise inapplicable. First of all, as in Randolph Hills, it was a request for a reclassification and not an application for variances. More importantly, when we said “a property owner may not require the Council to grant a rezoning ... by creating a hardship situation of his own making in which he cannot but lose money,” we were addressing the situation where a landowner, considering the uses permissible under the zoning classification of the property when he bought it, had paid too much money for a piece of property and was trying to have its classification designation changed to a higher category solely in an attempt to make it more valuable for resale. Kacur, 253 Md. at 231, 252 A.2d at 838-39. The factual situation there is nowhere close to the situation-in the case at bar.
Evans v. Shore Communications, Inc., 112 Md.App. 284, 685 A.2d 454 (1996), involved the denial, not the granting of variances. Again it was factually dissimilar. The intermediate appellate court, as relevant here, found that the claimed peculiarity, uniqueness, of the property necessary to satisfy the first prong of most variance ordinances — that a property be unique, was that the applicant had leased a piece of property for which, pursuant to the then existing ordinance, he could not erect the tower to the required height. The applicant there did not claim that a hardship existed for the main purposes of establishing an unwarranted hardship, but merely made the argument that a lease it had entered into in anticipation of receiving a variance caused the property to be unique or constituted peculiar circumstances surrounding the property, thereby satisfying the first uniqueness prong of the *194variance requirement of that particular ordinance (and many others). That court said that “while SCI ... may have painted itself into a corner when it entered into a lease agreement ... ‘the variance that is desired ... cannot be the source of the first [uniqueness] prong of the variance process----’ ” Evans, 112 Md.App. at 308, 685 A.2d at 466 (citing Cromwell, 102 Md.App. at 695, 651 A.2d at 426) (alteration added). The applicant in Evans asserted that the uniqueness of the property allegedly caused by the lease, was, itself, an unwarranted hardship. Only in that context did the court say:
“the second ‘special condition and circumstance’ claimed by SCI — the needs of its subscribers — are not peculiar to the land, but created by SCI.... The needs of SCI’s customers have nothing to do with the peculiarity of the property in question. Thus, any hardship claimed by SCI — the second prong of the test; — is self-inflicted, and thus not a ground for a variance.” Evans, 112 Md.App. at 309, 685 A.2d at 466.
Accordingly, as is evident, Evans does not support the position as to that case, taken by respondents in the case sub judice.
The case of Wilson v. Mayor and Comm’rs of the Town of Elkton, 35 Md.App. 417, 371 A.2d 443 (1977), also relied on by respondents, is equally distinguishable from the present case. In that case, the property owner at the pertinent time, unlawfully extended a non-conforming use. Later, a variance was sought that would make using the illegal extension easier. It was held that the unlawful extension had been self-created and thus the need for the requested relief was self-created. It was also a traditional self-created hardship situation. Wilson by his sole affirmative act had built a structure that illegally extended a non-conforming use and was attempting to legalize the use. Wilson is simply not relevant to the issues in the case at bar.
The cases cited by respondents do not support the proposition they ask this court to adopt in the present case. In similar fashion, the other cases relied on by the intermediate appellate court do not apply in the circumstances of the present case.
*195In addition to extensively relying on this Court’s case of Randolph Hills, supra, and relying on its own case of Cromwell, supra, which reliance as we have indicated was misplaced, the Court of Special Appeals also cited as authority our cases of Salisbury Board of Zoning Appeals v. Bounds, 240 Md. 547, 214 A.2d 810 (1965) and Marino v. Mayor and City Council of Baltimore, 215 Md. 206, 137 A.2d 198 (1957).
Bounds and Marino are also dissimilar from the case at bar. In Bounds, the property owner did not properly procure a building permit to convert an old single family dwelling into four apartments. Therefore, the apartments were built without any consideration by the appropriate city entities as to whether the conversion complied with local zoning provisions. The conversion violated the density provisions of the statute. We stated the then relevant provision set forth in Rathkopf, The Law of Zoning and Planning, that we considered to be applicable:
“ ‘If the peculiar circumstances which render the property incapable of being used in accordance with the restrictions contained in the ordinance have been themselves caused or created by the property owner or his predecessor in title, the essential basis for a variance, i.e., that the hardship be caused solely through the manner of the operation of the ordinance ... is lacking .... the hardship, arising as a result of the act of the owner ... will be regarded as having been self-created, barring relief.’ ” Bounds, 240 Md. at 554, 214 A.2d at 814.
We then held in Bounds:
“The instant case fits squarely within the above general rule. The construction of the fourth apartment and the resultant hardship could have been avoided if the appellees had used proper diligence in ascertaining what the density requirements were.... The hardship here relied on was entirely self-created.” Id. at 555, 214 A.2d at 814-15. [Emphasis added.]
*196Bounds, like Wilson,9 involved the building or remodeling of structures in violation of zoning laws, and the subsequent attempt to legalize a prior illegality by way of the granting of variances. It was a traditional case of self-created hardship.
The case of Marino was substantially different from the present case. It involved a “special exception.”10 Along with other things, we noted that under the Baltimore City ordinance the Marinos had the burden of establishing that the hardship they were alleging was not self-created. We also noted that the zoning ordinance being challenged had been in place when the Marinos had purchased the property.11 *197More important, the Marinos had applied for and received a prior exception that permitted them to use the property lor commercial purposes. That prior grant of Marino’s application to permit commercial use, we found “[i]s without doubt one of the reasons why the remainder is less adaptable now for residential use purposes.” Marino, 215 Md. at 220, 137 A.2d at 203. It is clear that the situation in Marino was very different than the situation in the case at bar. Here the petitioner re-subdivided her property, and in the process *198eliminated, and/or reduced the nonconforming character of the lots within the subdivision. As is permitted, in the process she ended up with certain lots that still had certain potential environmental constraints, but they were constraints that she had a right to attempt to resolve through the variance process. In the re-subdivision process she was reducing the degree of non-conformity of her property.
Although we do not hold in this case that re-subdividing in compliance with statutes can never constitute self-created hardships, such actions are not in the traditional sense, in general, self-created hardships for variance consideration purposes. Traditionally, self-created hardship requires an affirmative action, exclusively by a property owner or his predecessor in title, that is itself the sole reason for the need for the variance. Bounds and Marino represent the normal types of affirmative actions by property owners that will be held to constitute self-created hardships. Several of our sister jurisdictions have recognized similar types of self-created hardship in the variance context.
In Dueger v. Zoning Board of Appeals of the Incorporated Village of Lloyd Harbor, 61 N.Y.2d 743, 472 N.Y.S.2d 922, 460 N.E.2d 1357 (1984), the Court of Appeals of New York held that a deck illegally extended into a setback was a self-created hardship, and a variance was denied in spite of the fact that the removal of the deck would substantially impair the value of the house. The Supreme Court of Oklahoma, in Board of Adjustment of the City of Oklahoma City v. Puckett, 1960 Ok. 142, 353 P.2d 4 (1960), held that the construction of a ground level parking pad in a setback in order to support a carport structure that was forbidden to be placed in the setback, and the moving of driveways in contemplation of the carport placement and other structures, constituted self-created hardships and reversed the granting of the variance. In Bloom v. Zoning Board of Appeals of the City of Norwalk, 233 Conn. 198, 658 A.2d 559 (1995), the Supreme Court of Connecticut reversed the granting of a variance that had been obtained in order to legalize a dormer and stoop that had been constructed on a non-conforming structure pursuant to an illegal build*199ing permit. Other cases that have held that illegal construction is self-created hardship include: Caccia v. Zoning Board of Review of the City of Providence, 83 R.I. 146, 113 A.2d 870 (1955); Snyder v. Waukesha County Zoning Board of Adjustment, 74 Wis.2d 468, 247 N.W.2d 98 (1976) and Martirano v. Zoning Board of Appeals of the Town of Lewisboro, 57 N.Y.2d 867, 456 N.Y.S.2d 47, 442 N.E.2d 445 (1982) (both cases involved the illegal construction of porches); Markdale Corporation v. Board of Appeals of City of Milwaukee, 27 Wis.2d 154, 133 N.W.2d 795 (1965); and Ex Parte Chapman, 485 So.2d 1161 (Ala.1986). There are also cases that have held that a hardship created by the error of a surveyor working for the land owner constitutes a traditional self-created hardship. In re Application of Fecteau, 149 Vt. 319, 543 A.2d 693 (1988) and Pollard v. Zoning Board of Appeals of the City of Norwalk, 186 Conn. 32, 438 A.2d 1186 (1982). Creating a substandard parcel by a metes and bounds description in a deed was held to be a self-created hardship in Cherry Hill Homes, Inc. v. Board of Zoning Appeals of the Incorporated Village of Sea Cliff, 28 N.Y.2d 381, 322 N.Y.S.2d 225, 271 N.E.2d 211 (1971). In Foxhall Community Citizens Association v. District of Columbia Board of Zoning Adjustment, 524 A.2d 759 (D.C.App.1987), the court held that a church that was so poorly designed that it was unable to perform its current functions was not entitled to a variance for the purposes of remodeling because the inferior design had been self-created. And see Sciacca, supra.
What occurred in the case at bar is more similar to what occurred in Whittaker v. Zoning Board of Appeals of the Town of Trumbull, 179 Conn. 650, 427 A.2d 1346 (1980), where a prospective purchaser, Esposito, obtained a variance for the re-subdivision of property he was buying. Whittaker, and other land owners in the original subdivision, petitioned the issue to the courts. The prior subdivision had been approved with the understanding that a public road, eventually, would be extended through the middle of the property. There was an indication on the prior plat that a cul-de-sac was intended to be temporary and that a road might be extended in that *200area in the future. The purpose of the re-subdividing at issue was to accommodate the extension of the public road, the contemplation of which was required by the public authorities at the time of the prior subdivision, by creating two lots, one on each side of where the authorities had wished to place the road. Whittaker argued that no true hardship had been demonstrated because the lot before the variance was granted was conforming and buildable and that the town had not taken the road area by condemnation, therefore the re-subdivision was not necessary and the division of the lot itself, into two lots, would be self-created. The Connecticut court opined:
“The plaintiffs argue essentially that the hardship complained of by Esposito is self-created and, therefore, that the variance was improperly granted. We do not agree.
“The hardship which justifies a board of zoning appeals in granting a variance must be one that originates in the zoning ordinance....
“The applicant for the variance, Esposito, was presented with a genuine hardship beyond his control and not of his or the record owner’s making. The 1.79 acre parcel involved has been designated as the location through which Quail Trail is to extend to connect to Foster Avenue since 1969, when the town planning and zoning commission approved the Lagaña subdivision upon that condition.
“Esposito’s application for a variance was filed ... long after the commission’s 1969 decision to extend Quail Trail was expressed in an official map....
“Under the circumstances of this case, the extension of Quail Trail can hardly be said to be the voluntary act of Esposito.” Whittaker, 179 Conn. at 657-61, 427 A.2d at 1350-52. [Footnote omitted.]
In the present case, before the re-subdivision of the development, the undersized lots would not have been self-*201created hardships because they were legal lots, albeit perhaps non-conforming lots. When a governmental statute permits and encourages an owner, or owners, to take certain action in order to be able to utilize property, that action cannot be characterized as self-created.
Once the process of subdivision or re-subdivision commences, it is not at all uncommon for there to be parcels or lots reserved by the owners and not offered for immediate sale or proposed for immediate use. Sometimes the reason for the existence of these parcels or lots is that, because they contain environmentally sensitive areas, the owner intends to market the unencumbered lots first and later attempt to see if the affected lots or parcels can be approved for development. Often these reserved parcels have conditions attached to them at the direction of the governmental entity that approves the plats. When conditions are so imposed, the conditions, so long as they do not result in a taking of the property, are generally enforceable.
In Howard County v. JJM, Incorporated, 301 Md. 256, 270, 482 A.2d 908, 915 (1984), although it was a “Takings Clause” case, we described, in a somewhat limited manner, the nature of dedications and reservations, saying:
“We come down to the issue in this case, which is whether the Howard County subdivision regulation requiring JJM to reserve land for a proposed State highway constitutes an exercise of the County’s police power or a taking. If the regulation is determined to be a valid exercise of the police power, then JJM has no legal cause for complaint. If, on the other hand, the regulation is determined to be a taking of the property, the County has no right to require the reservation for the proposed highway.
“D. Hagman, Urban Planning and Land Development Control Law, § 140 (1975) defines the terms dedication and reservation:
‘Dedication ordinarily involves the conveyance of an interest in land by the fee owner to the public; usually to the local government having jurisdiction over the land. *202Reservation, on the other hand, involves no conveyance but restricts the right of the subdivider and others to use the land for anything but the restricted purpose.’ ”
The “Reserved Parcel 2,” in the present case, with the restriction as to percolation tests, in essence, constitutes a reservation of the property to the owner, but with a restriction that it cannot be used until such time as it passes the percolation requirements. Petitioner, as the re-subdividing property owner, was the person who reserved the parcel in her own ownership, and, albeit imposed by governmental regulation, placed the percolation restriction upon the use of her own property. As such, our interpretation of the nature of the designation and the restriction is subject to the body of property law we have developed in respect to the creation of restrictions, whether imposed by notations on plats or by a separate Declaration applicable to the property described on a particular plat. We addressed this issue, generally, in Belleview Construction Company, Incorporated v. Rugby Hall Community Association, Incorporated, 321 Md. 152, 158, 582 A.2d 493, 495 (1990), where we said, in construing covenant restrictions against a developer:
“If an ambiguity is present, and if that ambiguity is not clearly resolved by resort to extrinsic evidence, the general rule in favor of the unrestricted use of property will prevail and the ambiguity in a restriction will be resolved against the party seeking its enforcement.”
We had previously noted in Woodland Beach Property Owners’ Association, Incorporated v. Worley, 253 Md. 442, 449-50, 252 A.2d 827, 831 (1969) (quoting Brady v. Farley, 193 Md. 255, 258, 66 A.2d 474, 475 (1949)) that:
“ ‘In the recent case of Norris v. Williams, 189 Md. 73, 76, 54 A.2d 331, 332, Judge Delaplaine speaking for the Court, said:
“ ‘ “However, restrictions upon the use of land are in derogation of the natural right which an owner possesses to use and enjoy his property, and are repugnant to trade and commerce. Consequently, restrictive covenants are *203construed strictly against their establishment and effect, and liberally in support of the unrestricted use of the land....”
‘There must be borne in mind the often repeated doctrine that doubts should be resolved in favor of the unrestricted use of property.’ ”
We said in Peabody Heights Company of Baltimore City v. Willson, 82 Md. 186, 203, 32 A. 386, 389 (1895), in reference to restrictions concerning approval of building plans and the timing of construction, that:
“[AJJthough one in conveying real estate may impose certain restrictions.... Courts will always favor a liberal interpretation ... in order to impose as few difficulties as possible in the free use and disposal of the particular estate conveyed [or reserved].... [I]f the words are doubtful, they will be resolved in favor of keeping the restriction within the narrowest limits. In other words, if there be doubt as to the intention of the parties, Courts will naturally lean in favor of freedom of the property.” [Alterations added.]
See also Markey v. Wolf, 92 Md.App. 137, 151, 607 A.2d 82, 88-89 (1992), which quoted Peabody.
While in Belleview and cases since, we have modified the rule to be a reasonableness rule, the reservation in the present case, and the percolation restriction, even if ambiguous, which we do not believe they are, would be, even under the modified “reasonableness rule” of Belleview, construed to mean that the developer retained (“reserved”) a parcel of land for her future use if that property could be, at anytime in the future, successfully percolated.
In the case sub judice, the restriction placed on the reserved parcel was that it could not be built upon until such time as it passed percolation tests. It is clear, and it was clearly the governmental agency’s opinion, that if and when the parcel could be perked, it was a buildable lot. No other express limitations were contained on the plat. There was no *204evidence that the county had imposed any conditions forbidding petitioner from seeking variances. In fact, there was ample evidence that the county considered the parcel to be a legal lot, restricted only by the necessity to conduct satisfactory percolation tests.
Self-created Hardship as a Sole Factor
Petitioner presents the issue of whether self-created hardship, by itself, is sufficient to deny a variance without consideration of the remaining conditions contained in the ordinance. In other words, is it a sole disqualifying finding, or is it a factor to be considered along with other factors to determine whether practical difficulties or unwarranted hardships exist. The Board and the Court of Special Appeals held that in all cases, whether an area or a use variance is sought or whether practical difficulty or unwarranted hardship is the standard, a self-created hardship, by itself, is sufficient to deny the granting of a variance without any consideration of any other factors. In other words, if self-created hardship exists, the administrative entity need go no further.
We do have cases in which we have upheld the denial of variance relief where the agency has found that a self-created hardship existed. We have been unable to determine from the language of our cases whether this Court was ever expressly asked to address the question presented here — the issue of whether self-created hardship alone is sufficient to deny an area variance. We have appeared, in the absence of having it presented as a question by the parties in the various cases, to have assumed, without any extensive investigation of the matter, that it was sufficient.
We shall not resolve that issue in this case as we are holding that there is no self-created hardship in the first instance. Accordingly, we leave that issue for a future case, in so far as Maryland law is concerned.12
*207In the present case, the only condition required by Anne Arundel County was that the reserved parcel not be used until such time as it passed a percolation test. It imposed no other conditions. Often the need to reserve parcels is caused by then present circumstances that make the parcels, areas, or lots, then un-buildable, and thus, generally, unmarketable. Nonetheless, they are legal parcels or legal lots. They in fact are sellable, although rare may be the buyers for parcels with notations on the plats that they are presently defective, for whatever reason, as to building use. Later, if the circumstances change and the express and implied conditions placed upon the use of the property can be satisfied, the parcel stands in the same position as any other lot in respect to the right to seek variance relief. It is a legal parcel of property. The parcel in question has always been considered a legal lot by the county.
During the re-subdivision process permitted and encouraged by the Antiquated Lots Law and the pre-existing statute which placed the lots in nonconformance prior to the re-subdivision, the property combinations resulted in a parcel of land that was not then suitable for the erection of a residential structure because the portion of the parcel that remained after areas had been used for subdivision infra-structure would not, at that time, percolate or otherwise permit development due to critical area requirements.13 The area was designated as a *208reserve parcel, i.e., not then qualifying as real property upon which a house could be built. Nonetheless, the parcel remained the property of the subdivider. The only express restriction as to the reserve parcel is contained on the re-subdivision plat itself: “Reserve Parcel No. 2,” “unbuildable until a passing perc test is performed.” That limitation was required by Anne Arundel County authorities. The county subsequently approved the re-subdivision plat.14
It was clear to anyone examining the Administrative Plat that there was only one express limitation imposed on the subject property by the re-subdivision approval, i.e., that no residences could be built on the parcel until, and if, it passed a percolation test. ■ No other limitations were noted on the plat. Our examination of the record does not reflect that any other limitations were imposed on the parcel during the process.
Subsequently, it was determined that there was an area within the parcel that could, and did, pass a percolation test. However, the use of that area for the sanitary system to be utilized for a residence on the parcel left an insufficient remaining area to accommodate the type of structure required to be built by covenants that affect the lots within the development and still be in compliance with “yard,” and other requirements, both critical areas and otherwise, of the zoning ordinance. At that point, the petitioner sought the various approvals, by way of area variances, which would be needed in order for a residential structure to be constructed on the parcel. Because the land, or a portion of it, was either in the critical area, or the critical area buffer zone, review by the Chesapeake Bay Critical Area Commission also was sought. That Commission interposed no objection to the project. Petitioner then sought critical area and other variances necessary to accommodate her proposed project.15 The relief she *209sought via the variance process was of the same type, if not scope, of the relief she might have had to seek had she never re-subdivided the property in the first instance.16
Respondents proffer in their brief that “The very laws Stansbury seeks to abridge were in existence before she created her reserved parcel.” To be sure, some, if not all, of *210those laws were in effect prior to the re-subdivision. It was the impact of those “very laws” upon the preexisting lots and parcels that created the conditions necessitating the applications for the variances. Prior to the time those “very laws” were passed, Stansbury would have had the right to either rely on the non-conforming character of the lots, a nonconformity created by subsequent statute, or would have had the right to seek a variance of the statutory provisions that put the pre-existing lots out of conformity. The Antiquated Lots Law, which we presume respondents are referring to, created another potential restriction on petitioner’s property by imposing a condition that adjacent lots had to be recombined, if in the same ownership, in an attempt to put the lots in conformity, or closer conformity, with the lot size requirements of the new statute. If the Antiquated Lots Law applied, petitioners re-subdivision brought the property into closer compliance. Permissive re-subdivision (or any subdivision for that matter) that decreases nonconformance is not a self-created hardship in respect to remaining small areas of property that require variance considerations before they may be developed.
Conclusion
It is clear that the circumstances here present are far removed from the traditional concept of a self-created hardship. Petitioner, in re-subdividing in compliance with county requirements was left with, as is generally the case, a parcel of land not then buildable in that re-subdivision. In re-subdividing, which met the combination requirements and the requirement to file an Administrative Plat, and was in compliance with other county laws, she insured that the only express condition attached to her ability to fully use the reserve parcel was the provision in respect to percolation. There is no evidence in this case that the county intended to impose any other express conditions on the re-subdivision. It was equally clear that the county always considered this parcel to be a legal lot.
*211Therefore, the owner of the parcel is fully entitled to seek any relief that any other property owner is entitled to seek. She may not, on remand, get the relief, but she is entitled to try without having the Board or the courts disqualify her from seeking relief on the grounds that what occurred during her specific re-subdivision amounted to a self-created hardship. In light of our decision, we decline to resolve any other issues presented in this case.
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT OF SPECIAL APPEALS REVERSED AND THE CASE IS REMANDED TO THAT COURT WITH DIRECTIONS TO AFFIRM THE JUDGMENT OF THE CIRCUIT COURT FOR ANNE ARUNDEL COUNTY. COSTS IN THIS COURT AND IN THE COURT OF SPECIAL APPEALS TO BE PAID BY THE RESPONDENTS.
. Most jurisdictions have adopted the position that when a court is concerned with area variances, such as that in the present case, practical difficulty is the standard, and when use variances are sought, unwarranted hardship is the standard for the approval of a variance. We noted in Loyola Federal Saving and Loan Ass’n v. Buschman et al., 227 Md. 243, 248-49, 176 A.2d 355, 358-59 (1961), that "Rathkopf, ..., points out that use variances are customarily concerned with ‘hardship cases'.... Rathkopf next points out that area variances are customarily concerned with ‘practical difficulty'.... ‘‘[T]he basis for this lesser *177requirement ... is that the character of the zoning district is not changed .... variances going to such matters as area, height, or setbacks, are much less drastic than those affecting the use of property.” The Anne Arundel County zoning provisions, in that regard, in a general provision section, Section 11 102.1.(a) provide that the requirements of the statute, may be varied "when it is alleged that practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships prevent carrying out the strict letter ol this article.” Section 11-102.1.(a)(2) provides, as relevant here, that a variance may be granted if "because of exceptional circumstances . . . the grant of a variance is necessary to avoid practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship, and to enable the applicant to develop such lot.” Accordingly, except to the extent that the application for variances includes a request for variances that are for portions of the parcel located in the critical area, in which event that particular request would be subjected to the unwarranted hardship standard, the correct standard in Anne Arundel County is the lesser standard of "practical difficulties” to the extent that petitioner’s application concerns requests for area variances. The parties appear to presume that the unwarranted hardship standard applies to all of petitioner’s variance requests. That is correct if all of the requests involve critical area requirements. It would not be correct as to the requests for other variances. In light of our holding that the evidence does not support that there was a self-created hardship and our remand to the Board for it to consider the application without reference to self-created hardship, it is not necessary for us to sort the requests as to the applicable standard.
. Petitioner in her brief has framed the four issues above. In her petition she only presented two questions for our consideration. How*178ever, in tire argument contained in her petition she did at least touch on the other issues. Because of our resolution of this case we will not directly answer the questions respondents challenge as being un-preserved.
. There is a body of case law in the land use context concerning the merger of sub-standard lots. In Friends of the Ridge v. Baltimore Gas and Electric Company, 352 Md. 645, 653, 724 A.2d 34, 38 (1999), a case in which protestants were challenging the utilities' right to combine lots into larger parcels, thereby eliminating interior lot lines, we noted:
"These efforts have resulted in the creation and evolution in zoning of the doctrine of merger, which, in zoning cases, generally prohibits the use of individual substandard parcels if contiguous parcels have been, at the relevant time, in the same ownership and at the time of that ownership, the combined parcel was not substandard.”
We noted that we were unaware, at that time, of any prior Maryland cases expressly adopting that doctrine. We then concluded that generally, where the doctrine had been recognized, its primary function had been to prohibit the re-subdivision of 'combined' lots into smaller substandard lots. In Friends we noted numerous cases in other jurisdictions concerning the doctrine: Loechner v. Campoli, 49 N.J. 504, 231 A.2d 553 (1967); Somol v. Board of Adjustment, 277 N.J.Super. 220, 228, 649 A.2d 422, 426 (1994) ("[Sjeparate undersized but contiguous lots fronting on the same street in single ownership ordinarily merge *181into one lot and conveyance of a portion will require subdivision and variance approval.”); Iannucci v. Zoning Board of Appeals, 25 Conn. App. 85, 592 A.2d 970 (1991); In re Appeal of Gregor, 156 Pa.Cmwlth. 418, 627 A.2d 308 (1993); and Skelley v. Zoning Board of Review, 569 A.2d 1054, 1056 (R.I.1990) (“The concept of merger of contiguous nonconforming lots in common ownership as an appropriate method to combine nonconforming lots is gaining increased recognition.”).
What the Antiquated Lois Law does, is to essentially codify the doctrine of lot combination -or lot merger.
. In Anne Arundel County a "parcel'' of land fits within the definition of a lot for zoning purposes. Article 28, Section 1-101. Definitions— Generally, paragraph (36) provides " 'Lot’ has the meaning staled in § 1-109 of this title.” Section 1—109(a) provides: "In this article, 'lot' means a portion of a subdivision or any other parcel of land for building development, whether existing, immediate, or future . .. .” (emphasis added.)
. This type of ordinance is not unique to Anne Arundel County. The Supreme Court of Rhode Island, in Redman v. Zoning and Platting Board of Review of the Town of Narragansett, 491 A.2d 998, 998-99 (R.I.1985), in a case remarkably factually similar 1o the case at bar, described the statute there involved:
"Narragansett Town Council enacted an amendment to its zoning ordinance that required each lot to have a frontage of one hundred feet and a total area of ten thousand square feet. Section 8.2 of that ordinance provided that
'Li]f adjacent land in the same ownership is not sufficient to meet the minimum frontage requirements or minimum area requirements, or both, then the largest area and frontage which the adjoining common ownership make possible shall be provided.’
"Thus, the terms of the amended ordinance required petitioners, as joint owners of lot 126, now a substandard lot of record, and of lot 125, an adjacent lot, to merge the two lots to permit lot 126 to meet the minimum frontage and area requirements of the zoning ordinance.”
Another similar case is Sciacca v. Caruso, 769 A.2d 578 (R.I.2001). There the Town of Johnson had amended its zoning ordinance in 1979, mandating greater area requirements. The new ordinance also contained "a so-called merger provision, pursuant to which contiguous lot Nos. 91 and 92 merged into one lot to meet this particular ... minimum lot area and frontage requirements.” Id. 769 A.2d at 579-80 (footnole omitted). It required contiguous substandard lots in the same ownership to be merged in order to meet the new standards, or in order to meet the new standards as much as possible. Caruso applied to the *190local planning board, which had the authority to approve subdivisions, to re-subdivide lots, she had previously combined pursuant to the ordinance, into their previous sub-standard size. The planning entity illegally approved her request. She then sought a variance in order to construct a residence on the new substandard lots on the basis that they were legal non-conforming lots prior to their combination. The Supreme Court of Rhode Island held that her alleged hardship had been self-created by her attempt to undo the statutory combining of her lots and reversed the lower court that had upheld the agency’s granting of a variance.
. In order to qualify for a Euclidean zoning reclassification, an applicant, generally, must first establish that the current classification was a mistake when it occurred, or that there has been sufficient change in the neighborhood since the prior classification, to warrant the consideration of a change in classification.
. Respondents argue in their brief that prior to the re-subdivision of the development, petitioner and her brother, after learning of the potential for the passage of the Antiquated Lots Law, had adjusted their ownership from tenants in common to sole ownership of the lots in checkerboard fashion, with them owning alternate sub-standard lots. Respondents apparently are proffering that because there was a method whereby petitioner might have avoided compliance with the spirit and letter of the law, a later decision to comply, makes that compliance self-created hardship for purposes of variance consideration. We disagree. As we read the statute, anytime abutting substandard lots are in, or come under, sole ownership, they are required to be ‘merged’ or ‘combined’. It makes no difference, as we read the statute, whether owners or prior owners have attempted to avoid compliance.
In any event, the Antiquated Lots Law, even if it did not require the combination of lots which we believe it did, permitted, and strongly encouraged, lot combining in order to avoid a proliferation of nonconforming lots. While not squarely presented in this case, we doubt that a property owner that brings a property into legal conformance as to one standard is self-creating a hardship as to another standard so as to foreclose the ability of such an owner to apply for variance relief as to other matters, a right that is generally available via variance procedures to any owner. To posit to the contrary would be to encourage the continuation of non-conforming properties. One of the underlying basic tenets of zoning law is that non-conforming lots and uses are to be brought into conformance if at all possible. See also our discussion of the doctrine of merger in footnote 3.
. We have not been asked to, nor do we, consider the legality or constitutionality of such mandatory ‘‘combining” or "merger” provisions.
. Wilson also involved the remodeling of an existing building into more units than permitted under the zoning code. After the fact, Wilson sought a variance to provide outside stairway access to a third unit he had already constructed. The third unit was prohibited. The authorities only discovered the violation when he applied for a permit to build the stairs.
. In Marino, 215 Md. at 216, 137 A.2d at 201, we stated:
"Ordinarily, there is a marked distinction in the law of zoning between a variance and an exception, but there is none in Baltimore City since an exception apparently overlaps a variance inasmuch as both may be granted where there are 'practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships'. This is the reason why many cases which arise in Baltimore City, such as this one, discuss exceptions and variances without differentiation.” [Footnote omitted.]
. Under the Supreme Court's case of Palazzolo v. Rhode Island, 533 U.S. 606, 121 S.Ct. 2448, 150 L.Ed.2d 592 (2001), and our recent case of Roeser, supra, the fact that the statute predated an owner's purchase of a subject property would have no bearing on the ability of an owner to seek variance relief. As we indicated in Roeser, a purchaser receives as a part of his title to property, unless the conveyance is limited, all the rights his or her predecessor had in the property, including the right to apply for variance relief. Purchase is not a self-created hardship. To the extent the dicta in Mayor and City Council of Baltimore v. Sapero, 230 Md. 291, 297, 186 A.2d 884, 887-88 (1962), stales that “when a person purchases property with the intention of applying for a variance ... he can not contend that such restrictions cause him such peculiar hardship that entitles him to special privileges which he seeks.” conflicts with the Supreme Court's case of Palazzolo or our case of Roeser, it is rejected.
Cases from some other jurisdictions arc in accord with and actually predate Palazzolo and Roeser. See Rocheleau v. Town of Greene, 708 A.2d 660 (Me. 1998); In the Matter of Galin v. Board of Estimate of the City of New York, 52 N.Y.2d 869, 878, 437 N.Y.S.2d 80, 418 N.E.2d 673, *197678 (1981) ("if the other four conditions are mel, acquisition with knowledge of the Zoning Resolution provisions does not const ilute a self-created hardship.”); Johnny Cake, Inc. v. Zoning Board of Appeals of the Town of Burlington, 180 Conn. 296, 300-01, 429 A.2d 883, 885 (1980) ("But. if the hardship is created by the enactment of a zoning ordinance and the owner of the parcel could have sought a vaiiance, then the purchaser has the same right to seek a variance and, if his request is supported in law, to obtain the variance.... Otherwise the zoning ordinance could be unjust and confiscatory.”); and see Lewis v. Pickering, 134 Vt. 22, 26-27, 349 A.2d 715, 717-18 (1975), where the Supreme Court of Vermont discussed its cases and the ease law of New Jersey:
"Had it still been owned by Myers, the predecessor in title, and he had made application lor a variance such as was sought by the defendants, certainly no claim could have been raised that he had created his own hardship.
"In Wilson v. Borough of Mountainside, 42 N.J. 426, 453, 201 A.2d 540, 554 (1964), the New Jersey Supreme Court stated:
‘We wish to make it clear lhat if a prior owner would be entitled to such relief, that right is not. lost to a purchaser simply because he bought with knowledge of the zoning regulation involved. This situation is not within the realm of the sell-created hardship which will generally bar relief.’
"We also cite, with approval, the following language from Griffin Construction Corp. v. Board of Adjustment of Teaneck, 85 N.J.Super. 472, 205 A.2d 313, 316 (1964):
‘[WJhere an original owner would be entitled to a variance under a specific set of facts, any successor in title is ordinarily entitled to such a variance, providing that no owner in the chain of title since the adoption of the zoning restriction has done anything to create the condition for which relief by variance is sought.' ”
Under the cases, it is clear, that an owner’s attempts to comply with a new ordinance, such as attempts to comply with the Antiquated Lots Law at issue in this case, are not the types of actions that the cases would say would permit the consideration of those actions to be deemed self-created hardships in the process of determining whether variances are appropriate.
. In respect to general variance statutes, several jurisdictions have considered the issue and held that it is only one of the factors to be considered, and other jurisdictions have even held that self-created *205hardship is not a factor at all, when applications for area variances such as those sought in the case sub judice are concerned.
In Human Development Services of Port Chester, Incorporated v. Zoning Board of Appeals of the Village of Port Chester, 67 N.Y.2d 702, 706, 499 N.Y.S.2d 927, 490 N.E.2d 846, 848 (1986), a case in which a prior owner of the property had created a substandard lot, the intermediate appellate court in New York held:
“That a difficulty may be self-created is a factor to be taken into account, but as we held in Matter of De Sena v. Board of Zoning Appeals (45 N.Y.2d 105, 108[, 408 N.Y.S.2d 14, 379 N.E.2d 1144 (1978)]): 'A finding of self-created hardship normally should not in and of itself justify denial of an application for an area variance.’ [Emphasis added.]
In In the Matter of De Sena, 45 N.Y.2d 105, 108, 408 N.Y.S.2d 14, 379 N.E.2d 1144, 1145 (1978), that Court slated that:
“That a landowner's difficulty is in a sense self-created is certainly a factor to be lakcn into account in considering an application for an area variance, allhough it is less significant a consideration in such cases than in ihose involving use variances. It is not, moreover, the determinative factor....” [Citations omitted.]
In Russell v. Board of Adjustment of the Borough of Tenafly, 31 N.J. 58, 69, 155 A.2d 83, 89 (1959), the Supreme Court of New Jersey opined:
“A decision on self-created hardship, without more, is not conclusive on the detemiinative issue, of undue hardship. Although self-created hardship weighs against the application, it is only a circumstance to be considered in finding undue hardship.” [Citations omitted.] [Emphasis added.]
Our neighboring jurisdiction, ihe District of Columbia, very strongly supports the view that it is only one of the factors to be considered in determining the existence of "practical difficulties” or "unwarranted hardship.” In Carliner v. District of Columbia Board of Zoning Adjustment, 412 A.2d 52, 54 (D.C.App. 1980), the Court stated initially that, in respect to that instant case, the court was:
“unwilling to disturb the decision of the Board when it determines that the affirmative action of the applicant in making his property uon-conforming, rather than his mere knowledge at the time of purchase that his property is non-conforming, warrants the application of the hardship doctrine and thereby justifies denial of the variance."
It then noted, however, that “This court has upheld the grant of a variance where the only 'hardship' was petitioner's mere knowledge of the difficulties created by the zoning requirements.” Id. at 54 n. 3.
The facts in the case of De Azcarate v. District of Columbia Board of Zoning Adjustment, 388 A.2d 1233, 1235 (D.C.App.1978), were similar to the case at bar. The petitioners were persons who had protested the granting of a variance. There the court said:
“Lot 17, for which the Board granted the area variance was originally part of a considerably larger lot designated Lot 13. Lot 13 was a triangular-shaped parcel of a approximately 26,000 square feet.... During July 1975, Lot 13 was subdivided into three lots. .. . Subse*206quently, Lot 17 was enlarged slightly to include an additional strip of land and this subdivision was also recorded.
"As approved, Lot 17 was an irregular configuration. The main body of the property was connected to the street by a strip of land 30 feet wide and 70 feet long. A single-family home was to be constructed on the main portion of the .lot.... [Pitkin] sold Lot 17 to intervenor — Schafer on condition that the property was suitable for the erection of a single-family residence. During this same time-frame, single-family homes were constructed upon each of the other two lots carved from the original Lot 13.
"However, a recent decision of this court undermines petitioner's argument. In that case, the Board granted a parking variance. After concluding that the Board properly treated the application as an area variance rather than as a use variance, the court rejected the petitioners’ contention that the rule of self-created hardship applied.
“However, the hardship at issue here ... cannot be accurately described as the direct consequence of the intervenors’ sole and affirmative acts; here tire zoning department employees played a significant part by approving three separate applications during the original subdivision of Lot 13.” Id. at 1235-39. [Citations omitted.] [Footnotes omitted.]
See also Association for Preservation of 1700 Block of N Street, N.W., and Vicinity v. District of Columbia Board of Zoning Adjustment, 384 A.2d 674, 677-78 (D.C.App.1978), A.L.W., Inc. v. District of Columbia Board of Zoning Adjustment, 338 A.2d 428, 431-32 (D.C.App.1975), where the court said:
"It has been the rule, to be sure ... that one with actual or constructive knowledge that under the zoning ... a particular use would be nonconforming, is ordinarily not entitled to receive a use variance.
"In the case before us, however, petitioner applied not for a use variance but an area variance.... Yet where a substandard lot is the subject of a hardship application, proof of only ‘peculiar and exceptional difficulties' is involved....
“Additionally, the fact that the owner knew or should have known of the area restrictions before he purchased the property does not alter the lesser standard. In New York, for instance, the rule seems to be
‘that the "self created hardship” concept does not apply to area variance cases, i.e., the fact that the condition complained of was self created is not dispositive of the matter but only one factor to be considered ... [in passing on] an area variance.’...
"The Rhode Island Supreme Court has taken a similar position:
‘The question of whether an applicant is entitled to a variance because of hardship flowing from a literal application of the terms of the ordinance is in no way dependent upon his knowledge of the existence of zoning restrictions affecting the land.’
At least one other jurisdiction with a statute similar to our own has indicated that the self-imposed aspect of a particular hardship is not *207a bar to the grant of a variance.” [Citations omitted.] [Emphasis omitted.]
. In the development of subdivisions and re-subdivisions there are normally areas that cannot easily be accommodated within the a standard box-like lot plan. It is rare that a perfect box or checkerboard lot layout can be accomplished due to the varying shapes that tracts of land have, over the years, taken. Generally, land within the boundaries of the plat that is not then identified with a lot number, unless provisions to the contrary are contained on the plat or in other title documents, remains in the ownership of the developer and, unless limited by conditions or language on the plat itself or by necessary implication, or limited by recorded declarations, it is, generally, not encumbered in respect to the owner’s uses of the property. In such instances, in the absence of a statute to the contrary, it may, generally, be sold.
. Re-subdivision plats required under the Antiquated Lots Law are apparently designated as "Administrative Plats.”
. Respondents argue that because the property was re-subdivided after the county’s Critical Area restrictions were enacted, petitioner self-*209created any hardships caused by the enactment of those restrictions. That is incorrect. The property, however subdivided or not subdivided, would still have been subjected to the same Critical Area restrictions. Moreover, it. was in essentially the same ownership after the re-subdivision as it was before. Even if ownership had changed after ihe enactment of Ihe Critical Area provisions, the new owner could have asserted any rights the prior owner could have asserted, including the right to apply for variances. See Palazzolo v. Rhode Island, 533 U.S. 606, 626-38 121 S.Ct. 2448, 2462-63, 150 L.Ed.2d 592, 612-14 (2001), where the United Stales Supreme Court, in a “Takings Clause” conlext, stated:
“The state court held the postregulation acquisition of title was fatal to the claim for deprivation of all economic use and to the Penn Central Transp. Co. v. City of New York, 438 U.S. 104, 98 S.Ct. 2646, 57 L.Ed.2d 631 (1978)] claim.
“The theory underlying the argument that post-enactment purchasers cannot challenge a regulation under the Takings Clause seems to run on these lines: Property rights are created by the State. So, the argument goes, by prospective legislation the State can shape and define property rights and reasonable investment — backed expectations, and subsequent owners cannot claim any injury from lost value. After all, they purchased or took title with notice of the limitation.
“The State may not put so potent a Hobbesian stick into the Lockean bundle. The right to improve property, of course, is subject to the reasonable exercise of state authority, including the enforcement of valid zoning and land-use restrictions....
“A blanket rule that purchasers [or subdividers] with notice have no compensation right when a claim becomes ripe is to blunt an instrument to accord with the duty to compensate for wliat is taken [by a regulatory action].” [Citations omitted.] [Alterations added.]
. She may have been able to market the lots as non-conforming lots prior to the resubdivision. While, generally, if structures are destroyed they may have to be rebuilt in conformance, land subdivisions are not, normally, destioyable. Thus, generally, lots would never have to be reconfigured in accordance with present statutes, but could continue on under non-conformance principles, although their marketability might be diminished. In other words, undersized lots would remain legal and buildable, albeit variance relief might, depending on current setback and similar requirements, be necessary to enable an owner, or a subsequent owner to construct a viable structure.

=== CASE 9737234 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:19:40.335468+00 ===

Dissenting opinion by
WILNER, J.,
in which RAKER, J., joins
The Board of Appeals for Anne Arundel County denied a set of fifteen requested variances upon a determination that the need for the variances was self-created by the applicant, Nancy Stansbury. That finding was amply supported by the evidence before the board. Proclaiming the issue to be one of law rather than fact, however, this Court simply weighs the evidence differently and concludes that the need for the variances, as a matter of law, was not self-created. With respect, I dissent from both the conclusion and the analysis employed by the Court. It ignores the relevant facts and it ignores the relevant law.
Scattered throughout the opinion are some general statements with which I agree. Early in the opinion, for example, the Court states that “[w]hen a property owner does that which is permitted, or required, under a zoning code, that property owner is not necessarily creating an automatic hardship for purposes of the self-created hardship standards of variance provisions.” (Emphasis added). That is true. Later, the Court confirms the proposition that the mere purchas*212ing of land subject to a contingency that a needed variance will be granted also does not constitute a self-created hardship. I agree with that as well, and with the further statement that “subdividing property in accordance with all applicable statutes does not, generally, constitute a self-created hardship with respect to the property within the subdivision.”
Where the Court goes astray, in my view, is extending those valid precepts to reach the wholly unwarranted conclusion that, when an owner knowingly re-subdivides property in a way that may otherwise be lawful but that, in an effort to maximize the overall economic value of the land, deliberately and unnecessarily creates one or more odd lots that do not comply with known applicable land use requirements, the owner cannot be denied the variances necessary to excuse compliance with those requirements on the ground of self-inflicted hardship. The Court thus seems to hold that, because the re-subdivision is not itself unlawful, the owner can deliberately create non-conforming lots and nonetheless be eligible for the necessary variances. That is an extraordinary extension — one that essentially stands the doctrine of self-inflicted hardship, and, indeed, land use law itself, on its head. No authority truly in point is cited for the extension, and for good reason. None supports it. Indeed, the authority truly in point, either dismissed or ignored by the Court, establishes exactly the opposite..
It is important to consider what actually occurred here. The original tract consisted of 347 acres. In 1924, most of the tract was subdivided into approximately 157 small rectangular lots, most of which were only 50 feet wide and ranged in size from 15,000 to 20,000 square feet (essentially between one-third and one-half an acre).1 Until the 1990’s, the land remained undeveloped. Ms. Stansbury and her brother, James, inherited the property from their father in 1985.
*213At some point early in 1986, James made inquiry of the Anne Arundel County Office of Planning regarding the buildable status of the lots. In March, 1986, he was advised, in relevant part, that, although the subdivision was not subject to the 1970 subdivision regulations adopted by the county, he would be “required to combine whole lots to create building sites in order to meet setback requirements and the requirements of the Health Department.” The Office explained that, under the current R 1 zoning, there was a minimum front setback of 40 feet, a minimum rear setback of 35 feet, and a minimum side setback of 15 feet. The letter also noted that three of the lots did not have “legal access” and, unless combined with other lots, would not be individually buildable. Finally, the letter advised that, although the Critical Area regulations recently adopted by the State would not affect the property, if the property was developed after the county enacted the environmental laws mandated by the Critical Area Protection Act, the property would be subject to the critical area laws.
On January 1, 1987, the county adopted an Antiquated Lots Law, which required the owners of more than one contiguous substandard lot to combine the non-conforming lots in order to meet current lot size and width standards. Under that ordinance, the Stansburys were required to reconfigure the 1924 lots in order to meet a minimum lot size of 40,000 square feet and a minimum lot width of 80 feet. In August, 1988, the county adopted its first permanent critical area law, under which the undeveloped subdivision was classified as a Resource Conservation Area (RCA) — the most environmentally sensitive of the three categories provided for in the Critical Areas Law. In February, 1989, the county comprehensively rezoned the undeveloped subdivision to RLD (Residential Low Density). That zoning also required a minimum lot size of 40,000 square feet, as well as a minimum lot width of 150 feet, and it limited density to one unit per five acres. Few, if any, of the 1924 lots owned by the Stansburys met those requirements. If the property was to be developed, the lots would have to be combined.
*214In December, 1990, the Stansburys submitted an application for re-subdivision. The new plat proposed 37 lots, most of which did not meet either the applicable lot size or lot width requirements. The plat also proposed the clearing of 44% of the critical area woodlands, although the regulations applicable to an RCA area limited the clearing to 20 percent. Initially, the plat showed the lot at issue here as part of an open space and storm water management area and not as a reserved lot. It appears — although the record is scant on this — that revised plans submitted in April, 1991, detached the parcel in question from the open space area and designated it as a reserved lot. Notwithstanding the failure of the proposed lots to meet the applicable size and width standards, the revised plat was approved in July, 1991. The only reference to the reserved lot — identified as Reserve Parcel No. 2 — in the county’s file is a handwritten notation on the Administrative Plat that the lot was “unbuildable until a passing perc test is performed.” The evidence showed that this notation was added to the plat by a county official because the lot had recently failed a percolation test. The implication was not necessarily that the lot would be buildable if it did pass a percolation test but that it clearly would not be unless it did.
Following approval of the re-subdivision, the Stansburys began to market the new lots. In doing so, they emphasized the value of the reserved lot to adjoining lots, and they charged a significant premium for those lots. Evidence was presented that Ms. Stansbury told one buyer that, because the reserved parcel contained critical area wetlands and open space, it could never be developed and that his lot would cost more because the reserved parcel would “provide a buffer and enhance the value and enjoyment” of his lot. Buyers of other lots were charged premiums of up to $10,000 because of the unrestricted view they would have of the pristine reserved parcel.
In 1996, after most of the 37 lots were sold, Ms. Stansbury decided to develop the reserved lot and applied for a septic system permit for that lot. Because the lot had failed several percolation tests, however, compliance with the applicable *215requirements for a standard septic system, which required a 10,000 square foot drainfield area, proved to be a problem. Therefore, Ms. Stansbury sought to avoid those requirements. In July, 1997, having purchased her brother’s interest through a bankruptcy proceeding, she sought a waiver of the subdivision ordinance, which would have made the parcel a “legal lot” and permitted her to use an alternative septic system. No notice of the application for waiver was given to the residents of the subdivision — the persons from whom she had extracted a premium based on the reserve lot remaining undeveloped.
In September, 1997, the county granted a conditional waiver, but even that proved to be ineffective, as the county health department construed one of the conditions as still requiring the 10,000 square foot drainage area. In January, 1998, after repeated failures, the parcel finally passed a percolation test, and the health department approved a standard septic system, •with the 10,000 square foot drainfield. Unfortunately for Ms. Stansbury, that drainfield could only be placed on a small flat portion of the lot and, given the topography of the lot, that served to restrict the buildable area in a way that rendered the lot non-buildable absent the granting of fifteen variances. That is the hardship upon which Ms. Stansbury relies. That is the hardship that the Court finds, as a matter of law, was not self-inflicted.
What was significant to the Board of Appeals, and what the Court simply ignores, is that, when Stansbury and her brother re-platted the property in 1991, all of the applicable land use controls that made the reserve parcel non-buildable absent the granting of variances were in place. They knew, or at least should have known, when they went about reconfiguring the property that, if they re-platted it as they did, they would likely end up with a non-conforming lot. Evidence was presented to the board from David Blaha, a land and environmental planner whom the board accepted as an expert, that the property could have been re-subdivided to provide either a reserved parcel or a thirty-eighth legal lot that would not have encroached on steep slopes or the critical area buffer and that would not, therefore, have needed any of the requested vari*216anees. He offered exhibits to show how that could have been done. His testimony was unrebutted and was found by the board to be persuasive.
In reaching its conclusion that the need for fifteen separate variances was not self-created, as a matter of law, the Court dismisses as inapplicable Maryland and out-of-State cases pointing to an exactly opposite conclusion. I believe that the Maryland and out-of-State cases are in point. Moreover, they are consistent with other out-of-State cases that the Court fails even to cite. Let me deal first with the Maryland cases.
In Salisbury Bd. v. Bounds, 240 Md. 547, 214 A.2d 810 (1965), the owner purchased a large frame house that had been a single-family residence and desired to convert it to four apartments. The zoning law required both a permit for such conversion and a minimum of 2,500 square feet per apartment. As the house contained less than 10,000 square feet, it could accommodate only three apartments. Nonetheless, the owner proceeded to build four apartments without obtaining the necessary permit and, upon discovering his mistake, sought a variance. Holding that he was not entitled to one, we followed the law as stated in 2 Arden H. Rathkopf & Daren A. Rathkopf, The Law of Zoning and Planning § 48-1, that, in order to be entitled to a variance on the ground of hardship, the restrictions of the ordinance, coupled with the unique circumstances affecting the property, must be the cause of the hardship. Thus:
“If the peculiar circumstances which render the property incapable of being used in accordance with the restrictions contained in the ordinance have been themselves caused or created by the property owner or his predecessor in title, the essential basis of a variance, i.e., that the hardship be caused solely through the manner of operation of the ordinance upon the particular property, is lacking. In such case, a variance will not be granted; the hardship, arising as a result of the act of the owner or his predecessor will be regarded as having been self-created, barring relief. This rule is simple and of general application in the several states.”
*217Salisbury Bd. at 554, 214 A.2d at 814 (emphasis in last two sentences added). Noting that, aside from the fact that the hardship was self-inflicted, it was also shown to be “of a purely financial nature,” we concluded that the case “fits squarely within the above general rule.” Id. at 555, 214 A.2d at 814-15 (emphasis added).
We followed that reasoning in Randolph Hills v. Mont. Co. Council, 264 Md. 78, 285 A.2d 620 (1972). The developer there purchased a residentially zoned tract of 380 acres, part of which abutted a railroad right-of-way. It developed most of the tract for residential purposes but deliberately left undeveloped a wedge of the property, approximately 1,900 feet long, of which 1,600 feet ranged only from 50 to 100 feet in width, bordering the right-of-way. The developer, claiming hardship, then sought a special exception to permit that wedge to be used for the parking of motor vehicles in conjunction with some industrial land lying to the north. The zoning agency denied the request on the ground that any hardship was self-created, and we affirmed. Confirming again our adherence to the general rule as stated by Rathkopf, we noted our complete agreement with the view of the Circuit Court that “ ‘the use of the particular ground in question is restricted because the applicant chose to develop as it did.’” Id. at 82, 285 A.2d at 622 (quoting the opinion of the Circuit Court). See also Montgomery County Council v. Kacur, 253 Md. 220, 252 A.2d 832 (1969).
The Court dismisses Salisbury Bd. (and the similar case of Marino v. Mayor and City Council of Baltimore, 215 Md. 206, 137 A.2d 198 (1957)) on the curious ground that the action creating the hardship was taken “without any consideration by the appropriate city entities as to whether the conversion complied with local zoning provisions,” and it dismisses Randolph Hills and Kacur on the ground that they involved requests for reclassification, rather than for variances, and are therefore governed by the “change/mistake” rule. I fail to see how either constitutes a distinction. What the Court simply ignores is the basis for those decisions — the general rule that one cannot rely on hardship to justify any discretionary *218zoning change if the hardship was self-inflicted, and that a hardship will be regarded as self-inflicted if it was created deliberately and could have been avoided. As Rathkopf noted, that is the law throughout the country (except, after today, in Maryland).
The Rathkopfs continue in the belief that “[vjariances generally will not be granted when courts determine that the hardship was created by an affirmative act by the owner or his predecessor.” 3 Arden H. Rathkopf & Daren A. Rathkopf, The Law of Zoning and Planning § 58.21(Edward H. Ziegler, Jr. ed.2002). No distinction in this regard is drawn between requests for reclassifications and requests for variances, and, indeed, the quoted statement refers specifically to variances. They state:
“Division of property in such a fashion as to leave part in non-conformity with the minimum lot size, width, or frontage provisions is a common occurrence, and, on application for a variance for the lot thus rendered substandard, the hardship arising from the inability to put the substandard lot to use is usually considered self-created.”
Id.
The Rathkopfs note that, in some instances, evidence of good faith on the part of the applicant may suffice to eliminate the bar of self-creation of the hardship — as where the applicant has attempted to use alternatives to relieve the hardship prior to requesting a variance, or has relied on representations of zoning authorities, or had no actual or constructive knowledge of the requirements or limitations. None of those excuses applies to Ms. Stansbury, of course.
The Rathkopfs are not alone in their view. Most of the recognized commentators make the same point. See 5 Norman Williams, Jr. & John M. Taylor, American Planning Law § 146.01 (1985 rev.). Young makes the point that “[ajlthough there is some division of opinion as to whether the self-created hardship rule should be applied in area variance cases, there is general agreement that a variance may not be granted to the owner of a substandard lot where such lot was created by the *219deliberate conduct of the applicant.” 3 Kenneth H. Young, Anderson’s American Law of Zoning § 20.59 (4th ed. 1996 & Supp. 2002). Until Sasso v. Osgood, 86 N.Y.2d 374, 633 N.Y.S.2d 259, 657 N.E.2d 254 (1995), New York did not generally apply the doctrine of self-created hardship to area variances, but even under that approach, which Sasso changed, the courts disapproved the granting of relief to owners of substandard lots that were created by the deliberate conduct of the applicant. See Chasanoff v. Silberstein, 6 N.Y.2d 807, 188 N.Y.S.2d 194, 159 N.E.2d 684 (1959); Kenny Dev. Corp. v. Kramer, 22 Misc.2d 122, 202 N.Y.S.2d 421 (1960).
Courts have routinely rejected any distinction between area and use variances in this regard and have denied area variances when the need for them has been self-created. In Sciacca v. Caruso, 769 A.2d 578 (R.I.2001), the applicant subdivided a lot into two lots knowing that the newly created undeveloped lot was not in conformance with dimension requirements and then sought a variance. The Rhode Island Supreme Court reversed the granting of the variance and rejected the notion that the doctrine of self-created hardship did not apply to area variances, finding no reasonable basis for such a distinction.
In Herman v. Board of Adjustment, 29 N.J.Super. 164, 102 A.2d 73 (App.Div.1953), a subdivision plat was recorded in 1941. One of the lots—No. 13—had a frontage of 51 feet and a depth of 129 feet, which gave it an area of less than 7500 feet. In 1948, a zoning law was adopted that excluded from the general restrictive provisions of the ordinance previously recorded lots having a frontage of at least 50 feet and an area of at least 7500 square feet. Lot 13 was sold to Reid Development Company in 1949, although the deed was not recorded until March, 1950. Between the time of sale and the recording of the deed, an amendment to the zoning law was introduced that would have precluded the construction of a dwelling house on any lot with a frontage or depth such as that of Lot 13. While that bill was pending, the principal of Reid, an attorney, caused Reid to sell to his wife a number of the lots, including Lot 13, but assured that the lots sold to his *220wife were interspersed with those retained by Reid, so that none of the ones sold to the wife were contiguous to one another. The deed, prepared in May, 1950, was not recorded until late September — six days before the ordinance was enacted. That ordinance was later invalidated for procedural reasons but was re-enacted in 1952. The 1952 ordinance also prohibited construction of a dwelling house on a lot with the frontage and size of Lot 13 but provided that a bona fide owner who acquired title to a lot having a frontage of less than 75 feet prior to the effective date of the ordinance could obtain a variance.
The wife applied for a variance, asserting as a hardship the lack of requisite frontage and the absence of contiguity with other lots that would allow a combination to meet the frontage requirement. The zoning board denied the variance, and the appellate court affirmed. The court focused on the absence of contiguity and questioned whether the isolation of the lot, occasioned by the interspersing of the lots conveyed to the wife with those retained by the husband’s corporation, was premeditated and contrived to circumvent the anticipated zoning regulations. That, it held, was an issue of fact, and the findings of the zoning agency were entitled to deference. As (until today) has been the well-established rule in Maryland as well, the New Jersey court applied the principle that the agency’s denial of a variance “is presumptively correct and proper and the party impugning the determination on appellate review encounters the burden of proving to the contrary.” Id. at 74-75. On the record in the case, the court affirmed the implicit finding of the agency that the isolation of the lot, which alone made it eligible for a variance, was “adroitly purposeful in an anticipated effort to avoid the restrictions of the expected ordinance” and therefore did not constitute an exceptional or undue hardship. Id. at 77.
In In Re Volpe’s Appeal, 384 Pa. 374, 121 A.2d 97 (1956), the petitioner purchased - two lots — Lots 14 and 15. They contained a total of 32,500 square feet but neither contained 20,000 square feet. The zoning law precluded building on a lot with less than 20,000 square feet. In 1949, the petitioner *221conveyed all of Lot 15 and a portion of Lot 14 — a total of 20,130 square feet — to Foster, who erected a house on the property. That left petitioner with a portion of Lot 14 consisting of less than 12,500 square feet. He then sought a variance with respect to Lot 14, claiming hardship. The agency denied the request and the Pennsylvania Supreme Court affirmed, holding that any hardship was self-created “with full knowledge of the restrictions in the zoning ordinance.” Id. at 100. The court noted the obvious, that “[i]f we were to hold that this petitioner suffered unnecessary hardship, every other property owner in the area classified ‘AA’ residential, would similarly be entitled to build his home on a lot of 12,000 square feet, which of course would nullify the ordinance.” Id.
Volpe has been applied by the Pennsylvania courts in several later cases. In Borough of Baldwin v. Bench, 11 Pa. Cmwlth. 410, 315 A.2d 911 (1974), the appellant’s father had laid out fifteen lots, one of which had only a 40 foot frontage. The zoning law required lots to have a 55 foot frontage for a single family dwelling. Appellant acquired the non-conforming lot and applied for a variance. The agency denied the request, and the court affirmed, noting that the father had developed the property “in such a fashion that an undersized lot was created.” Id. at 913. The court concluded:
“Since his father would have been barred from receiving a variance because his hardship was self-inflicted, Bench must also be barred. To decide otherwise would be to completely emasculate the holding in Volpe, since a land developer, like the applicant in Volpe, need only deed the property to a member of his family in order to circumvent the holding of the Supreme Court.”
Id.
In Ephross v. Solebury Township Zoning Hearing Bd., 25 Pa.Cmwlth. 140, 359 A.2d 182 (1976)—a case almost identical to this one — a developer, fully aware that the applicable zoning law required one-acre lots, laid out a subdivision that contained 22 conforming lots and two that contained less than an acre each. The developer’s assignee then sought variances *222with respect to one of the non-conforming lots, claiming hardship. The request was denied by the agency, and that decision was affirmed. In reasoning that should control in this case, the court stated:
“We also agree with the authorities below in their conclusion that an experienced developer who purchases a large subdivision with express knowledge of existing zoning regulations and their applicability to that subdivision cannot be allowed to frustrate an express provision of a zoning ordinance by developing a vacant irregular lot in violation of the law. The law does not permit a developer to subdivide its own land and then make a subsequent claim for a variance because a remnant of that land is not in conformity with the zoning ordinance.”
Id. at 184 (emphasis added). See also Booe v. Zoning Board of Appeals of City of Shelton, 151 Conn. 681, 202 A.2d 245 (1964) (where owner purchased 70 acres of land in rural district and later sold all but four acres, owner not eligible for variance in order to build hotel on remaining property when zoning law required minimum of five acres).
The Court fails even to cite these out-of-State cases, which seem to me to be very much in point.
On the record before us, this should be a “slam dunk” case of self-inflicted hardship. Ms. Stansbury, for no reason other than to maximize her economic gain, knowingly and deliberately created a non-conforming lot when it was not necessary to do so. She even used the inability to develop the reserved parcel as a means to extract premiums from the sale of other lots, and then came crying to the zoning authorities that she had a hardship on her hands. The board of appeals, after hearing the witnesses, determined, as a fact, that the hardship was self-created. Normally, we defer to the factual determinations of the agency, but, in its peculiar desire to reward Ms. Stansbury for her deliberate conduct, the Court today throws both zoning law and established administrative law to the wind. We should leave Ms. Stansbury with the hardship she *223created and not open up vast new stratagems for developers to circumvent land use laws designed to protect everyone else.
Judge RAKER has authorized me to state that she joins in this dissenting opinion.
. The only reference to this subdivision is to Plat No. 2 of Pleasant Plains contained in the record extract. It is not clear whether that plat, as printed in the extract, is complete, but it appears to contain 157 lots, not all of which are consecutively numbered.

=== CASE 2209498 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:40.258079+00 ===

147 Ill. App.3d 871 (1986)
498 N.E.2d 571
JOHN TAINO et al., Plaintiffs-Appellees,
v.
ANNA SANCHEZ et al., Defendants-Appellants.
No. 84-1345.
Illinois Appellate Court  First District (1st Division).
Opinion filed September 15, 1986.
*872 Sanford Kahn, Ltd., of Chicago (Richard W. Christoff, of counsel), for appellants.
Robert F. Lisco, of Lisco & Field, of Chicago (Sidney Z. Karasik, of counsel), for appellees.
Judgment affirmed.
JUSTICE CAMPBELL delivered the opinion of the court:
Plaintiffs, John and Cecelia Taino, brought this action against defendants, Julio and Anna Sanchez, seeking a declaration of a constructive trust over real estate to which defendants held legal title. The trial court imposed a constructive trust on the property finding that defendants had abused their fiduciary relationship with the plaintiffs in obtaining title to the property. Defendants appeal from that judgment contending that the imposition of a constructive trust was against the manifest weight of the evidence since no fiduciary relationship existed between the parties.
Defendant, Julio Sanchez, is self-employed, owning and managing properties in Chicago. Plaintiff, John Taino, is his first cousin who came to the United States from the Philippine Islands in 1968. Sanchez paid for Taino's airfare from the Philippines to Chicago. Following Taino's arrival in the United States, Sanchez introduced Taino to the owner of a printing company where Taino obtained employment.
Beginning in 1970, Taino borrowed money from Sanchez from time to time. Sanchez charged Taino 3% interest per month and Taino repaid the loans. In September 1971, Taino undertook to purchase a three-flat apartment building at 2019 West Ohio Street in Chicago for $24,000. Towards this end, Taino borrowed $3,000 from Sanchez, $3,000 from Stella Salazar, his sister-in-law, and took a mortgage for the remaining $18,000. Julio Sanchez arranged to have the property placed in a land trust. Under the terms of the trust agreement, Anna Sanchez, the wife of Julio Sanchez, was vested with the power of direction. John Taino, Stella Salazar, Anna Sanchez and Cecelia Rodriguez each held a one-fourth beneficial interest in the trust. Cecelia Rodriguez was the wife of John Taino. Taino testified that he signed the trust agreement "in blank" and did not understand its terms. Taino made the mortgage payments by giving a cash payment every week to Julio Sanchez with the understanding he would pay the bank.
In May 1973, Anna Sanchez exercised her power of direction in the land trust and conveyed the property to Taino and his wife. Anna Sanchez testified that from January 1973 through November 1976, Julio *873 Sanchez loaned moneys to Taino totalling over $26,000. The testimony was in dispute as to whether these loans were repaid. In July 1976, John Taino and Julio Sanchez had a conversation in the Sanchez home. Anna Sanchez testified that Julio Sanchez asked Taino for the monies he had lent to Taino and that Taino responded that Sanchez should take the property since he could not pay the debt. In July 1976, the Tainos executed a second trust agreement and conveyed the Ohio Street property into the trust. Under the terms of the second trust agreement, John Taino, Cecelia Rodriguez and Anna Sanchez were named as beneficiaries of equal one-third interests in the property. Anna Sanchez was again named as the holder of the power of direction. John Taino testified that certain portions of the form trust agreement were blank when he signed it. Taino and his family resided on the first floor of the building. He collected rents from the second- and third-floor apartments and continued to make weekly payments to Sanchez for the mortgage expense.
Julio Sanchez died in August 1978. Several weeks after his death. Taino told Anna Sanchez that he wanted to know how much he owed on the Ohio Street property because he wanted to sell it. Anna responded that he couldn't sell it because she owned it. Anna testified that following her husband's death, she had made the mortgage payments on the property and had not received any payments from Taino. In August 1980, she exercised her power of direction, directing the trust to convey the property to herself and her son. A few weeks later, Anna demanded that the Tainos move from the building and that the rents from other tenants be forwarded to her.
Plaintiffs then filed this action for the imposition of a constructive trust on the property in their favor. At trial, both parties submitted proposed findings of fact. The trial court adopted the findings of fact proposed by plaintiff and held for the plaintiff. Included within those findings of fact, the court found that John Taino was the cousin of Julio Sanchez, that in 1968 Taino entered the United States under Sanchez' sponsorship, and that Sanchez helped Taino obtain his first job and find an apartment. The court held that these factors led to a "lasting relationship which the court finds to be a confidential relationship" between the parties. The court further found that Taino relied completely upon the advice and recommendations of Julio Sanchez, "thereby creating a special trust and confidence between the plaintiffs and Julio Sanchez."
 1 We are asked to decide whether the imposition of a constructive trust in the case at bar was against the manifest weight of the evidence. A constructive trust will be used by a court of equity to *874 compel a party who unfairly holds a property interest to convey that interest to the one to whom it justly belongs. (Gravitt v. Jennings (1979), 79 Ill. App.3d 286, 398 N.E.2d 395.) A constructive trust "arises by operation of law when the circumstances of a transaction are such that the court finds it inequitable for the legal owner to enjoy the beneficial interest." Price v. Illinois (1979), 79 Ill. App.3d 143, 148, 398 N.E.2d 365, 370.
 2 Constructive trusts are generally divided into two groups: (1) those where actual fraud exists; and (2) those arising by virtue of the existence of a fiduciary or confidential relationship. (Whewell v. Cox (1977), 54 Ill. App.3d 179, 369 N.E.2d 330, appeal denied (1978), 71 Ill.2d 601.) In the case at bar, since there is no allegation of fraud, we consider only whether a fiduciary relationship existed. Whether or not a fiduciary relationship exists between the parties depends on the facts in each case. The proof of a confidential relationship requires a showing that one party has reposed trust and confidence in another who thereby gains an influence and superiority over the other. (Edwards v. Miller (1978), 61 Ill. App.3d 1023, 378 N.E.2d 583.) "The relationship may be moral, social, domestic, or merely personal." (Anderson v. Lybeck (1958), 15 Ill.2d 227, 232, 154 N.E.2d 259, 262.) Factors to be considered in determining whether a confidential relationship exists are the degree of kinship of the parties, the disparity in age, health, mental condition, education and business experience between them and the degree of trust placed in the dominant party. Kester v. Crilly (1950), 405 Ill. 425, 91 N.E.2d 419; Desiderato v. Sullivan (1980), 84 Ill. App.3d 1117, 406 N.E.2d 116, appeal denied (1980), 81 Ill.2d 590.
 3 In considering these factors in light of the record before us, we believe that the evidence was sufficient to establish the existence of a fiduciary relationship between John Taino and Julio Sanchez. Julio Sanchez assisted his cousin, John Taino, in coming to the United States from the Philippines by purchasing his plane ticket and helping him obtain employment. Upon their arrival in the United States, Taino and his wife were not conversant in the English language. Julio and Anna Sanchez acted as parents to Taino. Taino regularly called them "mama" and "papa." John Taino and Julio Sanchez conversed in a Philippine dialect which even Sanchez' wife, Anna, could not understand. Sanchez also made loans of money to Taino for which he charged a rate of 3% interest per month. We think these facts are sufficient to establish the existence of a confidential relationship between the parties and a presumption of influence by Sanchez over Taino. Moreover, the record does not show any evidence to rebut the *875 presumption of influence.
 4 Having reached the conclusion that a fiduciary relationship existed between the parties, we now must consider whether the imposition of a constructive trust was warranted on the property at issue. We are mindful that in determining whether to impose a constructive trust we must consider the principles of equity, good conscience and unjust enrichment. (City of Chicago v. Roppolo (1983), 113 Ill. App.3d 602, 447 N.E.2d 870.) We conclude that the facts of this case warrant the imposition of a constructive trust. Plaintiffs presented evidence that Julio Sanchez was highly experienced in real estate matters since he had acquired, managed and owned various properties. Sanchez assisted Taino and his wife in acquiring the Ohio Street property by preparing the documentation for the land-trust agreement. The lawyer at the closing of the property had previously represented Sanchez in numerous real estate transactions and was unaware that Taino was contributing the down payment for the property. It was at the suggestion of Sanchez that Taino used a land trust to hold the property. John and Cecelia Taino signed the trust agreement without an understanding of what they were signing nor did they understand that the sole power of direction was vested in Anna Sanchez. Our reading of this record leads us to conclude that Anna Sanchez and her son came to hold title to the Ohio Street property by reason of the trust and confidence reposed in Julio Sanchez by John Taino. In reaching this conclusion, we recognize that the opinion of the trier of fact must be given especially great weight in a constructive trust case. (Whewell v. Cox (1977), 54 Ill. App.3d 179, 359 N.E.2d 330, appeal denied (1978), 71 Ill.2d 601.) In this case, we do not find the trial court's imposition of a constructive trust was against the manifest weight of the evidence.
Accordingly, for the reasons stated, the judgment of the circuit court of Cook County is affirmed.
Judgment affirmed.
QUINLAN, P.J., and BUCKLEY, J., concur.

=== CASE 2209506 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:40.347865+00 ===

593 N.W.2d 729 (1999)
256 Neb. 865
Rex A. WOOLLEN, Appellee and Cross-Appellant,
v.
The STATE of Nebraska, Appellant and Cross-Appellee.
No. S-98-127.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
May 7, 1999.
*733 Don Stenberg, Attorney General, and Hobert B. Rupe, Omaha, for appellant.
Siegfried H. Brauer, Kearney, for appellee.
HENDRY, C.J., WRIGHT, CONNOLLY, GERRARD, STEPHAN, McCORMACK, and MILLER-LERMAN, JJ.
MILLER-LERMAN, J.
I. NATURE OF CASE
The State of Nebraska appeals from a judgment entered following a bench trial finding the State liable to Rex Woollen, appellee, under the State Tort Claims Act (Act), Neb.Rev.Stat. § 81-8,209 et seq. (Reissue 1987 & Cum.Supp.1992), for damages Woollen sustained in a one-car accident on Highway 136 in Johnson County, Nebraska. Woollen cross-appeals, challenging the trial court's conclusion that he was responsible for 40 percent of the negligence that *734 proximately caused the accident, various findings with respect to items of damages, and an evidentiary ruling.
With respect to the State's appeal, we affirm the trial court's finding as to the comparative negligence of the parties. With respect to the cross-appeal, we conclude the trial court erred in striking Woollen's damage claim for legal expenses he paid in proceedings prior to the trial herein that concerned medical bills incurred for the treatment of injuries he sustained in the accident. We reverse, and remand for a new trial in the trial court limited to Woollen's claim for damages in the instant action due to legal expenses incurred in these other prior proceedings, and if such damages are established, they are to be reduced by Woollen's percentage of negligence. We conclude the remainder of the assigned errors in Woollen's cross-appeal are without merit.
II. STATEMENT OF FACTS
1. ACCIDENT
On February 14, 1992, at approximately 4:50 p.m., Woollen was driving his 1985 Buick Skylark west on Highway 136 in Johnson County when he was involved in a one-car automobile accident. Woollen, a 53-year old farmer, was alone in his vehicle. There was still daylight, and the temperature was approximately 45 degrees Fahrenheit. At the time of the accident, rain had been falling steadily for some time.
The surface of Highway 136 was deeply rutted, and as Woollen drove he tried to keep his car's tires on the ridges separating the ruts, for better control. Woollen was not familiar with the road conditions on Highway 136. He testified that he had driven on Highway 136 about five times in the 4 years preceding his accident but that he had never driven on Highway 136 in the vicinity of the accident in rainy or otherwise wet conditions.
Driving on the rutted surface, Woollen's car hit a pool of water that had "ponded" over the ruts and covered the entire width of the highway at the bottom of a low-grade slope. Woollen's car hydroplaned, and he lost control of it. The car veered diagonally across the highway, crossing the lane for oncoming traffic before leaving the road and striking a concrete culvert headwall located approximately 12 feet from the edge of the south side of the highway. As a result of the impact, Woollen's car flipped and rolled, and Woollen was ejected from it and sustained injuries.
Woollen sued the State for various damages under the Act. Woollen alleged, inter alia, that the State negligently failed to safely maintain the highway and negligently failed to warn motorists of the hazardous conditions at the accident site. Woollen's claim for damages for legal expenses incurred in prior proceedings brought to collect medical fees incurred for treatment of injuries he sustained in the accident were stricken before trial. Woollen filed his petition against the State in the district court for Johnson County on November 28, 1994.
2. CONDITION OF HIGHWAY 136 BEFORE ACCIDENT
(a) Road Ruts
When Woollen's accident occurred in February 1992, the surface of Highway 136 at the accident site was covered with asphaltic pavement. Over time, traffic had formed ruts on the highway's surface. In the westbound lane in which Woollen was traveling prior to the accident, the depth of the ruts was from one-half inch to over an inch. Trial evidence showed that some ruts were deeper than three-fourths of an inch at the point at which Woollen's car began to hydroplane. As a result of the highway's downward slope and steady rainfall on the day of the accident, water had filled and flowed out of the ruts, forming a pool across the highway. It was at this pool of water that Woollen lost control of his car when it began hydroplaning.
Fact witness Roger Batterscher testified that shortly before the accident, Woollen's car passed Batterscher's car after Batterscher had reduced his speed from 50 m.p.h to approximately 40 m.p.h. because of the highway ruts and the pooling water. Batterscher testified that in his experience, the road's rutted surface made it unsafe to drive at the 55-m.p.h. posted speed limit when the road was wet. The existence and depth of the *735 ruts in the vicinity of the accident were not seriously disputed at trial.
In 1972 and 1973, the State resurfaced Highway 136 at the accident location, applying a new asphaltic surface. No other changes were made to the highway or to the culvert and headwall.
In 1989, the State Department of Roads commenced the "Rehabilitation, Restoration and Reconstruction Project," which came to be known as the 3R Project, for Highway 136 at and near the accident site. As part of the 3R Project, the State extensively studied the highway's condition, and thus, the State was aware prior to Woollen's accident of the highway's slope, its deep surface ruts, and other automobile accidents caused by hydroplaning which had occurred in the approximate location of Woollen's accident.
In 1971 and again in 1991, the State adopted highway design and maintenance standards which specifically addressed, inter alia, the safety risks posed by ruts in road surfaces and the proper situation of culverts in relation to the edges of roadways. The trial court accepted evidence of these and other related standards, including exhibit 18, "Minimum Design Standards"; exhibit 74, "Pavement Management System"; exhibit 75, "Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices"; exhibit 232, the State's 1988 supplement to the manual found at exhibit 75; and exhibit 233, "Standards and Guides for Traffic Controls for Street and Highway Construction, Maintenance, Utility, and Incident Management Operations," published by the Federal Highway Administration. Documents entitled "Nebraska Highway Needs Study" for the years 1988 to 1990 were received as exhibits 86 through 88. For convenience, we refer to these exhibits collectively as "the safety standards." According to the safety standards, ruts three-fourths of an inch deep posed an unacceptable safety risk. Woollen's expert witness, William Berg, also so testified.
(b) Situation of Culvert and Headwall
Highway 136 was designed and originally constructed in 1955. The culvert and concrete headwall into which Woollen's car collided were installed during the highway's original construction. The culvert is a steel pipe, 48 feet long and 72 inches in diameter. The concrete headwall for the culvert was situated approximately 12 feet from the southernmost edge of the highway's paved surface. At the time this portion of Highway 136 was built, no standardized design safety guidelines had been adopted by the State to govern placement of the culvert and headwall in relation to the edge of the roadway. There was no evidence that the original design and construction of Highway 136 were negligent.
The safety standards introduced into evidence at trial addressed proper situation and "clear zone" dimensions for obstacles or structures located off the paved highway surfaces, such as the culvert and headwall into which Woollen's car collided. At all relevant times in the case at bar, the lateral clear zone at the accident site from the southern edge of Highway 136 to the culvert and headwall was 12 feet. According to the safety standards, lateral clearance of at least 20 feet from the pavement edge should be allowed when the average daily traffic (ADT) on a road is between 400 and 480 cars. In 1972 and 1973, when Highway 136 was resurfaced, the ADT was 570 cars, and it was projected that by 1992, the ADT would be 1,025 cars. The 1992 minimum design standards adopted by the State provided that for ADT between 850 and 1,700 vehicles, a 23-foot lateral clearance should be provided for any off-pavement structure.
At the time of the accident, the only warning sign near the culvert was a single post with three reflectors in a vertical configuration that marked the culvert headwall. Batterscher and Kimberly Koch, percipient witnesses to Woollen's accident, were both familiar with Highway 136 and drove it frequently. Both witnesses testified that the culvert and headwall which Woollen's car struck were not easily visible to motorists. Batterscher, a lifelong resident of the area who had driven on Highway 136 for years, testified that before Woollen's accident, he did not know that the culvert and headwall were there.
The evidence showed that the 3R Project was designed, inter alia, to correct these dangerous conditions. The State did not implement the changes recommended by the *736 3R Project. The State did take steps to warn motorists of the dangerous highway surface after Woollen's accident.
3. TRIAL OF WOOLLEN'S CLAIMS
Woollen's claims against the State were tried to the court on September 3 through 5, 1997, and the trial court's order entering judgment in favor of Woollen and against the State was filed on January 12, 1998. The judgment order was 16 pages long. In it, the trial court made extensive findings of fact and conclusions of law, relevant portions of which we set forth below.
(a) Factual Findings and State's Duty
As noted above, witness Batterscher testified that he had previously seen water pool on Highway 136 at the accident site and Batterscher also stated that on the day of the accident, Woollen passed him on the highway shortly before Woollen lost control of his car. Woollen testified that he did not remember exactly how fast he was going before the accident and that he did not recall seeing the pool of water before he drove into it. Based on the evidence, the trial court found that 40 m.p.h. was the appropriate driving speed for the conditions existing at the time the accident occurred. The trial court further found that a driver traveling at that speed would have seen the pool of water and would reasonably have been able to slow his or her vehicle before entering the pool. The trial court found that Woollen did not decrease his speed prior to driving into the pool of water where the hydroplaning started.
The trial court found that the ruts at and in the vicinity of the accident site rendered the surface of Highway 136 dangerous to motorists, especially during periods of rain and water accumulation. The trial court found that the State had actual notice of the ruts' depth and that according to the State's safety standards, the ruts posed an unacceptable safety risk, but that the State did not repair the ruts as it had a duty to do. The trial court found that the State knew of previous accidents at the location in question.
The trial court concluded that at the time of the accident, the State had no duty to rebuild the culvert and headwall, as there was no evidence that they had been negligently designed and constructed in 1955. However, based upon the minimum design and safety standards adopted by the State and introduced into evidence that showed the culvert and its headwall to be in a "danger area," the trial court concluded that the State had a duty to warn motorists of the hazard posed by the inadequate clear zone between the paved road's edge and the culvert and headwall and of the corresponding need for motorists to travel at a reduced rate of speed, or to construct guardrails or crash cushions to lessen the possibility of a collision with the culvert's headwall.
(b) Determinations Regarding Negligence
Given the foregoing findings of fact and conclusions regarding the State's duty, the trial court held that the State was negligent "in two respects." First, the trial court determined that the State failed to maintain the surface of Highway 136 in the vicinity of the accident and that this negligence facilitated the pooling of water, which created a hazard to drivers. Second, the trial court determined that the State was negligent in failing to warn drivers of the existence of the headwall or to take appropriate action with respect to the location of the headwall of the culvert to minimize the danger posed by the culvert headwall.
The trial court found that Woollen was contributorily negligent in failing to maintain an adequate lookout, in failing to maintain control of his vehicle, and in traveling at an unsafe rate of speed.
The trial court found that Woollen was responsible for 40 percent of the negligence that proximately caused the accident and that the State was responsible for the remaining 60 percent. The trial court apportioned liability for the accident's occurrence and Woollen's resultant damages according to these percentages.
(c) Damages Awarded to Woollen
Woollen sought damages for his past and future medical expenses; past, present, and future pain and suffering; lost earnings and loss of earning capacity; and loss of his vehicle. Woollen also claimed that he had incurred legal expenses defending against claims filed against him by health care providers seeking payment for care provided to Woollen as a result of the accident. In response *737 to the State's motion, the trial court struck Woollen's claim for damages for the attorney fees Woollen incurred in prior proceedings brought by health care providers seeking payment.
Following trial, the trial court found that as a result of the accident, Woollen sustained a total of $881,373.24 in damages, as follows: $145,373.24 in medical expenses, to date of trial; $50,000 in future medical expenses; $100,000 for Woollen's disability to date; $400,000 for Woollen's future disability; $100,000 for Woollen's pain and suffering to date; $50,000 for Woollen's future pain and suffering; $6,000 for Woollen's lost income to date of trial; and $30,000 for Woollen's loss of future earning capacity.
Based upon the court's determination concerning the respective negligence of the parties, judgment was entered against the State in the amount of $528,823.94, plus interest and costs. The trial court determined that Woollen had produced insufficient evidence to justify an award of damages for lost past or future income based upon Woollen's farming operation, although the trial court found that Woollen had proved an annual expense of $1,500 for an agronomist, which expense he had not been forced to incur prior to the accident. The trial court also determined that Woollen had offered insufficient evidence to merit an award of damages for the loss of his vehicle.
The State appeals, and Woollen cross-appeals.
III. ASSIGNMENTS OF ERROR
1. APPEAL
The State claims on appeal that the trial court erred in (1) failing to find the State immune from Woollen's claims under § 81-8,219(10) of the Act; (2) determining that the 12-foot clear zone for the roadside culvert struck by Woollen violated State policies; (3) finding the State had a duty to warn motorists of the culvert or to take other action such as installing guardrails or a crash cushion to make the location safer; and (4) failing to find that the State's negligence was not outweighed by Woollen's negligence.
2. CROSS-APPEAL
Woollen cross-appeals, claiming that the trial court erred in (1) striking Woollen's claim for damages for legal fees incurred to defend against actions seeking to collect for health care services provided to Woollen as a result of his injuries from the accident, (2) failing to award Woollen damages for his lost vehicle, (3) failing to award Woollen damages for his loss of earning capacity, (4) determining that Woollen was negligent, (5) determining that Woollen's negligence proximately caused his damages, and (6) allowing the State's expert witness, Dean L. Sicking, to testify on the issue of causation.
IV. STANDARD OF REVIEW
In actions brought under the Act, findings of fact made by the trial court will not be set aside unless such findings are clearly incorrect. Maresh v. State, 241 Neb. 496, 489 N.W.2d 298 (1992).
Where the facts of a case brought pursuant to the Act are undisputed, the issue of whether liability is precluded by sovereign immunity is a question of law in which an appellate court reaches a conclusion independent of the lower court's ruling. See, D.K. Buskirk & Sons v. State, 252 Neb. 84, 560 N.W.2d 462 (1997); Lemke v. Metropolitan Utilities Dist., 243 Neb. 633, 502 N.W.2d 80 (1993).
In proceedings where the Nebraska Rules of Evidence apply, the admission of evidence is controlled by rule and not by judicial discretion, except where judicial discretion is a factor involved in assessing admissibility. Talle v. Nebraska Dept. of Soc. Servs., 253 Neb. 823, 572 N.W.2d 790 (1998). Admission of expert witness testimony is ordinarily within the discretion of the trial court, and its ruling will be upheld in the absence of an abuse of discretion. Childers v. Phelps County, 252 Neb. 945, 568 N.W.2d 463 (1997).
The amount of damages awarded in a case pursuant to the Act is a matter solely for the finder of fact, whose action in this respect will not be disturbed on appeal if it is supported by evidence and bears a reasonable relationship to the elements of damages proved at trial. Talle, supra.
*738 V. ANALYSIS
1. STATE'S DIRECT APPEAL
(a) Sovereign Immunity
The State claims on appeal that given the evidence at trial, the trial court erred in failing to conclude that the State was immune from Woollen's claims. Neb. Const. art. V, § 22, provides, "The State may sue and be sued, and the Legislature shall provide by law in what manner and in what courts suits shall be brought." This provision of the Constitution is not self-executing, and legislative action is necessary to waive the State's sovereign immunity. Hoiengs v. County of Adams, 245 Neb. 877, 516 N.W.2d 223 (1994), appeal after remand 254 Neb. 64, 574 N.W.2d 498 (1998), cert. denied ___ U.S. ___, 119 S. Ct. 339, 142 L. Ed. 2d 280 (1998); Concerned Citizens v. Department of Environ. Contr., 244 Neb. 152, 505 N.W.2d 654 (1993). It is axiomatic that a waiver of sovereign immunity is found only where stated by the most express language of a statute or by such overwhelming implication therefrom as will allow no other reasonable construction. Hoiengs, supra. Statutes that purport to waive the State's sovereign immunity must be clear in their intent. They are strictly construed in favor of the sovereign and against the waiver. Wiseman v. Keller, 218 Neb. 717, 358 N.W.2d 768 (1984).
In support of its claim of immunity, the State relies upon § 81-8,219(10), which the State refers to as the "snow and ice" exception to the Act. The Act generally provides that the State is liable for torts in the same manner and to the same extent as a private entity. § 81-8,215. However, § 81-8,219 sets forth particular claims for which the State has not waived immunity. Section 81-8,219 was amended effective February 8, 1992, subject to an emergency clause. At the time of the accident, § 81-8,219 provided:
The State Tort Claims Act shall not apply to:
. . . .
(10) Any claim arising out of snow or ice conditions or other temporary conditions caused by nature on any highway as defined in section 30-602, bridge, public thoroughfare, or other state-owned public place due to weather conditions. Nothing in this subdivision shall be construed to limit the state's liability for any claim arising out of the operation of a motor vehicle by an employee of the state while acting within the course and scope of his or her employment by the state.
Although not relied upon by the parties, we note that § 81-8,219 further provided:
The State Tort Claims Act shall not apply to:
. . . .
(12) Any claim arising out of the alleged insufficiency or want of repair of any highway as defined in section 39-602, bridge, or other public thoroughfare. Insufficiency or want of repair shall be construed to refer to the general or overall condition and shall not refer to a spot or localized defect. The state shall be deemed to waive its immunity for a claim due to a spot or localized defect only if the state has had actual or constructive notice of the defect within a reasonable time to allow repair prior to the incident giving rise to the claim.
The State argues that the evidence shows that the rain falling on February 14, 1992, created a pool of water which was a "`temporary condition caused by nature,'" brief for appellant at 14, and that it was this condition which caused Woollen's accident. The State claims it is immune from liability pursuant to § 81-8,219(10) because the evidence shows that this accident was caused by "temporary conditions caused by nature ... due to weather conditions." We do not agree.
The State raised the immunity issue as an affirmative defense to Woollen's petition. As such, the burden of proving it rested upon the State. See Maresh v. State, 241 Neb. 496, 489 N.W.2d 298 (1992). Thus, the immunity issue must be evaluated on appeal in light of the proof introduced at trial.
The evidence at trial showed and the trial court found that the road surface at the location where Woollen lost control of his car was marred by ruts of three-fourths of an inch or greater depth. The trial court found that the State had actual knowledge of the *739 road's rutted condition before Woollen's accident and that there had been prior accidents at this location. In this regard, the trial court specifically noted that as a result of the State's 3R Project study of the road which began in 1989, the State had actual knowledge of hydroplaning accidents at the same location where Woollen lost control of his car. The evidence also showed that the State knew that the ruts created an unacceptable risk or danger that violated the State's own safety standards, yet the State did not repair the ruts, post a warning, or use other means to alert motorists of the danger caused by the ruts. The trial court determined that because of the ruts at this location, rainwater pooled at the base of a slight slope in the road instead of draining off the road, and that the pooled water increased the underlying dangerous condition of the road caused by the ruts.
Based on these facts, the trial court found that the underlying rutted condition of the road at the location of the accident, and not the weather on February 14, 1992, was a proximate cause of Woollen's loss of control of his vehicle and ensuing collision into the culvert headwall, that is, the ruts on the road were a condition created over time which caused Woollen's accident, and his accident was not due to a temporary condition caused by nature due to the weather. The trial court's findings are supported by evidence in the record, and we cannot say that they are clearly incorrect.
The State directs us to Hammond v. Nemaha Cty., 7 Neb.App. 124, 581 N.W.2d 82 (1998), in support of its claim that it was immune from suit. Hammond is distinguishable. In Hammond, the Nebraska Court of Appeals, applying § 81-8,219(10), concluded that the State was immune from a suit for damages arising from a motorcycle accident on a rain-slickened, gravel detour road on which the passenger plaintiff claimed the State had failed to post warnings. The Court of Appeals noted in Hammond that the evidence showed that the slickened condition of the road was obvious and that the motorcyclist, an experienced rider, had actual knowledge that the road surface was slick but, nevertheless, continued along the roadway. In Hammond, there was no evidence of negligent or defective maintenance of the road upon which the accident occurred. The Court of Appeals concluded that warnings about the conditions, of which the motorcyclist was aware and which were obvious, were not necessary. Hammond is inapposite to our analysis of the facts of the instant case.
In the case at bar, it is undisputed that through use and the passage of time Highway 136 was deeply rutted at the spot at which Woollen's car began to hydroplane. The trial court concluded and we agree as a matter of law that under § 81-8,219(10), the State was not immune from suit, because the defective condition of the highway, rather than a temporary condition caused by nature due to weather conditions, caused the accident. This conclusion is consistent with other portions of the Act, which we read in pari materia, see Willers v. Willers, 255 Neb. 769, 587 N.W.2d 390 (1998), and, in particular with § 81-8,219(12), which provides that with respect to roadways, "[t]he state shall be deemed to waive its immunity for a claim due to a spot or localized defect only if the state has had actual or constructive notice of the defect within a reasonable time to allow repair prior to the incident giving rise to the claim." In the instant case, the State knew that the ruts at the location of the accident constituted an unacceptable safety risk in violation of the State's highway safety standards and that accidents had occurred at this location, but the State nonetheless failed to act to alleviate the hazard caused by the ruts or to warn motorists of the danger the ruts created. The trial court determined that the ruts were the underlying cause of Woollen's accident, separate and independent from the rain that was falling at the time Woollen lost control of his car and as such, that the ruts were a proximate cause of Woollen's accident and injuries. On this record, we conclude the trial court's findings are not clearly incorrect, and based on our independent review of the law we affirm the trial court's conclusion that the State was not immune from suit on the basis of the "snow and ice" exception to liability contained in § 81-8,219(10).
(b) Trial Court Findings of State's Negligence
The trial court found that the State was negligent in two respects: (1) The State *740 failed to properly maintain the highway surface, which resulted in a pool of water that constituted a hazard to motorists, and (2) the State failed to warn motorists or take other appropriate action to minimize the danger of the culvert headwall, given its presence in what should have been an unimpeded clear zone. The trial court determined the State's failure to maintain the road and failure to warn of the location of the headwall or to take steps to minimize the danger of the headwall proximately caused Woollen's injury. On appeal, the State claims that the trial court erroneously mandated an onerous "`state of the art'" standard for all state roads. Brief for appellant at 21. The State's argument is without merit.
The section of Highway 136 upon which the accident occurred was constructed in 1955, when no standardized or official safety criteria governed the road design at issue. The trial court correctly found that the State was immune from liability for the design of the road, but that Woollen's claim against the State for negligent maintenance of the road was actionable and supported by the trial evidence. In Maresh v. State, 241 Neb. 496, 518, 489 N.W.2d 298, 314 (1992), we stated that "design is not actionable, as it involves discretionary decisions, but maintenance is actionable, as it does not."
The holding quoted above in Maresh was relied upon in Lemke v. Metropolitan Utilities District, 243 Neb. 633, 502 N.W.2d 80 (1993), where we held that when (1) a governmental entity has actual or constructive notice of a dangerous condition or hazard caused by or under the control of the governmental entity and (2) the dangerous condition or hazard is not readily apparent to persons who are likely to be injured by it, the governmental entity has a nondiscretionary duty to warn of the danger or take other protective measures that may prevent injury as the result of the dangerous condition or hazard. In Lemke, the defendant, a governmental entity which provided natural gas and associated products and services, was held liable for the plaintiff's catastrophic injuries resulting from leaking gas hoses which the defendant knew were defective and dangerous, but about which the defendant had issued no warning to alert others of the danger posed by the hoses nor taken steps to minimize the danger.
The State's liability for failure to maintain highways is the same as the comparable liability of counties. Maresh, supra. See § 81-8,219(12). Thus, to the extent applicable, we rely on cases involving alleged failure by political subdivisions to maintain highways.
In the case at bar, in order to establish the State's negligence, Woollen had to prove "the four basic elements of negligence, namely, duty, breach of duty, proximate causation, and damages." Scholl v. County of Boone, 250 Neb. 283, 289, 549 N.W.2d 144, 148 (1996). We analyze these elements below.
(i) Foreseeability and State's Duty to Woollen
We have noted:
"`"`Duty' is a question of whether the defendant is under any obligation for the benefit of the particular plaintiff; and in negligence cases, the duty is always the sameto conform to the legal standard of reasonable conduct in the light of the apparent risk....
"`"A duty, in negligence cases, may be defined as an obligation, to which the law will give recognition and effect, to conform to a particular standard of conduct toward another." Prosser and Keeton on the Law of Torts, Limited Duty § 53 at 356 (5th ed.1984).
"`Foreseeability is a factor in establishing a defendant's duty, or, as expressed by Justice Cardozo in MacPherson v. Buick Motor Co., 217 N.Y. 382, 394, 111 N.E. 1050, 1054 (1916): "[F]oresight of the consequences involves the creation of a duty[.]" ...'"
Lemke, 243 Neb. at 648-49, 502 N.W.2d at 90, quoting Union Pacific RR. Co. v. Kaiser Ag. Chem. Co., 229 Neb. 160, 425 N.W.2d 872 (1988). See, similarly, Popple v. Rose, 254 Neb. 1, 573 N.W.2d 765 (1998). Whether a legal duty exists for actionable negligence is a question of law dependent on the facts of a particular case. Id.; Schmidt v. Omaha Pub. Power Dist., 245 Neb. 776, 515 N.W.2d 756 (1994); Lemke, supra.
*741 For Woollen to recover, it was necessary that Woollen establish that the State could have foreseen the general manner in which the injury or loss occurred. The record on appeal amply demonstrates "`"[f]oresight of the consequences,"'" Lemke, 243 Neb. at 649, 502 N.W.2d at 90, sufficient to create a duty for the State to repair the deep ruts, i.e., a localized defect, and to warn of or minimize the dangers created by the inadequate clear zone between the edge of the highway pavement and the culvert headwall.
With respect to the ruts, the State's foresight arose as a result of, inter alia, its promulgation of safety standards, multiple and varied examinations of Highway 136 which confirmed its unacceptable noncompliance with State safety standards at the accident site, and the State's actual knowledge of other automobile accidents, including those caused by hydroplaning, which occurred at the same location where Woollen lost control of his car.
With respect to the concrete headwall, the State's foresight arose primarily from the evidence establishing the State's adoption of the safety standard's clear zones. The record contains evidence that a factor to be considered in analyzing the State's duty to repair and maintain a roadway is the existence of an adequate clear zone. A clear zone is an area beyond the roadway within which a fixed object, such as a utility pole or culvert headwall, is considered a hazard to vehicles. According to the evidence, when a hazard is identified in a clear zone, the State ordinarily has three alternatives: remove the hazard, relocate the hazard beyond the clear zone, or shield motorists from the hazard, customarily using a guardrail. According to the evidence, once a clear zone is identified, it should be maintained clear of hazards because conduct of drivers, including misconduct of drivers, causing vehicles to leave the roadway is anticipated. The concept of a "forgiving highway" has been developed to allow for driver error, including a driver's leaving the roadway and traveling off the shoulder or into the median. Goodermote v. State, 856 S.W.2d 715 (Tenn.App.1993). See, also, Martin v. Missouri Highway and Transp., 981 S.W.2d 577 (Mo.App. 1998). The safety standards in evidence in this case provide for a clear zone in the area of the accident because it is foreseeable that drivers will leave the roadway and an unimpeded clear zone reduces injuries. Thus, the trial court concluded, the State had a duty to adhere to its clear zone standards by warning of or minimizing the danger of the concrete headwall.
We conclude, as did the trial court, that the likelihood of an automobile accident at this location was foreseeable, thus creating a duty for the State to repair the deep ruts and to warn or minimize the dangers to motorists of the hazards precipitated by the narrow clear zone. See Maresh v. State, 241 Neb. 496, 489 N.W.2d 298 (1992).
(ii) State's Breach of Duty
A governmental entity's actual or constructive knowledge of a hazard or dangerous condition coupled with the entity's failure to follow governing statutes, policies, or rules that mandate warning of or correction of the hazard may, in a proper case, provide evidence of the entity's duty to a plaintiff and breach of that duty. For example, in Millman v. County of Butler, 244 Neb. 125, 504 N.W.2d 820 (1993), we held that a county was properly adjudged liable for negligently failing to maintain a bridge and warn of this danger where the bridge, like the highway in the case at bar, was built before safety criteria existed to govern the bridge's design and construction. The actionable negligence in Millman was not the bridge's design, but the county's actual knowledge of the bridge's unsafe condition and failure to warn motorists of the danger, in light of the facts that the county knew as the result of three prior inspections that the bridge was dangerous and did not meet the county's safety specifications and that the evidence indicated that a warning would have induced caution by drivers.
A similar analysis was applied in Maresh, supra, wherein this court concluded that the State negligently breached its duty to the plaintiff by, inter alia, the State's failure to follow its own safety standards in marking the edges of a highway made dangerous by construction. On appeal, we agreed with the Maresh trial court that the *742 State's violation of its safety standards was evidence of negligence and stated:
The State's failure to comply with its own manual as to channelizing device[s], edge markers, or placement of the object markers "in line with the edge of the obstruction," in light of the circumstances presented in this case, is sufficient evidence of breach of duty that it cannot be said the district court was clearly incorrect.
241 Neb. at 513, 489 N.W.2d at 311. See, also, Oldenburg v. State, 221 Neb. 1, 374 N.W.2d 341 (1985) (holding that State knew or should have known that its negligent failure to repair road rut in violation of safety standards rendered plaintiff's automobile accident reasonably foreseeable, thereby giving rise to duty by State and breach thereof). We agree with the trial court that the State breached its duty both as to the ruts in the roadway and as to the concrete headwall.
(iii) Proximate Cause
Determination of causation is ordinarily a matter for the trier of fact. Maresh, supra. See, also, Tapp v. Blackmore Ranch, 254 Neb. 40, 575 N.W.2d 341 (1998); Stewart v. City of Omaha, 242 Neb. 240, 494 N.W.2d 130 (1993). It is well established that a cause of an injury may be a proximate cause, notwithstanding that it acted through successive instruments of a series of events, if the instruments or events were combined in one continuous chain through which the force of the cause operated to produce the disaster. Rose v. Buffalo Air Service, 170 Neb. 806, 104 N.W.2d 431 (1960); Kroeger v. Safranek, 161 Neb. 182, 72 N.W.2d 831 (1955). In the instant case, the evidence shows that Woollen was traveling too fast for conditions, failed to maintain control of his vehicle, and failed to keep a lookout. The State failed to maintain a roadway that was rutted, posing a danger; the State failed to minimize the danger posed by the headwall in the clear zone; and Woollen's injuries were made more severe by collision into the concrete headwall. Each of these negligent acts combined to cause Woollen's injuries. The test of causation is not that the particular injury could be anticipated but whether, after the occurrence, the injury appears to be the reasonable and probable consequence of the acts or omissions. Oldaker v. Peters, 869 S.W.2d 94 (Mo.App.1993). See Libbey-Owens Ford Glass Co. v. L & M Paper Co., 189 Neb. 792, 801, 205 N.W.2d 523, 529 (1973) (stating that "[t]he law does not require precision in foreseeing the exact hazard or consequence which happens. It is sufficient if what occurs is one of the kind of consequences which might reasonably be foreseen").
Although we agree with the trial court that the State breached its duty as to the ruts and failed to minimize the impact with the concrete headwall in the clear zone and that these breaches proximately caused the accident, under the circumstances of this case, the trial court's alternative determination with respect to the clear zone, that is, that the State's breach of its duty to warn drivers of the condition of the clear zone was a proximate cause, is clearly incorrect. Our review of the record shows that under the facts of this case, a warning by the State logically placed in the area approaching the location where Woollen's vehicle left the pavement would not have been effective, because although such warning would have alerted oncoming eastbound traffic as to the clear zone conditions south of the pavement's southern edge, such warning would not have been visible to Woollen as he approached the location of the accident moving in a westerly direction. Thus, the trial judge's alternate finding of fact that the State's failure to warn proximately caused the accident is clearly incorrect. This determination does not require reversal, however, if the remaining evidence supports the trial court's decision regarding the comparative negligence of the parties. See, Gatewood v. City of Bellevue, 232 Neb. 525, 441 N.W.2d 585 (1989) (holding that where evidence is in conflict, issues of comparative and contributory negligence are questions of fact, wherein trial court's findings will not be set aside unless clearly wrong or unsupported by evidence); Phillips v. City of Omaha, 227 Neb. 233, 417 N.W.2d 12 (1987).
In an action under the Act, determination of whether the plaintiff's contributory negligence exceeds the negligence of the State requires findings of fact by the trial *743 court, which we will not disturb on appeal unless such findings are clearly incorrect. See, e.g., Maresh v. State, 241 Neb. 496, 489 N.W.2d 298 (1992). Compare Oldenburg v. State, 221 Neb. 1, 374 N.W.2d 341 (1985) (holding under former gross/slight negligence statutes that plaintiff who was more than slightly contributorily negligent was barred from recovery, despite State's negligence, which was less than gross). We have stated, "In Nebraska, a defendant's negligence is not actionable unless it is a proximate cause of the plaintiff's injuries or is a cause that proximately contributed to them." Sacco v. Carothers, 253 Neb. 9, 17, 567 N.W.2d 299, 305 (1997). Thus, for a plaintiff to succeed in an action based on negligence, the evidence must show that there is some reasonable connection between the negligent act or acts of defendant and the damage suffered by the plaintiff. Id. See W. Page Keeton et al., Prosser and Keeton on the Law of Torts § 41 (5th ed.1984). In the instant case, Woollen's evidence established proximate cause as a result of the State's breach of its duties to repair the ruts and to minimize the danger of impact with the headwall in the clear zone. The State's liability predicated on these acts of negligence was amply established.
As detailed more fully elsewhere in this opinion, the facts established that Woollen was traveling in excess of a safe speed for the existing conditions, failed to keep control of his vehicle, and failed to keep a proper lookout. The circumstances of this case support the trial court's determination that Woollen was 40 percent negligent. Thus, the trial court's attribution of 60 percent negligence to the State is correct. On this record, we affirm the trial court's findings that the State's negligence with respect to the ruts and the condition of the headwall in the clear zone were proximate causes of Woollen's injury and that the State's negligence exceeded Woollen's contributory negligence.
We are not persuaded by the State's argument that because the trial court found Woollen responsible for 40 percent of the negligence which caused his injuries, the State must be absolved of all liability for its negligence. Even given Woollen's contributory negligence, the trial court did not err in finding negligence on the part of the State which was a proximate cause of the accident. See, similarly, Maresh, supra. Under current comparative negligence principles, see Neb.Rev.Stat. § 25-21,185 et seq. (Reissue 1995), a plaintiff's contributory negligence as a contributing proximate cause of an accident may but does not necessarily discharge the other tort-feasor or tort-feasors, including the State, of liability for damages resulting from its or their negligence.
The State contends that the trial court's order imposing liability upon the State for Woollen's damages as a result of the State's negligence "seems to confer upon the State to have `state of the art' highways, in other words that all highways must be at the cutting edge of safety design." Brief for appellant at 21. We do not agree with this characterization of the trial court's order.
We have previously stated: "`If there is a legal duty to protect the public by warning of a danger or by taking preventing measures, or both, the choice of means may be discretionary, but the decision whether or not to do so at all is, by definition, not discretionary.'" Lemke v. Metropolitan Utilities District, 243 Neb. 633, 647, 502 N.W.2d 80, 89 (1993). Here, the trial court determined the liability of the State on the facts of this case; however, it did not order the State to bring the entirety of Highway 136 into compliance with the safety standards, nor did the trial court dictate the means or mode by which adequate compliance with the standards should be achieved.
It is true that a county is not an insurer of the safety of travelers on its roads. Scholl v. County of Boone, 250 Neb. 283, 549 N.W.2d 144 (1996). This proposition logically extends to roads and highways over which the State exercises control. Nonetheless, the State has certain duties with respect to roadways, and breaches of such duties which proximately cause injury can give rise to liability.
The trial court's findings that the State breached its duties to repair the ruts and minimize the danger of impact with the headwall and that such breaches proximately caused the injuries are supported by evidence in the record. The evidence also supports *744 the determination that Woollen was 40 percent negligent. Accordingly, we affirm the trial court's findings and order indicating that the State was 60 percent negligent.
2. WOOLLEN'S CROSS-APPEAL
For his cross-appeal, Woollen has raised six assignments of error. We will address these assignments in the order raised by Woollen.
(a) Legal Expenses in Prior Proceedings
Woollen claims the trial court erred in granting the State's motion to strike his claim for damages for legal expenses incurred by Woollen in prior proceedings brought to collect medical fees he incurred for the treatment of injuries he sustained in the accident. Because the trial court acted on a motion to strike, it heard no evidence as to the allegations in the petition for damages for attorney fees in prior proceedings, and we assume the truth of the allegations. See Thacker v. State, 193 Neb. 817, 229 N.W.2d 197 (1975). We conclude the trial court erred in striking this claim, and we reverse, and remand for further proceedings with respect to this item of damages.
The State observes in its brief that with regard to the recovery of attorney fees in Nebraska, the general rule is that such fees are recoverable only when provided for by statute or allowed in the uniform course of procedure. See, Zimmerman v. FirsTier Bank, 255 Neb. 410, 585 N.W.2d 445 (1998); Schirber v. State, 254 Neb. 1002, 581 N.W.2d 873 (1998). The rule applies, however, only when the party to litigation is seeking to recover attorney fees in the very case being litigated. See, Zimmerman v. FirsTier Bank, supra; Tetherow v. Wolfe, 223 Neb. 631, 392 N.W.2d 374 (1986).
In Tetherow, we held that the trial court correctly allowed as an item of the plaintiff's damages certain attorney fees which the plaintiff had incurred in defending an earlier legal action which were occasioned by the tort of the defendant. Thus, in Tetherow, the plaintiff vendor sued the defendant real estate broker for the broker's failure to properly prepare a real estate sale contract. We approved as an item of damages the attorney fees the vendor had expended defending a suit brought by the purchaser of the real estate to recover the downpayment. In support of our conclusion, we quoted the Restatement (Second) of Torts § 914(2) (1979), which states:
"One who through the tort of another has been required to act in the protection of his interests by bringing or defending an action against a third person is entitled to recover reasonable compensation for loss of time, attorney fees and other expenditures thereby suffered or incurred in the earlier action."
Tetherow, 223 Neb. at 638, 392 N.W.2d at 379.
In response to Woollen's assignment of error, the State relies upon Brochner v. Western Ins. Co., 724 P.2d 1293 (Colo.1986). The Brochner court held that a primarily liable, joint tort-feasor was not obligated in a contribution action to pay the attorney fees and costs incurred by the secondarily liable tort-feasor, in defending the original action filed by the injured plaintiff. Id. Brochner is inapposite to the instant case. Woollen is seeking as an item of damages in the instant case, i.e., legal expenses he paid in prior proceedings brought as a result of medical fees he incurred for the treatment of injuries he sustained as a result of the accident, as distinguished from attorney fees incurred to determine liability in the instant case. In accordance with our analysis in Tetherow, supra, Woollen's legal costs are recoverable as an item of damages in the instant case.
The trial court struck this claim for damages, and the record contains no evidence concerning the amount of these attorney fees and expenses incurred by Woollen. Because we have concluded that Woollen established liability against the State, he is entitled to an award of damages including the reasonable amount of attorney fees and expenses suffered by him due to his defense of the prior medical claims, to the extent his evidence may establish those damages, reduced by the percentage of Woollen's comparative fault.
We reverse, and remand the cause for a damages trial limited to the presentation of evidence and a determination of the actual expenditures for reasonable attorney fees and other necessary costs directly arising out of Woollen's defense of the health care claims and, if damages are established, they are to *745 be reduced by 40 percent, representing the percentage of negligence attributable to Woollen as determined in the first trial. See Reiser v. Coburn, 255 Neb. 655, 587 N.W.2d 336 (1998).
(b) Damages for Personal Property: Woollen's Vehicle
In his second assignment of error, Woollen claims the trial court erred in denying him recovery of damages for his vehicle, which Woollen claims was totally destroyed in the accident. In support of his damage claim, Woollen relies upon the following trial evidence: (1) photos of the automobile at the accident site, (2) an accident report, and (3) Woollen's testimony that he purchased the car for $3,000 several weeks before the accident and that he had paid sales tax on the purchase. Woollen concedes on appeal that his evidence is "not as precise as it might have been." Brief for appellee at 25.
Under Nebraska law, the measure of recovery for damage to personal property that cannot be repaired and thereby restored to substantially its condition immediately before the damage occurred "is the lost market value plus the reasonable value of the loss of use of the property for the reasonable amount of time required to obtain a suitable replacement." Chlopek v. Schmall, 224 Neb. 78, 89, 396 N.W.2d 103, 110 (1986). In order to recover this "lost market value," a party must show
(1) that the damage to the property is such that it cannot be repaired and thereby restored to substantially its condition immediately before the damage occurred or that the reasonable cost of repair exceeds the difference in market value of the property immediately before and immediately after the injury, (2) the reasonable market value of the property immediately before the accident, and (3) the reasonable market value of the property immediately after the accident.
Howells Elevator v. Stanco Farm Supply Co., 235 Neb. 456, 463, 455 N.W.2d 777, 782 (1990). Compare NJI2d Civ. 4.20.
A review of the record shows that the proof of the vehicle's value before the accident is thin and that, other than photographs of the vehicle, there is no evidence of the vehicle's value after the accident. We find no error in the trial court's determination that absent evidence of the car's value after the accident, it could not award damages to Woollen for the loss of his vehicle. We affirm the decision of the trial court on this item of damages.
(c) Lost Earnings
The court found that as a result of the accident, Woollen had sustained lost income to the date of trial in the amount of $6,000 and a $30,000 loss of future earning capacity. Woollen claims as error the trial court's award of past and future loss of earning capacity.
With respect to an award of damages under the State Tort Claims Act, we recently stated that the determination of the amount of damages is "a matter which is one solely for the fact finder, whose action in this respect will not be disturbed on appeal if it is supported by evidence and bears a reasonable relationship to the elements of damages proved." Talle v. Nebraska Dept. of Soc. Servs., 253 Neb. 823, 829, 572 N.W.2d 790, 796 (1998). In Talle, we held:
An award of damages may be set aside as excessive or inadequate when, and not unless, it is so excessive or inadequate as to be the result of passion, prejudice, mistake, or some other means not apparent in the record.... If an award of damages shocks the conscience, it necessarily follows that the award was the result of passion, prejudice, mistake, or some other means not apparent in the record.
(Citation omitted.) Id.
At trial, Woollen's evidence regarding loss of earning capacity consisted generally of Woollen's testimony regarding expenses and income. Given the evidence adduced at the trial concerning Woollen's claimed loss of past and future earning capacity, we cannot say the district court's award is so inadequate as to shock the conscience. This assignment of error is without merit.
(d) Contributory Negligence
Woollen's fourth and fifth assignments of error can be restated as one assignment of error: Woollen challenges the trial court's finding that he was contributorily negligent.
*746 In our consideration of the State's appeal, we have addressed the trial court's determination concerning the parties' comparative negligence. The trial court found that Woollen was aware of water collecting on the highway and was driving on the outer edges of the ruts so as to avoid driving in the accumulated water. The court further found the pool of water was visible to drivers traveling west. The court did not determine whether Woollen saw the pool, but found he failed to maintain control of his vehicle and was traveling at an unsafe rate of speed for the conditions then and there existing. These findings are amply supported by the record. We determine that the trial court did not err in finding that Woollen was contributorily negligent and that he was responsible for 40 percent of the negligence that proximately caused the accident. These assignments of error are without merit.
(e) Admission of Testimony of State's Expert on Causation
Woollen claims that the State's expert, Sicking, should not have been permitted to testify. Woollen's argument appears to be that Sicking's testimony did not agree with that of other witnesses and that it should, therefore, have been excluded. We do not agree.
The admission of expert testimony is ordinarily within the discretion of the trial court. Childers v. Phelps County, 252 Neb. 945, 568 N.W.2d 463 (1997). Here, Sicking indicated that his qualifications included a Ph.D. degree in civil engineering from Texas A & M University, 12 years of work with the Texas Transportation Institute researching roadside safety issues, and a position as the director of the Midwest Roadside Safety Facility, which conducts safety research and advises state highway departments on safety issues. Sicking testified that he has written over 100 publications, primarily in the area of roadside and roadway safety. He is a member of the American Society of Civil Engineers and the American Society of Mechanical Engineers, and he is an active participant on the Transportation Research Board. Sicking received the Federal Highway Administration Safety Award for his development of a roadside safety device. Sicking stated that he had reviewed the accident report, photos of the scene at the time of the accident, photos of the highway after the accident, photologs from the Nebraska Department of Roads photolog system, Woollen's deposition, witness statements, and climatological data in reaching his opinion. The record demonstrates that Sicking was qualified to render relevant expert testimony and had a basis for so doing. Woollen's complaint about Sicking goes to the weight to be accorded to Sicking's testimony, not its admissibility.
Our review of the record shows that the trial court did not err in admitting Sicking's testimony. This assignment of error is without merit.
VI. CONCLUSION
The trial court found Woollen 40-percent negligent and the State 60-percent negligent for the injuries Woollen suffered in this one-car accident. With respect to the State's appeal, we affirm the trial court's finding as to the comparative negligence of the parties. With respect to the cross-appeal, we conclude the trial court erred in striking Woollen's damage claim for legal expenses he paid in proceedings prior to the trial herein that concerned medical bills incurred for the treatment of injuries he sustained in the accident. We reverse, and remand for a new trial in the trial court limited to Woollen's claim for damages in the instant action due to legal expenses incurred in prior proceedings with directions that if such damages are established, such damages shall be reduced by 40 percent, representing the percentage of negligence attributable to Woollen as determined in the first trial. We conclude the remainder of the assigned errors in Woolen's cross-appeal are without merit.
AFFIRMED IN PART, AND IN PART REVERSED AND REMANDED FOR A NEW TRIAL ON THE ISSUE OF DAMAGES.

=== CASE 9737235 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:19:47.779572+00 ===

Smith, J.
Marian E. Phipps died on October 13, 1982, and her will was admitted to probate in the Barnstable Probate and Family Court on January 21, 1983. She left a life estate in her home and its contents, including three paintings by William McGregor Paxton,2 to her half sister, Janice E. Phipps (Phipps). At Phipps’ death, everything except the paintings would go to Kathy Barbera (Barbera), a cousin of the testatrix. The testatrix directed “that the three Paxton paintings ... be donated to the New York Museum of Fine Arts to be added to the Paxton paintings already at the Museum. If the New York Museum of Fine Arts advises they do not wish to accept these paintings, then I give, devise and bequeath said paintings to Kathy Bar-bera.”
Phipps was appointed executrix under the will. Because an investigation established that there is no museum by the name of the “New York Museum of Fine Arts,” Phipps filed a complaint in the Probate Court seeking instructions as to the proper disposition of the three paintings. The complaint listed as defendants all the named beneficiaries under the will, including Barbera. In addition, the Museum of Fine Arts (MFA), located in Boston, was listed as a defendant because, according to the complaint, it was the only “Museum of Fine Arts which already [had] a collection of Paxton paintings.” The Metropolitan *3Museum of Art (Metropolitan), located in New York, was not named as a defendant. It had one Paxton painting.
The MFA and Barbera were the only defendants who filed answers to the complaint. Both agreed with the executrix that the will contained a latent ambiguity.3 However, they disagreed as to the museum to which the faulty description applied. The MFA (and the executrix) contended that when the testatrix used the descriptive words “New York Museum of Fine Arts,” she meant the MFA. Barbera, however, claimed that the testatrix intended the Metropolitan to be the recipient of the paintings.4 Because of the ambiguity, the judge permitted the MFA and Barbera to introduce extrinsic evidence as an aid in construing the words used in the will. Tucker v. Seaman’s Aid Soc., 7 Met. 188, 208 (1843). See Smith, The Admissibility of *4Extrinsic Evidence in Will Interpretation Cases, 64 Mass. L. Rev. 123 (1979).
After the trial, the judge issued a memorandum of decision which contained his findings of fact, conclusions of law, and order for judgment. He ruled that he was not satisfied “beyond a reasonable doubt by the legal evidence as to whom the testatrix intended to name or describe when she referred to the New York Museum of Fine Arts.” He ordered that the three paintings be given to Barbera, rather than to the MFA or the Metropolitan. Later, the judge issued a “corrected” judgment, recognizing that the will gave to Phipps a life estate in the three paintings, after which they were to go to the residuary beneficiary (Bar-bera). The MFA appeals from that judgment and raises several issues. The MFA contends that (1) the judge committed reversible error when he employed the wrong standard of proof; (2) the judge’s findings of fact were, to a considerable extent, erroneous; (3) the judge committed error when he declined to apply the doctrine of cy pres; and (4) the judge erred in denying the MFA’s motion to join the Metropolitan as a party.
We agree that the judgment must be reversed because the judge applied the wrong standard of proof. Although we need not address the MFA’s other contentions, Brennan v. Bon-giorno, 304 Mass. 476, 478 (1939), we discuss briefly those issues which may arise at a new trial.
1. Standard of persuasion. The judge employed the “beyond a reasonable doubt” standard in determining whether the MFA had produced sufficient evidence to establish that it was the intended beneficiary. The MFA correctly argues that the “preponderance of evidence” standard should have been used by the judge.
Although one early case supports the judge’s position,5 later cases and a leading authority in the field demonstrate that in *5regard to latent ambiguities of this type, claimants need only meet the “preponderance of evidence” standard. In Bosworth v. Massachusetts Woman’s Christian Temperance Union, Inc., 299 Mass. 93 (1937), the testatrix bequeathed a legacy to the “Womens [sic] Christian Association.” Two organizations, the Boston Young Women’s Christian Association and the Massachusetts Woman’s Christian Temperance Union, Inc., claimed the bequest. The court stated that “[w]e cannot say that the judge was wrong in thinking it more likely that when the testatrix used the descriptive words . . . she meant the [Massachusetts Woman’s Christian Temperance Union, Inc.]” (emphasis supplied). Id. at 95. Also see Smith v. Livermore, 298 Mass. 223, 242-243 (1937). Professor Austin Wakeman Scott in his definitive treatise states that “[t]he cases are numerous in which there is a devise or bequest to a named corporation, but there is in fact no corporation having that name. ... It may appear that there are two or more corporations with somewhat similar names, none having the name stated in the will. The misnomer will not ordinarily result in the failure of the devise or bequest, and the property will be given to the corporation which on the evidence appears to have been the one probably intended by the testator.” (Emphasis supplied.) 3 Scott, Trusts § 397.3 [3d ed. 1967). Although neither source uses the phrase “preponderance of evidence” the terms “more likely” and “probabl[e]” are used in the definition of that phrase. See Sargent v. Massachusetts Acc. Co., 307 Mass. 246, 250 (1940) (“The weight or ponderance of evidence is its power to convince the tribunal which has the determination of the fact, of the actual truth of the proposition to be proved. After the evidence has been weighed, that proposition is proved by a preponderance of the evidence if it is made to appear more likely or probable in the sense that actual belief in its truth, derived from the evidence, exists in the mind or minds of the tribunal notwithstanding any doubts that may still linger there” [emphasis supplied]).
*6We see no reason why cases of this type require a higher degree of proof than the “preponderance of evidence” standard. We hold, therefore, that in a case that involves a latent ambiguity of this type, a claimant is required to show only by a preponderance of the evidence that it was the intended beneficiary. If no claimant meets that standard, the bequest is void for uncertainty. Tucker v. Seaman’s Aid Soc., 7 Met. at 208-209.
2. Other issues. We briefly discuss those issues which may arise at retrial.
a. Application of cy pres doctrine. The MFA argues that the judge committed error when he declined to apply the doctrine of cy pres to reform the bequest of the Paxton paintings. There was no error.
The cy pres doctrine has been stated as follows: “It is now a settled rule in equity that a liberal construction is to be given to charitable donations, with a view to promote and accomplish the general charitable intent of the donor, and that such intent ought to be observed, and when this cannot be strictly and literally done, [a] court will cause it to be fulfilled, as nearly in conformity with the intent of the donor as practicable.” Rogers v. Attorney Gen., 347 Mass. 126, 131 (1964), quoting from American Academy of Arts & Sciences v. President & Fellows of Harvard College, 12 Gray 582, 596 (1832). “[I]f the charitable purpose is limited to a particular object or to a particular institution, and there is no general charitable intent, then, if it becomes impossible to carry out the object ... the doctrine of [cy pres] does not apply, and, in the absence of any limitation over or other provision, the legacy lapses.” Selectmen of Provincetown v. Attorney Gen., 15 Mass. App. Ct. 639, 646 (1983), quoting from Teele v. Bishop of Derry, 168 Mass. 341, 343 (1897).
We think that the cy pres doctine does not apply here. The testatrix clearly intended to benefit a “particular,” although nonexistent, institution, rather than museums in general or the public at large. Selectmen of Provincetown v. Attorney Gen., supra at 646-647. In addition, the presence in the clause that disposes of the paintings of a specific gift over to Barbera if *7the paintings should not be accepted points to the conclusion that there was no general charitable intent. Rogers v. Attorney Gen., 347 Mass. at 134. We see nothing in this result that is contrary to G. L. c. 12, § 8K.
b. Joinder of Metropolitan as a party. After the close of the evidence, the MFA filed a motion requesting that the Metropolitan be added as a necessary party pursuant to Mass.R.Civ.P. 19(a), 365 Mass. 765 (1974). The motion was denied. The MFA contends that the judge erred because there was substantial evidence introduced at the trial by Barbera that demonstrated that the Metropolitan might have been the intended beneficiary of the paintings. Barbera argues that the judge’s action was correct because the Metropolitan was not subject to process and disclaimed any interest in the paintings in its affidavit that accompanied the MFA’s motion for summary judgment (see n.4).
Because there is to be a retrial, we do not deem it necessary to rule on the judge’s action. Prior to that trial, the MFA may renew its motion, if it so desires. We trust that if the motion is renewed, a showing will be made that the Metropolitan will submit to process and also claim that it has an interest relating to the subject of the action. See Mass.R.Civ.P. 19(a) (1), (2), 365 Mass. 765 (1974).
c. Findings of fact. We agree with the MFA that some of the judge’s findings were clearly erroneous, as they were not supported by any evidence. The judge ’ s finding that the testatrix told Barbera, prior to the execution of the will, that she wanted Barbera to have the paintings was totally irrelevant. By the terms of the will, the testatrix clearly intended a primary bequest to a museum, not a person. The sole issue before the judge was to determine which museum was probably intended by the testatrix to receive the paintings. In the circumstances of this case, any evidence that the testatrix intended the paintings to go to a person should not have been admitted. There were additional erroneous findings but they were of an inconsequential nature. We are sure that the errors will not be repeated at the new trial.
*83. Disposition. The judgment is reversed, and the case is remanded to the Probate Court for proceedings consistent with this opinion.
So ordered.
Paxton (1869-1941) was a leading member of the “Boston School," a group of painters affiliated with the Museum School, a branch of the Museum of Fine Arts. He was a nationally known artist, particularly well noted as a portrait painter and a genre painter. Paxton was a cousin of the testatrix.
A latent ambiguity occurs in a will when the words of the written instrument are clear and certain on their face, but some extrinsic fact makes their meaning ambiguous and uncertain. Here, the extrinsic fact that the “New York Museum of Fine Arts” did not exist rendered ambiguous the words “that the three Paxton paintings ... be donated to the New York Museum of Fine Arts.” Generally, there are two types of latent ambiguity. The first type occurs when a will clearly describes a person or thing, and two or more persons or things exactly fit that description. The second type of latent ambiguity exists when no person or thing exactly fits the description, but two or more persons or things partially fit. The latter type of latent ambiguity is present in the instant case. See Smith, The Admissibility of Extrinsic Evidence in Will Interpretation Cases, 64 Mass. L. Rev. 123, 124 (1979).
Barbera’s contention that the testatrix intended that the Metropolitan should receive the paintings was not devoid of self-interest. Prior to trial the Metropolitan had submitted an affidavit in support of the MFA’s motion for summary judgment, which motion was subsequently denied. In its affidavit, the Metropolitan disclaimed any interest in acquiring the paintings and “irrevocably assigned] all of its right, title, and interest, if any, in and to the three Paxton paintings ... to the [MFA].” Barbera argued to the judge that if he ruled that the Metropolitan was the intended recipient of the paintings, then she would be entitled to the paintings because the Metropolitan’s statement in the affidavit was a disclaimer which triggered the provision in the will which stated that “if . . . [the museum does] not wish to accept these paintings, then I give, devise and bequeath said paintings to Kathy Barbera.” We note that the judge’s decision to award the paintings to Barbera was not based on this argument, and that the question whether the assignment of the Metropolitan’s interest in the paintings would constitute a refusal to accept them under the terms of the will has not been decided.
In Thayer v. Boston, 15 Gray 347, 348 (1860), the court stated that “[i]t has long been settled that when in a will the name or description of a legatee is erroneous, the legacy shall not fail of effect if it can be ascertained beyond reasonable doubt, by legal evidence, whom the testator intended” (emphasis supplied). Although the opportunity has presented itself on numer-*5pus occasions, Thayer has never been cited as an authority in any subsequent Massachusetts case.

=== CASE 9737236 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:19:47.783607+00 ===

Warner, J.
(concurring). I write in concurrence only to point to the paradox were we to hold that the burden of persuasion for the MFA was “beyond a reasonable doubt.” A complaint for instructions may properly be brought only where a fiduciary harbors reasonable doubt as to the interpretation of an instrument or his duties under it. See Hill v. Moors, 224 Mass. 163, 165 (1916) (“In cases of doubt as to what the law is and what their conduct ought to be under it, [trustees] are entitled to instruction and direction from the court. . . . Unless a petitioner for instructions has real and serious doubts as to his duty, and the advice of the court is required for his protection and the discharge of his trust, the court is without jurisdiction to entertain such a petition.”); Restatement (Second) of Trusts § 259, comment b (1959) (“The trustee is not entitled to instructions as to his powers or duties, unless there is a reasonable doubt as to the extent of his powers or duties.”); 3 Scott, Trusts § 259 (3d ed. 1967) (“There are situations ... in which the court will refuse to give instructions to the trustee. No instructions will be given where there is no reasonable doubt as to his duties and powers.”); Bogert, Trusts and Trustees § 559 (rev. 2d ed. 1980) (“The court will not advise the trustee as to his powers where they are clearly fixed by the trust instrument or by common or statute law, but only in cases of real difficulty where there is an honest doubt after a careful reading of the instrument and the procurement of legal advice from counsel.”); Loring, Trustee’s Handbook § 48 (Farr rev. 1962) (“In practice, tile courts are sympathetic to the problem of the trustee and will seek to help him in any case where a bona fide doubt or controversy exists. The trustee cannot simply lay the burden of his office upon the court; the court will not instruct him just because he is ignorant and does not know his duty or what the *9law is. In such case, the court may tell him to take legal advice. There must be a reasonable doubt as to duties or powers.”). The imposition of a burden of persuasion beyond a reasonable doubt would, of course, render all such questions unresolvable.

=== CASE 9737237 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:19:55.433365+00 ===

OPINION
Chief Justice ZAPPALA.
We granted allowance of appeal in this case to determine whether the Superior Court erred in affirming the denial of Appellant’s petition for relief under the Post Conviction Relief Act (PCRA), 42 Pa.C.S. §§ 9541-46, when it deemed all of Appellant’s issues waived due to counsel’s failure to file a Statement of Matters Complained of on Appeal, pursuant to Pa.R.A.P.1925(b). For the reasons that follow, we affirm.
*443On November 17, 1995, a jury convicted Appellant of murder of the first degree, robbery, and criminal conspiracy.1 The trial court sentenced Appellant to life imprisonment for the first degree murder conviction, along with two concurrent sentences of five to ten years’ imprisonment for the robbery and conspiracy convictions. The Superior Court affirmed, Commonwealth v. Butler, 706 A.2d 1249 (Pa.Super.1997) (unpublished memorandum), and Appellant did not seek allowance of appeal to this Court.
Appellant filed a pro se PCRA petition on February 26, 1998. Alter the PCRA court appointed counsel, Appellant filed an amended petition.2 The PCRA court dismissed Appellant’s amended petition without a hearing and Appellant filed a notice of appeal with the Superior Court. On June 25,1999, the PCRA court ordered Appellant to file a Statement of Matters Complained of on Appeal, pursuant to Pa.R.A.P. 1925(b). Appellant failed to file a Rule 1925(b) statement. As a result, the PCRA court issued an opinion that addressed only the claims raised in the amended PCRA petition.
The Superior Court affirmed in a published opinion. Commonwealth v. Butler, 756 A.2d 55 (Pa.Super.2000). Relying on this Court’s decision in Commonwealth v. Lord, 553 Pa. 415, 719 A.2d 306 (1998), the court reasoned that it could “only conduct meaningful review where the appellant writes a Rule 1925(b) statement and the court below ... responds to those issues in its opinion.” Butler, 756 A.2d at 58. Accordingly, the court held that appellants will face waiver if they fail to comply with a court’s order to file a Rule 1925(b) statement. Id. In light of Appellant’s failure to file a Rule 1925(b) statement, the Superior Court deemed all of Appellant’s issues waived and affirmed the denial of Appellant’s amended PCRA petition. Id.
We granted Appellant’s petition for allowance of appeal, limited to the issue of whether the Superior Court erred in deeming all of Appellant’s issues waived due to his failure to *444file a Rule 1925(b) statement. Commonwealth v. Butler, 564 Pa. 471, 769 A.2d 442 (2001). As the Commonwealth never raised Rule 1925 waiver, Appellant argues that the Superior Court improperly deemed his issues waived sua sponte.
As promulgated by this Court, Pennsylvania Rule of Appellate Procedure 1925 provides, in pertinent part:
(a) General rule. Üpon receipt of the notice of appeal the judge who entered the order appealed from, if the reasons for the order do not already appear of record, shall forthwith file of record at least a brief statement, in the form of an opinion, of the reasons for the order, or for the rulings or other matters complained of, or shall specify in writing the place in the record where such reasons may be found.
(b) Direction to file statement of matters complained of. The lower court forthwith may enter an order directing the appellant to file of record in the lower court and serve on the trial judge a concise statement of the matters complained of on the appeal no later than 14 days after entry of such order. A failure to comply with such direction may be considered by the appellate court as a waiver of all objections to the order, ruling or other matter complained of.
Prior to our decision in Lord, the intermediate appellate courts seized upon an apparent vest of discretion contained in the language of Rule 1925: “A failure- to comply with such direction may be considered by the appellate court as a waiver....” Pa.R.A.P.1925(b) (emphasis added). As a result, courts enforced waiver under Rule 1925 by determining whether they could conduct a “meaningful review” despite an appellant’s failure to either file a Rule 1925(b) statement or include certain issues within a filed statement.3
*445In Lord, however, this Court eliminated any aspect of discretion and established a bright-line rule for waiver under Rule 1925: “[I]n order to preserve their claims for appellate review, [ajppellants must comply whenever the trial court orders them to file a Statement of Matters Complained of on Appeal pursuant to Rule 1925. Any issues not raised in a 1925(b) statement mil be deemed waived.” Lord, 719 A.2d at 309 (emphasis added). Thus, waiver under Rule 1925 is automatic.
The same is true in PCRA appeals, despite the recitation of issues within a PCRA petition. As we noted in Lord, the purpose of Rule 1925 is “to aid trial judges in identifying and focusing upon those issues that the parties plan to raise on appeal.” Id. at 308; see also Commonwealth v. Johnson, 565 Pa. 51, 771 A.2d 751, 755 (2001) (Opinion Announcing the Judgment of the Court). As the Superior Court cogently observed, PCRA petitions fail to serve that purpose. Here, the claims in Appellant’s amended PCRA petition were identical to the issues that Appellant ultimately argued before the Superior Court. While the PCRA court was well acquainted with the claims raised in the amended PCRA petition, Appellant’s failure to comply with the court’s order to file a Rule 1925(b) statement compelled the court to speculate which of those claims Appellant would maintain on appeal. Bearing in mind the purpose of Rule 1925, this result is unsupportable. Therefore, as PCRA petitions do not fully inform PCRA courts of what issues an appellant will raise on appeal, a PCRA petition cannot serve as a substitute for a Rule 1925(b) statement.
*446We reiterate our holding in Lord, and now expressly apply it to PCRA appeals. PCRA appellants, in order to preserve their claims for appellate review, must comply whenever the PCRA court orders them to file a Statement of Matters Complained of on Appeal under Rule 1925. Accordingly, any issues not raised in a Rule 1925(b) statement are waived. See Lord, 719 A.2d at 309.
Applying the preceding to the case sub judice, Appellant’s failure to comply with the PCRA court’s order to file a Rule 1925(b) statement resulted in the automatic waiver of any issues he may have raised on appeal. As issues not preserved for appellate review generally may not be considered by an appellate court, the Superior Court properly refused to address the merits of Appellant’s waived claims.
Even so, Appellant argues that the Superior Court erred in deeming his issues waived sua sponte. As explained supra, however, Rule 1925 waiver is automatic. Accordingly, the Superior Court properly deemed Appellant’s issues waived under Rule 1925, notwithstanding that the Commonwealth never briefed or argued Rule 1925 waiver. Moreover, if we were to accept Appellant’s position, courts would be constrained to selectively enforce the Rule based upon the arguments of parties, which would subvert the purpose and effectiveness of Rule 1925.
Lastly, Appellant has attached an unverified Rule 1925(b) statement to his brief and avers that he “provided” it to the PCRA court. Appellant’s Brief at 5, Appendix “C.” Appellant does not allege that he properly filed this statement with the PCRA court. Rather, the unverified Rule 1925(b) statement is addressed directly to the PCRA court judge. In addition, Appellant’s unverified Rule 1925(b) statement does not appear anywhere, in the original record, is not evinced by any docket entry, and does not bear the customary “time stamp” of the clerk of courts.
Rule 1925 is not satisfied when an appellant merely mails his Rule 1925(b) statement to the presiding judge. Rather, Rule 1925(b) requires appellants to “file of record in the lower *447court and serve on the trial judge a concise statement of the matters complained of on the appeal.... ” Pa.R.A.P.1925(b). Even if we were to accept Appellant’s unproven assertions that he mailed his statement to the PCRA court judge, Appellant nonetheless failed to properly file the statement with the clerk of courts. Thus, as “[a]ny issues not raised in a 1925(b) statement will be deemed waived!,]” Appellant’s failure to properly file a Rule 1925(b) statement waives any issues he may have raised. See Lord, 719 A.2d at 309.
The order of the Superior Court is affirmed.
Justice EAKIN did not participate in the consideration or decision of this case.
Justice CASTILLE and Justice SAYLOR file concurring opinions.
Justice NIGRO files a dissenting opinion.
. 18 Pa.C.S. §§ 2502(a), 3701, 903, respectively.
. Appellant’s court-appointed attorney has represented Appellant throughout the PCRA proceedings and this appeal.
. See Commonwealth v. Ervin, 456 Pa.Super. 782, 691 A.2d 966 (1997) (holding that mere omission of issue from statement does not automatically result in waiver; rather, Superior Court will address merits of any issue in criminal case whenever certified record is sufficient to conduct meaningful appellate review); Commonwealth v. Stilley, 455 Pa.Super. 543, 689 A.2d 242 (1997) (holding that appellate court may exercise discretion to invoke waiver provision of Rule 1925 only where failure to file statement or omission from statement defeats effective appellate review); Reynolds v. Commonwealth, Dept. of Transp., Bureau of Driver *445Licensing, 694 A.2d 361 (Pa.Cmwlth.1997) (explaining that Commonwealth Court would review merits of appeal despite agency’s failure to file statement if trial court filed an opinion allowing meaningful appellate review); Commonwealth v. Nelson, 453 Pa.Super. 637, 684 A.2d 579 (1996) (holding that waiver of claims on appeal for failure to file statement is not automatic; Superior Court will discharge its appellate function unless failure to file statement prevenís meaningful appellate review). Indeed, this analysis has survived despite our decision in Lord. See, e.g., Commonwealth v. Ortiz, 745 A.2d 662 (Pa.Super.2000) (finding no impediment to meaningful review where trial court’s opinion discussed sole issue raised on appeal, despite untimely filing of statement).

=== CASE 9737238 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:19:55.438191+00 ===

Justice CASTILLE,
concurring.
I join the majority opinion, which affirms the order of the Superior Court, which affirmed the denial of appellant’s petition for relief under the Post Conviction Relief Act (PCRA), 42 Pa.C.S. §§ 9541-46. I write separately to address points made in the dissenting opinion by Mr. Justice Nigro.
The majority holds that appellant’s failure to properly file a statement of matters complained of on appeal, in response to the PCRA court’s directive that he do so under Pa.R.A.P. 1925(b), results in the waiver of any appellate issues he would have raised. This holding is commanded by Commonwealth v. Lord, 553 Pa. 415, 719 A.2d 306 (1998). As the majority notes, in Lord, this Court, in an opinion authored by Mr. Justice Nigro, specifically held that:
[F]rom this day forward, in order to preserve their claims for appellate review, Appellants must comply whenever the trial court orders them to file a Statement of Matters Complained of on Appeal pursuant to Rule 1925. Any issues not raised in a 1925(b) statement will be deemed waived.
*448719 A.2d at 309 (emphases supplied). The “day forward” referred to in Lord was the date of the decision, i.e., October 28, 1998. It was not until June 25, 1999, almost eight months later, that appellant was ordered to file an Appellate Rule 1925 statement in this case. His failure to do so, under the plain and unequivocal language of Lord, requires affirmance of the Superior Court’s order.
As the majority recognizes, the bright line interpretation of Appellate Rule 1925(b) ultimately set forth in Lord was not commanded by the actual language of the rule, since it is expressed in purely discretionary terms, i.e., “A failure to comply with such direction may be considered by the appellate court as a waiver of all objections to the order, ruling or other matter complained of.” Pa.R.A.P.1925(b) (emphasis supplied). As the majority also aptly notes, Lord “eliminated any aspect of discretion” in treating a failure to comply with an Appellate Rule 1925(b) directive. The very fact that this Court altered the nature of the Rule from permissive to mandatory obviously is one of the reasons our bright-line construction was given prospective effect only.
I have no qualms about the merit of the construction prospectively adopted in Lord. Requiring compliance with an Appellate Rule 1925 directive aids the trial judge in identifying which issues to write upon, it helps to ensure effective appellate review, and it provides for a certainty and evenness in application that is difficult, if not impossible, to achieve via a discretionary rule. Moreover, since Appellate Rule 1925 is a rule of our own creation, I had no difficulty in Lord, and I have no difficulty now, with our effectively amending the rule via a prospective decision, rather than through the formal rulemaking process.
The dissent offers a narrowing construction of Lord’s unequivocal, prospective holding, suggesting that it was powered by the interplay between Appellate Rule 1925 and Criminal Procedure Rule 720 (then-Rule 1410), which governs post-sentencing procedures. Since Lord involved a direct criminal appeal, and spoke to the interplay of Appellate Rule 1925 and a post-verdict rule, the dissent suggests, Lord’s holding should *449be confined to direct appeals. The dissent objects to what it views as the majority’s “expansion” of the holding in Lord, which it deems “unwarranted and unfair.” In my view, the dissent’s quarrel is with Lord and not with the majority’s proper application of that unequivocal decision.
Whatever may have been the factual and procedural posture of the case in Lord, the holding at issue was specifically rendered under Appellate Rule 1925, it was rendered without qualification, and it was rendered in light of the purpose which Appellate Rule 1925 is designed to serve. The Rules of Appellate Procedure govern all appeals, not just criminal appeals, and not just direct criminal appeals. See Pa.R.A.P. 103 (“Scope of Rules”) (“These rules govern practice and procedure in the Supreme Court, the Superior Court and the Commonwealth Court, including procedure in appeals to such courts from lower courts.... ”). The distinction offered by the dissent is not recognized in the Rules, nor was it recognized in Lord.
Indeed, the issue in Lord was not whether there was something unique to criminal direct appeals which required that Appellate Rule 1925 be construed differently than it would be in all other appellate contexts, but the very opposite: did the fact that Criminal Rule 720, which was relatively new and which provides that issues raised before or during trial shall be deemed preserved for appeal irrespective of whether the defendant renews them in a post-sentence motion, render a potential waiver under Appellate Rule 1925 inoperative? The question, in essence, was whether direct criminal appeals were excepted from the general appellate waiver rule set forth in Appellate Rule 1925.
In deciding the question, the Court in Lord noted that the Superior Court had interpreted the new criminal rule as relieving criminal defendants of the obligation to “list[ ] all appellate issues in a 1925(b) statement” if the issues not raised could be effectively reviewed from the record. We explicitly “disagree[d]” with those decisions, not because of anything unique to direct criminal appeals, but because of the purpose of Appellate Rule 1925:
*450The absence of a trial court opinion poses a substantial impediment to meaningful and effective appellate review. Rule 1925 is intended to aid trial judges in identifying and focusing upon those issues that the parties plan to raise on appeal. Rule 1925 is thus a crucial component of the appellate process.
Lord, 719 A.2d at 308. Accord Commonwealth v. Johnson, 565 Pa. 51, 771 A.2d 751, 755 (2001) (plurality opinion). Accordingly, we held that direct criminal appeals were not excepted from Appellate Rule 1925 and, in so holding, we announced the prospective interpretation of the appellate waiver standard set forth in Appellate Rule 1925(b). Nothing in Lord remotely suggested that the Appellate Rule 1925 holding was limited to direct criminal appeals, as if the unitary language and purpose of the Rule means one thing for some appeals, and something entirely different for others.
As noted above, I recognize, as the majority does, that our prospective interpretation of Appellate Rule 1925 in Lord was stricter than what the rule’s plain language suggested. But the strictness of our prospective interpretation had nothing to do with the fact that Lord involved a direct criminal appeal, rather than a civil appeal, or a PCRA appeal, or any other appeal; it had to do with the necessary and salutary function of Appellate Rule 1925 as a rule of appellate procedure. As such, it is an interpretation that necessarily must apply to all cases on appeal. Notably, both the Superior Court and the Commonwealth Court have applied the teaching of Lord to civil cases no less than to criminal cases. Lobaugh v. Lobaugh, 753 A.2d 834, 837-38 (Pa.Super.2000); Giles v. Douglass, 747 A.2d 1236, 1236-37 (Pa.Super.2000); Municipality of Monroeville v. Monroeville Police, 767 A.2d 596, 599 n. 6 (Pa.Cmwlth.2001), allocatur denied, 566 Pa. 672, 782 A.2d 551 (2001); Cheltenham Twp. Sch. Dist. v. Slawow, 755 A.2d 45, 48 (Pa.Cmwlth.2000). I would not undo Lord’s salutary effect in an ad hoc fashion.
Even if I believed that Appellate Rule 1925, as construed in Lord, was subject to equitable exceptions upon an ad hoc basis, I see nothing “unfair” in holding PCRA appeals subject *451to the rule. Indeed, in my view, an exception for PCRA appeals would be perverse. First, it is difficult to understand why notions of fairness would require favoring a collateral appeal in a criminal case over the direct appeal. Indeed, the equities work in the opposite direction. The right of direct appeal is constitutional while the right of PCRA review exists only by statute, with the right of PCRA appeal being secondarily triggered. Moreover, the claims available upon PCRA review are far more restricted than are available upon direct appeal; although PCRA review may be a “safety valve” to permit review of some issues not previously or properly raised, it is by no means a substitute for a direct appeal.
More importantly, the PCRA affords criminal defendants something which is afforded to no other litigant: a second bite at the review apple. Application of Lord on a direct civil appeal puts that appellant out of court forever with respect to the waived claims. Those civil appellants who have their claims deemed waived under Lord (or under any waiver doctrine) have no “safety valve” whatsoever. I would not place a greater value upon an appeal of a collateral attack upon a final judgment, an attack not available to all, than I would place upon the right of appeal, which is available to all. Thus, in my mind, if Lord sufficiently balances the equities in the direct appeal context, it necessarily is fair in the context of collateral appellate review of final criminal judgments.
The majority rightly applies Lord in this appeal. I join the opinion without reservation.

=== CASE 9737239 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:19:55.442498+00 ===

Justice SAYLOR,
concurring.
I am cognizant of the interests that motivated the Lord Court’s decision — given the constraints arising from the volume of cases managed by the Pennsylvania appellate courts, as well as the concern for uniformity in the administration of claims, the system simply cannot function properly if appellants or their counsel are derelict in their obligation to adequately frame appeals for review. See Commonwealth v. Lord, 558 Pa. 415, 418-20, 719 A.2d 306, 308-09 (1998). Nevertheless, at least on direct appeal in criminal cases, a majori*452ty of the Court appears to be willing to ameliorate the effect of Lord’s waiver rule by allowing for assessment of claims of ineffective assistance of counsel for failing to file a Rule 1925 statement. See Commonwealth v. Johnson, 565 Pa. 51, 60, 771 A.2d 751, 756 (2001) (plurality).1
The effect of Johnson, however, is to fully resurrect the “double waiver” situation that led to the elimination of the requirement to file post-verdict motions in criminal cases to preserve claims for appeal.2 As the Lord Court explained, the requirement to identify issues in post-sentence motions had resulted in issues being waived on appeal where they were not so identified, but nevertheless generated subsequent claims of ineffective assistance of counsel. See Lord,- 553 Pa. at 419, 719 A.2d at 308-09 (quoting Commonwealth v. Cortes, 442 Pa.Super. 258, 261, 659 A.2d 573, 574 (1995)). Such multi-faceted process was considered cumbersome and unnecessary. See id. Lord, as applied by the lead in Johnson, nonetheless left intact the same process for challenging counsel’s stewardship subsequent to the waiver, merely displacing the second facet of the double waiver from the post-verdict motion stage to the stage governed by Rule 1925.
Whereas Johnson concerned a case on direct appeal, the present case arises at the post-conviction stage. Significantly, however, this Court has held that post-conviction petitioners have a rule-based interest in effective post-conviction counsel analogous to the Sixth Amendment right prevailing at trial and on direct appeal, and that a remedy may be fashioned to vindicate such entitlement. See Commonwealth v. Priovolos, 552 Pa. 364, 368, 715 A.2d 420, 423 (1998). Indeed, the Court has directed that, in cases in which counsel’s deficient performance in effect denies the post-conviction petitioner the right of appeal guaranteed by Article V, Section 9 of the Pennsylva*453nia Constitution, the accepted remedy is a remand for appointment of new counsel. See Commonwealth v. Albrecht, 554 Pa. 31, 45-46, 720 A.2d 693, 700-01 (1998). In accordance with Johnson, Priovolous and Albrecht, it appears to me that there is an avenue in place to vindicate the rights of a post-conviction petitioner whose counsel has failed to file a Rule 1925 statement as directed without justification.
In light of Appellant’s failure to implicate or discuss in his one-and-one-quarter page argument this potential avenue for relief or some broader perspective gleaned from experience with Lord, I am simply unable to conclude that the Court should fashion an equitable exception to Lord, or a general exception to the rule pertaining to the post-conviction process, in this case. Respectfully, however, given the limited argument presented, I do not join in the majority’s broader pronouncements. Rather, it appears to me that it may be advisable for the Court to reconsider Lord’s strict waiver rule in an appropriate case in light of the developing experience, including that which is reflected in Johnson and its progeny, particularly as there was some advantage in reposing a degree of discretion in the intermediate appellate courts in instances in which a claim can be reviewed on the record (as, for example, a sufficiency claim). If the Court were to re-implement Rule 1925(b) as written (“failure to comply with such direction [to file a statement of matters complained of on appeal] may be considered ... as a waiver”), Lord could effectively be read as a strong admonition that the failure to raise issues in a Rule 1925 statement may well result in a deemed waiver by an appellate court.
. In civil cases, it appears that the client's present recourse, if any, lies with counsel.
. By comparison, in the civil context the waiver concern is more pronounced, as, to adequately preserve an issue for review, it must be raised in pre-trial proceedings or by appropriate method at trial, see Pa.R.Civ.P. No. 227.1(b)(1), included in post-trial motions, see id. at (b)(2), and specified in a Rule 1925(b) statement.

=== CASE 9737240 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:19:55.446593+00 ===

Justice NIGRO,
dissenting.
I disagree with the majority’s conclusion that the failure of Appellant’s counsel to file a court-ordered Pa.R.A.P.1925(b) statement resulted in the automatic waiver of all the claims that Appellant raised on appeal from the denial of his PCRA petition. In my view, the strict waiver rule from Commonwealth v. Lord, 553 Pa. 415, 719 A.2d 306 (1998), is not *454applicable to the unique circumstances of a PCRA appeal. Thus, I must respectfully dissent.
Appellant filed a pro se PCRA petition on February 26, 1998, which was later amended by appointed counsel. Over one year later, on May 11, 1999, Appellant’s amended petition was dismissed without a hearing, the PCRA court having determined that a decision could be made from the existing record. Appellant filed a notice of appeal to the Superior Court, and on June 25, 1999, the PCRA court ordered him to file a statement of matters complained of on appeal pursuant to Pa.R.A.P.1925(b). Appellant’s counsel did not file a Rule 1925(b) statement on his behalf and, as a result, in its Rule 1925(a) opinion the PCRA court addressed only the issues Appellant raised in his amended PCRA petition.
The Superior Court affirmed the PCRA court’s denial of Appellant’s PCRA petition without considering the merits of any of his appellate issues. Commonwealth v. Butler, 756 A.2d 55 (Pa.Super.2000). Instead, the court deemed all of Appellant’s claims waived due to his failure to file a Rule 1925(b) statement, concluding that a PCRA petition may not serve as a substitute for a 1925(b) statement. I agree with Appellant that the Superior Court erred in refusing to address the merits of the issues he raised in his PCRA petition.
In Commonwealth v. Lord, this Court considered whether Pennsylvania Rule of Criminal Procedure 720 (formerly Rule 1410(B)(1)(c)) precludes an appellate court from deeming an issue waived when an Appellant fails to raise that issue in his Rule 1925(b) statement. 719 A.2d at 307. Thus, Lord involved the interplay between Rule 1925(b) and Rule 720, which states that issues raised before or during trial are preserved for appeal whether or not the defendant elects to file a post-sentence motion on those issues.1 After examining the intent *455behind Rule 720 and the importance of Rule 1925 to the appellate process, we determined that the Rules were not in conflict, and that Rule 720 did not modify the operation of Rule 1925. Given this determination, we held that in order to preserve their claims for appellate review, appellants must comply whenever the trial court orders them to file a 1925(b) statement and that any issue not raised in an appellant’s 1925(b) statement will be deemed waived. Id. at 309.
Given this analysis and reasoning, it is clear to me that the strict waiver rule of Lord applies only in the context of direct appeals. The majority essentially agrees with this conclusion, but then expands the strict waiver rule to PCRA appeals, explaining that because the purpose of Rule 1925 is to aid trial judges in identifying the issues a party plans to raise on appeal, the need for a 1925(b) statement still exists at the PCRA level. As a result, the majority finds that Appellant’s PCRA petition cannot serve as a substitute for a 1925(b) statement, and instead concludes that the strict waiver rule from Lord applies to Appellant’s appeal from the denial of his PCRA petition. In my view, this expansion of Lord is not only unwarranted, but simply unfair.
Importantly, when a court applies the strict waiver rule of Lord on direct appeal, the appellant still has the safety valve of PCRA review. See Commonwealth v. Johnson, 565 Pa. 51, 771 A.2d 751, 759 n. 1 (2001) (Nigro, J., concurring and dissenting) (“Appellant, however, may still seek relief for his ineffective assistance of counsel claim under the [PCRA]”). This protection, however, is clearly absent on appeal from the denial of a PCRA petition. While I recognize that the PCRA represents the General Assembly’s attempt to provide some finality to criminal appeals, I nonetheless believe that, by *456applying the Lord waiver rule to PCRA appeals, the majority fails to provide a reasonable opportunity for those who have been wrongly convicted to demonstrate the injustice of their conviction.2 With the firm time restrictions mandated by the PCRA,3 the majority effectively precludes Appellant, and all similarly situated future PCRA appellants, from receiving even one appellate review of their claims on the merits, through no fault of their own. As I cannot endorse such a result, I must respectfully dissent.4
. Some lower courts had concluded that, pursuant to post-trial procedures under Rule 720, appellants on direct appeal were not required to list all appellate issues in a 1925(b) statement as long as the issues not raised in the statement could be effectively reviewed from the record. As we explained in Lord, Rule 720 was enacted in order to eliminate the "double waiver" doctrine:
*455Prior practice required that to preserve an issue for appeal, the matter must have been raised initially when it occurred either before or during trial, and then be included in the Post-verdict Motion. Failure to include an issue in the Post-verdict Motion resulted in it being waived on appeal and often led to subsequent attacks on the conviction claiming counsel’s ineffectiveness. New [Rule 720] was intended to eliminate this cumbersome process and allow the first appeal to address the issues properly raised before and during trial.
Lord, 719 A.2d at 308-09 (citation omitted).
. The PCRA is "the sole means of obtaining collateral relief and encompasses all other common law and statutory remedies for the same purpose ..., including habeas corpus and coram nobis.” 42 Pa.C.S. § 9542; see Commonwealth v. Lantzy, 558 Pa. 214, 736 A.2d 564, 569 (1999).
. See 42 Pa.C.S. § 9545(b)(1) (any PCRA petition, including a second or subsequent petition, must be filed within one year of the date the judgment of sentence becomes final); Commonwealth v. Peterkin, 554 Pa. 547, 722 A.2d 638, 641-42 (1998).
. My conclusion here is consistent with the view I have expressed in other cases regarding waiver under the PCRA. For example, in addressing the issue of whether an appellant could obtain reinstatement of his direct appeal rights nunc pro tunc when he failed to file a timely PCRA petition, I stated:
I am troubled by the prospect that a defendant who, for example, instructed counsel to file a direct appeal, was told by counsel that an appeal was being filed, was subsequently reassured by counsel that the appeal was filed, but later found out after the one-year limitation period expired that counsel never filed the appeal, is forever precluded from receiving at least one appellate review of his case. In my view, a rule that penalizes a defendant who reasonably relies in good faith upon his counsel to protect his appellate rights is contrary to the ■purpose of the PCRA, and such a defendant should be entitled to, at a bare minimum, one appellate review.
Commonwealth v. Hall, 565 Pa. 92, 771 A.2d 1232, 1237 (2001) (Nigro, J., concurring). See also Com. V. Kenney, 557 Pa. 195, 732 A.2d 1161, 1166 (1999) (Nigro, J., dissenting) ("Under these circumstances, I cannot agree that simply because [present counsel] recognized a meritorious issue overlooked by prior counsel yet failed to use the operative words in his brief to overcome waiver of this issue by prior counsel, Appellee’s Persinger claim should, in effect, never be subject to review on its merits.”)

=== CASE 9737241 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:19:56.538497+00 ===

OPINION
Justice CAPPY.
Jules Melograne (“Appellant”), a former district justice, has filed a direct appeal from the order of the Court of Judicial Discipline imposing sanctions on him. For the following reasons, we affirm in part and vacate in part the order of the Court of Judicial Discipline.
Appellant began serving as the district justice for Magisterial District 05-2-17 in 1970. He continuously served in this capacity until August 16, 1993, when he was placed on inactive status, with pay, pending disposition of federal criminal charges.
On January 22, 1996, Appellant was found guilty in federal court of conspiracy to commit mail fraud and conspiracy to violate civil rights. That same day, he resigned his judicial office. Subsequently, the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit affirmed Appellant’s conviction for conspiracy to violate civil rights, but reversed his conviction for conspiracy to commit mail fraud.
On August 10, 1999, the Judicial Conduct Board filed a complaint against Appellant. The parties agreed to a Stipulation of Fact in Lieu of Trial per C.J.D.R.P. 502(D)(1); the Court of Judicial Discipline then issued an opinion and order in which it concluded that Appellant’s misconduct subjected him to discipline pursuant to Article V, § 18(d)(1) of the Pennsylvania Constitution. After holding a sanction hearing in which the parties argued about what the appropriate discipline should be, the Court of Judicial Discipline ordered that Appellant be removed from office, declared that he was ineligi*494ble to hold judicial office in the future, and disbarred him from the Bar of this Commonwealth.
Appellant then filed an appeal with this court.1 For the reasons that follow, we affirm in part and vacate in part.
Our review of a determination of the Court of Judicial Discipline is channeled by Article V, § 18(c)(2) of the Pennsylvania Constitution. That provision states that we are to “review the record of the proceedings of the Court of Judicial Discipline as follows on the law, the scope of review is plenary; on the facts, the scope of review is clearly erroneous; and as to sanctions, the scope of review is whether the sanctions imposed were lawful.” Pa. Const, art. V, § 18(c)(2). It is with this standard in mind that we commence our analysis of Appellant’s claims.
Appellant first claims that the Court of Judicial Discipline could not discipline him because he was no longer a judicial officer at the time the disciplinary proceedings commenced. Appellant acknowledges that he did not pursue this issue below, and thus technically it is waived. Yet, he contends that the issue is saved from waiver because it raises a claim of subject matter jurisdiction, a claim which by its nature is nonwaivable.
Appellant is correct in stating that issues of subject matter jurisdiction cannot be waived. See Blackwell v. Commonwealth, 523 Pa. 347, 567 A.2d 630, 636 (1989). Yet, this proposition will aid Appellant only if his claim does indeed raise an issue of subject matter jurisdiction. We have noted that some litigants, while believing they are raising a claim of subject matter jurisdiction, are actually posing a challenge to the tribunal’s authority, or power, to act. See Riedel v. Human Relations Comm’n of Reading, 559 Pa. 34, 739 A.2d 121, 124 (1999). This confusion between the meaning of the terms “jurisdiction” and “power” is not surprising. While the terms are not synonymous, they are often used interchange*495ably by judges and litigants alike. Id. In Riedel, we teased out the distinctions between these terms, explicating that
[j Jurisdiction relates solely to the competency of the particular court or administrative body to determine controversies of the general class to which the case then presented for its consideration belongs. Power, on the other hand, means the ability of a decision-making body to order or effect a certain result.
Id. Claims relating to a tribunal’s power are, unlike claims of subject matter jurisdiction, waivable. Id. at 125. Thus, if Appellant’s claim is in actuality a challenge to the Court of Judicial Discipline’s power, it has been waived as he failed to preserve it below.
With this standard in mind, we may now analyze Appellant’s claim more acutely. Our analysis of this issue is aided by our recent decision in Office of Disciplinary Counsel v. Jepsen, 567 Pa. 459, 787 A.2d 420 (2002). In that matter, the question was whether this court or the Court of Judicial Discipline was the proper tribunal to disbar Jepsen, a district justice, from the practice of law. Jepsen argued that we did not have jurisdiction to disbar her, but rather the Court of Judicial Discipline had exclusive jurisdiction to sanction judicial officers. We rejected the Jepsen’s characterization of her claim. We found that although this issue was “phrased in terms of jurisdiction, the real issue is whether our Court had the authority to impose the sanction of disbarment under the circumstances of this case.” Id. at 422 (citing Riedel).
We find that as in Jepsen, the question here relates to the authority of the tribunal, rather than its jurisdiction. It is beyond cavil that the Court of Judicial Discipline has jurisdiction over the general subject matter presented here, namely, determining whether an individual engaged in judicial misconduct. In fact, that is the tribunal’s constitutional raison d’etre. The question Appellant raises — whether that body may discipline a judicial officer following his resignation from office— *496challenges the tribunal’s power. Unfortunately, Appellant failed to preserve this issue and thus it is waived.2
Appellant next contends that the Court of Judicial Discipline improperly ordered that he be removed from office and banned from holding judicial office in the future. He suggests that the facts of this case render each of these sanctions meaningless. He reasons that he cannot be removed from office as he has already removed himself. Furthermore, as Article 2, § 7 of the Pennsylvania Constitution forbids him from holding office following his conviction for an “infamous crime”, he is effectively barred from running for office by virtue of his felony conviction. Thus, Appellant deduces, if his actions effectively impose self-punishment, there is nothing left for the Court of Judicial Discipline to accomplish via sanctions.3
Appellant’s argument presupposes that the only purpose of the Court of Judicial Discipline is to punish the miscreant judicial officer. Appellant misapprehends the role of the Court of Judicial Discipline. The Court of Judicial Discipline exists not only to chasten the misbehaving judge; *497rather, it serves an equally — if not more — important function as protector of the integrity of the judiciary and the public’s confidence in that branch of government. In disciplining a judicial officer for his misconduct, that tribunal not only punishes the wrongdoer, but also repairs the damaged public trust and provides guidance to other members of the judiciary regarding their conduct. Appellant’s conviction and resignation do not accomplish these goals. Therefore, we cannot equate the voluntary relinquishment of office and the presumption that Appellant’s felony conviction would bar him from running for public office with the discipline imposed by the Court of Judicial Discipline. One simply is not a substitute for the other. We thus hold that Appellant’s resignation from judicial office and conviction of a felony crime did not divest the Court of Judicial Discipline of its authority to impose sanctions on Appellant.
Finally, Appellant contends that the Court of Judicial Discipline could not disbar him. He raises two arguments in support of his position. First, he argues that the Court of Judicial Discipline could not impose such a sanction because “there was no factual basis before the Court of Judicial Discipline relating to [Appellant’s] status as an attorney.” Appellant’s Brief at 16.
Contrary to Appellant’s contention, there was such evidence before the Court of Judicial Discipline, and it came in the form of an admission from Appellant himself. At the outset of the sanction hearing, a question was posed as to whether Appellant was an attorney in good standing with the Bar of Pennsylvania. Sanction Hearing, 9/27/2000, N.T. at 4. During the course of the hearing, Appellant admitted that he was an attorney and that his license to practice law was still active at that point. Id. at 8-9. Thus, we reject Appellant’s argument that there was no evidence before the Court of Judicial Discipline regarding his status as an attorney.
In the alternative, Appellant argues that the Court of Judicial Discipline had no authority to disbar him. He contends that this court has exclusive jurisdiction over disciplin*498ary proceedings against attorneys, and there is no basis for the Court of Judicial Discipline to discipline attorneys.
We recently addressed the question of whether this court has the authority to disbar a judicial officer. See Jepsen, supra. The parties in Jepsen offered us polarized views on the proper resolution of this issue. The Office of Disciplinary Counsel argued that only this court had the power to disbar an attorney, regardless of whether the attorney also happened to be a judicial officer. Jepsen, on the other hand, contended that any discipline of a judicial officer — including disbarment from the practice of law — must be meted out by the Court of Judicial Discipline and that no other tribunal had the authority to sanction a judicial officer. In resolving the issue before the court, we rejected both of these views, and stated that both the Court of Judicial Discipline and this court concurrently held the power to discipline a judicial officer. Jepsen, 787 A.2d at 423-24.
At first blush, it would appear that Jepsen conclusively resolves the issue before us, and would dictate that the Court of Judicial Discipline has the power to disbar an attorney. More careful analysis, however, reveals that this is not the case. While there is language in the Jepsen opinion that intimates that the Court of Judicial Discipline would have the power to disbar a judicial officer, that was not the issue presented to this court. The sole issue in Jepsen was whether this court had the authority to disbar a judicial officer. Thus, any language in Jepsen regarding the power of the Court of Judicial Discipline was obiter dicta; the decision has no precedential value as to the issue of whether the Court of Judicial Discipline has the power to disbar a jurist.
While Jepsen does not squarely address the issue with which we now grapple, it does provide guidance as to its resolution. Of particular importance is the Jepsen court’s conclusion that when the Court of Judicial Discipline was created via the 1993 amendment to Article V, § 18, we were not divested of “our inherent and exclusive power to supervise the practice of law pursuant to Article V, section 10(c) of the Pennsylvania Constitution.... ” Jepsen, 787 A.2d at 425. We *499have recognized that this power, being exclusive, is not one that is subject to being shared with other entities. We have emphasized that “[njo other component of our state government may ... admit to practice or discipline an attorney. These prerogatives are within this Court’s exclusive jurisdiction.” Maunus v. Com., State Ethics Comm’n, 518 Pa. 592, 544 A.2d 1324, 1326 (1988). See also P.J.S. v. Pennsylvania State Ethics Comm’n, 555 Pa. 149, 723 A.2d 174, 178 (1999) (no governmental entity other than this court may regulate and discipline the professional class of attorneys). In short, our “inherent and exclusive power” is not subject to dilution via sharing among other governmental entities, and is not subject to encroachment in the area of attorney discipline.
As this court has the exclusive power to discipline attorneys, the Court of Judicial Discipline lacked the authority to disbar Appellant. Such a sanction may be imposed only by this court. Thus, we vacate that portion of the Court of Judicial Discipline’s order which disbarred Appellant from the practice of law and refer Appellant to the Disciplinary Board of the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania.
For the foregoing reasons, the order of the Court of Judicial Discipline is affirmed in part and vacated in part.
Justice CASTILLE did not participate in the consideration or decision of this matter.
Chief Justice ZAPPALA files a concurring opinion.
Justice SAYLOR files a concurring and dissenting opinion in which Justice NIGRO joins.
. This matter is directly appealable to this court by virtue of Article V, § 18(c)(1) and 42 Pa.C.S. § 725(2).
. Even assuming arguendo that this issue was not waived, it would still not entitle Appellant to relief. Appellant’s definition of the Court of Judicial Discipline’s authority is an overly restrictive one, not consonant with the role of that tribunal. The Court of Judicial Discipline exists to police the conduct of the judiciary and assure the public of the integrity of this branch of government. Were we to adopt Appellant’s view of that court’s power, the Court of Judicial Discipline would not be able to hear a complaint brought against a judicial officer who left office due to voluntary retirement, superannuation, or even impeachment; such an overly restrictive definition of that court’s authority would be in opposition to, rather than consistent with, the Court of Judicial Discipline’s role. Thus, we would reject Appellant’s argument and hold that the Court of Judicial Discipline has the power to sanction misbehaving judicial officers, regardless of whether they are in office during the pendency of disciplinary proceedings.
. Appellant incorrectly phrases this issue in terms of mootness. We have stated that the "concept of mootness focuses on a change that has occurred during the length of the legal proceedings.” In re Cain, 527 Pa. 260, 590 A.2d 291, 292 (1991). Where, as here, the facts have not changed since the inception of the legal proceedings at issue, the party's challenge is not properly characterized as one of mootness, but rather as a challenge to the authority of the tribunal. Id.

=== CASE 2209510 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:40.380545+00 ===

267 Cal. App. 2d 581 (1968)
THE PEOPLE, Plaintiff and Appellant,
v.
GEORGE J. POMPEI, Defendant and Respondent.
Crim. No. 6951.
California Court of Appeals. First Dist., Div. Two.
Nov. 22, 1968.
Thomas C. Lynch, Attorney General, Robert R. Granucci and Karl S. Mayer, Deputy Attorneys General, for Plaintiff and Appellant.
Morgan & Moscone, Charles O. Morgan, Jr., and George R. Moscone for Defendant and Respondent.
TAYLOR, J.
The State appeals from an order granting respondent Pompei's motion to dismiss (Pen. Code,  995) an indictment charging him with keeping and occupying premises for the purpose of bookmaking (Pen. Code,  337a, subd. *583 2), recording and registering bets (Pen. Code,  337a, subd. 4) and offering or accepting bets (Pen. Code,  337a, subd. 6). The questions on appeal are: 1) the existence of reasonable or probable cause for the arrest without a warrant; 2) the lawfulness and reasonableness of the search of respondent's apartment; and 3) the sufficiency of the evidence presented to the grand jury to support each count of the indictment.
The transcript of the proceedings before the grand jury reveals the following facts: About 3 p.m. on July 6, 1966, Sergeant James Mullan had just arrested Mitchell Palioudakis for bookmaking at 940 B Potrero Avenue in San Francisco. Sergeant Mullan was in charge of the Bookmaking and Gambling Detail of the San Francisco Police Department and with 10 years' experience in the field, qualified as an expert of the paraphernalia and devices used by bookmakers in San Francisco.
While lawfully searching the premises at 940 B Potrero Avenue incident to the arrest of Palioudakis, Mullan found a sheet of paper identifying a person by the name of "Barney" as a "runner"  [fn. 1] and a "run-down" on a count sheet listing the bets placed on Barney's account. While Sergeant Mullan was busily examining and gathering the bookmaking paraphernalia at the Potrero Avenue address, the telephone rang a number of times. Mullan answered the telephone and purported to accommodate the callers,  [fn. 2] including accepting bets from some of them. One caller responded to Sergeant Mullan's "Hello" by saying: "This is Barney. How are things going." Mullan replied that things were going well but there were problems and asked Barney to leave a number where he could be reached. Barney gave the number EXbrook 2-0642. Mullan checked the number with the telphone company and ascertained that it was listed to George Pompei at 480 Vallejo Street in San Francisco.
Shortly after 4 p.m. the same day, Mullan and two other officers proceeded to the Vallejo Street address, an apartment house. While the other officers watched apartment No. 9, Mullan went to the manager's apartment and from there placed a *584 telephone call to the EXbrook number provided by Barney. The same male voice Mullan had heard before answered and identified himself as Barney. Mullan then arranged to immediately meet Barney at the nearby corner of Columbus and Broadway. Mullan then went downstairs and joined the other two officers outside the door to apartment No. 9. A minute or two later, a man, subsequently identified as respondent, stepped out of apartment No. 9. Mullan and the other officers took out their badges and identified themselves. Mullan said: "Barney, I am Sergeant Mullan and I am on a bookmaking investigation. You are under arrest, and at this time we advise you of your rights, etc." The man replied: "Who are you?" Mullan recognized the voice as that of Barney to whom he had talked on the phone twice earlier that day. Mullan again identified himself and asked: "Who are you?" Respondent replied: "I am George Pompei."
Thereafter, Mullan said: "Let's got back in your place. Is your wife inside and is she dressed?" After respondent indicated that his wife was inside, Mullan said: "Let's go. We are going to clear this up now." Respondent then took the apartment key from his pocket and opened the door. As the door opened, Mullan smelled smoke. He pushed respondent out of the way and rushed to the kitchen, which was immediately back of the door. He saw papers burning in the sink and turned on the faucet to extinguish the fire. The half-burned papers were "pay and collect sheets," namely, records of current and past bets. On the desk in the living room, the officers found a list of names identical to one found earlier at the Palioudakis residence and near the telephone, a piece of paper with Mr. Palioudakis' telephone number at 940 B Potrero Avenue. Other bookmaking paraphernalia were found in the desk and included a portion of ledger in which older bets were registered.
[1a] Respondent first contends that Mullan had no reasonable or probable cause to arrest him. As the arrest and resulting search were made without a warrant, the burden was on the prosecution to show proper justification (People v. Cruz, 61 Cal. 2d 861, 865 [40 Cal. Rptr. 841, 395 P.2d 889]; Badillo v. Superior Court, 46 Cal. 2d 269, 272 [294 P.2d 23]). A peace officer may make an arrest without a warrant whenever "he has reasonable cause to believe that the person to be arrested has committed a felony" (Pen. Code,  836). [2] Reasonable or probable cause exists when the facts and circumstances within the knowledge of the officers at the moment *585 of arrest are sufficient to warrant a prudent man in believing that the defendant has committed an offense. [3] The question of probable cause to justify an arrest without a warrant must be tested by the facts which the record shows were known to the officers at the time the arrest was made (People v. Talley, 65 Cal. 2d 830, 835 [56 Cal. Rptr. 492, 423 P.2d 564]).
[4] There is no exact formula for determining reasonable cause for arrest; each case must be determined on its own facts and circumstances, and on the total atmosphere of the case (People v. Ketchel, 59 Cal. 2d 503, 526 [30 Cal. Rptr. 538, 381 P.2d 394].)
[1b] Respondent here contends that Mullan had no reasonable basis for believing that he was Barney,  [fn. 3] as he was arrested immediately after he came out the door of his apartment and before he had said anything. Respondent argues that the identification of his voice as Barney's did not occur until after the arrest when he spoke to Mullan.
Here, a few moments after Mullan had arranged to meet "Barney" nearby, respondent came out the door of apartment No. 9, at 480 Vallejo Street, the address listed for the telephone number given to the officer by "Barney." Although the record indicates that the officers informed respondent that he was under arrest as soon as he came out the door, they repeated their identification and clearly manifested their intent of taking him into custody a second time, immediately after respondent spoke to them. In view of the almost simultaneous occurrence of the arrest and respondent's first words, we think to find an absence of probable cause under the particular circumstances, on the ground suggested, would be an indulgence in legal technicalities. Only a few seconds elapsed between the time respondent stepped out the door and the time he answered the officer's question. Respondent's identification as "Barney" was complete as soon as he spoke and Mullan recognized his voice. The facts leading to the arrest were based on Mullan's personal knowledge and aural perception. Respondent's physical and temporal proximity to the apartment occupied by Barney were sufficient under the circumstances and atmosphere of this case to lead to the conclusion that Mullan reasonably believed that respondent was *586 Barney and acted reasonably in arresting him.  [fn. 4]people v. White, 231 Cal. App. 2d 82 [41 Cal. Rptr. 604], cited by respondent, is distinguishable as therein, the only information connecting the defendant with the stolen automobile came from an unreliable informer. We hold, therefore, that Mullan had reasonable and probable cause to arrest respondent. As the arrest was lawful, we turn next to the question of the search of respondent's apartment.
[5a] Respondent next argues that the entry and search of his apartment after the arrest exceeded the lawful and reasonable bounds of a search incident to a lawful arrest. We cannot agree.
[6] A search can be incident to an arrest only if it is substantially contemporaneous with the arrest and confined to the immediate vicinity of the arrest (James v. Louisiana, 382 U.S. 36, 37 [15 L. Ed. 2d 30, 31, 86 S. Ct. 151]; Stoner v. California, 376 U.S. 483, 486 [11 L. Ed. 2d 856, 859, 84 S. Ct. 889]). In laying down the guidelines for the making of a search incidental to an arrest, our Supreme Court has said that such a search must be: 1) limited to the premises where the arrest is made; 2) contemporaneous with the arrest; 3) have a definite object; and 4) be reasonable in scope (People v. Cruz, 61 Cal. 2d 861, 866 [40 Cal. Rptr. 841, 395 P.2d 889]).
[5b] Respondent, relying on People v. Cruz, supra, and People v. Henry, 65 Cal. 2d 842 [56 Cal. Rptr. 485, 423 P.2d 557], here argues that since he was arrested outside the locked door of the apartment, the search of the apartment was beyond the immediate vicinity of the arrest. Neither of the cases cited by respondent is helpful; in People v. Cruz, the defendant was arrested in an automobile parked on a public street at some distance from his home; in Henry, supra, the arrest occurred on a public sidewalk at a distance from the entrance to the hotel where the defendant occupied a second story room. The instant case is substantially similar to People v. Aleria, 193 Cal. App. 2d 352 [14 Cal. Rptr. 162]; People v. Adame, 250 Cal. App. 2d 380 [58 Cal. Rptr. 687]; People v. Rodriguez, 238 Cal. App. 2d 682, 688-690 [48 Cal. Rptr. 117]; and People v. Samuels, 229 Cal. App. 2d 351, 357 [40 Cal. Rptr. 290]. In each of these cases, the defendant was arrested in the common entrance or areaway of a multiple unit dwelling and the subsequent search of the particular portion of the locked *587 premises under the control of the defendant held to be incidental to the arrest.
Similarly here, the fact that respondent was at the moment of arrest outside the four walls of his apartment does not, by itself, preclude the search of the apartment (People v. Marquez, 259 Cal. App. 2d 593, 601 [66 Cal. Rptr. 615]). We conclude that under the circumstances here shown, the search was incidental to the arrest, was limited to the premises where the arrest was made, was contemporaneous therewith and reasonable in scope (People v. Cruz, supra, p. 866).
Since we conclude that the search was lawful as incidental to respondent's lawful arrest, we need not consider whether or not his acquiescence in the search amounted to a voluntary consent or was tainted by the fact of arrest (People v. Pressley, 242 Cal. App. 2d 555, 560 [51 Cal. Rptr. 563]).
As respondent's final argument concerning the sufficiency of the evidence presented to the grand jury is predicated on the exclusion of the fruits of the assertedly illegal arrest and unlawful search, we need not discuss the contention in detail. The trial court erred in setting aside the indictment if the evidence presented to the grand jury shows some rational ground for assuming the possibility that respondent was guilty as charged (Bompensiero v. Superior Court, 44 Cal. 2d 178, 183-184 [281 P.2d 250]). It is not for this court or the trial court to weigh the evidence presented to a grand jury. Under the circumstances of this case, all of the items found in respondent's apartment were competent and admissible. It follows that there was competent evidence for assuming that respondent was guilty of violating Penal Code section 337a, subdivisions 2, 4, and 6, as charged (People v. Cahan, 126 Cal. App. 2d 785, 793 [273 P.2d 64]; People v. Foster, 199 Cal. App. 2d 866, 870-871 [19 Cal. Rptr. 283]).
The order appealed from is reversed.
Shoemaker, P. J., and Agee, J., concurred.
NOTES
[fn. 1]  1. In a bookmaking operation, a runner is one who arranges for bets to be made anonymously by others (who use a code name and make the bets on the runner's account) and who is financially responsible to the bookmaker for all bets made on his account.
[fn. 2]  2. Under the circumstances, it was not improper for the police officer to answer the telephone and purport to accommodate the callers (People v. Sandoval, 65 Cal. 2d 303 [54 Cal. Rptr. 123, 419 P.2d 187]; People v. Malotte, 46 Cal. 2d 59 [292 P.2d 517]).
[fn. 3]  3. The only question raised relates to the matter of identity. Respondent apparently does not dispute that the items found at the Palioudakis residence and Barney's subsequent telephone call provided a sufficient basis for a reasonable belief that Barney had committed felony bookmaking offenses in violation of section 337a of the Penal Code.
[fn. 4]  4. We note that in the proceedings before the court below, the legality of the arrest was apparently assumed. The record indicates that the lower court granted respondent's motion as it concluded that the search was unreasonable and unlawful.

=== CASE 2209723 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:42.886478+00 ===

329 Mass. 243 (1952)
107 N.E.2d 513
CITY OF NEW BEDFORD & others
vs.
NEW BEDFORD, WOODS HOLE, MARTHA'S VINEYARD AND NANTUCKET STEAMSHIP AUTHORITY & another.
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Suffolk.
April 8, 1952.
July 9, 1952.
Present: QUA, C.J., LUMMUS, RONAN, SPALDING, & WILLIAMS, JJ.
Harry A. Lider, City Solicitor, (Louis A. Perras, Jr., *244 Assistant City Solicitor, with him,) for the city of New Bedford.
W. Arthur Garrity, Jr., for the interveners.
Robert G. Dodge, (Harold S. Davis with him,) for New Bedford, Woods Hole, Martha's Vineyard and Nantucket Steamship Authority.
David H. Stuart, Assistant Attorney General, for the Department of Public Utilities.
WILLIAMS, J.
This is a bill in equity brought by the city of New Bedford under G.L. (Ter. Ed.) c. 231A, inserted by St. 1945, c. 582, § 1, seeking a declaratory decree as to the obligation of New Bedford, Woods Hole, Martha's Vineyard and Nantucket Steamship Authority to furnish adequate transportation service by steamship to and from the said city and as to the jurisdiction of the department of public utilities "to deal with and enforce the obligation of the ... Authority in respect of service." The defendants are the Authority and the department. A group of seventeen taxpayers and voters of the town of Falmouth were allowed to intervene as plaintiffs. The case was reserved and reported for the consideration of the full court by a single justice without decision, upon the bill, the demurrer of the department, and the answers of the department and of the Authority. G.L. (Ter. Ed.) c. 211, § 6.
The facts set out in the bill and not denied in the answers, and all facts well pleaded in the answers which are at variance with the allegations in the bill, must be taken to be true. Joslin v. Boston & Maine Railroad, 274 Mass. 551, 552.
The Authority is created "a body corporate" by special act of the Legislature, St. 1948, c. 544. Therein it is provided that the Authority "shall be deemed to be a public instrumentality for the purpose of this act," which purpose is stated in the preamble of the statute to be "to provide without delay adequate transportation facilities between New Bedford, Falmouth and the islands of Martha's Vineyard and Nantucket." The Authority, which consists of five members appointed by the Governor, is authorized to *245 purchase from Massachusetts Steamship Lines, Incorporated, a corporation which operates a steamship line between New Bedford, Falmouth, Martha's Vineyard and Nantucket, all of its property both tangible and intangible and to operate the said steamship line when purchased. The Authority may issue its bonds to provide for payment of the cost of the project and may fix rates of fare and charges adequate to meet the cost of service. Under certain stated conditions deficiencies in revenue may be compensated by payments from the treasury of the Commonwealth and the amount of such payments subsequently assessed on the city of New Bedford, the towns of Falmouth and Nantucket and the County of Dukes County in stated proportions.
It is alleged in the bill and admitted in the answers that the Authority was organized, that it purchased the property in question, and that in May, 1949, it began to operate the steamship line and to provide transportation facilities between New Bedford, Falmouth, and the Islands. On or about November 29, 1951, it "voted to discontinue and eliminate any and all transportation service to and from the port of the ... city of New Bedford, for the period January 2, 1952, to April 26, 1952." "On December 18, 1951, a complaint was filed with the department of public utilities, under the provisions of G.L. (Ter. Ed.) c. 159, § 24, by twenty legal voters of said city which recited the foregoing decision of the ... Authority to discontinue service to and from New Bedford during the period January 2, 1952, to April 26, 1952, and which requested that the department examine into the propriety of such decision and order the ... Authority to continue to furnish the `adequate transportation facilities' to the city of New Bedford which it was required to provide by the act establishing ... [it]. Acting on the foregoing petition the department of public utilities on December 20, 1951, entered an order to the effect that the ... Authority maintain unchanged the operating schedule in effect on December 15, 1951, over all its lines (including the service to and from *246 New Bedford) without modification until further ordered by the department ... to avoid, as the department recited in its order, irreparable damage to the public. The department in the same order directed, under a provision of G.L.c. 25, § 4A, that a public hearing be held at the City Council Chamber, City Hall, New Bedford, on Tuesday, January 15, 1952, at 11:00 A.M., in order that the department might investigate the service of said Authority as provided for in G.L.c. 159, § 16.... The ... Authority, by its counsel, has ... informed the duly authorized representatives of the ... [city of New Bedford] that it has determined not to comply with the said order for the reason that it believes and contends that the ... commissioners have no jurisdiction to make such an order and are without authority to deal with the amount of service to be rendered by the Authority."
The Authority admits in its answer that the questions to which reference is made in the bill "ought to be determined" and joins in the plaintiffs' prayers for a declaratory decree. The department in its answer denies that any controversy exists "between all the parties named in" the bill but prays that this court "determine the matter of its jurisdiction and whether the department has been deprived of power by virtue of St. 1948, c. 544, as amended." The department filed a demurrer alleging "1. That the ... [plaintiff] has not stated in its bill such cause as entitles it to any relief in equity. 2. That the court is without jurisdiction to entertain this bill. 3. That no actual controversy exists between the parties mentioned in this bill. 4. That the cause of action set forth in its bill is anticipatory in character and content, and unless and until the Authority discontinues service to the port of the city of New Bedford, the court would not be warranted in assuming jurisdiction in this matter. 5. The scope of the Authority's general powers is not to be determined by the general powers vested in the department of public utilities by G.L. (Ter. Ed.) c. 159."
On December 28, 1951, the Authority with the approval *247 of the court stipulated that until further order of the court the operating schedules of the Authority in effect on December 15, 1951, would be substantially maintained. We assume that following this stipulation there was no actual suspension of service to and from New Bedford. The period of the threatened suspension has now expired and the question as to what, if any, relief should be given the plaintiffs from such suspension of service has become moot. We think it inadvisable to proceed further by attempting to define generally the obligation of the Authority to furnish adequate transportation service to and from New Bedford. The standard of adequacy can have meaning only in its application to the facts of a particular case.
There remains, however, for consideration the alleged controversy between the Authority and the department of public utilities in reference to the jurisdiction of that department in general over the service to be provided by the Authority. The construction of St. 1948, c. 544, under which the Authority derives its power, and of G.L. (Ter. Ed.) c. 159, by virtue of which the department claims jurisdiction, is involved. The department has asserted jurisdiction by issuing its order of December 20, 1951. The Authority has indicated its intention to refuse compliance with that order. Both parties have a definite interest in the matter involved and "the circumstances attending the dispute plainly indicate that unless the matter is ... [decided] such antagonistic claims will almost immediately and inevitably lead to litigation." School Committee of Cambridge v. Superintendent of Schools of Cambridge, 320 Mass. 516, 518. Hogan v. Hogan, 320 Mass. 658, 662. We think that under the authority of G.L. (Ter. Ed.) c. 231A, § 1, this controversy is properly before us for decision. See Saint Luke's Hospital v. Labor Relations Commission, 320 Mass. 467, 470. We are not required to await proceedings under G.L. (Ter. Ed.) c. 25, § 5, for a review of the present or any future order of the department. The demurrer of the department is overruled. Carlton Hotel, Inc. v. Abrams, 322 Mass. 201.
*248 Without considering whether technically the city of New Bedford is a proper party to bring this bill, we deem it proper to consider the case on its merits. Brownell v. Railroad Commissioners, 163 Mass. 276, 281.
The Authority is a corporation established as an agency of the Commonwealth to exercise certain delegated governmental powers. This appears from § 7 of c. 544, wherein it is stated and provided that "The exercise of the powers granted by this act will be in all respects for the benefit of the people of the commonwealth, for the increase of their commerce and prosperity, and for the improvement of their health and living conditions, and as the operation and maintenance of the steamship line by the Authority will constitute the performance of essential governmental functions, the Authority shall not be required to pay any taxes or assessments upon the project or any property acquired or used by the Authority under the provisions of this act or upon the income therefrom, and the bonds and refunding bonds issued under the provisions of this act, their transfer and the income therefrom (including any profit made on the sale thereof), shall at all times be free from taxation within the commonwealth." See Seaver v. Onset Fire District, 282 Mass. 209, 213; People v. Chicago Transit Authority, 392 Ill. 77; Webb v. Port Commission of Morehead City, 205 N.C. 663; Wells v. Housing Authority of Wilmington, 213 N.C. 744, 749-750; Sheldon v. Grand River Dam Authority, 182 Okla. 24; State v. Housing Authority of New Orleans, 190 La. 710; People v. Newton, 106 Colo. 61, 68; State v. Great Falls, 110 Mont. 318, 328; Nelson-Johnston & Doudna v. Metropolitan Utilities District, 137 Neb. 871, 873-874; Furlong v. Housing Authority of Newark, 132 N.J. Eq. 341, 342; Morrison v. Smith Bros. Inc. 211 Cal. 36, 44; Gaynor v. Marohn, 268 N.Y. 417, 424-425. It is provided in c. 544, § 18, that "All other general or special laws, or parts thereof, inconsistent herewith are hereby declared to be inapplicable to the provisions of this act." The powers granted by the Legislature to the Authority as an agency of government are to be exercised free from the control of any *249 other governmental agency unless these powers are made subject to such control by the statute creating the Authority or by some other general or special law. The only restriction on the stated powers of the Authority is found in § 5 (c), which provides that the Authority is authorized and empowered "To fix, from time to time, such rates of fare and charges for service furnished or operated as in the judgment of its members are best adapted to insure sufficient income to meet the cost of the service, as hereinafter defined. Rates so fixed shall be and remain in effect until changed by the Authority unless the department of public utilities shall upon petition and after a public hearing disapprove them. Such disapproval, if any, shall not be retroactive in effect." To this limited extent the acts of the Authority are made subject to the control of the department. According to a familiar rule of statutory construction the grant of this specific power tends by implication to negative a legislative intent to vest in the department other or broader powers of supervision over the Authority. McArthur Brothers Co. v. Commonwealth, 197 Mass. 137, 139. Boston & Albany Railroad v. Commonwealth, 296 Mass. 426, 434. Universal Machine Co. v. Alcoholic Beverages Control Commission, 301 Mass. 40, 45. Spence, Bryson, Inc. v. China Products Co. 308 Mass. 81, 88. Haines v. Town Manager of Mansfield, 320 Mass. 140, 142-143. Demos Brothers General Contractors, Inc. v. Springfield, 322 Mass. 171, 174. County of Bristol v. Secretary of the Commonwealth, 324 Mass. 403, 406-407.
In G.L. (Ter. Ed.) c. 159, entitled "Common Carriers," on which the department relies as the source of its asserted jurisdiction, § 12 provides that the department of public utilities shall have general supervision and regulation of, and jurisdiction and control over, certain services including the transportation or carriage of persons or property by ships or vessels when furnished or rendered for public use within the Commonwealth, and all persons, firms, corporations, associations, and joint stock associations or companies furnishing or rendering such services. It is plain, we think, *250 that the power of supervision and regulation granted by c. 159 over services furnished or rendered by common carriers is intended to apply only to such services when furnished or rendered by the agencies therein specified. "It has been a general rule in our legislation that statutes passed for the regulation of the rights and liabilities of corporations are to be applied only to private or moneyed corporations and not to public or municipal corporations or quasi corporations" the purpose of whose organization is in the main political. O'Donnell v. North Attleborough, 212 Mass. 243, 245-246. Linehan v. Cambridge, 109 Mass. 212, 213. Donohue v. Newburyport, 211 Mass. 561, 566-569. MacRae v. Selectmen of Concord, 296 Mass. 394, 396. The word person, which by reason of G.L. (Ter. Ed.) c. 4, § 7, Twenty-third, may be held to include "corporations, societies, associations and partnerships," is not apt to describe a municipality. Howard v. Chicopee, 299 Mass. 115, 121. In our opinion the Authority is not one of the agencies the services of which the department is authorized to supervise and regulate under the provisions of c. 159. We think the only control that the department may exercise over the acts of the Authority imposed upon it by c. 544 is by disapproving the rates which the Authority may fix. A decree may be entered in conformity with this opinion.
So ordered.

=== CASE 9737294 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:21:01.372625+00 ===

Saad, P.J.
Petitioner, Czars, Inc., appeals as of right from a decision of the Michigan Tax Tribunal upholding a use tax assessment arising from its purchase of *635an aircraft in Arizona for use in Michigan by a sister corporation, Grand Aire Express.1 We affirm.2
i
NATURE OF THE CASE
This case addresses the use tax assessment levied against an aircraft owned by petitioner. On November 15, 1994, the Department of Treasury issued a final use tax assessment against petitioner for the purchase of the aircraft because petitioner “used” the aircraft in Michigan, triggering the provisions of the Use Tax Act.3 The Michigan Tax Tribunal upheld the assessment. Petitioner raises three issues in its appeal of the Tax Tribunal’s decision: (1) petitioner did not “use” the aircraft within the meaning of the statute; (2) petitioner is entitled to rely on the use tax exemption enjoyed by its sister corporation, Grand Aire; and (3) even if petitioner did “use” the aircraft, it did so only as the lessor of exempt property. We find these arguments to be without merit, and we accordingly affirm the Tax Tribunal’s decision for respondent.
n
FACTS AND PROCEEDINGS
Tahir Cheema is the sole shareholder of petitioner, a Delaware corporation not engaged in any business activity, and Grand Aire, a Michigan corporation engaged in the business of air cargo transportation. *636Before June 23, 1994, aircraft used for cargo transport were subject to the Michigan use tax; however, aircraft used in passenger flights by domestic carriers were exempt under MCL 205.94; MSA 7.555(4). In an effort to avoid taxation on Grand Aire’s cargo planes, Cheema incorporated petitioner in Delaware on February 24, 1994. Cheema admits that his intent, at least in part, was to register aircraft in petitioner’s name, in order to shield Grand Aire from the use tax and other liabilities. Other than the aircraft, petitioner had no assets. It conducted no business and employed no workers.
On May 24, 1994, petitioner purchased an aircraft in Arizona and registered it with the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) in petitioner’s name.4 On June 10, 1994, a Grand Aire pilot flew the aircraft from Arizona to Michigan under a special permit the FAA issued to Grand Aire. Shortly after the plane was brought to Michigan, on June 23, 1994, the Legislature amended the Use Tax Act so as to exempt air cargo carriers from the use tax. See MCL 205.94(x); MSA 7.555(4)(x) as amended by 1994 PA 214 and further amended by 1994 PA 424. It is undisputed that Grand Aire was eligible for the exemption, but that petitioner was not, unless petitioner could somehow be permitted to benefit from Grand Aire’s exemption.
Meanwhile, petitioner allowed Grand Aire to use the aircraft in the latter’s cargo business. Petitioner never prepared a lease agreement, never received any consideration, and never applied for a use tax registration. Grand Aire modified and operated the aircraft as a cargo plane and paid taxes on the income it *637made from those flights. Grand Aire also held the license and maintained logs to comply with FAA regulations. Petitioner was not licensed to operate the plane.
On November 15, 1994, the Department of Treasury issued a final use tax assessment against petitioner for the purchase of the plane because the plane was being used in Michigan. Cheema thereby faced a bitter irony. If he had purchased and registered the plane in Grand Aire’s name, no use tax could have been assessed against the plane. Instead, the plane was taxed only because of the structure of the operations that Cheema formulated to avoid the tax. Petitioner unsuccessfully petitioned the Tax Tribunal to set aside the assessment, and petitioner now appeals.
m
ANALYSIS
“In the absence of fraud, review of a decision by the Tax Tribunal is limited to determining whether the tribunal erred in applying the law or adopted a wrong principle; its factual findings are conclusive if supported by competent, material and substantial evidence on the whole record.” Michigan Bell Telephone Co v Dep’t of Treasury, 445 Mich 470, 476; 518 NW2d 808 (1994). “[A]mbiguities in the language of a tax statute are to be resolved in favor of the taxpayer.” Id. at 477. However, exemptions are to be strictly construed in favor of the taxing authority. Edison v Dep’t of Revenue, 362 Mich 158, 162; 106 NW2d 802 (1961).
*638A. WHETHER PETITIONER “USED” THE AIRCRAFT
Petitioner argues that there is no factual support for the tribunal’s conclusion that it used, or may be deemed to have used, the subject aircraft in Michigan such that it is liable for the use tax assessed by the department. According to petitioner’s argument, petitioner’s passivity while Grand Aire actively used the aircraft cannot, as a matter of law, establish a taxable use by petitioner. We disagree.
MCL 205.92(b); MSA 7.555(2)(b) defines “use” as follows:
“Use” means the exercise of a right or power over tangible personal property incident to the ownership of that property including transfer of the property in a transaction where possession is given.
Additionally, MCL 205.93(1); MSA 7.555(3)(1) provides:
For the purpose of the proper administration of this act and to prevent the evasion of the tax, it is presumed that tangible personal property purchased [elsewhere] is subject to the tax if brought into the state within 90 days of the purchase date and is considered as acquired for storage, use, or other consumption in this state. [Emphasis added].
This presumption applies here because the aircraft was brought into Michigan less than three weeks after it was purchased and because it was purchased for use in Michigan. Petitioner, therefore, bore the burden of rebutting the presumption or establishing that an exemption applies. Kellogg Co v Dep’t of Treasury, 204 Mich App 489, 493; 516 NW2d 108 (1994).5
*639Petitioner concedes that there is no lease or other documentary evidence showing that it totally or permanently relinquished control of the aircraft to Grand Aire in Arizona. In addition to allowing Grand Aire to fly the plane to Michigan (thereby exercising ownership rights in Arizona), petitioner also permitted Grand Aire in Michigan to modify the plane extensively, to obtain faa approval to fly the plane, and to make use of the plane in Grand Aire’s cargo transport business. Under these circumstances, petitioner failed to rebut the presumption that it exercised rights and powers of ownership both in Arizona and in Michigan and, therefore, is liable for use tax. See Master Craft Engineering, Inc v Dep’t of Treasury, 141 Mich App 56, 70-72; 366 NW2d 235 (1985) (plane repaired in Michigan). The fact that Grand Aire was the only active user of the plane does not serve to rebut the presumption.
Petitioner’s reliance on Sharper Image Corp v Dep’t of Treasury, 216 Mich App 698; 550 NW2d 596 (1996), is misplaced. Sharper Image, id. at 702-703, held that catalogs distributed in Michigan by third-class mail from another state were not subject to the use statute, because distribution did not constitute “using, storing, or consuming” as provided in MCL 205.93(1); MSA 7.555(3)(1). We see no material similarity between mailing catalogs to Michigan — where the distributor relinquishes all control over the catalogs— and flying an aircraft to Michigan — where the borrower is permitted to modify and operate the aircraft, *640while the purchaser retains status as registered owner.
Petitioner’s aircraft was thus subject to the Michigan use tax. We now consider petitioner’s argument that it is entitled to share Grand Aire’s exemption.
B. WHETHER PETITIONER CAN RAISE GRAND AIRE’S EXEMPTION
Petitioner contends that it is exempt from the use tax by virtue of Grand Aire’s exemption because petitioner and Grand Aire should be considered one company for purposes of determining use tax liability. Petitioner maintains that its separate corporate identity is inconsequential for purposes of applying the exemption. We disagree.
Both parties rely on Ann Arbor v Univ Cellar, Inc, 401 Mich 279, 284-285, 291-292; 258 NW2d 1 (1977), in which the Michigan Supreme Court considered whether the University Cellar, a corporation created by the University of Michigan Board of Regents to operate a book store, shared the university’s property tax exemption for government bodies and educational institutions.6 Id. at 284-285. The majority’s paramount consideration was the extent of the university’s control over the University Cellar:
The question whether the property of the Cellar is, in substance, University property depends essentially on whether the Regents or persons acting for and responsible to them so dominate the management and operation of the Cellar that its separate corporate identity should be ignored. [Id. at 285-286.]
Deferring to the State Tax Commission’s factual determination, the Court noted that the university did not *641control the University Cellar. Students selected a majority of the directors, and university regents exercised no influence over the store’s operations. Id. at 286-287. The Court therefore concluded that the University Cellar should not be considered the university’s “alter ego” for tax exemption purposes. Id. at 291-292. See also Knapp-Stiles, Inc v Dep’t of Revenue, 370 Mich 629, 631-633, 636-637; 122 NW2d 642 (1963) (construction company found to be entitled to exemption for work being done for a corporation created at federal government’s request and controlled by the construction company).
In addition to the control issue, the majority in Ann Arbor, supra at 291-292, also found it significant that the university incoiporated the University Cellar in order to protect itself from liability:
To disregard the corporate entity and treat the Cellar as the alter ego of the University for tax exemption purposes, and yet regard it as a separate entity for purposes of determining whether the University is subject to liability to unpaid suppliers or to customers who are injured on the premises or by defective products would be to run with the hare and hunt with the hounds.
Petitioner contends that under the control test established by Ann Arbor and Knapp-Stiles, it is entitled to the protection of Grand Aire’s exemption. With regard to the “hare and hounds” portion of the Ann Arbor decision, petitioner vehemently protests that Cheema’s motive in avoiding tax liability is irrelevant to the control issue. Petitioner avers that this Court should not “exalt form over substance” and declare it to be a separate entity from Grand Aire for purposes of applying the tax exemption.
*642Petitioner’s argument misses the point of the control test. To benefit from the control test, petitioner would have to demonstrate that it was wholly owned and controlled by Grand Aire. Petitioner has not done so. Rather, the evidence here establishes that Cheema owned and controlled both Grand Aire and petitioner. Were we to accept petitioner’s claim of shared tax exemption among “sister corporations” that are controlled by a common entity, a taxpayer who creates multiple corporations to conduct different functions of a business enterprise could avoid tax liability for all of them by structuring just one to benefit from a statutory exemption. Such a ruling would grossly undermine the policy and intent of the tax law.
Furthermore, we cannot, as petitioner desires, simply ignore the Ann Arbor Court’s “hare and hounds” pronouncement. The Ann Arbor Court clearly intended that taxpayers not be able to assert or disregard arbitrarily their chosen corporate structures to suit the occasion. Having created separate corporate entities in the belief that his businesses would save money, Cheema cannot expect us to undo his efforts merely because, in hindsight, the creation of separate corporate entities has proved disadvantageous. Our consistency in this matter is not, as petitioner insinuates, “punishment” for tax planning.
Petitioner also relies on Nat'l Music Camp v Green Lake Twp, 76 Mich App 608; 257 NW2d 188 (1977). There, the National Music Camp, one of four corporate entities comprising the Interlochen Educational Complex, owned property that it used for educational purposes during its summer music program. Another of the four corporations, the Interlochen Arts Academy, used the property during the regular school *643year. Id. at 612. The township assessing property tax claimed that the camp could not rely on its educational exemption, because it did not exclusively use the property as required by the pertinent statute. Id. at 613. This Court rejected the argument, however, and held that the camp and the academy, which were both components of the Interlochen Educational Complex, could be considered one institution for property tax purposes. Id. at 613-614.
Nat’l Music Camp is not relevant or analogous here. That case did not involve a nonexempt entity asserting an exempt entity’s tax exemption. Rather, it involved two exempt entities, using the same property for a common educational purpose. In contrast, Grand Aire and petitioner were formed for distinct purposes, the former to operate a cargo business, the latter to act as registered owner of aircraft. The Nat’l Music Camp Court’s language that a contrary result would “exalt[] form over substance” has no applicability in the present case.
C. WHETHER PETITIONER WAS EXEMPT BECAUSE OF A “VIRTUAL LEASE”
Lastly, petitioner argues that it should be exempt from the use tax because it has a “virtual lease” agreement with Grand Aire. We disagree.
Subsection 4(g) (i) of the Use Tax Act, MCL 205.94(g)(i); MSA 7.555(4)(g)(i), provides an exemption for property sold or rented to an “industrial processor for use or consumption in industrial processing.”7 However, subsection 4(g)(i) specifically states that the term industrial processor
*644means a person who transforms, alters, or modifies tangible personal property by changing the form, composition, or character of the property for ultimate sale at retail or sale to another industrial processor to be further processed for ultimate sale at retail. Sales to a person performing a service who does not act as an industrial processor while performing the service may not be excluded under this subdivision,* ***8 [Emphasis added.]
It is undisputed that Grand Aire is engaged in the business of transporting air cargo and that the aircraft at issue is used in that business. There is no indication that the aircraft is used in any other way. Thus, even if petitioner had formally leased aircraft to Grand Aire — which it has not — it would not be entitled to an exemption under this statute because Grand Aire does not qualify as an industrial processor. See Michigan Automotive Research Corp v Dep’t of Treasury (After Remand), 222 Mich App 227; 564 NW2d 503 (1997), and Beckman Production Services, Inc v Dep’t of Treasury, 202 Mich App 342; 508 NW2d 178 (1993) (petitioners did not satisfy “industrial processor” definition and were therefore not eligible for exemption).
We reject as unpersuasive petitioner’s remaining arguments relating to its alleged status as a “constructive lessor.” There is no authority for petitioner’s suggestion that lessors, as a class, are automatically entitled to any exemption enjoyed by their lessees. We are unconvinced by petitioner’s argument that Grand *645Aire’s exemption “flows through” to petitioner under rule 82, 1979 AC, R 205.132. This rule provides that lessors may opt to pay the use tax at the time of purchase of tangible personal property or to report and pay use tax on the rental receipts from the rental of that property, and describes the procedures for making the election. Petitioner’s assertion that this rule allows it to benefit from Grand Aire’s exemption — irrespective of its failure to comply with the rule’s procedures or to enter into a formal lease agreement with Grand Aire — cannot be logically inferred from the language of this rule or from any of the authorities it cites.
Affirmed.
Hoekstra, J., concurred.
Petitioner is not itself a domestic air carrier within the meaning of the use tax act and, therefore, is not exempt from use tax. See MCL 205.94(x); MSA 7.555(4)(x).
Petitioner initially challenged the tax assessment on constitutional grounds, but abandoned these arguments while the case was before the Tax Tribunal.
MCL 205.91 et seq.; MSA 7.555(1) et seq.
Nine other aircraft have also been registered in Czars’ name.
We find no merit in petitioner’s contention that the Tax Tribunal improperly held it to a “reasonable doubt” standard of proof. In accor*639dance with the statute, the Tax Tribunal presumed that the aircraft petitioner brought into the state within ninety days of purchase was used in Michigan, and ruled against petitioner because it failed to rebut the presumption.
MCL 211.7, 211.9; MSA 7.7, 7.9.
Because “price” is defined as including rental receipts, MCL 205.92(f); MSA 7.555(2)(f), this exemption applies to property leased to an industrial *644processor. See Kress v Dep’t of Revenue, 322 Mich 590; 34 NW2d 501 (1948) (disallowing exemption for rental income of “domestic” water processing units but allowing exemption for those units used in industrial processing).
Computer systems are excluded. See MCL 205.94(g)(i) and (ii); MSA 7.555(4)(g)(i) and (ii).

=== CASE 9737295 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:21:01.379414+00 ===

Jansen, J.
(dissenting). I dissent from the holding that petitioner, Czars, Inc., “used” the aircraft within the meaning of MCL 205.92(b); MSA 7.555(2)(b) such that it is liable for use tax. I find that the record is devoid of any evidence that Czars used the aircraft; therefore, I would reverse the decision of the Tax Tribunal.
As noted by the majority, Czars purchased the aircraft in Arizona and registered it with the Federal Aviation Administration in Czars’ name. Czars, however, was not licensed to operate the aircraft. Tahir Cheema is the sole shareholder of Czars, a Delaware corporation that otherwise conducts no business, has no assets, and employs no one. Further, Czars transferred the aircraft to Grand Aire in Arizona. The aircraft was flown by a pilot employed by Grand Aire from Arizona to Michigan. While the aircraft was in Michigan, Grand Aire modified and operated it as a *646cargo plane in Grand Aire’s cargo business. Grand Aire held the license and maintained logs to comply with federal regulations.
The use tax applies to every person in this state “for the privilege of using, storing, or consuming tangible personal property in this state.” MCL 205.93(1); MSA 7.555(3)(1). Further, “it is presumed that tangible personal property purchased is subject to the tax if brought into the state within 90 days of the purchase date and is considered as acquired for storage, use, or other consumption in this state.” Id. I believe that Czars has rebutted this presumption because there is no record evidence that Czars used the aircraft within the meaning of MCL 205.92(b); MSA 7.555(2)(b), which defines “use” as
the exercise of a right or power over tangible personal property incident to the ownership of that property including transfer of the property in a transaction where possession is given.
In its decision, the Tax Tribunal stated the following with regard to finding that Czars used the aircraft:
There can be no dispute that, as owner, Czars must be deemed to have “used” the plane in question, in conformity with the definition contained in [MCL 205.92(b); MSA 7.555(2)(b)] of the use tax act, by means of “the exercise of a right or power over tangible personal property incident to the ownership of that property including transfer of the property in a transaction where possession is given.”
The majority concludes that Czars “allowed” Grand Aire to fly the aircraft to Michigan, thereby exercising ownership rights in Arizona, and “permitted” Grand Aire to modify the aircraft, obtain federal approval to fly the aircraft, and use the aircraft in the cargo trans*647port business. However, I do not find this to be evidence that Czars “used” the aircraft and find these conclusions to be too passive to constitute “use” as that word is defined in the statute. See, e.g., Sharper Image Corp v Dep’t of Treasury, 216 Mich App 698, 702-703; 550 NW2d 596 (1996) (the term “use” in the Use Tax Act does not include the distribution of catalogs from an out-of-state business).
I cannot conclude that there is sufficient evidence in the Tax Tribunal record that Czars exercised a right or power over the aircraft incident to its ownership of the aircraft. The Tax Tribunal seemed to conclude that the mere fact of Czars’ ownership of the aircraft is sufficient to find that it used the aircraft as that word is defined in the statute. But, mere ownership is not necessarily sufficient to conclude that the entity (Czars) exercised a right or power over the property. In this case, the evidence indicates that Czars did nothing more than purchase the aircraft. The Tax Tribunal also made much of the fact that Cheema possessed total control of his companies, including Czars and Grand Aire. This fact still does not provide evidence that Czars exercised a right or power over the aircraft incident to its ownership of that aircraft.
I am unable to conclude that Czars “used” the aircraft within the meaning of MCL 205.92(b); MSA 7.555(2)(b) and find no evidence of such use in the Tax Tribunal record or the Tax Tribunal’s decision. I would reverse the decision of the Tax Tribunal and find that Czars is not hable to pay a use tax on the aircraft in question. Because I would reverse on this *648basis, I find it unnecessary to address the other issues raised by petitioner.

=== CASE 9737242 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:19:56.542601+00 ===

Chief Justice ZAPPALA,
concurring.
I join the majority opinion. As the author of Office of Disciplinary Counsel v. Jepsen, 567 Pa. 459, 787 A.2d 420 (2002), I write separately only to further differentiate that case from the instant matter. The majority opinion aptly notes that Jepsen is distinguishable because the issue there was whether our Court has the authority to disbar a judicial officer, and not whether the Court of Judicial Discipline *500possessed such power. Another fundamental distinction, however, exists. The Judicial Conduct Board sought Jepsen’s removal from office pursuant to a constitutional mandate applicable to disbarred members of the bar, rather than pursuant to any inherent authority possessed by that constitutionally created entity. Thus, Jepsen is not controlling here, where the disbarment was imposed by the Court of Judicial Discipline for judicial misconduct.
To illustrate this point, the procedural posture of the two cases must be examined. In this case, the Judicial Conduct Board filed a complaint against the judicial officer. The Court of Judicial Discipline proceeded to examine the misconduct engaged in by the judicial officer and concluded that the appropriate sanction included disbarment. That did not occur in Jepsen. The Judicial Conduct Board did not file a complaint against Jepsen. Instead, the Judicial Conduct Board filed in our Court an application to implement automatic forfeiture of the judicial office pursuant to Article V, Section 18(d)(3) of the Pennsylvania Constitution, which states
A justice of the peace convicted of misbehavior in office by a court, disbarred as a member of the bar of the Supreme Court or removed under this section shall forfeit automatically his judicial office and thereafter be ineligible for judicial office.
Pa. Const. Art V, § 18(d)(3) (emphasis added).
It is evident that the Judicial Conduct Board in Jepsen did not examine the alleged misconduct of the judicial officer. It was proceeding solely on the ground that she had been disbarred on consent by this Court and therefore was required to automatically forfeit her judicial office. Thus, the factual paradigm did not include the present scenario where the Court of Judicial Discipline examined misconduct of the judicial officer pursuant to its constitutionally conferred authority and determined that the judicial officer should be disbarred. Under these circumstances, Jepsen can not be interpreted as authorizing the Court of Judicial Discipline to remove a judicial officer’s license to practice. As the majority opinion recognizes, that authority is exclusively vested in this Court.

=== CASE 9737243 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:19:56.546248+00 ===

*501Justice SAYLOR,
concurring and dissenting.
A pivotal premise of the majority’s analysis in this case is its assertion that “[i]t is beyond cavil that the Court of Judicial Discipline has jurisdiction over the general subject matter presented here, namely, determining whether an individual engaged in judicial misconduct.” Majority Opinion at 1167. Assuming such a foundation, the majority’s conclusions flow readily. But the constitutional provisions enabling the Court of Judicial Discipline address the lodging of charges, not against individuals generally, but against “a justice, judge or justice of the peace.” Pa. Const. Art. V, § 18(a)(9), (b)(5).1 Accordingly, jurisdiction is not facially implicated with respect to persons, such as Appellant, who are former judicial officers when proceedings are commenced.2
By contrast, in Office of Disciplinary Counsel v. Jepsen, 567 Pa. 459, 787 A.2d 420 (2002), the sole issue was whether this Court retained the ability to direct a particular result, disbarment on consent with respect to an attorney who was also a sitting district justice, where the Constitution also conferred jurisdiction and disciplinary authority upon the Court of Judicial Discipline. Significantly, there was no question in Jepsen that this Court would have possessed disciplinary jurisdiction and authority had the attorney not also been a judicial officer. The salient issue was whether the Constitutional provisions *502enabling the Court of Judicial Discipline divested this Court of disbarment authority. See id. at 462, 787 A.2d at 422.
There is no similar question of overlapping jurisdiction and potential divestiture presented here. Rather, this case concerns the scope of the jurisdiction conferred upon the Court of Judicial Discipline in the first instance. Despite the facial import of Article V, Section 18, the majority determines that jurisdiction over former judicial officers is necessary to effectuate the policy aims of Article V, Section 18. While the majority’s articulation of policy is sound, I cannot agree that it requires the departure sanctioned. Rather, in my view, it would be preferable to respect the express means of effectuating policy that have been selected by the General Assembly and approved by the voting public, including the discemable, incorporated limitations. Accordingly, as Appellant had resigned from his judicial office prior to the initiation of charges against him in the Court of Judicial Discipline, I would hold that jurisdiction was not present.
I agree with the majority, however, that the Court of Judicial Discipline lacks disbarment authority, even where jurisdiction is present. In addition to the reasons presented by the majority, I note that Section 18(b)(5)’s catch-all phrase, “or other discipline as authorized by this section,” is qualified under the doctrine of ejusdem generis by the preceding examples, all of which are directed to a judicial officer’s function as such, and not his or her status as an attorney.
Justice NIGRO joins this concurring and dissenting opinion.
. Although I recognize that jurisdictional boundaries may be drawn with reference to the underlying conduct at issue, see, e.g., Riedel v. Human Relations Comm'n of Reading, 559 Pa. 34, 40, 739 A.2d 121, 124 (1999), the plain text of Article V, Section 18, clarifies that the class of controversies brought into view by that provision is defined, as well, by the condition that the accused be a justice, judge, or justice of the peace.
. I would contrast a situation in which a formal complaint has been filed prior to resignation or removal, in which case jurisdiction can reasonably be viewed as having attached. See, e.g., In re Larsen, 717 A.2d 39, 43 (Pa.Ct.Jud.Disc.1998), vacated in part, 812 A.2d 640 (Pa. Spec.Trib.2002); cf. Judicial Inquiry and Review Bd. v. Snyder, 514 Pa. 142, 151, 523 A.2d 294, 299 (1987) (concluding that, once disciplinary jurisdiction attaches in this Court, the matter is not rendered moot by the judge's subsequent failed quest for retention); In re Glancey, 518 Pa. 276, 282-83, 542 A.2d 1350, 1353-54 (1988) (same as to a judge who resigns during the matter’s pendency).

=== CASE 9737244 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:19:59.731336+00 ===

Skoglund, J.
The issue raised by these consolidated, interlocutory appeals is whether the Vermont Labor Relations Board (the “Board”) has jurisdiction and authority to order disclosure of confidential information contained in the records of the Vermont Department of Public Safety Internal Affairs Unit. The Vermont Department of Public Safety (the “Department”) appeals a Board decision ordering it to release redacted Internal Affairs Unit (IAU) records to grievant, former police sergeant Gloria Danforth. Danforth cross-appeals claiming that the Board erred in denying her subpoena request for the Department’s “command and review sheets.” Danforth also appeals a second Board order, concerning the same underlying facts, denying her subpoena request for IAU records of investigations which may have occurred subsequent to her dismissal. We affirm the challenged decisions of the Board.
These appeals were bom of a grievance hearing brought by Danforth and other female employees against the Department over alleged discrimination and retaliation within the Department based on their gender, prior complaints they made regarding Departmental practices, and Danforth’s prior grievance activity.1 During that grievance hearing, in an effort to impeach an adverse witness who was *233also a sergeant with the Department, Danforth’s attorney asked the witness if he had ever told Danforth he had lied in a deposition. Prompted by this pregnant question, an IAU investigation was summarily brought to determine if the witness had, in fact, lied in a deposition. With one business day’s notice, Danforth was ordered to appear as a material witness at the IAU investigative interview of the witness.
Danforth was unable to obtain counsel for the IAU interview, in accordance with her rights under Department Rules and Regulations, see Department Rules and Regulations, Section III, Art. Ill, § 7.5, after only one business day’s notice of the investigative interview.2 The investigating officer excused her appearance and ordered her to appear four days later. She was again unsuccessful in obtaining counsel, but attended the interview nonetheless, asserting her right to counsel and refusing to answer questions until she obtained one. Three days later, Danforth herself became the subject of a separate IAU investigation based on her alleged violation of the Department’s code of conduct by deliberately failing to obey a lawful order, and by failing to fully and truthfully answer questions in connection with an internal investigation. Again she was ordered to appear before an IAU investigator and again she was unable to obtain counsel. She answered some, but not all questions — refusing to answer questions without her “counsel of choice” present.
The commissioner of the Department delivered formal written charges to Danforth pursuant to 20 V.S.A. § 1880, advising that her actions during the IAU investigation violated the Department’s code of conduct. In accordance with 20 V.S.A. § 1880, the charges advised Danforth that she had a right to have the matter determined by a hearing panel comprised of members of the Department, and that if she did not request such a hearing, the commissioner would take such disciplinary action as he deemed appropriate, including dismissal. Danforth did not request a hearing panel. The commissioner then determined that her violations of the Department’s code of conduct warranted her dismissal.
Danforth appealed the disciplinary action to the Labor Board as authorized by 20 V.S.A. § 1880, asking the Board to overturn her dismissal. Her appeal asserts that her dismissal was “without just cause and with improper motives.” She claims she is the only member of the Department who has been ordered to answer questions by IAU *234without counsel present, after one business clay’s notice, and after asserting her right to have counsel for such questions. She also claims her dismissal constituted retaliation for exercising her First Amendment rights, engaging in grievance activity and whistle blowing, and was a discriminatory violation of the collective bargaining agreement between the State and the Vermont State Employees’ Association (VSEA), which requires discipline to be applied consistently and uniformly. VSEA, State Police Bargaining Unit, Art. 14, § 2(c).
In accordance with her grievance appeal before the Board, Danforth sought discovery and issued subpoenas duces tecum on the commissioner to obtain the following information in the appeal hearing:
1. Reports of all allegations of misconduct by state police officers, and the findings as to such allegations, submitted by the commissioner of public safety to the State Police Advisory Commission since January 1, 1995. Such reports may be redacted so that the name of the individual state police officer is not revealed so long as the log shows the alleged misconduct and the disposition, and is in such a form to permit a determination whether discipline is imposed on members uniformly.
2. Copies of the written log made with respect to each allegation of misconduct relating to any state police officer maintained pursuant to 20 V.S.A. § 1928(c) since January 1, 1995. Such reports may be redacted so that the name of the individual state police officer is not revealed so long as the log shows the alleged misconduct and the disposition, and is in such a form as to permit a determination whether discipline is imposed on members uniformly.
3. Copies of the records of the Office of Internal Investigation relating to Sargent [sic] Gloria Danforth.
4. Copies of the Command and Review Sheets (or records) relating to the referral of charges against and dismissal from employment of Detective Sergeant Gloria Danforth.
5. Copies of any e-mails, notes, or written material of any sort, not otherwise requested, from or to the Commissioner of Public Safety relating to the referral of charges against *235and dismissal from employment of Detective Sergeant Gloria Danforth.
After being served with these subpoenas, the Department and the state police advisory commission (SPAC)3 both filed timely motions to quash pursuant to V.R.C.P. 45(c)(3), arguing that the records created and maintained by the Department’s IAU are confidential under 20 V.S.A. § 1923(d)(3) and can be disclosed only at SPAC’s direction.
The Labor Board issued an order, granting the motions in part, denying them in part, and commanding the Department to produce summaries containing limited information of internal affairs investigations concerning misconduct by state police officers since January 1,1995, relevant to Danforth’s allegations, including: the case number; the date the member being investigated was notified of the charges; the date the member was interviewed; whether the member requested that an attorney be present for the interview; all cases in which the interview took place after the member requested legal counsel without legal counsel for the member present; and all cases in which discipline was taken for refusal to answer questions without legal counsel present. The Board also granted Danforth’s subpoena requesting IAU records relating to the time usually given to officers to obtain counsel and respond to an IAU investigation. The Board’s order recognized the importance of anonymity and the difficulty maintaining such in “a state of Vermont’s size” and so ordered that “[t]he summaries of allegations and findings should be prepared so that the identity of the involved state police officer is not revealed.” It further ordered that the summaries set forth the alleged misconduct and the Department’s disposition “in such a form to permit a determination whether discipline is imposed on members uniformly and consistently.” Danforth’s subpoena requesting copies of IAU command and review sheets which allegedly include reasons for her dismissal was denied because the Board found she had failed to make a sufficient showing of need. Both parties filed timely motions to reconsider, which were denied. Both parties appeal.
On appeal, the Department argues that the Board lacked jurisdiction to order the Department to disclose IAU records, that those records are confidential under 20 V.S.A. § 1923, and, assuming the Board has jurisdiction, the Board’s order was both overbroad and *236unduly onerous. Danforth cross-appeals asserting that she needs the command and review sheets in order to determine if reasons other than the alleged failure to answer questions at the IAU investigation motivated her dismissal. She also brings a second appeal of the Board’s later denial of her subpoena for IAU records of investigations that may have been brought subsequent to her dismissal.
I.
The Department argues that the Board lacks jurisdiction to order the disclosure of confidential IAU records. We disagree.
As a public administrative body, jurisdiction of the Board is exclusively conferred by statute. Boynton v. Snelling, 147 Vt. 564, 565, 522 A.2d 232, 233 (1987). Under the State Employees Labor Relations Act (SELRA or the “Act”) the Board is authorized to “hear and make final determination^ on the grievances of all employees who are eligible to appeal grievances to the board.” 3 V.S.A § 926. “Grievance” is defined by the Act as “an employee’s ... expressed dissatisfaction, presented in writing, with aspects of employment or working conditions under collective bargaining agreement or the discriminatory application of a rule or regulation, which has not been resolved to a satisfactory result through informal discussion with immediate supervisors.” 3 V.S.A. § 902(14); In re Guttman, 139 Vt. 574, 576, 431 A.2d 491, 493 (1981). State police members are included within the meaning of “state employee.” 3 V.S.A. § 902(5)(A).
The Department argues that, technically, Danforth’s action before the Board cannot be a “grievance” governed by SELRA because that Act applies to “the state police in the department of public safety except for matters of discipline, disciplinary action, transfer or suspension and those items specifically covered by statute.” 3 V.S.A. § 1004. Rather, the Department argues, this action is an “appeal” taken from a disciplinary discharge and thereby governed solely by 20 V.S.A. § 1880: “[a]ny disciplinary action taken by the department against a member of the department, except a temporary suspension, shall be taken pursuant to the procedures set forth in this section.” Id. The Department claims the Board’s authority under the statutory scheme of 20 V.S.A. § 1880 is significantly more limited than its authority under SELRA.
Under 20 V.S.A § 1880, a member of the Department who receives written charges of misconduct has two choices on how to proceed. The member may first choose to file a request for a hearing before a hearing panel. Id. § 1880(b). If the member chooses this option, the *237statute authorizes the hearing panel to issue subpoenas, to schedule an adversarial, evidentiary hearing, and to determine whether the charges underlying the dismissal are proved by a preponderance of the evidence. Id. § 1880(d). If the member does not request a hearing, the commissioner “may take such disciplinary action as the commissioner deems appropriate.” Id. § 1880(c). Under this option, the member may appeal the charges and the disciplinary action taken by the commissioner to the Labor Board. Id. The statute further provides that “[a]ll hearings before the board... shall be de novo.” Id.
As an appeal governed by 20 V.S.A. § 1880, the Department claims that the Board’s authority is limited to performing the same functions as hearing panels under that statute, that is, making a sole determination whether or not the Department has proved the grounds for dismissal by a preponderance of factual evidence relating to the appellant’s conduct. As a result of this purported limit on the Board’s authority, the Department seems to conclude that the Board may not order discovery of materials relating to contractual rights delineated in the parties’ collective bargaining agreement. Therefore, the Department argues, in matters of police discipline governed by 20 V.S.A. § 1880, the Board may not exercise the authority it enjoys under SELRA to order release of records in order to evaluate whether the discipline was imposed in accordance with the collective bargaining agreement.
The Department’s contention, that § 1004 of SELRA exempts state police discipline from consideration by the Board, is tempting in its simplicity. That approach, however, fails to consider the legislative history and evolution of 20 V.S.A. § 1880, fails to acknowledge the inclusion of state police as members under SELRA, and fails to heed the erosion of § 1004 in light of SELRA’s statutory scheme related specifically to state police member working conditions. Finally, the very existence of a collective bargaining agreement between the Department and state police members, replete with provisions pertaining to Department disciplinary and corrective action, further undermines the Department’s premise that Department disciplinary matters are excluded from the precepts of a collective bargaining agreement enforceable under SELRA.
An early version of § 1880 allowed a member of the Department to ask the district court to determine whether charges made against him or her had been proved or not proved by a preponderance of the evidence. 20 V.S.A. § 1880 (1983), amended by 20 V.S.A. §§ 1880(b)-1880(e), 1880(g), 1880(h) (1991); 20 V.S.A. § 1880 (1996). If the member *238did not file with the court, the commissioner would appoint a panel to hold hearings to establish whether the charges had been proved by the same standard. Id. § 1880(c) (1983). Following a finding by either body that the charges had been proved, the court or the panel would make recommendations with respect to what action the commissioner should take. Id. § 1880(e) (1983). The member could then appeal to the Labor Board after the commissioner’s action. Id. § 1880(f) (1983). In 1991, this version of § 1880 was invalidated on separation of powers grounds. In re Kennedy, 156 Vt. 645, 592 A.2d 893 (1991) (mem.) (holding that statute unconstitutionally made district court a hearing officer for potential personnel dispute between Department and state police officer). In response, the Legislature amended § 1880 and gave members the option of requesting appointment of a hearing board or, if no such request was made, the commissioner would appoint a hearing panel. See 1991, No. 25 (codified as 20 V.S.A. § 1880(c) (1991)). The 1991 amendment left in place the ability of the member to appeal ■ to the Labor Board. Id.; 20 V.S.A. § 1880(f) (1991).
. In 1996, § 1880 was again amended, resulting in the current scheme. See 1995, No. 98 (Adj. Sess.), § 1 (codified as 20 V.S.A. § 1880 (1996)). New language added by the 1996 amendment provides greater specificity about the scope of the Board’s review of a state police officer’s appeal. of the commissioner’s disciplinary action. Id. The current statute provides that the member can appeal both “the charges and the disciplinary action taken” to the Board and that all such appeals hearings before the Board are to be de novo. 20 V.S.A. § 1880(c).
When construing a statute “our overriding objective must be to effectuate the intent of the Legislature.” State v. Dixon, 169 Vt. 15, 17, 725 A.2d 920, 922 (1999) (citation omitted). Provisions that are part of the same statutory scheme must be read in context and the entire statutory scheme read in pari materia. Robes v. Town of Hartford, 161 Vt. 187, 192, 636 A.2d 342, 346 (1993). The Legislature is presumed to make changes in light of existing law. State v. Read, 165 Vt. 141, 147, 680 A.2d 944, 948 (1996). With these principles in mind we examine the governing statutes.
Authorization to conduct a de novo hearing means that “the case shall be heard the same as though it had not been heard before.” Bookstaver v. Town of Westminster, 131 Vt. 133, 136, 300 A.2d 891, 893 (1973). By requiring a de novo hearing, the statute empowers the Board to compel testimony and evidence by subpoena, examine witnesses and issue 'written findings. See In re Bushey-Combs, 160 Vt. *239326, 328, 628 A.2d 541, 542 (1993) (holding that administrative board conducting hearings de novo is empowered to compel testimony and evidence by subpoena, examine witnesses and issue written findings).
Further, by allowing an employee to appeal both the commissioner’s charges and the commissioner’s disciplinary action, the statute confers a broader jurisdiction on the Board than is conferred on hearing panels under 20 V.S.A. § 1880. This authorization, coupled with the Board’s explicit authority to hear these appeals in hearings de novo, forces the conclusion that the Board’s role is not limited to simply determining whether charges are proven. Unlike the hearing panels and district court in the earlier version of § 1880, the Board does-not function as a mere “hearing officer.” See In re Kennedy, 156 Vt. at 646, 592 A.2d at 894.
Support is also found in the fact that the Legislature has authorized the state police to bargain collectively, see 3 V.S.A. §§ 902-903, which has resulted in collective bargaining agreements binding on the commissioner and the state police members. Article 5 of the current collective bargaining agreement prohibits, in relevant part, discrimination based on gender and on the filing of complaints and grievances. VSEA, State Police Bargaining Unit, Art. 5, § 1. Article 14 of the agreement provides that “no disciplinary action shall be taken without just cause,” and “disciplinary action will be applied with a view toward uniformity and consistency.” The collective bargaining agreement includes a grievance procedure culminating in an appeal to the Board. Under the contract, the Board is charged with authority to determine whether the commissioner’s action was consistent with the collective bargaining agreement’s provisions relating to discrimination and disciplinary action.
An interpretation of 20 V.S.A. § 1880 that confers jurisdiction on the Board to resolve all state police labor disputes, if an involved officer chooses not to use the hearing panels, is consistent with the legislative scheme under that statute, as well as the scheme under the parties’ collective bargaining agreement.4
*240The legislative amendments to chapter 113 of Title 20 relating to the discipline and transfer of members of the Department lead us to conclude that § 1004 of SELRA does not preclude the Labor Board’s jurisdiction over this grievance. When read in context, the statutory provisions relevant to Department disciplinary actions and the Board’s review thereof necessitates a finding that 20 V.S.A. § 1880 bestows upon the Board authority to determine whether charges are proved or not proved, as well as authority to review the actions of the commissioner challenged in this grievance to determine if they comport with collective bargaining provisions prohibiting discriminatory or disparate treatment. In short, the Board has authority to order production of evidence essential to its resolution of the parties’ claims.
II.
The Department claims that under the statute authorizing creation of the IAU, 20 V.S.A. § 1923, all records of the IAU are to be kept strictly confidential and the only entity with authority under § 1923 to release IAU records is SPAC.5 Section 1923 mandates that “[rjecords of the office of internal investigation shall be confidential,” but makes three exceptions:
(1) The state police advisory commission shall, at any time, have full and free access to such records; and
(2) The commissioner shall deliver such materials from the records of the office of internal investigation as may be necessary to appropriate prosecutorial authorities having jurisdiction; and
(3) The state police advisory commission shall, in its discretion, be entitled to report to such authorities as it may deem appropriate, or to the public, or to both, to ensure proper action is taken in each case.
20 V.S.A.§ 1923(d).
As the Court noted in Douglas v. Windham Superior Court, 157 Vt. 34, 39, 597 A.2d 774, 777 (1991), the most important point of privilege doctrine was set forth by Chief Justice Burger in United States v. Nixon, 418 U.S. 683 (1974). In discussing various privileges, including the Fifth Amendment protection against self-incrimination and that of attomey/client, he wrote,
*241These and other interests are recognized in law by privileges against forced disclosure, established in the Constitution, by statute, or at common law. Whatever their origins, these exceptions to the demand for every man’s evidence are not lightly created nor expansively construed, for they are in derogation of the search for truth.
Nixon, 418 U.S. at 709-10.
We addressed the evidentiary privilege created under 20 V.S.A. § 1923 in State v. Boy, 151 Vt. 17, 32, 557 A.2d 884, 893 (1989), and held, under the facts presented therein, that IAU records were not discoverable. In Boy, defendant was charged with simple assault on a police officer. He sought access to IAU records concerning the victim/officer so that he could show the violent character of same. In that decision, we noted that “[w]e do not exclude the possibility that a defendant could have access to internal investigation files in a proper case and in a proper manner.” Roy, 151 Vt. at 35, 557 A.2d at 895.6
Because this is not a criminal case, the analysis utilized in Boy is not applicable. However, this Court’s approach to privilege doctrine and reluctance to interfere with the truth seeking function of litigation still applies. See In re Inquest Proceedings, 165 Vt. 549, 551, 676 A.2d 790, 792 (1996) (mem.) (noting that privileges are strongly disfavored for their interference with truthseeking); Douglas v. Windham Superior Court, 157 Vt. at 40, 597 A.2d at 777 (“Because of their interference with truthseeking, privileges are strongly disfavored.”). Danforth is not trying to impeach police officers with their prior disciplinary history, but rather seeks IAU records to determine if the Department has violated the collective bargaining agreement and her constitutional rights.7 To that end, the Board ordered production of only a limited *242category of cases that would be relevant to her claim that discipline was not applied uniformly and consistently in her case. Specifically, it noted that grievant was charged with violating § 14.0, Truthfulness, of Part A of the employer’s disciplinary guidelines and that dismissal is available as the sanction for the first offense of the section. It found that some, but not all, of Part A offenses were relevant to grievant’s allegation that she was not disciplined in a consistent and uniform manner. Those found relevant also included dismissal as a sanction for a first offense. The Board then listed the specific sections it found similar in nature to a violation of the truthfulness provision of § 14.0 and ordered employer to provide grievant with summaries of all allegations of misconduct by state police officers, and the findings as to such allegations, since January 1,1995 covered by the specific sections found applicable.
Adhering to the mandate that all IAU records must be confidential except in those instances where SPAC authorizes their release would result in an injustice to complainants, such as Danforth, who claim they were unfairly treated by the Department. We assume the Legislature did not intend a statutory scheme which allows a member of the state police to bring a grievance to the Labor Relations Board based on a claim that they had been subjected to the discriminatory application of a rule or regulation, or a violation of the collective bargaining agreement that requires disciplinary action to be applied with a view toward uniformity and consistency, but which also creates an absolute shield against inquiries into how the Department treats its members through § 1923. of Title 20. To construe the statutes in this manner would prevent members of the state police from accessing the very evidence which may support a claim of disparate or discriminatory treatment.
The Department further claims that the Board abused its discretion by determining Danforth has a legitimate need for IAU records, and by failing to give sufficient weight to the confidentiality concerns of the statute. The Department claims that the Board’s order that it summarize investigations of unrelated code violations and provide *243summaries of the timing and scheduling of every other IAU interview since January 1,1995 was overbroad and unduly onerous. As discussed above, the scope and jurisdiction of the Board’s power exceeds a mere determination of whether or not the charges have been proved by a preponderance of the evidence. Implicit in the authority of the Board to conduct a de novo hearing is the authority to compel disclosure and fashion its order in a manner it deems most appropriate. “We treat the Board’s decisions with deference, and presume the Board’s decisions are correct and reasonable.” In re Whitney, 168 Vt. 209, 213, 719 A.2d 875, 878 (1998) (internal citations omitted). The Board’s decision “will not be overturned unless it is shown to be clearly erroneous.” In re AFSCME, Local 490, 153 Vt. 318, 321, 571 A.2d 63, 65 (1989).
The Board ruled that certain records must be disclosed to Danforth and those records must be redacted to ensure privacy. The Board’s order was sufficiently narrow in scope to maintain the privacy of Department employees while still permitting Danforth access to pertinent IAU records. We find that the circumstances before us present a proper case warranting disclosure of confidential IAU records as limited by the Board. Nor has the Department convinced us that the Board’s directive is unduly onerous.
We deny Danforth’s cross-appeal seeking reversal of the Board’s order denying her access to the Department’s command and review sheets. We agree with the Board that Danforth has failed to make a sufficient showing of need for the information contained in these sheets. Pursuant to Section III, Art. IV, § 2.3 of the Department’s Rules and Regulations, a charged member “shall be given a copy of all the statements and other evidence compiled during the course of the investigation into the allegations against him/her” at the time charges are served. The Department’s compliance with these rules provides employees with sufficient notification and information relating to allegations of improper conduct made against them, and sufficient protection against unsubstantiated allegations, such that unimpeded access to internal affairs records is not required.
III.
Danforth appeals a second Board order denying her subpoena seeking IAU records to determine if the Department conducted an investigation of another specified member of the Department subsequent to her dismissal and, if so, to evaluate the Department’s *244handling of the same.8 She claims the information sought is necessary to determine whether the Department took disciplinary action towards that member in a manner consistent with the actions taken against her. Danforth contends that she is entitled to these IAU records in order to establish her claim that discipline was applied to her in a discriminatory manner because of her gender and in violation of Article 14 of the VSEA collective bargaining agreement requiring application of disciplinary action “with a view toward uniformity and consistency.” The Department again moved to quash under V.R.C.P. 45(c)(3)(A) and claimed 20 V.S.A. § 1923 required confidentiality of IAU records.
The information Danforth seeks was developed subsequent to Danforth’s dismissal.9 The Board held as a threshold matter that evidence of alleged inconsistent discipline is not relevant to its review of Danforth’s dismissal to the extent that it involves alleged improper conduct by other employees of which management was unaware at the time Danforth was dismissed. The Board considered twelve factors set forth in In re Colleran, 6 V.L.R.B. 235, 265 (1983), to determine whether to grant Danforth’s request. Id. at 266-69. The Board found that one factor, “the consistency of the penalty with those imposed upon other employees for the same or similar offense,” rendered examination of the requested IAU records irrelevant. Since the Board’s duty is “to police the exercise of discretion by the employer,” In re Gage, 137 Vt. 16, 19, 398 A.2d 297, 299 (1979), the Board found the relevant focus is on management’s actions and knowledge at the time the decision to dismiss Danforth was made, and that any alleged improper employee conduct of which management was unaware at the time of her dismissal is not relevant. Additionally, the Board’s decision was based in part out of consideration for the purported statutory purpose of 20 V.S.A § 1880, which arguably contemplates expeditious resolution of appeals by calling for a hearing to be scheduled within 60 days after an appeal is taken. 20 V.S.A § 1880(c). To allow an appellant to delve into post-dismissal conduct, the Board observed, would have *245the very real potential of creating ongoing discovery that continuously pushes back the date the case can be heard.
Again, as noted above, we will defer to Board decisions with regard to matters committed to its discretion, presuming they are correct and reasonable, and will not overturn them unless they are shown to be clearly erroneous. See In re AFSCME, Local 190, 158 Vt. at 321, 571 A.2d at 65.
We affirm the Board’s decision to order release of redacted IAU records, affirm the Board’s decision denying Danforth’s request for command and review sheets, and affirm its decision denying Danforth’s request for IAU records of investigations conducted subsequent to her dismissal.
In 1991, Sgt. Danforth initiated a civil action against the Department seeking redress for sex discrimination. In 1994, the Department entered into a settlement agreement and consent decree in Danforth v. State Department of Public Safety, Docket S-438-91WnCv, in Washington Superior Court in which the Department admitted that: “Sgt. Danforth has experienced sexual harassment through a hostile environment that has negatively impacted her career achievements.” In re Danforth, V.L.R.B. No. 99-62 (Sep. 30, 1999); see also In re Barney, 172 Vt. 530, 772 A.2d 1074 (2001) (mem.) (affirming Labor Board’s finding that Danforth was discriminated against by the Department for whistle blowing).
She did not want her original attorney to represent her as he had precipitated the problem by asking the question.
The state police advisory commission was created to “provide advice and counsel to the commissioner in carrying out his responsibilities for the management, supervision and control of the Vermont state police.” 20 V.S A. § 1922(a).
Lending further support to a conclusion that the mandate of § 1004 of SELRA has become obsolete when viewed in the context of the surrounding statutory schemes is the statute governing a member’s grievance of nondisciplinaiy transfers. That statute mandates: “[n]ondisciplinary transfers shall be grievable directly to the Vermont labor relations board in accordance with the rules of practice of the board. In any such grievance, the burden shall be on the grievant to establish that the transfer was either discriminatory or disciplinary.” 20 V.S.A. § 1921(b).
IAU records are exempt from public disclosure by the Public Records Act, except as provided in 20 V.S.A § 1923. See 1 V.SA § 317(b)(18).
In Roy, we affirmed the denial of access to the internal investigation file based on three reasons: (1) the procedural posture of the case, including the fact that defendant’s discovery motion was untimely; (2) the defendant failed to malee a sufficient case of need under the circumstances; and (3) the statutory privilege makes no provision for access to the confidential information by the courts. 151 Vt. at 34-35, 557 A.2d at 894. We then noted that the decision did not “exclude the possibility that a defendant could have access to internal investigation files in a proper case and in a proper manner.” Id. at 35,557 A.2d at 895. This footnote is offered as a response to the dissent’s suggestion that the above quote from Roy was taken out of context.
Danforth asserts that her First Amendment rights were violated because the actions taken against her were in retaliation for bringing suit against the Department for sex discrimination. See Dangler v. New York City Off Track Betting Corp., 193 F.3d 130 (2d Cir. 1999) (dismissal of employee who blew the whistle on superiors is potential First Amendment violation which may be redressed under 42 U.S.C. § 1983). She also claims *242the Department violated her Fifth and Fourteenth Amendment due process rights and right against deprivation of property without due process of law. Article 5 of the VSEA collective bargaining agreement prohibits discrimination, retaliation and harassment on the basis of gender and protected complaint and grievance activity. An employee’s free speech and whistle blowing activities are protected against Department discrimination, retaliation and harassment under Article 53 of the collective bargaining agreement. An employer must apply discipline with a view toward uniformity and consistency under Article 14 of the agreement.
Danforth initially sought access to IAU records concerning two state police members, but on appeal pursues only the subpoena request for information relating to one of the members.
Specifically she seeks: (1) IAU records relating to any request that a named state police lieutenant appear for an interview with an internal affairs investigator, or any other form of investigation, relating to allegations that the lieutenant lied in his deposition given in this case; and (2) documents relating to any charges or disciplinary action brought against the lieutenant based on his deposition testimony.

=== CASE 9737245 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:19:59.736551+00 ===

Dooley, J.,
dissenting. Respectfully, I dissent from Part II of the majority opinion. It is black letter law that evidence which is covered by an evidentiary privilege cannot be admitted into evidence, see V.R.E. 501, or discovered, see V.R.C.P. 26(b)(1). Evidentiary privileges apply in administrative proceedings. See 3 V.S.A. § 810(1). We held in State v. Roy, 151 Vt. 17, 32, 557 A.2d 884, 893 (1989), that:
The specific records that the defendant requested are made confidential by 20 V.S.A § 1923(d). There is no exception in the statute for use of the records in court proceedings. It is clear that the intent of the statute is that the records not be subject to disclosure except for the statutory purposes. Thus, the statute creates a form of evidentiary privilege in a court proceeding. See Camp v. Howe, 132 Vt. 429, 433, 321 A.2d 71, 73 (1974); V.R.E. 501.
There is also no exception in the statute for administrative or personnel grievance proceedings. Thus, the statute creates an evidentiary privilege with respect to those proceedings as well.
Up to this point, the majority and I appear to agree on the relevant law. We part company, however, when we address our power to allow discovery despite the statutory privilege — the majority holds we can and should allow the discovery; I would hold that we cannot, whatever may be our policy preferences.
The majority suggests two ways around the privilege. First, it holds that we can implement our “reluctance to interfere with the truth seeking function of litigation” through judicially-created exceptions to absolute privileges. Certainly, we can do that in instances where we have created, or are being asked to create, the privilege at common *246law, as in the two instances cited by the majority. In re Inquest Proceedings, 165 Vt. 549, 551, 676 A.2d 790, 792-93 (1996) (mem.); Douglas v. Windham Superior Ct., 157 Vt. 34, 40, 597 A.2d 774, 777-78 (1991). Despite our policy preferences, however, we have no power to override the Legislature’s definition of the scope of a privilege. See State v. Henneberry, 558 N.W.2d 708, 710 (Iowa 1997) (“The creation of an exception to the statutory privilege is solely within the province of the legislature, and not the judiciary.”). Here, the Legislature has not made an exception for court or administrative proceedings.
The second way is taken from State v. Roy. Roy was a criminal case in which the defendant wanted access to the personnel records of the arresting officer to determine whether he had been disciplined in the past for using excessive force in an arrest. We recognized in Roy that although the privileged nature of the disciplinary file prohibited defendant’s access as a matter of state law, it did not necessarily overcome his sixth amendment compulsory process right to present evidence in his favor as developed in Pennsylvania v. Ritchie, 480 U.S. 39 (1987). Roy, 151 Vt. at 32-35, 557 A.2d at 894-95.
Ritchie was also a criminal case in which the defendant was charged with sexually assaulting his daughter and sought access to records of the state child protection agency relating to a prior report of sexual abuse by the defendant against the victim. The records were covered by a statutory evidentiary privilege, but the Court held that the defendant’s right to present evidence in his favor could overcome the privilege if the trial court found the evidence material to the defendant’s guilt or punishment. See id. at 55-58. To make this determination, the Court held, the information should be submitted to the trial court for in camera inspection. See id. at 60.
For a variety of reasons, we held in Roy that Ritchie did not require even an in camera inspection of the personnel file in that case. 151 Vt. at 34-35, 557 A.2d at 894-95. We added, however, that “[w]e do not exclude the possibility that a defendant could have access to internal investigation files in a proper case and in a proper manner.” Id. at 35, 557 A.2d at 895. The majority has taken this phrase out of context to justify access to the personnel file in this case.
The phrase related solely to the sixth amendment right, as explicated in Ritchie, that would require access to the privileged material as a matter of federal constitutional law. The Ritchie rationale is applicable only to criminal cases. There is no similar constitutional right to present favorable evidence in a civil ease. See Gilbert v. Superior Ct., 238 Cal. Rptr. 220, 227-28 (Ct. App. 1987); Giesing v. *247Blefeld, 2001 WL 56437, *3 (Conn. Super. Ct. 2001); V.B.T. v. Family Servs. of W. Pa., 705 A.2d 1325, 1335 (Pa. Super. Ct. 1998). There is no due process right to discovery in a civil case or administrative proceeding. See Soc’y of Lloyd’s v. Ashenden, 233 F.3d 473, 480 (7th Cir. 2000); Silverman v. Commodity Futures Trading Comm’n, 549 F.2d 28, 33 (7th Cir. 1977) (administrative proceeding). The majority has articulated no constitutional right of access to the personnel information that would allow the Board or this Court to override the statutory privilege.
Even if we were to somehow apply Ritchie by analogy, I cannot agree that we can uphold the broad order of the Board in these circumstances. Although Danforth alleged that the charges against her, and the decision to terminate her, were motivated by gender discrimination and retaliation for grievance and whistleblowing activity, she made no factual showing that there was evidence of lack of uniformity in disciplinary sanctions that would be shown by the IAU records. She has not alleged that any other officer was ever disciplined for conduct even remotely similar to that alleged against her. Her counsel admitted in his argument before this Court that he had no such evidence and shouldn’t be expected to have it until he examined the records. Thus, the subpoena request was a pure fishing expedition, hoping counsel would find fish in the IAU sea.
In Ritchie, the Supreme Court tailored its remedy to the interests involved and did not allow access to privileged information merely in the hope of discovering helpful information:
A defendant’s right to discover exculpatory evidence does not include the unsupervised authority to search through the Commonwealth’s files____[T]his court has never held — even in the absence of a statute restricting disclosure — that a defendant alone may make the determination as to the materiality of the information____In the typical case where a defendant makes only a general request for exculpatory material under Brady v. Maryland, ... it is the State that decides which information must be disclosed.
Ritchie, 480 U.S. at 59 (internal citations omitted). Thus, at a maximum, Ritchie supports only that a party can require the adjudicatory body to conduct an in camera inspection to determine the materiality of the privileged information, and not that the party can make that materiality decision. The Board failed to impose that limit here.
*248I think, however, there is a more important requirement that the Board ignored. The majority of courts that have addressed the issue have required a threshold showing of some degree of relevance before allowing a defendant to pierce a privilege. See, e.g., Commonwealth v. Bishop, 617 N.E.2d 990, 995 n.5 (Mass. 1993) (listing cases from other states that have required an initial showing of relevance). Thus, the Bishop court required that the defendant “advance, in good faith, at least some factual basis which indicates how the privileged records are likely to be relevant to an issue in the case____” Id. at 996-97 (emphasis added). This is consistent with our holding in Douglas v. Windham Superior Court that an in camera inspection can be ordered only based on some showing of need. 157 Vt. at 43-44, 597 A.2d at 779-80.
These requirements to protect the confidentiality of the information are particularly critical in a case like this where the litigant seeks extensive privileged records of many persons. Danforth’s position is that all state police disciplinary records generated since 1995 should become public so that she can search through them to try to make a case. Even the Board’s narrowing of the request will make a substantial part of the disciplinary records public. I recognize that names will be redacted from the records, but I share the concern of the State that in a small state like Vermont the redaction of the names is an inadequate, and likely ineffective, protection of privacy.
Danforth has made no showing of likely materiality, and the Board has failed to impose restrictions that will protect the confidentiality of the information in the IAU records. Even if I believed that the Board could override the careful and specific confidentiality protection contained in 20 V.S.A. § 1923(d) in any case, I cannot endorse the way it has done so in this case.
I am authorized to state that Justice Morse joins in this dissent.

=== CASE 9737246 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:20:00.353821+00 ===

ELKINGTON, J.
This case concerns section 168.1.6 of the Charter of the City and County of San Francisco.  That section was designed to prevent “double recovery” by a police officer for one duty-incurred disability through receipt of both disability retirement allowances under San Francisco’s charter and benefits payable under the workmen ’s compensation laws.
The retirement provisions of the charter, which include section 168.1.6, constitute part of the contract of employment between San Francisco and its policemen. It has been stated that such provisions “ ‘are an inseparable part of that contract. ’ ” (City of Oakland v. Workmen’s Comp. App. Bd. (Reimers), 259 Cal.App.2d 163, 166 [66 Cal.Rptr. 283] ; Holt v. Board of Police etc. Comrs., 86 Cal.App.2d 714, 716 [196 P.2d 94].)  The retirement provisions of the charter are not only the organic law of San Francisco, but are also the law of the state, with the force of legislative enactments. (C. J. Kubach Co. v. McGuire, 199 Cal. 215, 217 [248 P. 676] ; City of Oakland v. Workmen’s Comp. App. Bd. (Reimers), supra; Adams v. Wolff, 84 Cal.App.2d 435, 440 [190 P.2d 665].)
*774The appellate courts of this state have repeatedly held that a city may protect itself against paying twice (through the workmen’s compensation provisions of the Labor Code and its own retirement system) for the same industrial disability. Because of the arguments presented to us it seems profitable at this point to review the pertinent eases.
City of Los Angeles v. Industrial Acc. Corn. (Morse), 63 Cal.2d 263 [46 Cal.Rptr. 110, 404 P.2d 814], concerned section 182% of that city’s charter, relating to pensions following duty-incurred disability or death of Los Angeles policemen and firemen. The section contained provisions designed to prevent double payments for the same disability or death.1 On behalf of herself and two children, the widow of a fireman who died in the line of duty applied to the Industrial Accident Commission for the statutory death benefits. A full award, payable in weekly amounts, was ordered. The city paid the award as ordered but attempted, as apparently permitted by section 182%, to reduce the monthly pension payments by the same amount. The widow thereupon applied for a lump sum commutation of the compensation award; the purpose being to secure its immediate payment, thus preventing the city from thereafter reducing her monthly pension ‘1 in amount to the difference between the amount of pension provided for . . . , and the total amount of such compensation or award granted and paid . . . until the total amount [of compensation] shall have been fully paid.” (See fn. 1, ante.) The commission granted the commutation request on the theory that the widow “should receive both full compensation and pension payments. ’ ’
The court rejected the Industrial Accident Commission’s theory. It stated (p. 264): “We have held in Fraide[2] that this theory is erroneous: that the city is entitled to a partial credit against workmen’s compensation. The city, therefore, *775may be entitled to a credit on future compensation liability or may be entitled to reduce future pensions. . . .”3 (Italics added.) The commutation order of the commission was annulled and the cause was remanded for further proceedings.
City of Los Angeles v. Industrial Acc. Com. (Fraide) supra, 63 Cal.2d 242. This ease concerned a policeman, permanently disabled in line of duty, who was granted a disability pension. He thereafter applied for a workmen’s compensation disability award. Los Angeles Charter section 182% (see fn. 1, ante) was then in effect. The commission granted the compensation award, but refused to allow the city any credit for the disability pension paid, against such award. The court annulled the commission’s order, stating (p. 253) : “. . . the city has substantially contributed to the pension fund. Moreover, we cannot properly sanction ‘double recovery’ for the employee. ... [ ] The city, therefore, should receive a partial credit against workmen’s compensation liability for the disability pension it pays each employee. The credit should bear the same ratio to workmen’s compensation liability as the ‘city’s contributions’ bear to the ‘total contributions. ' . . ,”4 (Italics added.)
Stafford v. Los Angeles etc. Retirement Board, 42 Cal.2d 795 [270 P.2d 12], Stafford was a deputy sheriff, retired for industrial disability in January 1950. In May 1950 he was given a lump sum workmen’s compensation award which was paid by the county forthwith. Thereafter Stafford applied to the retirement board for a pension based on the same disability. His pension rights were set forth in the County Peace Officers Retirement Law. (Gov. Code, §§ 31900-32082.) Section 32080 provided (p. 797) : “ ‘It is the intention of this chapter [the Retirement Law] that pensions allowed for injury incurred in line of duty shall not be cumulative with the *776benefits under workmen’s compensation awarded for the same injury or disability. ’ Section 32081, hereinbefore referred to and relied upon by respondent board, provides that ‘If any beneficiary receives compensation under any workmen’s compensation act or by virtue of any judgment obtained against the county . . . for disability arising out of and in the course of the employment of a member or pensioner, the benefits shall be modified as follows: (a) ‘If the amount is paid in one sum . . . the beneficiary shall not receive any retirement payments until the total amount of the retirement payments which would otherwise be paid equals the total amount received under the workmen’s compensation act or by virtue of the judgment. . . .’”
Los Angeles County refused to make any payment on account of the pension until (using the language of subdivision (a) of section 32081) “the total amount of the retirement payments which would otherwise be paid equals the total amount received [by Stafford] under the workmen’s compensation act.” Stafford sought mandamus relief to compel the county to pay the pension without credit for the previously paid compensation award. From an order denying mandamus he appealed. Affirming, the Supreme Court stated: “. . . a contrary view would defeat the declared policy of section 32080 that disability pensions shall not be cumulative with workmen’s compensation benefits awarded for the same disability.” (Italics added; p. 798.)5
Lyons v. Hoover, 41 Cal.2d 145, 148 [258 P.2d 4], concerned the City of Sacramento Charter section 173, subsection (j), which provided: “ ‘That portion of any allowance payable because of the death or retirement of any such employee which is provided by contributions of the City shall be reduced, in the manner fixed by the City Council, by the amount of any benefits payable to or on account of such person, under the Workmen's Compensation, Insurance and Safety Law of the State of California. It is the express intent that payments under said Workmen’s Compensation, Insurance and Safety Law shall be a deductible credit against any allowance under the Retirement System which is provided by contributions of the City payable to or on account of the death of any such person; that double payments, in whole or in part, at the expense of the taxpayers, shall not be permitted. ’ ’
*777Plaintiff Lyons’ husband had been retired from the city’s fire department on a disability pension. Upon his death she was granted a widow's pension of $75 per month. Thereafter the Industrial Accident Commission awarded her and her three minor children a disability and death benefit of $5,910.71. The city council, endeavoring to take advantage of the charter section 173, subsection (j), reduced plaintiff's pension “by the sum of $71.31 per month until the amount withheld should equal the total of the compensation award.” The superior court held that the city was entitled to no reduction.
The Supreme Court reversed, holding, as to the widow, it was proper for the city to withhold pension payments until the payments she would otherwise have received equalled the portion of compensation payments that she (not the children) was entitled to receive. Referring to the effect of Sacramento’s charter section 173, subsection (j), the court stated (pp. 148-149) : “It is clear that if a widow receives all of a compensation award, the portion of her pension allowances provided by the city’s contributions can be reduced until the sums withheld equal the total amount of the award.” However, the court held that the portion of the award granted the children could not be offset against the widow’s pension.
Healy v. Industrial Acc. Com., 41 Cal.2d 118 [258 P.2d 1], Healy was a police officer disabled in the line of duty. He was thereafter paid full salary for two years until his retirement on a disability pension of $283.50 per month. Thereafter he received a compensation award of $7,200 for permanent disability and $18.46 a week for life. The commission, however, allowed the city credit against the award for the monthly pension payments made to Healy. The Supreme Court upheld the city’s right to take such a credit where (as in the case at bench) the pension resulted from contributions made by the city alone. However, it appeared that a portion of Healy’s pension might be attributable to contributions made by him. For that reason the proceeding was remanded to the commission to determine if Healy had made such contributions, and if so, for an appropriate reduction in the credit to be allowed the city.6
City of Oakland v. Workmen’s Comp. App. Bd. (Reimers), supra, 259 Cal.App.2d 163. Reimers, an Oakland fireman, *778■was retired for a service-incurred industrial disability in 1952. He received a pension of 75 percent of salary until his death in 1964. In 1965 his widow, although herself receiving a death allowance, in a derivative claim based on such rights as were held by her husband during his lifetime, sought a workmen's compensation award for the disability incurred by him in 1952. Oakland claimed credit against such an award for disability retirement payments made to Reimers during his lifetime. The city’s charter section 249(2) provided, among other things: “It is the intention of this section that [retirement] allowances granted to or on account of members of the [Police and Fire Retirement] System for injury, illness or death incurred-in the performance of duty shall not be cumulative with benefits under the Labor Code of California awarded as the result of the same injury, illness or death.”
, -The appeals board granted a compensation award of $8,250 for Reimers’ disability but denied any credit to the city. Since the disability pension payments had all been made in Reimers’ lifetime, it was, of course, impossible to discontinue such payments until the amount thereof would have equalled the workmen’s compensation award. The court, however, pointed to Labor Code section 4909 which expressly allows the appeals board “in fixing the amount of compensation to be paid” to take into account any “benefit received by the injured employee during the period of his incapacity” which was not due and payable under the workmen’s compensation provisions of the Labor Code. Recognizing the strong policy against such double payments, particularly when prohibited by municipal charter or ordinance, the court held the appeals board to have abused its discretion in failing to give effect to Oakland’s charter section 249(2) as permitted by Labor Code section 4909.
Barnett v. Brizee, 258 Cal.App.2d 97 [65 Cal.Rptr. 493], This case concerns the City of Oakland Charter provision which was the subject of City of Oakland v. Workmen’s Comp. App. Bd. (Reimers), supra, 259 Cal.App.2d 163. Involved was an attempt to take credit against the pension of a fireman’s widow for a workmen’s compensation death benefit award to the widow and her minor child. It was properly held that the charter’s credit provision applied only when the recipients of the city’s pension and of the compensation award are “the same person or same dependent.” The court '(p,"98) iterated the rule announced in Lyons v. Hoover, *779supra, 41 Cal.2d 145: “ 1 It is clear that if a widow receives all of a compensation award, the portion of her pension allowances provided by the city’s contributions can be reduced until the sums withheld equal the total amount of the award.' ”
O’Brien v. City of San Jose, 180 Cal.App.2d 609 [4 Cal.Rptr. 744], O’Brien, Chief of San Jose’s Fire Department, sustained an injury in the course of his duties. He was retired for disability on a pension of $429.83 per month. The following year he was granted a lump sum workmen’s compensation disability award in the amount of $4,680, which sum the city was ordered to, and did, pay forthwith. The city then ordered O ’Brien’s retirement pay stopped for 11 months, the effect of which was to withhold the amount of the compensation award.' O’Brien, by a mandamus proceeding, sought to compel the. city to pay his retirement allowances without reduction. The superior court denied the writ.
San Jose’s charter section 2903, subdivision (j), had a “double recovery” provision which read:'“Reasonable provisions shall be made for both service-connected disability retirements and non-service-connected disability retirements] with credit allowances in favor of the retirement fund for any, industrial benefits paid by the City.” (Italics added; p. 612.) This section was qualified, however, by section 2903.31 which specifically provided that the monthly disability retirement payments should he in an amount which “when added to the amount allowed and received and to be received monthly under said [Workmen’s Compensation] Act, equal the monthly retirement allowance herein provided for.” (Italics added.) An obvious purpose of the provision was to insure that each month the retired employee would, in spite of any credit or setoff otherwise applicable, receive sufficient funds for his sustenance, even though he may at some earlier time have received a compensation award.7 The appellate court, although recognizing the policy against “double recovery,” was obliged to respect the charter provisions which prevented O’Brien’s monthly payments from being reduced because of the earlier paid compensation award.
It seems proper to emphasize here that Stafford v. Los Angeles etc. Retirement Board, supra, 42 Cal.2d 795, also’, involved an attempt to offset monthly pension payments *780against an earlier lump sum compensation award. In Stafford there was no provision (such as that of San Jose) guaranteeing minimum monthly payments even though the effect was to deny credit. The court in Stafford held the city to be entitled to credit. The effect was to deny Stafford any disability pension payments until the amount which would otherwise have been paid equalled the amount of the previously paid compensation award.
Three cases are called to our attention which seemingly limit the right of a municipality to offset pension payments against a compensation award. These cases are Holt v. Board of Police etc. Comrs., 86 Cal.App.2d 714, 717 [196 P.2d 94], Johnson v. Board of Police etc. Pension Comrs., 74 Cal.App.2d 919 [170 P.2d 48], and Larson v. Board of Police etc. Comrs., 71 Cal.App.2d 60 [162 P.2d 33], Each dealt with a “double recovery” charter provision of the City of Long Beach which provided: “This [pension] provision is intended to be in lieu of and take the place ... of the Workmen’s Compensation . . . Act . . . and any person who would be entitled to a pension . . . hereunder shall be deemed to have waived all provisions under the Workmen’s Compensation . . . Act.” In each ease the appellate court held that while the acceptance of a pension was a waiver of workmen’s compensation, the converse was not true, and the acceptance of a compensation award was not a waiver of pension rights. Thus, the right of the city to pay but once for an industrial disability depended on the fortuity (or design) of whether pension or compensation was first applied for. These cases were considered in Stafford v. Los Angeles etc. Retirement Board, supra, 42 Cal.2d 795, 798-799. After discussing the “declared policy . . . that disability payments shall not be cumulative with workmen’s compensation benefits awarded for the same disability,” the court in Stafford stated that Holt, stipra, Johnson, supra, and Larson, supra, were “neither compelling nor persuasive to a contrary holding. ’ ’ (P. 799.)
From the foregoing authorities it will be seen that under appropriate charter provisions a municipality has broad power to prevent double disability payments to the same person. The order in which the respective payments, awards or allowances are payable is immaterial. Pension payments may be reduced and offset against an earlier and fully paid compensation award. (City of Los Angeles v. Industrial Acc. Com. (Morse) supra, 63 Cal.2d 263; Stafford v. Los *781Angeles etc. Retirement Board, supra, 42 Cal.2d 795.) Earlier pension payments may be credited against a later compensation award. (City of Oakland v. Workmen’s Comp. App. Bd. (Reimers), supra, 259 Cal.App.2d 163.) And where award and pension are payable concurrently one may be offset or credited against the other to the end that total payments shall not exceed the stipulated monthly pension. (City of Los Angeles v. Industrial Acc. Com. (Fraide), supra, 63 Cal.2d 242; Lyons v. Hoover, supra, 41 Cal.2d 145; Healy v. Industrial Acc. Com. supra, 41 Cal.2d 118; Barnett v. Brizee, supra, 258 Cal.App.2d 97.) This flexible right to take credit was made clear in City of Los Angeles v. Industrial Acc. Com. (Morse) supra, 63 Cal.2d 263, 264, where the court stated, “The city, therefore, may be entitled to a credit on future compensation liability or may be entitled to reduce future pensions. ...”
George J. Engler, the subject San Francisco police officer of the case before us, sustained injury in the course of his employment in 1957. However, he continued in his employment on full salary until October 1, 1965, when he was granted a monthly disability retirement allowance as a result of the residual effect of his 1957 injury. On June 20, 1966, petitioner San Francisco filed an application with respondent Workmen’s Compensation Appeals Board to determine its liability, if any, for permanent disability indemnity, and its right to credit against such liability its payments of disability retirement allowances to Engler.
The evidence before the appeals board indicated that respondent Engler has been receiving from San Francisco monthly allowance of $689.87 pursuant to his disability retirement. Of this sum, $41 represented an annuity derived from the contributions made by Engler to San Francisco’s retirement system during his employment; under the “Fraide formula” it is not here at issue. The balance, $648.87, was provided directly by San Francisco.
It was stipulated by Engler and San Francisco in the proceedings below that the injury and disability which resulted in Engler’s disability retirement allowances was the same injury and disability which was the subject of the workmen’s compensation proceedings before the appeals board. The same stipulation was repeated by the parties appearing at oral argument before this court.
San Francisco contended that it was entitled to credit to *782the extent of its payments of $648.84 per month against any award of permanent disability indemnity which might be made. The appeals board awarded Engler “Permanent disability indemnity in the total sum of $1890.00 payable forthwith. ’ ’ It denied any credit.
San Francisco seeks relief in this court by writ of review from the award of the appeals board. It contends that the board acted in excess of its powers and abused its discretion in refusing to allow credit against Engler’s retirement allowance.8
The charter provisions here at issue provide as follows:
“Section 168.1.6. That portion of any allowance payable because of the death or retirement of any member of said department, which is provided by contributions of the City and County, shall be reduced in the manner fixed by the Board of Supervisors, by the amount of any benefits, other than medical benefits, payable to or on account of such person, under the Workmen’s Compensation Insurance and Safety Law of the State of California and because of the injury or illness resulting in said death or ■ retirement. Such portion which is paid because of death or retirement which resulted from injury received in or illness caused by performance of duty, shall be considered as in lieu of any benefits, other than medical benefits, payable to or on account of such person under the said law of the State of California, and shall be in satisfaction and discharge of the obligation of the City and County to pay such benefits. ’ ’
Respondent appeals board construes section 168.1.6, with San Francisco’s Municipal Code section 267 (quoted infra), to allow credit only for such portion of the city’s disability retirement allowances as is payable concurrently with the workmen’s compensation permanent disability benefits. Having found Engler’s compensation benefits to have been due and payable (but not paid) prior to the commencement of his disability retirement payments, it accordingly denied any credit.
It is concluded that the appeals board’s construction of section 168.1.6 is incorrect and that the board abused its discretion and exceeded its powers in denying the claimed credit.
*783We first point out that San Francisco’s charter should be construed, if reasonably possible, to avoid double liability to the city for one disabling injury to an employee. (See City of Los Angeles v. Industrial Acc. Com. (Fraide), supra, 63 Cal.2d 242, 253; City of Oakland v. Workmen’s Comp. App. Bd. (Reimers), supra, 259 Cal.App.2d 163, 166-167.) The rule that pension laws should be liberally construed to carry out their beneficent purposes (see England v. City of Long Beach, 27 Cal.2d 343, 346 [163 P.2d 865]) has no application here. That rule is not designed to encourage a construction which would cause an employer city, already paying agreed disability retirement allowances, to become doubly liable for the same disability.
Section 168.1.6 contains two sentences. We must, if reasonably possible, give significance to each of these provisions. (Select Base Materials, Inc. v. Board of Equalization, 51 Cal.2d 640 [335 P.2d 672].) To achieve harmony and give force and effect to the whole section seeming inconsistencies should be reconciled. (Burks v. Poppy Constr. Co., 57 Cal.2d 463, 470 [20 Cal.Rptr. 609, 370 P.2d 313]; Hough v. McCarthy, 54 Cal.2d 273, 279 [5 Cal.Rptr. 668, 353 P.2d 276].)
We construe the first sentence of section 168.1.6 to provide for offsetting against a retired policeman’s disability allowance, workmen’s compensation payments previously made because of the injury which brought about his later retirement. The provision obviously recognizes that when a retired policeman has previously received compensation benefits, offsetting such earlier payments would usually result in decreased or discontinued monthly retirement allowances over extended periods of time. Such a practice would also frequently result in inadequate monthly funds for the living requirements of the retired policeman and his dependents. To alleviate such probable hardship, San Francisco’s Board of Supervisors is permitted by section 168.1.6 to fix the manner of such retirement allowance reduction. This the board of supervisors has done by the enactment of Municipal Code section 267, which, as pertinent, states: “If said benefits under said Compensation Act shall run concurrently with the allowance under this Article and shall be due the beneficiary in payments which are equal to or less than said portion of the retirement allowance, then said portion shall be reduced each month by the amount of such other benefits so due during said month, and the beneficiary shall have no more right *784to such reduction than if the Retirement System had never existed. ... It is the purpose of the preceding paragraphs of this section to reduce the pension portion of the retirement allowance payable from the Retirement Fund, by the amount due to the beneficiary concurrently with said portion, under said Compensation Act, . . . ”9
The second sentence of section 168.1.6 relates to workmen’s compensation payments payable and made after the police officers’ retirement. It provides that such portion of the retirement allowance as is paid shall be considered as in lieu of any workmen’s compensation disability benefits payable for the same disability “and shall be in satisfaction and discharge of the obligation of the City and County to pay such benefits.” (Italics added.) The sentence gives no authority whatever to the board of supervisors; consequently Municipal Code section 267 does not apply to cases covered by it.
The second sentence of section 168.1.6 is relevant to the issue before us.10 Engler has been, and is being, paid disability retirement allowances by San Francisco in excess of the appeals board’s award for the same disability. San Francisco is therefore, under established law, entitled to credit such retirement allowances against Engler’s compensation award.
San Francisco could properly, by charter provision or ordinance, have required full credit against its disability retirement allowances for payments made on workmen’s compensation awards for the same disability. So long as the allowance and award were for the same disability it ivould be immaterial that one had accrued or was payable, or was paid, prior to the other. Such credit would be permissible even though it resulted in no monthly payments being made to the retired employee until the exhaustion of the credit; it was expressly so held in *785Stafford v. Los Angeles etc. Retirement Board supra, 42 Cal.2d 795. In that case it will be recalled, that the Los Angeles Retirement Board had refused to make any payment on account of Stafford’s pension until “ ‘the total amount of the retirement payments which would otherwise be paid equals the total amount received [by Stafford] under the workmen’s compensation act.’ ” (P. 796.) The court affirmed the retirement board’s order, stating (p. 798): “[A] contrary view would defeat the declared policy of section 32080 that disability pensions shall not be cumulative with workmen’s compensation benefits awarded for the same disability. ...”
San Francisco was considerate of the welfare of its retired disabled policemen in its desire to assure to them adequate monthly living funds even at the probable cost of denying to itself complete credit for workmen’s compensation awards already paid. This gratuitous act does not result in the denial of a right to take credit under charter section 168.1.6 against an unpaid workmen’s compensation award which accrued before retirement when doing so does not decrease monthly payments below the amount of its agreed disability retirement allowances.
It is strongly urged that since the compensation award to Engler had accrued, and was payable, before his pension payments started, it is somehow unreasonable or improper now to credit one against the other. Had the award been paid when it accrued, we are told, the city would not now be entitled to a corresponding credit or offset. This is not the law. In Stafford v. Los Angeles etc. Retirement Board, supra, 42 Cal.2d 795, it was expressly held that the city could withhold disability retirement payments until the amount of retirement payments which would otherwise have been paid equals the total amount of a previously paid compensation award.
The decision of the Workmen’s Compensation Appeals Board that ‘ ‘ Applicant City and County of San Francisco is not entitled to credit for disability retirement benefits against permanent disability indemnity awarded herein” is annulled.
Molinari, P. J., concurred.
As relevant here section 182% provided as follows: “any payments made under the provisions of this article shall be first applied to payment of such compensation or award and any balance of such payments made pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be deemed to be pension payments; and it is hereby provided that the pension provided for in this article for such member . . . shall be reduced in amount to the difference between the amount of pension provided for in this article, and the total amount of such compensation or award granted and paid under such general law until the total amount awarded under such general law shall have been fully paid. ” (Cf., City of Los Angeles v. Industrial Acc. Com. (Fraide) 63 Cal.2d 242, 244 [46 Cal.Rptr. 97, 404 P.2d 801].)
City of Los Angeles v. Industrial Acc. Com. (Fraide) 63 Cal.2d 242 [46 Cal.Rptr. 97, 404 P.2d 801],
The court’s reference to a “partial credit” and that the city “may be entitled to a credit” resulted from the possible future application of “res judicata’’ and “collateral estoppel,” and from the fact that a portion of the monthly pension payments appeared to flow from contributions made by the fireman. (See City of Los Angeles v. Industrial Acc. Com. (Fraide) supra, 63 Cal.2d 242.) None of these considerations is applicable here.
This is the so-called ‘ ‘Fraide formula” devised by the court which denies a municipality credit for that portion of pension payments reasonably resulting from contributions made by the disabled or deceased policeman or fireman. In the case at bench, the city making no claim as to the portion of the pension resulting from Engler’s contributions, it is stipulated that the “Eraide formula” is inapplicable.
Government Code sections 32080-32082 were repealed in 1959.
The proper method of computing such a reduction was later devised by the “Fraide formula.” (See fn. 4, ante.)
San Francisco’s charter, as will he seen, has a somewhat similar provision.
Eor reasons not made apparent to us Engler denied jurisdiction in the appeals board to make any award in Ms behalf. He has not appeared in the instant proceedings before this court.
The appeals board referee reported: “I find that upon enactment of Section 168.1.6 of the Charter that the Board of Supervisors had in mind the existence of Section 267 Part I of the Municipal Code and the Board of Supervisors in that manner have fixed the method by which disability retirement benefits are reduced. Pitts v. Perluss, 58 C.2d 824 at page 838 [27 Cal.Rptr. 19, 377 P.2d 83]; Universal Eng. Co. v. Board of Equalization, 118 C.A.2d 36 at page 43 [256 P.2d 1059]; Section 1963(7) C.C.P.”
It is noted that in the proceedings below Engler conceded the applicability of the second sentence of section 168.1.6 to his case. He stated that he had “accepted the [retirement allowances] granted to him by [San Francisco] as in lieu of [workmen’s compensation] benefits and in full satisfaction of the obligation of the City and County of San Francisco to pay same. ’ ’