=== CASE 9739751 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:20:22.660973+00 ===

Cavanagh, C.J.
I respectfully dissent. The majority holds that "the legislative purpose and the underpinnings of the Probate Code mandate the conclusion that a probate court’s discretion at the dispositional phase of a waiver hearing remains unfettered by certain evidentiary requirements recognized in criminal proceedings and already extended to the adjudicative phase of a waiver hearing.” Ante, p 204. The decision to waive jurisdiction over a juvenile is not, however, consistent with the "rehabilitative ideal,” underlying the *228creation of the juvenile courts.1 As one commentator noted:
To those committed to rehabilitation as a goal of the justice system, waiver of juvenile court jurisdiction over any offender seems nonsensical. As a matter of logic, waiver could only be appropriate when a better means of rehabilitation — that is, a better process for removing the juvenile’s desire to misbehave — exists in the criminal court. As a practical matter, the criminal courts will never provide a better rehabilitative process than the juvenile court. If nothing else, the conditions of criminal incarceration guarantee that. So a waiver theory based on the concept of rehabilitation has but one premise — there should be no waiver. [Whitebread & Batey, The role of waiver in the juvenile court: Questions of philosophy and function, printed in Major Issues in Juvenile Justice Information and Training: Readings in Public Policy 207, 218 (1981).]
While there are no doubt instances where it is necessary to waive jurisdiction over certain juvenile offenders, the decision to waive cannot be characterized as being consistent with the philosophy underlying the juvenile court system. In reality, the decision to waive juvenile court jurisdiction is not a decision to rehabilitate, but, rather, a decision to punish the juvenile upon conviction. Thus, the juvenile should be afforded the traditional due process protections in judicial waiver proceedings enjoyed by adults accused of crime.
I
The majority holds that adult constitutional protections are unnecessary in phase ii juvenile *229waiver hearings because it is a dispositional proceeding and "precedes any determination of guilt.” Ante, p 219. (Emphasis in original.) In so holding, the majority makes clear that it views phase n as a nonadversarial proceeding that is concerned only with the determination of the forum within which the juvenile will be tried. As is evident from this discussion, however, there is much more at stake in phase n of the juvenile waiver proceeding than the mere determination of which court will adjudicate the juvenile’s guilt or innocence.
Since the United States Supreme Court decided Kent v United States, 383 US 541; 86 S Ct 1045; 16 L Ed 2d 84 (1966), and In re Gault, 387 US 1; 87 S Ct 1428; 18 L Ed 2d 527 (1967), various jurisdictions have rejected the view espoused by the majority, including the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit,2 Alaska,3 *230Kansas,4 Massachusetts,5 New Mexico,6 and Oklahoma.7 Either by analogizing the transfer hearing to the sentencing phase of adult criminal proceedings,8 or by characterizing the rights affected by the decision to waive jurisdiction as equally, if not more important, than the rights affected in juvenile proceedings to determine delinquency,9 each of *231these jurisdictions has held that constitutional protections afforded adult criminal defendants apply to juvenile waiver proceedings.
Those jurisdictions that view the decision to waive juvenile court jurisdiction as being analogous to adult sentencing, generally rely on Estelle v Smith, 451 US 454; 101 S Ct 1866; 68 L Ed 2d 359 (1981), in finding that the privilege against compelled self-incrimination applies to juvenile waiver proceedings. In Estelle, the Supreme Court held that the Fifth Amendment protects against the use of testimonial disclosures that might subject a person to harsher punishment upon conviction. Id., pp 462-463. The Court stated:
The essence of this basic constitutional principle is "the requirement that the State which proposes to convict and punish an individual produce the evidence against him by the independent labor of its officers, not by the simple, cruel expedient of forcing it from his own lips.” . . .
The Court has held that "the availability of the [Fifth Amendment] privilege does not turn upon the type of proceeding in which its protection is invoked, but upon the nature of the statement or admission and the exposure which it invites.” [Id., p 462, quoting Gault, supra, p 49. Emphasis in original.]
*232The Court distinguished between the "limited, neutral purpose of determining his competency to stand trial,” and the "plainly adverse” use of testimonial disclosures to enhance a defendant’s punishment. Id., p 465.
Characterizing the waiver proceeding as adversarial and the decision to waive jurisdiction as punishment, both the court in RH v State, 777 P2d 204, 208 (Alas App, 1989), and the court in Commonwealth v Wayne W, 414 Mass 218, 236; 606 NE2d 1323 (1993), held that Estelle "foreclosed” the use of confessions and admissions taken in violation of a juvenile’s right against compelled self-incrimination in juvenile waiver proceedings. I agree.
The majority’s reasoning to the contrary ignores reality. The waiver of juvenile court jurisdiction is "a sentencing decision that represents a choice between the punitive disposition of adult criminal court and the 'rehabilitative’ disposition of the juvenile court.” Feld, Criminalizing juvenile justice: Rules of procedure for the juvenile court, 69 Minn L R 141, 269 (1984). (Emphasis in original.)10 Given the substantial interests at stake, there can be no question that waiver proceedings are adversarial. Indeed, this case demonstrates the adversarial nature of phase n waiver proceedings. The prosecution filed a petition for waiver of jurisdiction to the circuit court and presented evidence against the defendant, attempting to prove, as it *233must,11 that Kafan Hana, who had no prior juvenile record, was "beyond rehabilitation under existing juvenile programs and statutory procedures.” See former MCR 5.950(B)(2)(c). Kafan presented substantial testimonial evidence, attempting to convince the court to retain jurisdiction.
There can also be no question regarding the punitive nature of the decision to waive juvenile jurisdiction over Kafan. Had Kafan been prosecuted as a juvenile, he would have faced a maximum of two and one-half years (he was 16 Vi) of confinement (until 19) in a juvenile reformatory. The decision to waive jurisdiction over Kafan, however, paved the way for the state to secure not only a conviction but also a life sentence in an adult prison.12 In my view, this case clearly demonstrates both the adversarial and punitive nature of juvenile waiver proceedings and compels the conclusion that Estelle requires the recognition of Fifth Amendment protections in such proceedings.
I also agree with the courts that find the rationale underlying the United States Supreme Court decision in Gault to compel the conclusion that the constitutional rights recognized in that case must apply in phase n proceedings.13 In my view, the rights affected by the decision to waive jurisdiction are equally, if not more important, than the rights affected in juvenile proceedings to determine delinquency, requiring equal, if not more protection. Further, as mentioned in part in, waiver of juvenile court jurisdiction deprives the juvenile of his *234statutory rights to the traditional benefits of the juvenile justice system. As recognized in both Kent and Gault, the justification for denying juveniles traditional due process rights is the benefits that juveniles purportedly derive from the juvenile justice system. See part ii. Therefore, it seems to follow that traditional due process protections should be afforded to juveniles in any proceeding in which the state seeks to deprive a juvenile of those rights.14 In filing a petition for waiver of juvenile court jurisdiction, the state is not acting as parens patriae to determine whose "custody” is in the best interest of the juvenile accused of crime. To the contrary, the state is deliberately initiating, via the only available avenue, criminal proceedings against the juvenile. Accordingly, such proceedings should be "subject to the requirements which restrict the state when it seeks to deprive a person of his liberty.” Gault, supra, p 17.
II
At common law, children over the age of seven who committed crimes were subject to punishment as adults and entitled to the same procedural protections. Gault, supra, p 16. As the majority recognizes, however, punishment was foreign to the philosophy underlying the progressive movement that sparked the creation of juvenile courts. Ante, p 210. The progressives envisioned a system that focused "on reforming the offender rather than on punishing the offense.” Feld, supra, pp 146-147._
*235The early reformers sought to develop a juvenile justice system that would "use the techniques of the then-developing behavioral sciences — psychiatry, psychology, and sociology — to treat and cure antisocial behavior in children.” Whitebread & Batey, supra, p 208. "The child — essentially good, as they saw it — was to be made 'to feel that he is the object of [the state’s] care and solicitude,’ not that he was under arrest or on trial.” Gault, supra, p 15. To avoid the stigma associated with adult criminal prosecutions, "hearings were confidential and private, access to court records was limited, and youths were found to be 'delinquent’ rather than guilty of an offense.” Feld, supra, p 151. Further, a juvenile found to be delinquent was "never to be incarcerated with adult offenders . . . .” Whitebread & Batey, supra, p 208.
"As corollaries to these propositions, the reformers . . . proposed that the courts operate informally and without legal process.”15 Id. As a result, until the United States Supreme Court decided Kent and Gault "[c]hildren had none of the traditional rights of the criminal defendant because juvenile courts were considered 'civil’ courts.” Whitebread & Batey, supra, p 209. Traditional due process rights were considered unnecessary because "the state was proceeding as parens *236patriae,”16 and, consequently, the proceedings were viewed as nonadversarial. Gault, supra, p 16.
The right of the state, as parens patriae, to deny to the child procedural rights available to his elders was elaborated by the assertion that a child, unlike an adult, has a right "not to liberty but to custody.” ... If the parents default in effectively performing their custodial functions — that is, if the child is "delinquent” — the state may intervene. In doing so, it does not deprive the child of any rights, because he has none. It merely provides the "custody” to which the child is entitled. On this basis, proceedings involving juveniles were described as "civil” not "criminal” and therefore not subject to the requirements which restrict the state when it seeks to deprive a person of his liberty. [Id., p 17.]
In short, "[t]he traditional due process rights had, in theory, been traded for the benefits of the juvenile court philosophy.” Whitebread & Batey, supra, p 209.
III
The Supreme Court has recognized that the waiver of juvenile court jurisdiction "is a 'critically important’ action determining vitally important statutory rights of the juvenile.” Kent, supra, p 556. Aptly referred to as "the most important dispositional decision in the juvenile court,”17 the decision to waive jurisdiction is, in reality, a decision to forgo any rehabilitative effort and to punish the juvenile as an adult upon conviction. In*237deed, some courts have characterized the waiver of juvenile court jurisdiction as "the worst punishment the juvenile system is empowered to inflict.” Ramona R v Superior Court, 37 Cal 3d 802, 810; 210 Cal Rptr 204; 693 P2d 789 (1985).18 (Emphasis added.)
In addition to the possibility of a substantial increase in the loss of liberty upon conviction in adult court, the waiver decision also deprives the juvenile of the protections purportedly afforded juveniles under the Probate Code. For instance, incarceration with adults pending trial and, if convicted of a felony, loss of certain rights of citizenship. All of these are benefits that the early reformers relied upon to justify denying the juvenile traditional due process protections. See part n.
As the majority notes, the United States Supreme Court, although faced with the issue in Kent,19 has never explicitly held that, in a juvenile waiver proceeding, a juvenile is entitled to the full panoply of constitutional protections afforded adults accused of crime. The Court did, however, find the denial of such protections particularly *238disturbing, "where . . . there is an absence of any indication that the denial of rights available to adults was offset, mitigated or explained by action of the Government, as parens patriae, evidencing the special solicitude for juveniles commanded by the Juvenile Court Act.” Kent, supra, pp 551-552. It was precisely this concern — that "children had traded away their traditional due process rights for benefits they were not receiving,” Whitebread & Batey, supra, p 209 — that prompted the Court in Gault to hold that in proceedings involving the potential loss of liberty, children are entitled to constitutionally adequate notice of the charges against them, Gault, supra, p 41, the right to counsel, id., the right to confrontation and cross-examination, id., pp 56-57, and the Fifth Amendment right against compelled self-incrimination. Id., pp 47-48.
IV
For the foregoing reasons, I would remand this case to the juvenile court for a hearing to determine whether the statements and confessions introduced and considered at phase ii of Kafan’s juvenile waiver hearing were obtained in violation of his Fifth Amendment right to remain silent or his Sixth Amendment right to counsel. If the juvenile court determines that the statements and confessions were constitutionally obtained, then I would affirm Kafan’s adult convictions and sentences. If, however, the juvenile court determines that the statements and confessions were obtained in violation of Kafan’s constitutional rights, then the juvenile court should conduct another waiver hearing. In the event another waiver hearing is necessary, and, absent any tainted statements and confessions, the juvenile court again determines *239that the waiver of juvenile court jurisdiction is appropriate, then I would affirm Kafan’s adult convictions and sentences. If, absent any tainted statements and confessions, however, the juvenile court determines that the waiver of juvenile court jurisdiction was inappropriate, then I would vacate Kafan’s adult convictions and sentences, try Kafan as a juvenile, and enter the appropriate dispositional order consistent with the Probate Code.
Levin, J., concurred with Cavanagh, C.J.
Feld, Criminalizing juvenile justice: Rules of procedure for the juvenile court, 69 Minn L R 141, 146-147 (1984).
Kemplen v Maryland, 428 F2d 169, 174 (CA 4, 1970). In Kemplen, the court stated:
|T]t seems to us nothing can be more critical to the accused than determining whether there will be a guilt determining process in an adult-type criminal trial. The waiver proceeding can result in dire consequences indeed for the guilty accused. If the juvenile court decides to keep jurisdiction, he can be detained only until he reaches majority. . . . But, if jurisdiction is waived to the adult court, the accused may be incarcerated for much longer, depending upon the gravity of the offense, and, if the offense be a felony, lose certain of his rights of citizenship. [Emphasis in original.]
R H v State, 777 P2d 204, 210 (Alas App, 1989). The court stated:
[Jjuvenile waiver hearings are hardly "neutral proceedings.” Rather, they are fully adversary proceedings in which the burden of establishing a child’s probable unamenability to treatment is formally allocated to the state. . . .
Nor can juvenile waiver proceedings realistically be said to affect "only the forum where the issue of guilt will be adjudicated.” A juvenile waiver proceeding is the only available avenue by which the state may seek to prosecute a child as an adult. Consequently, the stakes involved in such proceedings are high:
*230"The result of a fitness hearing is not a final adjudication of guilt; but the certification of a juvenile offender to an adult court has been accurately characterized as 'the worst punishment the juvenile system is empowered to inflict.’ ” [Quoting Ramona R v Superior Court, 37 Cal 3d 802, 810; 210 Cal Rptr 204; 693 P2d 789 (1985).]
Edwards v State, 227 Kan 723, 725; 608 P2d 1006 (1980) (stating that "proceedings to certify a minor to stand trial as an adult [as] 'comparable in seriousness to a criminal prosecution’ ”).
Commonwealth v Wayne W, 414 Mass 218, 230; 606 NE2d 1323 (1993). The court stated:
It minimizes the importance, and the potential impact, of transfer hearings to characterize them as civil proceedings that merely determine the proper forum for an adjudication of guilt. Part b hearings are fully adversary — the Commonwealth seeks transfer; the juvenile seeks to remain in the juvenile justice system. In a murder case, the outcome of these proceedings will, in the event of conviction, usually mean the difference between a limited period of confinement in a treatment setting and a lengthy term of imprisonment. [Emphasis added.]
Christopher P v State, 112 NM 416, —; 816 P2d 485, 486 (1991) (stating that majority’s characterization of juvenile waiver proceedings "diminishes the impact of the proceedings on the child”).
JTP v State, 544 P2d 1270, 1276 (Okla Crim App, 1975) (characterizing the nature of the rights affected by a waiver decision as "critical”).
See Kemplen, n 2 supra; R H, n 3 supra; and Wayne W, n 5 supra.
See Edwards, n 4 supra, p 725 (holding that "[t]he exclusionary rules, pertaining to illegally obtained confessions, [are] equally applicable to waiver proceedings in juvenile courts, as to juvenile proceedings or criminal trials”).
In JTP, n 7 supra, p 1276, the Oklahoma Court of Criminal Appeals held:
[W]e are compelled to conclude that there is no rational basis for a rule which would permit an illegally obtained confession to be introduced into evidence at a certification hearing when *231the same confession would be clearly excluded at a delinquency hearing or a criminal trial. In addition we believe it to be contrary to the fundamental policy of the juvenile court system to permit a child within its jurisdiction to stand trial as an adult with no consideration of whether an admission or confession obtained from him was taken under circumstances which make its trustworthiness suspect. We hold it is the duty of the judge of the juvenile court to deny admission into evidence at a certification hearing those statements of a child, obtained in violation of constitutional or statutory rights, which are inadmissible in delinquency or criminal proceedings.
See also Christopher P, n 6 supra, 816 P2d 487 (stating that "[cjonsidering the consequences that evolve from transfer, the distinction between adjudicatory and transfer proceedings blurs in the context of the fifth amendment”).
The waiver decision is a choice to allocate an alleged offender to one of two courts which differ markedly in basic philosophy; in other words, the waiver decision is a choice of philosophies .... In aspiration, at least, the juvenile court is committed to rehabilitation of the offender, while the primary commitment of the criminal justice process lies elsewhere, in the theoretical realms of retribution and deterrence. [White-bread & Batey, supra, p 213.]
See former MCR 5.950(B)(2)(b).
Because the crime charged carried a mandatory sentence, the decision to waive jurisdiction, for all practical purposes, established the sentence that he would receive upon conviction.
See n 9; see also In re Doe, 61 Hawaii 48, 58; 594 P2d 1084 (1979) (stating that "full application of the broad principles announced in Gault would lead to the conclusion that the privilege [against compelled self-incrimination] should apply in such proceedings”).
If the United States Constitution requires the extension of adult criminal protections to juveniles retained in the juvenile system, because the underlying rationale for denying such benefits has, for the most part, little basis in reality, then surely the Constitution must also require the extension of such protections to juvenile waiver proceedings where the juvenile faces the possibility of losing those benefits entirely.
"Because the reformers’ aims were benevolent, their solicitude individualized, and their intervention guided by science, [the early reformers] saw no reason to narrowly circumscribe the power of the state.” Feld, supra, p 150. Consequently, the reformers sought a system that "maximized discretion to provide flexibility in diagnosis and treatment and focused on the child and the child’s character and lifestyle rather than on the crime.” Id. "Discretion was necessary because identifying the causes and prescribing the cures for delinquency required an individualized approach that precluded uniformity of treatment or standardization of criteria.” Id., p 147, n 22. "Because the important issues involved the child’s background and welfare rather than the commission of a specific crime, courts dispensed with juries, lawyers, rules of evidence, and formal procedures.” Id., p 151.
The parens patriae doctrine drew no distinction between criminal and noncriminal youth conduct, a view that supported the Progressive position that juvenile court proceedings were civil rather than criminal in nature. [Feld, supra, pp 148-149.]
Feld, supra, p 272.
One commentator has even analogized the waiver decision to the imposition of the death penalty in adult court:
To transfer a young offender from juvenile to criminal court is clearly not the same thing as executing a convicted murderer. However, considering waiver of serious juvenile offenders as "the capital punishment of juvenile justice” reveals a number of disturbing similarities. Capital punishment in criminal justice and waiver in juvenile justice share four related characteristics: (1) low incidence, (2) prosecutorial and judicial discretion, (3) ultimacy, and (4) inconsistency with the premises that underlie the system’s other interventions. [Zimring, Notes toward a jurisprudence of waiver, printed in Major Issues in Juvenile Justice Information and Training: Headings in Public Policy, p 193.]
The Court was not required to reach this issue because it remanded the case because of procedural error with respect to waiver of jurisdiction. Kent, supra, p 552.

=== CASE 3784429 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2016-07-06 07:34:08.860009+00 ===

The single question here for determination *Page 618
at this time is whether the admissions contained in the company's reply justify the action of the trial court in rendering judgment in favor of Redman.
A study of the material part of the reply discloses two admissions. The first is that there was a trial in the case in which Kuhl was the plaintiff and Redman the defendant. The second is that Kuhl "did not recover a judgment but lost said case." Then follows a denial that "the issues involved in this case have been adjudicated in favor of the defendant, John Redman." Thus it is apparent that the company and Redman are in disagreement as to the identity of the. issues involved in the two cases. Under this state of the pleadings the question ofres judicata is not determinable from them alone.
However, it is urged by Redman that in the trial of the case of Kuhl v. Redman the jury in answering certain interrogatories found Kuhl guilty of contributory negligence. Even if the jury so found, this fact obviously cannot enter into a consideration of the instant question inasmuch as it involves evidencealiunde. Therefore until the precise nature of the defense ofres Judicata is adequately presented it would be inconsistent with the proprieties and probably serve no useful purpose for this court. to speculate with reference thereto to the extent of indulging in a theoretical discussion of the law relating to the various problems that may eventually materialize.
In view of the foregoing the judgment of the Court of Appeals is affirmed and the cause remanded to the trial court for further proceedings not inconsistent with this opinion.
Judgment affirmed.
WEYGANDT, C.J., STEPHENSON, JONES, MATTHIAS, BEVIS, ZIMMERMAN and WILKIN, JJ., concur. *Page 619

=== CASE 3784430 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2016-07-06 07:34:08.926265+00 ===

The case is before us solely on the record disclosed by the findings of the Board of Tax Appeals. Facts growing out of the investigation of the Black estate are not in this record, and statements thereof or arguments based thereon may not be considered in this case. *Page 55
The provisions of Sections 5398 and 5398-1, General Code, govern and control the action of the Tax Commissioner and the Board of Tax Appeals in the matter under consideration. Under the very specific terms thereof, the only question committed to them for consideration and determination upon timely application being made is "whether or not the person whose returns are proposed to be investigated by the county auditor made a return in the year 1932 and fully and in good faith listed therein the taxable property required by the law in force in said year to be so listed."
Under the mandatory provisions of the statute, the board, upon finding such fact in the affirmative, "shall issue its certificate to that effect." The application in this proceeding was rejected, however, upon the sole ground of the unconstitutionality of the immunity provision of Section 5398-1, General Code.
The conclusion of the Board of Tax Appeals was that the applicant was entitled to the certificate of immunity sought if the statute authorizing it is valid. The sole question presented to this court, therefore, is whether the Tax Commissioner was in error in rejecting the application for the certificate of immunity sought upon the ground that the immunity provisions of the statute involved have in effect been held by this court to be unconstitutional in the eases referred to above.
In the case of State, ex rel. Greenward Realty Co., v.Zangerle, County Aud., 135 Ohio St. 533, 21 N.E.2d 662, all that was actually decided was that the petition in mandamus failed to allege facts sufficient to indicate that the county auditor believed or had reasonable grounds to believe that the taxpayers had been delinquent in returning their personal property for taxation and hence there was no showing he was under a duty to act.
The constitutionality of Sections 5398 and 5398-1, General Code, was not directly in issue and the decision, *Page 56
insofar as it referred to the immunity provisions in question, was based upon the case of State, ex rel. Hostetter, v. Hunt etal., Exrs., 132 Ohio St. 568, 9 N.E.2d 676, where the effect of the certificate there involved was to remit the tax which had been actually assessed. In the latter case, Section 5403-2, Page's General Code (114 Ohio Laws, 776, Section 5), alone was under consideration and the question considered and determined, as clearly stated in the opinion, was whether the Legislature had the authority to grant power to the Tax Commission "to issue certificates of immunity from thecollection of omitted taxes for the years 1926 to 1930, inclusive, where such taxes had been placed on the duplicate by the county auditor and certified to the county treasurer as provided by law." (Italics ours.) As there further stated: "The tax, therefore, had become a liability by statute and the county had a right to proceed to collect the same."
The decision in the Hostetter case declared invalid any procedure under Section 5403-2, Page's General Code, which would have the effect of cancelling or preventing the collection of taxes theretofore assessed, which assessment was in 1931 and prior to the effective date of the intangible tax law. The question here is the validity of Sections 5398 and 5398-1, Greneral Code, which withdrew the previously conferred authority of the county auditor to conduct investigations in 1932 or thereafter with a view of levying assessments of taxes for the years preceding 1932 upon the finding by the Tax Commissioner of compliance with the conditions enumerated in such statute by the taxpayer applying for a certificate of immunity.
The same vital distinction was made in the case of State, exrel. Struble, v. Davis et al., Tax Comm., 132 Ohio St. 555,9 N.E.2d 684, where legislation exempting taxes, the assessment of which had been completed at the time such acts had become laws, was held *Page 57
violative of the provisions of Section 28 of Article II of the state Constitution providing that "the General Assembly shall have no power to pass retroactive laws."
The certificate of immunity sought here would not have the effect of remitting any taxes which had been assessed. It would only preclude further action by the county auditor in the matter of examination relative to intangible property taxes for the years beginning with 1926 and ending with 1931. The authority of county auditors to conduct such examination is conferred by statute and of course may be modified or terminated by statute. The question of policy is one for the Legislature and not for the court.
If the immunity certificate was found to be warranted by the facts and accordingly issued, authority theretofore granted the auditor to conduct such examination would be immediately arrested. He would "not be authorized to proceed further therein." Liability for taxes is fixed only where there has been an assessment thereof which has become final.
It cannot be claimed that a liability has been released which has never come into existence, or a tax remitted which had not been assessed. The immunity provision in question, therefore, not having the effect of remitting back taxes or cancelling liability for back taxes, cannot be deemed retroactive.
The immunity provision does not violate the equal protection of the law provision of the Constitution. Conditions long prevailing which brought about the enactment of the intangible tax law in 1931, as well as the object and purpose of such legislation, were widely recognized and well understood. In order that the desired results might be attained from such legislation, inducements for a full and complete return of intangible property in 1932 were provided by the amendment of Section 5398, General Code, and the enactment of Section 5398-1, General Code. For the very *Page 58
evident purpose of inducing all taxpayers in the year 1932 to list fully and in good faith their taxable property as then required by law, assurance of immunity from any examination respecting taxes for the five preceding years was provided by this statute. This inducement was extended to all taxpayers. It had reference to future action and was without discrimination.
Though the discussion in the briefs and oral argument in this case departed widely from the issue involved, the only question presented by the record, as previously indicated, is whether the Legislature, having conferred authority upon county auditors to examine and investigate tax returns during the period prescribed, also had power under the Constitution to revoke such authority or prescribe the conditions under which such examinations should be made. In no case previously before this court has that question been presented or decided.
The Board of Tax Appeals having found "that said Frank B. Black 'made return in the year 1932 and fully and in good faith listed therein the taxable property required by the law in force in said year to be so listed' within the spirit, intent, and purpose of this provision of Section 5398-1, General Code," should have reversed the determination of the Tax Commissioner and ordered him to issue the certificate of immunity sought in this proceeding in accordance with the requirements of the statute. The decision of the Board of Tax Appeals is accordingly reversed.
Decision reversed.
TURNER, ZIMMERMAN and BETTMAN, JJ., concur.
WEYGANDT, C.J., and WILLIAMS, J., dissent.
HART, J., not participating.

=== CASE 2220858 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:59.131266+00 ===

85 N.Y.2d 1014 (1995)
654 N.E.2d 1218
630 N.Y.S.2d 970
Pepi S. Summer, Appellant,
v.
Donald L. Summer, Respondent.
Court of Appeals of the State of New York.
Decided June 13, 1995.
Beckerman & Beckerman, Rochester (Gerald Beckerman and Betsy L. Album of counsel), for appellant.
Brown & Kelly, Buffalo (Philip B. Abramowitz of counsel), and Frank A. Aloi, Mendon, for respondent.
Chief Judge KAYE and Judges SIMONS, TITONE, BELLACOSA, SMITH, LEVINE and CIPARICK concur.
*1015MEMORANDUM.
The order of the Appellate Division should be modified, without costs, by reinstating that portion of Supreme Court's *1016 judgment that awarded plaintiff-wife lifetime maintenance and, as so modified, affirmed.
The Appellate Division's reliance on Hartog v Hartog (194 AD2d 286, 295, mod 85 N.Y.2d 36) and Harmon v Harmon (173 AD2d 98, 108) for its award of durational maintenance to the wife based on her ability to become self-supporting fails in the light of this Court's recent modification of Hartog (85 N.Y.2d 36, supra). We held that Domestic Relations Law § 236 (B) (6) (a) requires the court to consider the marital standard of living in making maintenance awards, among other factors (85 NY2d, at 51-52, supra). Although there is no automatic entitlement to lifetime maintenance, the Appellate Division failed entirely to consider the factor of the parties' marital standard of living. Thus, we modify that Court's order with respect to the duration of maintenance.
Because Supreme Court's determination that the wife is incapable of becoming self-supporting at a level roughly commensurate with the marital standard of living more nearly comports with the weight of the evidence, we reinstate its judgment insofar as it awarded the wife permanent maintenance.
On review of submissions pursuant to section 500.4 of the Rules of the Court of Appeals (22 NYCRR 500.4), order modified, without costs, in accordance with the memorandum herein and, as so modified, affirmed.

=== CASE 3784432 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2016-07-06 07:34:08.939891+00 ===

I concur in the foregoing opinion, believing the instant case to be distinguishable from the cases of State, ex rel.Hostetter, v. *Page 59 Hunt et al., Exrs., 132 Ohio St. 568, 9 N.E.2d 676, andState, ex rel. Greenward Realty Co., v. Zangerle, County Aud.,135 Ohio St. 533, 21 N.E.2d 662, and entertaining the view that the General Assembly possesses the power to limit a county auditor in the examination and investigation of tax returns for preceding years.
The presumption of the constitutional validity of statutes still prevails in Ohio and an act of the General Assembly should not be struck down by judicial pronouncement unless clearly violative of some provision of the state or federal Constitution. Neither have courts the right to usurp the functions of the legislative branch of the government upon questions of public policy. In this connection the following observation, based on public records, would seem pertinent:
For a long time prior to 1931 the tax rates on personal property were high. From 1926 through 1930 the average was in excess of two per cent. Many of the owners of intangible property, regardless of whether their holdings were large or small, considered the rates not only unjust but confiscatory, with the result that they felt no moral obligation to make complete returns and did not do so. Whether justified or not, a "taxpayer's strike" existed. For example, in 1924 there was approximately $3,514,334,261 on deposit in Ohio banks on tax listing day, but only $183, 234,261, or about five per cent, was returned for taxation. From a realistic standpoint the state taxing authorities faced a desperate situation about which something had to be done. So in 1931 a new and fairer taxing system was evolved and translated into law. In order to make this new system effective and to serve a public purpose, the General Assembly said in effect to the owners of personal property, "If you will make a full and complete disclosure of your property in 1932, you will be protected from the assessment of back *Page 60
taxes and penalties." The offer was certainly made in good faith to assure the success of the new law, and the response was wholehearted and gratifying. Despite the sharp decline in market values generally from 1930 to 1932, the report of the state Tax Commission for 1933 discloses that the value of intangible personal property returned for taxation rose from $902,194,870 in 1930 to $7,172,823,115 in 1932.
Under these circumstances, a holding that the immunity provisions of the statutes in question are unconstitutional would produce an unconscionable result.

=== CASE 2220884 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:59.730907+00 ===

654 N.E.2d 742 (1995)
Clarence L. LEITER, Appellant (Respondent below),
v.
Carolee J. (Leiter) SCOTT, Appellee (Petitioner below).
No. 29S04-9504-CV-443.
Supreme Court of Indiana.
August 25, 1995.
*743 Stuart T. Bench, Indianapolis, for appellant.
Christine Crull Altaian, Karen R.
McClure, Noblesville, for appellee.
SHEPARD, Chief Justice.
Several years after appellant Clarence Leiter and appellee Carolee J. Scott divorced, Clarence filed a petition to modify the decree issued to dissolve the marriage. He asserted he now had reason to believe he was not the father of the boy identified as a child of the parties in the decree. He asked the court to order DNA tests so he could prove it. The trial court dismissed the petition and the Court of Appeals affirmed. Leiter v. Scott (1994), Ind.App., 638 N.E.2d 1335. They were correct to do so.
We confronted similar issues in Fairrow v. Fairrow (1990), Ind., 559 N.E.2d 597. When the parties to a dissolution inform the court that they have children and ask for findings to that effect, under what circumstances may one of the parties seek relief from the decree in later years? We recognized in Fairrow that under certain extraordinary facts justice may require allowing subsequent access to the courts for reexamination of paternity, and we granted relief to Mr. Fairrow. At the same time, we observed the substantial disadvantages of allowing divorce litigants to use paternity as a tool in the frequently rambunctious atmosphere following the dissolution of a marriage. We advised that "[o]ne who comes into court to challenge a support order on the basis of non-paternity without externally obtained clear medical proof should be rejected. . . ." Id. at 1336.
The balance we struck in Fairrow does not represent a perfect solution. Still, the Court of Appeals was right to affirm on the basis of Fairrow. The relatively bright line we established there is one that could easily evaporate to the disadvantage of thousands of parents and children should it become riddled with exceptions.
Accordingly, we grant transfer and summarily affirm the opinion of the Court of ` Appeals. Ind.Appellate Rule 11(B)(3). The judgment of the trial court is affirmed.
DeBRULER and SELBY, JJ., concur.
DICKSON and SULLIVAN, JJ., concur in result.

=== CASE 2220885 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:59.752939+00 ===

178 Wis. 2d 428 (1993)
STATE of Wisconsin, Plaintiff-Respondent,
v.
Janice J. KUHN, Defendant-Appellant.
No. 92-0592-CR.
Court of Appeals of Wisconsin.
Submitted on briefs April 13, 1993.
Decided July 27, 1993.
*429 For the defendant-appellant the cause was submitted on the briefs of C. Virginia Finn of Milwaukee.
For the plaintiff-respondent the cause was submitted on the briefs of James E. Doyle, attorney general, with William C. Wolford, assistant attorney general, of Madison.
*430 SULLIVAN, J.
Janice J. Kuhn appeals from a judgment of conviction for four counts of theft by bailee, in violation of sec. 943.20(1)(b) and (3)(c), Stats. Kuhn, the owner of an auction gallery, was charged with theft of auction proceeds, which she held as bailee on behalf of the owner's of the auctioned property. Kuhn presents the following issues: (1) that she could not be charged as an individual because it was a corporation, the auction gallery, and not Kuhn as an individual, who dealt with the victims; (2) that she could not be charged under sec. 943.20(1)(b), Stats., because her non-payment on consignors' accounts was not a criminal offense, but rather a mere contractual default between debtor and creditor; (3) that the State failed to prove both the intent element of the crime and that she converted the money to her own use or the use of a person other than the owner of the money; (4) that the trial court erroneously admitted certain exhibits into evidence; and (5) that she should be granted a new trial in the interests of justice. We reject each of Kuhn's claims, in turn, and affirm the conviction.
Kuhn purchased Milwaukee Auction Galleries, Ltd. (MAG), a Wisconsin corporation, in 1977. At all pertinent times, Kuhn was MAG's president, treasurer, sole director and sole shareholder. Her children acted as corporate vice-presidents and secretary. Kuhn also performed appraisal work for MAG, for which she received a salary. MAG was in the business of selling consigned property at auction. It received a commission ranging from 10% to 25% of the sales price. It received an additional 10% commission paid by the buyer. MAG had two bank accounts"one was denominated a "trust account," into which gross sales proceeds were deposited, the other was a general operating account. Periodically, gross income was computed and *431 an average commission percentage was withdrawn from the trust account and deposited into the operating account, from which business expenses were to be paid.
Under its typical consignment contract, MAG was required to remit net sales proceeds to consignors within thirty-five days of the auction sale.[1] Sometime during 1988, however, MAG became delinquent in its payments to consignors. Several consignors received checks from MAG, only to have the checks returned to them by the bank due to insufficient funds in MAG's account, and others received no checks at all. Kuhn admitted that accounts showed deficiencies, and that MAG had a "leak in the bucket," but claimed that she couldn't find the leak.
Following a bench trial, Kuhn was convicted of four counts of theft in violation of sec. 943.20(1)(b), which provides:
Whoever does any of the following may be penalized as provided in sub. (3):
. . . .
(b) By virtue of his office, business or employment, or as trustee or bailee, having possession or custody of money or of a negotiable security, instrument, paper or other negotiable writing of another, intentionally uses, transfers, conceals, or retains possession of such money, security, instrument, paper or writing without the owner's consent, contrary to his authority, and with intent to convert to his own use or to the use of any other person except the owner. A refusal to deliver any money or a negotiable *432 security, instrument, paper or other negotiable writing, which is in his possession or custody by virtue of his office, business or employment, or as trustee or bailee, upon demand of the person entitled to receive it, or as required by law, is prima facie evidence of an intent to convert to his own use within the meaning of this paragraph.
Kuhn's first issue on appeal is that she cannot be charged as an individual because it was MAG, and not Kuhn as an individual, who dealt with the consignors. Kuhn argues that the trial court erred in not explaining why it "pierced the corporate veil" and held her personally at fault. In support of her position, Kuhn cites numerous civil cases that explain that, in general, shareholders are not personally liable for obligations of the corporation. See e.g., Benjamin Plumbing, Inc. v. Barnes, 162 Wis. 2d 837, 849-50, 470 N.W.2d 888, 893 (1991).
[1]
Individual officers are, however, personally responsible for criminal acts committed in the name of the corporation. State v. Lunz, 86 Wis. 2d 695, 707, 273 N.W.2d 767, 773 (1979). "Since a corporation is an individual existing only in contemplation of the law, its criminal acts are those of its officers and agents; and thus persons in control of a corporation and who knowingly acquiesce to the corporation's [criminal act] may be personally prosecuted for the criminal act." Id.
Kuhn's next argument is that she could not be charged under sec. 943.20(1)(b), Stats., because her non-payment on consignors' accounts was not a criminal offense, but rather a mere contractual default between debtor and creditor. She contends that she was erroneously considered a bailee under the statute, when, in fact, she doesn't meet the definition of bailee *433 under the Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.), as contained in sec. 407.102(1), Stats.[2] That statute provides that the definitions contained in the statute apply to chapter 407, which is the chapter within the U.C.C. that governs documents of title. The definition of "bailee" in sec. 407.102(1), however, is irrelevant to the meaning of the word as used in the criminal theft statute.
[2]
"Where goods are consigned to another with the understanding that the consignee will either sell the property for the consignor and remit to him the price or, if he does not sell the property, return it to the consignor, the transaction is not a sale, but a bailment for sale." 8 AM. JUR. 2D Bailments § 45 (1980); 8 C.J.S. Bailments § 11 (1988) ("transaction is a bailment or an agency to sell on consignment"). It is this definition of the word bailment that should be used to determine whether an individual fits the definition of a "bailee" as used in sec. 943.20(1)(b), Stats. See State v. Dohn, 216 Wis. 367, 370-71, 257 N.W. 21, 22-23 (1934).
MAG's contracts with the consignors fit this definition of bailment. MAG agreed to sell the consigned property and remit the sale proceeds, less the commission, to the consignors within thirty-five days of the sale date. In the event that the property was not sold, MAG agreed to return the unsold property to its owner. MAG was a "bailee" under sec. 943.20(1)(b), Stats., and Kuhn could be charged as a bailee for criminal acts committed in the name of that corporation.
*434 [3, 4]
Kuhn's next issue on appeal is that the facts do not establish her guilt with regard to the intent element of the crime. In a criminal trial to a court or jury, we will reverse only when the evidence, considered most favorably to the state, is so insufficient in probative value that, as a matter of law, no trier of fact acting reasonably could be convinced of guilt to the required degree of certitude, which the law defines as beyond a reasonable doubt. State v. Oppermann, 156 Wis. 2d 241, 246, 456 N.W.2d 625, 627-28 (Ct. App. 1990). Where more than one reasonable inference may be drawn from a set of circumstances, an appellate court is required to accept the inference drawn by the trier of fact. State v. Poellinger, 153 Wis. 2d 493, 506-07, 451 N.W.2d 752, 757 (1990).
Under sec. 943.20(1)(b), Stats., the State must prove that a defendant "intentionally uses, transfers, conceals, or retains possession of such money ... without the owner's consent, contrary to his authority, and with intent to convert to his own use or to the use of any other person except the owner."
There is sufficient evidence in this case to prove that Kuhn acted with the necessary intent under the statute. According to the testimony of Kuhn's employees, MAG began experiencing financial difficulties some time during the mid-1980's. Commissions generated by the auctions were no longer sufficient to cover the overhead costs of running the business. To keep the business running, money above and beyond MAG's commissions was used to pay overhead costs. By necessity, this meant that money held by MAG as bailee on behalf on the consignors was spent for business purposes. Payments to consignors became delinquent, and *435 often, only those consignors who complained the loudest received their money from MAG.
Decisions on which consignors would get paid were made solely by Kuhn. Although her employees would often make out the checks, Kuhn was the only person authorized to sign corporate checks. While the bookkeeping system was set up so that auction proceeds were to be deposited in the "trust account," and only commissions were to be deducted and deposited in the general account, this system began to break down as money became more scarce. On occasion, Kuhn would direct her employees to bypass the "trust account" and deposit total auction sale proceeds into the general account to cover business expenses. The employees testified that the system of who received payment and the vicious circle of taking from Peter to pay Paul was done, not only with the full knowledge of Kuhn, but under her sole direction and control. Thus, the evidence was sufficient to prove that Kuhn acted with the requisite intent.
Kuhn also argues that the State did not prove that she converted the money to her own use or the use of a person other than the owner of the money. She contends that the money was "owned" by MAG, as it was commingled with corporate funds and had lost its "individual identity."
We have already explained that MAG held the property as a bailee, and not as an "owner." When MAG sold the consignors' property and received the proceeds, the proceeds became the subject of the bailment for sale. See Dohn, 216 Wis. at 371, 257 N.W. at 22. Thus, when the State proved that MAG used those proceeds to fund its financially troubled operation, the State had proved that the bailment was converted to the use someone other than the owner of the money. *436 The evidence was sufficient to show that Kuhn, as sole shareholder of the corporation, was converting the funds to her own use as well.
Kuhn contends that the admission of several exhibits into evidence was an erroneous exercise of discretion, that it denied her due process of law because it was a surprise and fundamentally unfair, and that it violated her rights to confrontation and cross examination guaranteed by U.S. Const. amends. V and VI, and Wis. Const. art. I, secs. 1, 7 and 8.
The trial court initially excluded the exhibits. After the defense had rested, however, and apparently under a mistaken impression as to its previous ruling, the court admitted the exhibits.[3] The State does not argue that the admission of the exhibits was proper, but rather, that any resulting error was harmless because there was no reasonable possibility that the error affected the outcome of the trial. See State v. Dyess, 124 Wis. 2d 525, 543, 370 N.W.2d 222, 231-32 (1985). We agree that any error was harmless.
The exhibits involved concern proxy bidding and reserve pricing, which are complicated concepts that, Kuhn argues, she could have explained if given the opportunity. The State argues that these were mere collateral issues upon which the State's case did not depend. The State points out that it had not included any reference to the exhibits in its closing argument or trial brief. We agree with the State's reasoning and conclude that any error with regard to the admission of the exhibits was harmless.
*437 Kuhn's next argument on appeal is that she was denied effective assistance of counsel because her trial counsel failed to urgue that she was not a "bailee" under the U.C.C., and failed to adequately supervise the drafting of a stipulation. We reject this argument.
[5]
We apply a two-part test in determining whether a defendant received effective assistance of counsel; first, whether counsel's performance was deficient, and second, whether counsel's deficient performance prejudiced the defendant. State v. Johnson, 133 Wis. 2d 207, 216-17, 395 N.W.2d 176, 181 (1986). As we have already explained, Kuhn's argument that she was not a bailee under the U.C.C. is meritless, and thus, counsel was justified in not raising the issue. Kuhn has failed, therefore, to meet her burden of proving that her attorney's conduct was deficient in that regard. See id.
Kuhn also claims that her attorney failed to adequately supervise the drafting of a stipulation, which described the contractual relationship that Kuhn had with each consignor and certain undisputed facts such as non-payment of funds to the consignors. Kuhn argues that trial counsel allowed the stipulation to contain erroneous statements of facts. First, Kuhn claims that the stipulation erroneously stated that the consignors did not give consent to anyone to retain possession of their proceeds. Kuhn argues that this was not a correct statement because, to quote Kuhn, "the consignors granted MAG the right to possess, and presumably to use," the proceeds for 35 days after the sale. This is simply not true, and the attorney cannot be faulted for not pursuing this claim. The contract stated that MAG had thirty-five days in which to turn over the money to the consignors. The contract does not state that MAG could use the money for its own purposes *438 until the thirty-five days had elapsed. Kuhn's attorney's conduct was not deficient in that regard.
Kuhn argues that a second factual error contained in the stipulation was its false characterization of the "[c]opies of consignors' vouchers" as "itemizing proceeds of the sale of ... property." Kuhn points out that the lists really only included the high bid at the auction, which may or may not have been collected from the bidder.
Because we conclude that Kuhn could not have been prejudiced by the alleged error, we need not address whether counsel's performance was deficient in not objecting to the stipulation's characterization of the vouchers. See Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668, 697 (1984). Kuhn herself testified that money was owed to several estates and had not been paid. Kuhn's argument that the auction lists did not accurately reflect the true proceeds due to the estates goes only to the amount that was owed to the estates"an issue that was not crucial to the State's case. The exact amount that MAG owed to each of the victims was included in the stipulation and Kuhn does not argue that these amounts are incorrect. Kuhn suffered no prejudice from the alleged error in the stipulation. Thus, we reject Kuhn's claim that she was denied effective assistance of counsel.
Finally, Kuhn argues that this court should grant a discretionary reversal and order a new trial because the real controversy has not been fully tried and because the interests of justice require it. See sec. 752.35, Stats. Kuhn's appellate brief focuses on evidence that one of her employees, a bookkeeper, had been accused of embezzlement by Kuhn in the past. Kuhn argues that this fact must have escaped the attention of the trial judge. The issue, however, was *439 addressed both during Kuhn's cross-examination of the witness, and during Kuhn's own testimony. Kuhn's claim that because the trial judge did not comment on the information, he didn't hear it, is unsupported.
As further evidence of such embezzlement by the bookkeeper, Kuhn includes in the appendix of her appellate brief copies of the employees payroll checks, which allegedly show that the employee changed the amounts on the payroll checks from $337.71 to $637.71. Kuhn also alleges, for the first time on appeal, that the bookkeeper also deposited MAG funds directly into her own bank account. Included in the appendix of her appellate brief are fourteen instances where deposit slips indicating certain cash deposits to her personal account at approximately the same time she made deposits for MAG. Kuhn's appendix also contains evidence that on February 20, 1992, long after Kuhn's trial, Kuhn presented three payroll checks dated in June, July and August, 1988 to the Brown Deer Police Department and stated her opinion that they had been altered. On April 22, 1992 the Police Department transmitted the checks to the State Department of Justice Regional Crime Laboratory for further investigation.
[6]
Kuhn asks this court to order a new trial in the interest of justice based on this evidence. She contends that it indicates an apparent miscarriage of justice and a retrial under optimum circumstances will produce a different result. See State v. Machner, 92 Wis. 2d 797, 305-06, 285 N.W.2d 905, 909 (Ct. App. 1979). None of the evidence that Kuhn urges us to consider, however, is part of the appellate record. We are limited by the record before us and cannot consider the extraneous material included in Kuhn's appendix. See State v. *440 Aderhold, 91 Wis. 2d 306, 314, 284 N.W.2d 108, 112 (Ct. App. 1979). Therefore, we deny Kuhn's request for a new trial.
Thus, we conclude that Kuhn was properly charged under sec. 943.20(1)(b), Stats., and that the State has proven both the intent and conversion elements of the crime. We also conclude that any error that resulted from the admission of certain exhibits was harmless and we reject Kuhn's request for a new trial.
By the Court.Judgment affirmed.
NOTES
[1]  The printed from of consignment agreement contained the following settlement provision: "Settlement checks will be mailed to you within thirty-five days after the last sale date of the session, along with the post-sale voucher showing the successful bid price of each item and the net amount due to you."
[2]  Section 407.102(1), Stats., provides in relevant part: "In this chapter ... (a) `Bailee' means the person who by a warehouse receipt, bill of lading or other document of title acknowledges possession of goods and contracts to deliver them." (Emphasis added.)
[3]  In fairness to the trial court, we note that the State introduced numerous exhibits and, due to a lengthy continuance, one and one-half months passed between the two contradictory rulings.

=== CASE 9739766 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:20:36.706275+00 ===

SIMONETT, Justice.
This is an appeal from a summary judgment granted plaintiff-respondents in a class action suit. Both the trial court and the court of appeals ruled that Minn.Stat. § 256D.065 (1992), which imposes a dura-tional residency requirement for full general assistance-work readiness benefits, was *199unconstitutional. See Mitchell v. Steffen, 487 N.W.2d 896 (Minn.App.1992). We granted the petition for further review of the Commissioner of the Minnesota Department of Human Services, and we now affirm.
Faced with a budget crisis for the 1992-93 biennium, the legislature enacted Minn. Stat. § 256D.065, effective July 1, 1991 (hereinafter referred to as the “1991 amendment”), which reduces general assistance grants available to certain welfare recipients during their first 6 months of residency in this state. The amendment reads:
Notwithstanding any other provisions of sections 256D.01 to 256D.21, otherwise eligible applicants without minor children, who have been residing in the state less than six months, shall be granted general assistance and work readiness payments in an amount that * * * equal[s] 60 percent of the amount that the applicant would be eligible to receive under section 256D.06, subdivision 1. A person may receive benefits in excess of this amount, equal to the lesser of the benefits actually received in the last state of residence or the maximum benefits allowable under section 256D.06, subdivision 1.
(Emphasis added.)
Plaintiff-respondents are unmarried adults without children who had resided in Minnesota less than 6 months and had applied for general assistance benefits after July 1, 1991. They received the reduced benefits and filed a complaint under 42 U.S.C. § 1983, alleging that Minn.Stat. § 256D.065 violates their right to travel, as well as the equal protection clause of both the federal and state constitutions and the privileges and immunities clause of the federal constitution. The district court certified the action as a class action.
Welfare recipients who have resided in Minnesota for at least 6 months receive general assistance benefits of $203 a month for a single person and $260 per month for a married couple. Minn.Stat. §§ 256D.05, subd. la and 256D.06, subd. 1 (1990 & Supp.1991).1 Under the 1991 amendment, recipients who have resided in this state less than 6 months receive only 60 percent of these amounts.
In other words, eligible adults without minor children who have resided in Minnesota for less than 6 months receive $122 per month (instead of $203) if a single person and $156 per month (instead of $260) if a married couple; however, if the applicant provides verification, that person receives either the amount received in the previous state or the $203 or $260 per month granted Minnesota residents, whichever is lesser. Thus Minnesota will match the welfare benefits granted in the recipient’s prior state but only up to the maximum Minnesota grant. Many states, however, provide no general assistance-work readiness benefits to their indigent residents.
The trial court ruled that the 1991 amendment violated the respondents’ fundamental right to travel and to equal protection of the laws under the United States Constitution, but did not reach the question of whether the Minnesota equal protection clause was violated. The trial court concluded that the primary purpose of the 1991 amendment was to deter indigents from coming to Minnesota, and that the law “burdens plaintiffs’ right to travel because it uses a classification which penalizes the exercise of that right.” The court enjoined further enforcement of the law but denied retroactive benefits.
The court of appeals agreed with the trial court that the 1991 amendment was unconstitutional. Because the right to travel was implicated by the 6-month residency requirement, the appeals court held *200the classification thereby created was subject to strict scrutiny; and because the law failed this heightened standard, it was unconstitutional. In addition, the court of appeals went on to hold that the law also violated our state’s equal protection clause. Finally the court of appeals reversed the trial court’s denial of retroactive benefits and remanded to the trial court to fashion a remedy for members of the class.
We granted the commissioner’s petition for further review, which raises only the constitutional issues of equal protection and right to travel. (Issues relating to the privileges and immunities clause and to retroactive benefits are not raised here.)
The first two issues, as set out in the appellant commissioner’s brief, are (1) whether the 1991 amendment violates the constitutional right to travel, and (2) whether the amendment violates the federal equal protection clause. It seems to us the question is not so much whether the right to travel has been “violated,” but whether the right to travel has been so burdened by the durational residency requirement of the 1991 amendment that the statute’s classification requires strict scrutiny rather than minimal rational basis analysis. “In reality, right to travel analysis refers to little more than a particular application of equal protection analysis.” Zobel v. Williams, 457 U.S. 55, 60 n. 6, 102 S.Ct. 2309, 2313 n. 6, 72 L.Ed.2d 672 (1981).
The right to travel is inherent in the concept of our country as a federal union; hence the right to travel is a fundamental constitutional right under the federal constitution. United States v. Guest, 383 U.S. 745, 758-60, 86 S.Ct. 1170, 1178-79, 16 L.Ed.2d 239 (1966). This right to travel, which includes the right to migrate, is delineated in a series of United States Supreme Court decisions, particularly Shapiro v. Thompson, 394 U.S. 618, 89 S.Ct. 1322, 22 L.Ed.2d 600 (1969); Memorial Hospital v. Maricopa County, 415 U.S. 250, 94 S.Ct. 1076, 39 L.Ed.2d 306 (1974); and Attorney Gen. of N.Y. v. Soto-Lopez, 476 U.S. 898, 106 S.Ct. 2317, 90 L.Ed.2d 899 (1986). The right to travel is implicated when a statute actually deters such travel, when impeding-travel is its primary objective, or when it uses any classification which serves to penalize the exercise of that right. Soto-Lopez, 476 U.S. at 903, 106 S.Ct. at 2320.
In this case, there is no evidence that the 1991 amendment actually deters migration or seeks to impede travel. Indigent newcomers to Minnesota are no worse off (and maybe better off) for welfare benefits in this state than they were in the state of their prior residency, so that the level of benefits under the 1991 amendment is not a deterrent to leaving the prior state. And while the purpose of the legislation was to conserve funds, it is clear from the statute itself that it was intended to save money without placing a deterrence on an indigent’s decision to travel.
This lawsuit, then, is to be judged under the third type of situation, under those right-to-travel cases that have dealt “with state laws that, by classifying residents according to the time they established residence, resulted in the unequal distribution of rights and benefits among otherwise qualified bona fide residents.” Soto-Lopez, 476 U.S. at 903, 106 S.Ct. at 2321.
Shapiro v. Thompson, 394 U.S. 618, 89 S.Ct. 1322, 22 L.Ed.2d 600 (1969), is particularly pertinent. There a state statute denied welfare assistance to residents who had not resided in the state for at least 1 year. The statute created two classes of needy persons, one composed of residents residing in the state for over a year and the other of residents residing in the state for less than a year. “Since the classification here touches on the fundamental right of interstate movement, its constitutionality must be judged by the stricter standard of whether it promotes a compelling state interest.” Id. at 638, 89 S.Ct. at 1333. The Court then held that the 1-year waiting period, which would cause indigents to hesitate to migrate to the state, failed to meet equal protection standards. While a state has a legitimate interest in preserving its fiscal integrity, the saving of welfare costs, said the Court, does not justify discriminating against newcomers.
*201A few years later, the United States Supreme Court decided Memorial Hospital v. Maricopa County, 415 U.S. 250, 94 S.Ct. 1076, 39 L.Ed.2d 306 (1974). There an Arizona statute required a year’s residence in a county as a condition for receiving non-emergency medical care at county expense. It was understood this statute covered interstate movement. The Court reasoned that medical care is as much a basic necessity of life to an indigent as welfare benefits; and, therefore, following Shapiro, the Court declared the statute unconstitutional. The Court held that the 1-year durational residency requirement for nonemergency free medical care created an “invidious classification” that impinged on the right to travel by denying newcomers the basic necessities of life and for which there was no compelling state interest. Id. at 269, 94 S.Ct. at 1088.
In several cases the United States Supreme Court has struck down state statutes with fixed point residency requirements. See Hooper v. Bernalillo County Assessor, 472 U.S. 612, 105 S.Ct. 2862, 86 L.Ed.2d 487 (1985) (state veterans preference limited to veterans who had been state residents on or prior to a certain date); Attorney Gen. of N.Y. v. Soto-Lopez, 476 U.S. 898, 106 S.Ct. 2317, 90 L.Ed.2d 899 (1986) (veterans preference limited to veterans who had entered military service when a state resident or had been residents prior to a certain date). Cf. Zobel v. Williams, 457 U.S. 55, 102 S.Ct. 2309, 72 L.Ed.2d 672 (1982) (Alaskan statute distributing oil revenue payments to all residents with the amount of the payments varying with years of residency, held, invalid, failing to meet even the minimal rational basis test). In these three cases, interstate movement is less directly involved because the conferring of benefits is not dependent on a waiting period, but simply on the length of the residency.
Under the analysis applied in the United States Supreme Court’s decisions, which we must follow, the 1991 amendment clearly implicates the right to travel. If a needy resident of Minnesota has resided here less than 6 months, he or she receives only 60 percent of the general assistance or work readiness benefits that other needy residents of Minnesota receive. These two classes are composed of equally needy welfare recipients, but members of the first class — solely because of a shorter residency — have their benefits reduced 40 percent.
Arguably the “right to travel” should focus on the interstate travel itself, not on what happens after the travel has ended. Within this context, it would seem that the decision to migrate is dependent upon a comparison of the benefits available in the state one proposes to leave with the benefits available in the state one proposes to go to. We understand the dissent in this case to take this position.
The United States Supreme Court, however, has extended the so-called “right to travel” to include what might better be called a “right to abide in any state,” i.e., a right to live and settle down anywhere one chooses in this country without being disadvantaged because of that choice. See Dunn v. Blumstein, 405 U.S. 330, 338, 92 S.Ct. 995, 1001, 31 L.Ed.2d 274 (1972). Inherent in making this choice is the exercise of the right to travel, or as it is sometimes and more precisely called, the right to migrate. Thus, it is said, a durational residency requirement involves an “indirect manner of burdening the right [to travel].” Soto-Lopez, 476 U.S. at 903, 106 S.Ct. at 2321.
In determining this “indirect” burdening of the right to travel, the United States Supreme Court has ruled that the comparison, in our case, is to be made between recent residents to Minnesota and other Minnesota residents, not between recent Minnesota residents and residents of other states. The Court has made this abundantly clear. In Shapiro v. Thompson, 394 U.S. 618, 631, 89 S.Ct. 1322, 1329, 22 L.Ed.2d 600 (1969), the Court said, “[A] State may no more try to fence out those indigents who seek higher welfare benefits than it may try to fence out indigents generally.” Or as put in Soto-Lopez, the right to migrate “protects residents of a State from being disadvantaged, or from being treated differently, simply because of the *202timing of their migration, from other similarly situated residents.” Soto-Lopez, 476 U.S. at 904, 106 S.Ct. at 2322. Or Hooper, 472 U.S. 612, 623, 105 S.Ct. at 2868: “The State may not favor established residents over new residents based on the view that the State may take care of ‘its own,’ if such is defined by prior residence.” 2
Plainly, then, the 1991 amendment implicates the constitutional right to travel. Even if so, contends the appellant commissioner, the “60 percent benefits for 6 months” does not penalize the right to travel so as to trigger strict scrutiny. “Penalize,” as used in this context, does not mean, however, to sanction or punish, but rather to suffer disadvantage, loss or hardship. See Cole v. Housing Authority of City of Newport, 435 F.2d 807, 811 (1970) (quoted approvingly in Memorial Hospital at footnote 10). The nature of the disadvantage or hardship is important. See Shapiro, 394 U.S. at 638 n. 21, 89 S.Ct. at 1333 n. 21 (durational residence requirements for a license to hunt or fish or to practice a profession may not constitute a penalty on the exercise of the right to travel); Davis v. Davis, 297 Minn. 187, 192, 210 N.W.2d 221, 225 (1973) (durational residency requirement for bringing a divorce action valid, observing “not every penalty in interstate travel triggers the compelling-state-interest test”).
At stake in this case are payments for the basic necessities of life, just as in Shapiro and Memorial Hospital. Half a year is a long time to wait for full general assistance benefits. “[Ejven temporary deprivations of very important benefits and rights can operate to penalize migration.” Soto-Lopez, 476 U.S. at 907, 106 S.Ct. at 2323. A divided Wisconsin Supreme Court upheld a durational residency requirement for welfare benefits in certain instances, but the waiting period there was only 60 days. Jones v. Milwaukee County, 168 Wis.2d 892, 485 N.W.2d 21 (1992). Here, instead of receiving $203 or $260 a month, the newly arrived indigents receive $81 a month less if single and $104 a month less if a couple, a not insignificant amount, especially if a Minnesota winter is at hand.3
Nor is it necessary to show that the 6-month waiting period has actually stopped people from coming to Minnesota. “Shapiro did not rest upon a finding that denial of welfare actually deterred travel.” Dunn v. Blumstein, 405 U.S. 330, 339, 92 S.Ct. 995, 1002, 31 L.Ed.2d 274 (1972). It is not to be expected individuals in other states, if deterred from migrating here, would come forward to say so. The test, rather, is whether it is reasonable to infer that needy individuals would be discouraged from migrating. See Shapiro, 394 U.S. at 629, 89 S.Ct. at 1328 (“An indigent who desires to migrate, resettle, find a new job, and start a new life will doubtless hesitate if he knows that he must risk making the move without the possibility of falling back on state welfare assistance * * *.”); Memorial Hospital, 415 U.S. at 257, 94 S.Ct. at 1081 (An indigent “may hesitate if he knows that he must make the move without the possibility of falling back on the State for medical care.”).
Finally, the fact that the 1991 amendment does provide at least reduced welfare benefits does not make the deprivation any less a “penalty” on travel. In Memorial Hospital, the fact that Arizona provided emergency medical care during the waiting period, while nonemergency medical care was denied, did not save the Arizona statute from being held unconstitutional.4
*203True, a state is not constitutionally required to provide welfare benefits in an adequate amount or in any amount. Dandridge v. Williams, 397 U.S. 471, 486-87, 90 S.Ct. 1153, 1162, 25 L.Ed.2d 491 (1970). The equal protection clause is not an entitlement clause. Indeed, many states do not have a general assistance program, and recently Michigan canceled its entire general assistance-work readiness program. But when a state decides to provide welfare benefits, the constitutional right to travel, as interpreted by the United States Supreme Court, mandates that the state distribute these benefits equally to its needy residents who are similarly situated without distinguishing between its residents on the duration of their residency.5
We conclude, therefore, that the “60 percent benefits for 6 months” plan “penalizes” the fundamental constitutional right to migrate. Indeed, under the federal constitution as interpreted by the United States Supreme Court, we have no alternative. Only one step in our analysis then remains, namely, determining whether the state can show a compelling state interest for its durational residency requirement. The appellant commissioner claims the 1991 amendment serves a legitimate state interest, but, as the commissioner acknowledges, if there has been an impingement on the fundamental right to travel, the strict scrutiny standard governs, and the commissioner does not contend (nor could she) that the 1991 amendment meets a compelling state interest.
The purpose of the 1991 amendment was to conserve limited state funds, but Shapiro and Memorial Hospital flatly hold this is not a compelling reason. “The conservation of the taxpayers’ purse,” declares Memorial Hospital, 415 U.S. at 263, 94 S.Ct. at 1085, “is simply not a sufficient state interest to sustain a durational residence requirement which, in effect, severely penalizes exercise of the right to freely migrate and settle in another State.”
The 1991 amendment is, therefore, unconstitutional under the equal protection clause of the United States Constitution. There is no need to consider whether the 1991 amendment violates our state equal protection clause, and we do not reach that issue.
Affirmed.
PAGE, Justice, took no part in the consideration or decision of this case.
. The 1991 amendment applies also to work readiness benefits. These benefits are paid for 6 months in a 12-month period (with a minor exception) to a recipient who complies with the training requirements of the work readiness program. Maximum work readiness benefits are also $203 a month for a single person and $260 a month for a married couple, and are reduced to 60 percent for recipients who have resided in this state for less than 6 months. See Minn.Stat. § 256D.051 (1990 & Supp.1991).
.Under the dissent's view, the 1991 amendment creates two classes, one class consisting of indigents residing in Minnesota, and the other class consisting of indigents living in other states. Here the distinction between the classes is the place of residence, not the duration of residence.
But if the place of residence is the relevant distinction, it seems the equal protection problem largely dissipates. There are ample differ-enees between states to justify different welfare benefits in different states.
. The commissioner estimates that the 1991 amendment will save the state approximately $890,000 in fiscal year 1992, $1 million in 1993, $1.2 million in 1994, and $1 million in 1995.
. Recently, we might add, a federal district court held California’s AFDC program, patterned similarly to this state’s 1991 amendment, *203unconstitutional. Green v. Anderson, 811 F.Supp. 516 (E.D.Cal.1993). The California plan imposed a 1-year residency requirement on newly arrived residents but provided reduced benefits not to exceed what the family would have received in the state of prior residence during the 1-year waiting period. Following Shapiro and Memorial Hospital, the court held the plan unconstitutional.
. The .assumption that nonresident indigents move to a new state because of higher welfare benefits is apparently unproven and in some doubt. There are many other factors to account for migrating to Minnesota, such as job opportunities, the presence of family and friends, etc. Then, too, the net impact of in-migration and out-migration has been estimated at about zero. See Welfare Migration Study: A Report to the 1991 Legislature, Dept. of Human Services (Feb.1991) at 24-25.
It should be noted, too, that the general assistance-work readiness programs deal with those persons residing in the state. The problem of transients, le., those who pass through the state just long enough to pick up a welfare check, is a different problem, and is handled by weekly grants or vouchers for food and shelter by a county. Id. As Shapiro makes clear, the state may require residency for receipt of benefits without impinging on the constitutional right to travel, but it may not require a waiting period before receipt of benefits. 394 U.S. at 637, 89 S.Ct. at 1333.

=== CASE 9739767 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:20:36.713254+00 ===

TOMUANOVICH, Justice
(dissenting).
Because I would answer all three questions presented in the negative, I respectfully dissent and would hold that Minn. Stat. § 256D.065 (1992) is constitutional.
The right to travel is implicated when a statute actually deters travel, when impeding travel is its primary purpose, or when it uses any classification which serves to penalize the exercise of the right to travel. Attorney General of New York v. Soto-Lopez, 476 U.S. 898, 903, 106 S.Ct. 2317, 2321, 90 L.Ed.2d 899 (1986).
*204Although the respondents failed to show that they or any other people were actually deterred from migrating or traveling to Minnesota because of section 256D.065, the court of appeals assumed
an indigent who desires to migrate to Minnesota may hesitate if he or she knows only 60 percent of the amount necessary to live in Minnesota will be available. This assumes, of course, that the $203 grant amount available to established Minnesota residents is the amount ‘necessary to maintain a subsistence reasonably compatible with decency and health’ in Minnesota.
Mitchell v. Steffen, 487 N.W.2d 896, 902 (citing the purpose of the general assistance statute at Minn.Stat. § 256D.01, subd. 1 (1990)). By this reasoning, if $203 is not sufficient to maintain this subsistence, the entire general assistance statute deters travel and would therefore be unconstitutional. It is a dubious assumption that $203 per month is sufficient to provide food, clothing, shelter and transportation in Minnesota. While I am very concerned about unfortunate people who must rely on this meager amount, a statute is not unconstitutional simply because it is under-funded to fulfill its purposes. Furthermore, the state does not have a legal duty to provide welfare benefits. This is not a case where the state is granting “basic subsistence to one class of needy residents while denying it to an equally needy class of residents.” Starns v. Malkerson, 326 F.Supp. 234, 238 (Minn.1970), aff'd, 401 U.S. 985, 91 S.Ct. 1231, 28 L.Ed.2d 527 (1971), (quoting Kirk v. Board of Regents, 273 Cal.App.2d 430, 440, 78 Cal Rptr. 260, 266-67 (1969), appeal dismissed, 396 U.S. 554, 90 S.Ct. 754, 24 L.Ed.2d 747 (1970)).
The respondents have failed to show that the intent of the statute is to deter travel. I do not agree that the intent of the legislature was to deter the transient population from coming into the State for benefits, nor to punish the decision of indigents to migrate to Minnesota. Had this been the purpose, the legislature could have enacted legislation to provide vouchers for shelter and other needs in lieu of cash grants, or eliminated the entire general assistance/work readiness grant programs. Rather, the legislature chose to carefully craft the 1991 amendment so as to make the amount of welfare benefits a neutral factor in a person’s decision to migrate to Minnesota. Although it does not totally remove the incentive for all persons, “if the classification has some ‘reasonable basis,’ it does not offend the Constitution simply because the classification ‘is not made with mathematical nicety or because in practice it results in some inequality.’ ” Lindsley v. Natural Carbonic Gas Co., 220 U.S. 61, 78, 31 S.Ct. 337, 340, 55 L.Ed. 369 (1911). As we noted in another case, the legislature is granted
‘the exercise of a wide scope of discretion * * * i
[[Image here]]
[i]f any reasonable distinction between the subjects * * * can be found, the legislative classification should be sustained.
Anderson v. City of St. Paul, 226 Minn. 186, 194-95, 32 N.W.2d 538, 543 (1948) (quoting Whitney v. California, 274 U.S. 357, 47 S.Ct. 641, 71 L.Ed. 1095 (1927)).
We further noted that
[I]t is not permissible for the courts to inquire into the motives * * * in enacting the ordinance for the purpose of assailing its validity. The motives * * * are wholly immaterial.
Id. at 226 Minn, at 204, 32 N.W.2d at 548.
Finally, I conclude that a person is never punished for exercising their right to travel by section 256D.065 since an eligible person receives at least as much, if not more, than he or she received in his or her previous state of residence, unless that amount exceeds the statutory maximum. A single person would receive less only if they migrated from a state where they received more than $203, the statutory maximum for residents of longer duration in Minnesota. If a single person migrated from a state where they received less than $122 per month, or no grant at all, he or she is actually rewarded for exercising his or her *205right to travel by receiving a grant of $122 per month for six months in Minnesota.1
The named representatives of the class illustrate this fact. Two each received $122 per month in Minnesota, although they had received nothing at all in their previous state of residence. The other two named representatives received the same amount in Minnesota that they received in their last state of residence. Clearly, of these four respondents, none were penalized and two were rewarded under section 256D.065 for exercising their right to travel to Minnesota.
Although the United States Supreme Court found that a 1-year residency requirement prior to receiving non-emergency care infringed upon the right to travel and was therefore unconstitutional in Memorial Hospital v. Maricopa County, 415 U.S. 250, 94 S.Ct. 1076, 39 L.Ed.2d 306 (1974), that case is distinguishable. Unlike Memorial Hospital, the respondents do not have to wait one year before receiving any benefits under section 256D.065; grants, albeit at a reduced level, are received immediately if the person is eligible. The court stated that medical care is a basic necessity of life that could not be denied to newcomers in Memorial Hospital; although food and shelter are also basic necessities, the Supreme Court has never imposed a duty upon the states to provide a standard of living for its residents, nor established a right for anyone to receive welfare assistance. See, Lavine v. Milne, 424 U.S. 577, 584 n. 9, 96 S.Ct. 1010, 1015 n. 9, 47 L.Ed.2d 249 (1976) (citing Dandridge v. Williams, 397 U.S. 471, 90 S.Ct. 1153, 25 L.Ed.2d 491 (1970)).
There is language in some United States Supreme Court cases which might be read to dictate that the right to travel is implicated whenever a state treats a new resident differently than longer term residents.
[T]he right of interstate travel must be seen as insuring new residents the same right to vital government benefits and privileges in the States to which they migrate as are enjoyed by other residents.
Memorial Hospital, 415 U.S. at 261, 94 S.Ct. at 1084. This statement seems to suggest that the right to travel can be implicated not only if a migrant is treated less favorably in the new state of residence than in the previous state of residence, but also if, within the new state, the newcomer is treated less favorably than other residents. In another case the Court says
the right to migrate protects residents of a State from being disadvantaged, or from being treated differently, simply because of the timing of their migration, from other similarly situated residents.
Soto-Lopez, 476 U.S. at 904, 106 S.Ct. at 2322.2
And then again the Court said
[t]he State may not favor established residents over new residents based on the view that the State may take care of ‘its own,’ if such is defined by prior residence.
Hooper v. Bernalillo County Assessor, 472 U.S. 612, 623, 105 S.Ct. 2862, 2868, 86 L.Ed.2d 487 (1985).
The use of this language has blurred the distinction between equal protection and the right to travel. However, these are separate challenges which must be analyzed on their own merits. I do not believe that the Court intends to conclude that the right to travel is implicated every time an equal protection challenge is presented. See, e.g., Zobel v. Williams, 457 U.S. 55, 102 S.Ct. 2309, 72 L.Ed.2d 672 (1982). This would open a floodgate of appeals requiring strict scrutiny. Surely the Court does not intend to re-enter the Lochner era.3
*206The right to travel is not implicated by this 1991 amendment because there has been no showing of actual deterrence or that the legislative intent in enacting the 1991 amendment was to deter travel. When determining whether a person is penalized for exercising their right to travel, the appropriate focus is not whether the person is treated differently than longer term residents, but whether the benefits the person is eligible for are less than those received, if any, in their last state of residence. I doubt a person contemplating migration would study the classifications in a state statutory scheme and then “hesitate” to migrate. A person might look at the resources presently available and compare them to what will be available after migration: If he or she would have the same or more resources than at the present, no hesitation would be induced by the 1991 amendment. Unlike the “hesitation” in Shapiro and Memorial Hospital, newly arrived indigents do have the possibility of “falling back on state welfare assistance.”
This is not, as the majority claims, a comparison of indigents newly arrived in Minnesota with indigents in other states, or an attempt to evaluate the cost of living in various states as the California court seems to require in Green v. Anderson, 811 F.Supp. 516 (E.D.Calif.1993). It merely looks at the status of an indigent person’s economic resources immediately before and after the move to Minnesota to determine if that person has been penalized by the 1991 amendment for exercising their right to travel. If an indigent has the same grant both before and after their move to Minnesota, the loss, disadvantage or hardship suffered, if any, is due to the higher cost of living in Minnesota, not because her or his grant level is temporarily lower than that available to longer term residents.
Even if the exercise of the right to travel were implicated, “[N]ot every penalty on interstate travel triggers the compelling-state-interest test.” See Davis v. Davis, 297 Minn. 187, 192, 210 N.W.2d 221, 225 (1973); see also Soto-Lopez, 476 U.S. at 905, n. 5, 106 S.Ct. at 2322, n. 5. In Davis we held that a 1-year residency requirement before divorce proceedings was constitutional. Davis, supra, at 227. See also Sosna v. Iowa, 419 U.S. 393, 95 S.Ct. 553, 42 L.Ed.2d 532 (1975). In another case, a statute with a 1-year residency requirement for resident tuition at a state university was upheld. Starns, 326 F.Supp. 234; see also Vlandis v. Kline, 412 U.S. 441, 452, 93 S.Ct. 2230, 2236, 37 L.Ed.2d 63 (1973); Sturgis v. Washington, 368 F.Supp. 38 (W.D.Wash.1973), aff'd, 414 U.S. 1057, 94 S.Ct. 563, 38 L.Ed.2d 464 (1973).
Discussing Shapiro, the court in Memorial Hospital said that “any durational residence requirement impinges to some extent on the right to travel” but that “[t]he amount of impact required to give rise to the compelling-state-interest test was not made clear.” Memorial Hospital 415 U.S. at 256-57, 94 S.Ct. at 1081. The Court said the factors to consider were whether the waiting period deters migration and the extent to which the residence requirement penalized the right to travel. Id. at 257, 94 S.Ct. at 1080. Since there is neither deterrence nor penalty by the 1991 amendment, strict scrutiny is not required even if it “impinges to some extent on the right to travel.”
The cases in which the Court has overturned statutes on right to travel grounds have either involved waiting periods for longer than 6 months or a complete denial of benefits, usually for 1 year. See Shapiro, supra; Memorial Hospital, supra. The 1991 amendment is not that harsh. The residency requirement is for only six months and benefits are not withheld if applicants are otherwise eligible.
The other cases in which the Court has struck down statutes on right to travel grounds involve situations where the classifications created are permanent and the treatment of the classes never equalizes. See Zobel, supra; Soto-Lopez, supra. Our legislature has not created this type of permanently unequal system in which new residents will never “catch up” with longer term residents; benefits equalize after 6 months.
*207Since the respondents have failed to prove that the 1991 amendment implicates the right to travel by any of the means indicated in Soto-Lopez, strict scrutiny is not appropriate. Minn.Stat. § 256D.065 need only be rationally related to a legitimate government purpose to survive constitutional review. Hooper v. Bernalillo County Assessor, 472 U.S. 612, 618, 105 S.Ct. 2862, 2866, 86 L.Ed.2d 487 (1985); New Orleans v. Dukes, 427 U.S. 297, 96 S.Ct. 2513, 49 L.Ed.2d 511 (1976); Weber v. Aetna Casualty & Surety Co., 406 U.S. 164, 172, 92 S.Ct. 1400, 1405, 31 L.Ed.2d 768 (1972).
The state has a legitimate purpose to be fiscally responsible and to conserve limited funds. The projected savings of $890,000 in the first fiscal year, and $1 million or more in successive years is directly and rationally related to this purpose. The legislature could have terminated the entire general assistance/work readiness programs, as Michigan has recently done, but instead chose to preserve these grants and maximize the limited welfare resources available. Similarly, we upheld a statutory scheme under which $100 in “gate-pay” was made available to prisoners upon their release from prison, unless they had more than $100 set aside from their work earnings. Thomale v. Schoen, 309 Minn. 285, 244 N.W.2d 51 (1976). We reasoned that the legislature ensured a “greater gratuity than it would have otherwise been able to give if it had provided a flat payment to all parolees regardless of the amount accumulated in their funds.” Id., 309 Minn. at 288, 244 N.W.2d at 53.
Since I conclude that Minn.Stat. § 256D.065 does not implicate the right to travel and survives constitutional scrutiny, I must consider the remaining two questions presented.
The Equal Protection Clause contained in the Fourteenth Amendment of the United States Constitution provides that persons similarly situated be treated alike unless a rational basis exists for discriminating among them. However, the state is not required to treat all citizens identically, rather
[the state] must have substantial latitude to establish classifications that roughly approximate the nature of the problem perceived, that accommodate competing concerns both public and private, and that account for limitations on the practical ability of the State to remedy every ill.
Plyler v. Doe, 457 U.S. 202, 216, 102 S.Ct. 2382, 2394, 72 L.Ed.2d 786 (1982).
Here the respondents’ claim does not involve either a suspect classification, as identified by the United States Supreme Court, nor does it implicate a fundamental right.4 The standard of review to be used when measuring classifications created by a public welfare benefit statute against an equal protection claim was established in Jefferson v. Hackney, 406 U.S. 535, 92 S.Ct. 1724, 32 L.Ed.2d 285 (1972), and Dandridge, 397 U.S. 471, 90 S.Ct. 1153. In Jefferson, the United States Supreme Court used the minimum scrutiny of the rational basis test when it upheld a Texas statute which established a percentage reduction factor to be applied to apportion available welfare benefits among various recipients. Jefferson, 406 U.S. at 546, 92 S.Ct. at 1731.
The rational basis analysis is the same as that used in my determination that the right to travel is not implicated. The state has a legitimate purpose in being fiscally responsible, and 256D.065 is rationally related to that purpose.
This is not like the statute in Zobel v. Williams, supra. In Zobel, the United States Supreme Court held that the creation of a fund to pay dividends from oil reserves in different amounts depending on length of residence was unconstitutional on equal protection grounds. Id. 457 U.S. at 65, 102 S.Ct. at 2315. In Zobel, the classifications were permanent and the dividends were derived from a natural resource and *208were a continuing, permanent entitlement, guaranteed by constitutional amendment. Id. at 56-57, 102 S.Ct. at 2310-11. On the contrary, these general assistance/work readiness benefits involved are not a constitutional right and the classification involved is only temporary.
I am aware of two other states which have considered the constitutionality of somewhat similar statutes. In Opinion of the Justice to the House of Representatives, 357 Mass. 827, 257 N.E.2d 94 (1970), the Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts gave its opinion on a bill pending before the Massachusetts House of Representatives which would have limited welfare benefits for 2 years to the amount the new resident had received in the state of the person’s last domicile. Id. 257 N.E.2d at 94. The court concluded that if the sole purpose of the proposed bill was to deter the migration of indigent people, it would violate the Equal Protection Clause of the United States Constitution. Id. at 95.
In Jones v. Milwaukee County, 168 Wis.2d 892, 485 N.W.2d 21, 22 (Wis.1992), the statute involved required persons to be residents of the state for at least 60 consecutive days before they would be eligible for any welfare relief.5 The Wisconsin Supreme Court found it to be constitutional under both the state and federal constitutions. Id. 485 N.W.2d at 22. The court relied upon Dandridge, which held that the state could place a ceiling on welfare benefits to encourage employment and avoid discrimination between welfare families and families of the working poor. Id. at 27.
Minn.Stat. § 256D.065 falls between these two examples. The 6-month residency requirement is far less than the 2 years proposed in Massachusetts, but more than the 60 days involved in the Wisconsin statute. However, in Wisconsin, all aid is withheld for 60 days, whereas in Minnesota reduced benefits are granted during the 6 months.
I conclude the statute passes the minimal scrutiny of the federal rational basis test and therefore does not violate the Equal Protection Clause of the United States Constitution. In doing so I agree with the Dandridge Court, which wrote:
We do not decide today that the * * * regulation is wise, that it best fulfills the relevant social and economic objectives * * *, or that a more just and humane system could not be devised. * * * But the intractable economic, social, and even philosophical problems presented by public welfare assistance programs are not the business of this Court. The Constitution may impose certain procedural safeguards * * *. But the Constitution does not empower this Court to second-guess state officials charged with the difficult responsibility of allocating limited public welfare funds among the myriad of potential recipients.
Dandridge, 397 U.S. at 487, 90 S.Ct. at 1162.
Plaintiff-respondents further assert, and the court of appeals agreed, that the six-month residency requirement for full general assistance benefits violates the Equal Protection Clause of the Minnesota Constitution. The court of appeals was of the view that our recent case, State v. Russell, 477 N.W.2d 886, 888-89 (Minn.1991), created an equal protection standard “which is different and more stringent than its federal counterpart,” and that, under this Russell standard, the 1991 amendment must be found unconstitutional. Mitchell, 487 N.W.2d at 904.
Our case law on state equal protection analysis has not always been characterized by doctrinal constancy, and this case seems an appropriate occasion to review briefly and to clarify that analysis. Our equal protection “clause” is an un-enumerated but inherent constitutional right, found and confirmed in Minn. Const, art. 1, § 16 and included in art. 1, § 2. Russell, 477 N.W.2d at 893 (Simonett, J., concurring). Under this equality guaranty, “persons similarly situated are to be treated alike unless a sufficient basis exists for distinguishing among them.” Id.
*209As the concurring opinion in Russell points out, over the years our state equal protection approach has at times been intertwined with our constitutional prohibition against special legislation (art. 12, § 1), our state provision for uniformity in taxation (art. 10, § 1), and the federal equal protection analysis. Id. at 893-94. See, for example, Miller Brewing Co. v. State, 284 N.W.2d 353, 356 (Minn.1979). Miller cites Montgomery Ward Co. v. Comm’r of Taxation, 216 Minn. 307, 12 N.W.2d 625 (1943), which relies on the federal rational basis test, but then also cites Schwartz v. Talmo, 295 Minn. 356, 205 N.W.2d 318 (1973), appeal dismissed, 414 U.S. 803, 94 5.Ct. 130, 38 L.Ed.2d 39 (1973) for what has come to be called the “three part test.” Miller, supra at 356. See footnote 5, infra. This “three part test” can be traced back to Loew v. Hagerle Brothers, 226 Minn. 485, 33 N.W.2d 598 (1948), and even beyond; interestingly, Loew was really a special legislation challenge, not an equal protection case. It is this “three part test,” at times slightly reworded, which appears eventually in Russell. Consequently, it is not surprising that the question has been raised whether the state’s “rational basis” test is more strict than the federal rational basis test. See, e.g., McKnight, Minnesota Rational Relation Test: The Lochner Monster in the 10,000 Lakes, 10 Wm.Mitchell L.Rev. 709 (1984); Haskell’s, Inc. v. Sopsic, 313 N.W.2d 921 (1981).
In 1983 we attempted to clarify our equal protection test in AFSCME Councils 6, H, 65 and 96 v. Sundquist, 338 N.W.2d 560 (Minn.1983). There we upheld the constitutionality of legislation requiring state employees to make additional payments into a pension fund. The case lent itself to the federal rational basis test. We also upheld the legislation, however, under our state equal protection guaranty and stated:
We therefore reiterate that the prohibitions against arbitrary legislative action embodied in the state equal protection clause * * * are coextensive with those afforded by the federal equal protection clause.
Id. at 570 n. 12. We added:
We have recognized that the standard applied to claims brought under the state equal protection clause * * * is the same as that applied to claims brought under the federal equal protection clause.
Id. at 569 n. 11 (emphasis added). Yet, notwithstanding Sundquist, we again raised, but did not answer, the question whether our state rational basis test was more strict than the federal test in Bernthal v. City of St. Paul, 376 N.W.2d 422, 424-25 (Minn.1985).
This brings us, then, to State v. Russell, supra, where this court applied the “three part test,”6 stating it was “our stricter standard of rational basis review,” and then held unconstitutional a statute that would have survived the federal rational basis test. Russell, 477 N.W.2d at 889. The particular facts of Russell, however, must be kept in mind. There the state criminal statute made both possession of three or more grams of crack cocaine and possession of ten or more grams of cocaine powder the same third degree offense. The statute was found to have a disparate impact upon African-Americans because crack cocaine was used primarily by blacks while cocaine powder was used primarily by whites. Although the statute was neutral on its face and there was no evidence of any discriminatory purpose, we held that the disparate impact on a suspect class required more than minimal rational basis *210scrutiny. The irony of the statute, we noted, was that “the challenged classification appears to impose a substantially disproportionate burden on the very class of persons whose history inspired the principles of equal protection.” Id. at 889. As Justice Simonett’s concurrence pointed out, the court's analysis was something less than federal “strict scrutiny” and something more than federal “rational basis”; and that this mid-level equal protection scrutiny was appropriate “to preserve a proper regard for the civil liberties of this state’s people while at the same time according the legislative branch the deference which the separation of powers doctrine requires.” Id. at 894.
Equal protection methodology is designed in large part to expand or contract the degree of deference to be accorded the legislative judgment when it creates classes treating persons within and without the class differently. For this purpose, federal equal protection analysis has three “levels” of scrutiny: First is the level of least deference called strict scrutiny for cases implicating fundamental rights or involving suspect classes, where there must be a necessary relation to a compelling government interest and the legislation must be narrowly drawn. Dunn v. Blumstein, 405 U.S. 330, 92 S.Ct. 995, 31 L.Ed.2d 274 (1972); Harper v. Virginia Bd. of Elections, 383 U.S. 663, 86 S.Ct. 1079, 16 L.Ed.2d 169 (1966). Next is a mid-level of intermediate scrutiny for cases involving semi-suspect classes, where there must be shown a substantial relationship to an important government interest. Craig v. Boren, 429 U.S. 190, 97 S.Ct. 451, 50 L.Ed.2d 397 (1976). Finally, there is the minimal scrutiny of the rational basis test for all remaining classes, where all that is required is a rational relation to a legitimate government interest. Weber v. Aetna Casualty & Surety Co., 406 U.S. 164, 92 S.Ct. 1400, 31 L.Ed.2d 768 (1972).
What emerges, I think, from our cases and what best reconciles them, is an analysis which places the Russell three part test within the mid-level of scrutiny. In Russell, the facial neutrality of the statute was compromised by the substantial, although inadvertent, disparate impact on a particular racial group; this special situation fits best within an intermediate or mid-level degree of scrutiny. Consequently, I would adopt the following analytical framework for our state constitution’s equal protection analysis. First, strict scrutiny requiring a necessary relation to a compelling state interest should apply when a fundamental right is implicated or if the legislation involves a suspect class. Next, mid-level scrutiny should apply for semi-suspect classes and for legislation which is neutral on its face but which has a disparate impact upon a suspect class. The test for mid-level scrutiny should be the Russell “three part” test. See footnote 5, infra. Finally, for remaining classifications, the minimal scrutiny of the rational basis test should apply, requiring a rational or reasonable relation to achieving a legitimate state interest. See AFSCME, 338 N.W.2d at 569.
The “three part test” should be reserved for mid-level scrutiny. A separate minimal level of scrutiny would remain, measured by the traditional rational basis analysis. Actually, this approach has been implicit in the equal protection cases we have decided since Russell, where we have declined to apply the three part Russell test and have instead used minimal rational basis scrutiny. See Clabo v. Bor-Son Constr. Co., 481 N.W.2d 47, 48 (Minn.1992) (use of construction industry weekly wage to determine benefits); Peterson v. Stafford, 490 N.W.2d 418, 423 (Minn.1992) (challenge to statutory ballot form and designation of incumbency). See also John Hancock Mutual Life Ins. Co. v. Comm’r of Revenue, 497 N.W.2d 250 (Minn.1993) (federal rational basis test used to determine constitutionality of income tax treatment of insurance premium).
I turn now to this case. The statute involved is economic legislation, concerning the allocation of the state’s financial resources to a social welfare program. No fundamental right is implicated nor is a suspect class or semi-suspect class involved. Consequently, I apply the rational *211basis test. The legislation will not be set aside if any set of facts may reasonably be conceived to justify the classification. See, e.g., AFSCME, supra; Thomale, 309 Minn. at 288, 244 N.W.2d at 53. Here the state has a legitimate purpose in safeguarding its financial integrity: The classification on the basis of residency with adjusted benefit levels is rationally related to that purpose. I would hold that Minn.Stat. § 256D.065 (1992) does not violate the equal protection guaranty of our state constitution.
. Many states provide general assistance at an amount less than Minnesota, and many states provide no general assistance whatsoever.
. But in note 5 the same court says that not all waiting periods are constitutionally impermissible.
. Lochner v. New York, 198 U.S. 45, 25 S.Ct. 539, 49 L.Ed. 937 (1905) lends its name to a period of time for which the Supreme Court has been severely criticized for conducting substantive due process review to invalidate laws that did not involve personal liberties.
. The United States Supreme Court has consistently held that there is no constitutional right to welfare benefits, and that states have wide latitude in setting welfare benefits. Dandridge, 397 U.S. at 480, 90 S.Ct. at 1159; Lavine, 424 U.S. at 584, n. 9, 96 S.Ct. at 1015, n. 9.
. Several exceptions were provided for by the statute. Id. 485 N.W.2d at 23-24.
. The "three part test” as given in Russell is:
(1) The distinctions which separate those included within the classification from those excluded must not be manifestly arbitrary or fanciful but must be genuine and substantial, thereby providing a natural and reasonable basis to justify legislation adapted to peculiar conditions and needs; (2) the classification must be genuine or relevant to the purpose of the law; that is there must be an evident connection between the distinctive needs peculiar to the class and the prescribed remedy; and (3) the purpose of the statute must be one that the state can legitimately attempt to achieve.
State v. Russell, 477 N.W.2d 886, 888 (Minn.1991), (quoting Wegan v. Village of Lexington, 309 N.W.2d 273, 280 (Minn.1981), which, in turn, quotes Guilliams v. Comm’r of Revenue, 299 N.W.2d 138, 142 (Minn.1980)).

=== CASE 9739768 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:20:36.717845+00 ===

COYNE, Justice
(concurring specially).
Because I have concluded, albeit reluctantly, that the United States Supreme Court has ruled that any statute which bases different treatment on a fixed point residency requirement constitutes an unconstitutional implication of the right to travel and because I recognize that we are bound by the Supreme Court’s determination, I concur in the result reached by the majority. It does seem to me, however, that fixed point residency requirements can have any one of three effects upon the right to travel. The operation of the statute may burden the right to travel or it may provide an incentive to travel or it may simply be neutral with respect to the right to travel. I consider the Minnesota statute strictly neutral as it impinges upon the right to travel because a resident newly arrived in Minnesota will be eligible for general assistance in an amount not less than that person was receiving in the state from which he or she had emigrated up to the amount of general assistance to which the most senior Minnesota resident is entitled. At a time when most states are struggling to remain solvent, I can see no earthly reason for limiting a state’s option to the total discontinuance of general assistance or of risking financial ruin.

=== CASE 9739769 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:20:37.664892+00 ===

MR. JUSTICE BURMAN delivered the opinion of the court. In this action a petition was filed in a divorce proceeding seeking a post decretal order requiring defendant to pay expenses incident to a college education for a daughter who had reached her majority. The chancellor dismissed the petition on the sole basis that he had no jurisdiction to entertain the petition and this appeal followed. The parties were married on June 11, 1937, and resided together until the 16th day of October, 1960. Three children were born of this marriage. On January 3, 1961, a decree for divorce was entered in which the mother (plaintiff) was awarded custody of the two minor children, subject to the right of reasonable visitation by the father. The decree further recited that the settlement agreement and the respective releases entered into by the parties “concerning the settlement and disposition of certain rights and obligations with respect to support, maintenance and proprietary interests” were found to be fair, just and equitable and provisions were made in the decree according to the terms of the settlement agreement. Thereafter, on October 2, 1962, an order was entered pursuant to the agreement of the parties giving custody of Lynn, the minor daughter who was then over seventeen, to the father. Subsequently, on June 21, 1963, after Lynn had attained her majority, plaintiff petitioned the Circuit Court for an order requiring the defendant to pay and defray the expenses incident to a college education for the daughter. The petition recited that when custody of Lynn was given to the father, the defendant represented to the court that he would pay and defray all the costs and expenses incidental to a college education for the minor child, but notwithstanding such promise, he refused to do so after the child reached her 18th birthday; that Lynn had “reached such an educational level as to warrant the furthering of such education at the college or university level, that she has made application and been received at the University of Miami; that the Respondent is well able and capable of paying and defraying the costs of such expenses and that justice and equity demand that an Order of Court should be entered requiring the Defendant and Respondent to furnish and to pay and defray the costs and expenses by said child at the University of Miami.” The sole question presented by this appeal is whether the trial court improperly dismissed the petition on the grounds that it had no jurisdiction to act upon the question of support and education of the child on a petition filed after she reached her majority. Divorce and custody of children and matters of their support are creatures of statute, and they exist only by reason of legislative action. Jurisdiction of the subject matter is the power of the court to hear and determine the issues involved in the case. The plaintiff contends that the Divorce Act gives authority to the court for the relief sought. We therefore turn to the pertinent portions of the Divorce Act which provides under Chapter 40 § 14 (1963) headed Custody of Children, as follows: [t]he court may . . . make such order concerning the custody and care of the minor children of the parties during the pendency of the suit . . . and may award the custody of the minor child or children of the marriage . . . and may make such provision for the education and maintenance of the child or children out of the property of either or both of its parents. . . . (Emphasis ours.) Under § 19 it provides that the court upon granting a divorce, . . . may make such order touching . . . the care, custody and support of the children, or any of them, as from the circumstances of the parties and the nature of the case, shall be fit, reasonable and just. . . . It is plaintiff’s position that the question presented to us has previously been decided favorably to plaintiff and counsel cites Freestate v. Freestate, 244 Ill App 166; Strom v. Strom, 13 Ill App2d 354, 142 NE2d 172 and Maitzen v. Maitzen, 24 Ill App2d 32, 163 NE 2d 840, which he says are controlling here. In Freestate v. Freestate, 244 Ill App 166, the mother was given the care and custody of the minor invalid child, but no provision was made for the support and maintenance of the child. The Appellate Court held that the trial court had jurisdiction in the divorce action to enter an order against the father, ten years after the time the divorce was entered, for the support of his invalid daughter although she was 23 years of age. In Strom v. Strom, 13 Ill App2d 354, 142 NE2d 172 the trial court had denied the requested provision for the child’s education beyond the period of her minority on the ground that it had no jurisdiction. The Appellate Court concluded that, “it is the obligation of a parent of ample means to support a child, incapable of self support beyond the period of that child’s minority and that this obligation includes the duty to provide not only care and bare necessities, but also a college education where that appears desirable in order to better equip the child for adult life.” It is to be noted that the petition requesting an order for a college education was filed in the Strom case for a fifteen-year-old child who was stricken with poliomyelitis. In Maitzen v. Maitzen, 24 Ill App2d 32, 163 NE2d 840, the Appellate Court upheld an order requiring the father to pay $150 per month for a period of four years for the college education of his seventeen-year-old daughter.  As a general rule, liability of a spouse in a divorce action for support of a child continues during its minority and is terminated by the child’s coming of age. ILP Divorce § 218; Rife v. Rife, 272 Ill App 404; 162 ALR 1085. Besides illness or incapacity of a child there appear to be two other situations under which a court will retain jurisdiction to order a divorced father to pay for the support, including the college education of an adult child. The first of these is where the father entered into a written agreement to pay for the college education of his child which was then evidenced by an order of the court or by the divorce decree. The court will then order the divorced father to carry out the terms of his agreement even though the child has reached his or her majority. Robrock v. Robrock, 167 Ohio St 479, 150 NE2d 421; Dunham v. Dunham, 189 Iowa 802, 178 NW 551. The theory which evidently underlies this power is that once the divorce court has succeeded in acquiring jurisdiction it can retain such, jurisdiction to carry out an agreement between the parties even though the child has attained his or her majority. The continuing jurisdiction of a court to carry out its own orders issued during the child’s minority provides the second exception to the general rule. Thus in Esteb v. Esteb, 138 Wash 174, 244 Pac 264 the trial court was petitioned by the mother for an increase in support payments by the divorced father in order that the minor child could attend college. The court after discussing the benefits to be gained by a college education went on to order the father to pay “$60 per month until she (the minor daughter) became of age, 21 years.” The court recognizing that under the great weight of authority it would lose its jurisdiction after the child came of age, thus ordered a fund to be built up during the child’s minority. Some courts using this same principle have extended their jurisdiction even further. In Hart v. Hart (Iowa), 30 NW2d 748, the trial court was upheld in its modification of a support decree for the purpose of allowing the parties’ minor sons to attend four years of college. In that case, as in Maitzen, the court acquired its jurisdictional basis at a time when the child or children were still minors. In the case at bar, however, the petition in question was not filed in the divorce proceedings until after the girl attained her majority. Lynn Crane, the child involved in this case, is a healthy young lady, and in addition there is no allegation in the plaintiff’s petition that the father had made any formal agreement of record to pay for his daughter’s college education. In the absence of the factors of minority, accord or disability we are unable, as was the plaintiff in her brief, to find any case which would allow the trial court to assume jurisdiction. For the reasons here indicated we hold that the chancellor correctly held that under §§14 and 19 of the Divorce Act the jurisdiction of the court under the circumstances in the instant case terminated upon the child attaining her majority. The order of the Circuit Court is therefore affirmed. Affirmed. MURPHY, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9739770 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:20:37.669775+00 ===

ENGLISH, P. J., dissenting: As stated by my colleagues, the sole question to be determined on this appeal is the jurisdiction of the court to entertain plaintiff’s petition requesting an order on defendant to pay for the college education of the parties’ eighteen-year-old daughter. Having thus declared the question to be one of jurisdiction, the majority appear then to decide the case on the basis of their conception of the proper limits of discretion for the exercise of that jurisdiction, the existence of which they ultimately deny. They hold that in the absence of “minority, accord or disability” jurisdiction is lacking. Yet, surely the court cannot create jurisdiction for itself to order payments during majority by the simple expedient of entering the order before the child comes of age; nor can an accord of the parents confer on the court a jurisdiction otherwise absent; nor can the particular needs of a particular child, such as those arising from physical disability, limit the jurisdiction of the court so as to prevent its inquiry into whatever other special circumstances may exist in other cases to justify exercise of its discretion in favor of ordering child support after majority. It is true, as the majority say, that “[a]s a general rule” child support terminates when the child comes of age. This Division recently restated that point in Snip v. Snip, 35 Ill App2d 427, 431, 183 NE2d 175, but in the same opinion we recognized that it would be otherwise if special circumstances were present, such as existed in Strom v. Strom, 13 Ill App2d 354, 142 NE2d 172 and Maitzen v. Maitzen, 24 Ill App2d 32, 163 NE2d 840. As to the necessity of filing a petition prior to a daughter’s eighteenth birthday, I simply cannot believe that equity jurisdiction can be made to depend upon so unfair and insignificant a thing. If any young girl is to be denied the far-reaching benefits of a college education simply because a petition on her behalf (the filing of which is beyond her control) is filed on the day of her eighteenth birthday rather than the day before, then there is more substance than I am ready to concede to the well-known lay criticism that the courts have separated themselves from the practicalities of life in the society they judge. Instead of foreclosing a child’s right to petition for college expenses immediately upon coming of age, I should think that, consistent with the time allowed for the assertion of minor’s rights in other fields of law, the allowance of a reasonable period after majority would be essential to equity, so that, if necessary, a petition might be presented by the child on his own behalf. For certainly there might be situations in which neither parent would have any interest in the child’s education, and on that account the matter would never be brought to the attention of the court until, under our decision in this case, it would be too late, and the court would be powerless to act even though the best interests of the child might be manifest. As a matter of fact, the majority cite with apparent approval the case of Freestate v. Freestate, 244 Ill App 166, in which the court ordered child support even though the petition was filed when the child was 23 years old. The internal inconsistency of the majority opinion in this regard is apparent, for if a court were •without jurisdiction to act in one case of a petition filed after majority, it would have to be without jurisdiction in all such cases. The only attempt which the majority make to distinguish the Maitzen decision from the case now before us is by repeated references to the fact that the petition in that case was filed while the child was still a minor. As I have indicated, I consider this to be of no consequence. Nor did the court in Maitzen consider this fact to be of any importance. The masterful Maitzen opinion written by Justice Schwartz (concurred in by Justices Dempsey and McCormick) took no such narrow view of the jurisdiction problem. It stated flatly: “The question presented to us is whether in a divorce case a parent may be ordered to provide a college education for an adult child.” (Page 34.) The affirmative answer which it gave was bottomed on the inherent power of equity over children of broken homes, and cases supporting this proposition were referred to with citations going back more than 100 years. The decision was not based on any powers granted by the Divorce Act, the only question in that regard being whether the Act had taken away a jurisdiction of the court which it had previously possessed. The pertinent part of Section 19 (ignored by the majority here) provides that the court may “from time to time make such alterations in the allowance of alimony and maintenance, and the care, custody and support of the children, as shall appear reasonable and proper.” In holding that the historical equity power had not been withdrawn, the court found that the meaning of the word “children” in this section was not limited in its application to “minor children,” a term which could have been used by the legislature if it had so intended, and which was, in fact, employed elsewhere in the Divorce Act as well as in numerous other statutes. Similar interpretations had been given in Strom and Freestate. As pointed ont in the Maitzen opinion (page 37), the legislature had let more than one opportunity pass by without amending the Act after these decisions had been rendered, and, not having amended the statute, “it is presumed that the court’s construction is in harmony with legislative intent. (Citing cases.)” Since the filing of that opinion (which received wide circulation) there has been another regular session of the legislature and the interpretation remains undisturbed. See also Rockford Memorial Hospital Ass’n. v. Whaples, 25 Ill App2d 79, 88, 165 NE2d 523. Freestate involved an invalid child, but soon after that decision, in a case not concerned with disability, this court indicated that it would not be unreasonable (and, as a necessary correlative, not beyond the jurisdiction of the divorce court) to order a father to pay for his child’s education past her minority where the need of the child and the income of the father were such as to make it appropriate. It was not so ordered in that case only because of insufficient parental income. Wagner v. Wagner, 248 Ill App 358, 360. Then followed Strom, dealing with a physically afflicted child, but in Maitzen there was no illness or incapacity on the part of the child concerned. Nor was there any agreement between the parents in Maitzen. Since we are concerned here with jurisdiction of the subject matter and not of the person, it would be impossible for the parties, by their agreement, to vest the court with a jurisdiction it did not possess. Bratkovich v. Bratkovich, 34 Ill App2d 122, 127, 180 NE2d 716 (First District); Abbott v. Lee, 13 Ill App2d 296, 142 NE2d 138; and other cases cited in ILP Courts § 19. After Maitzen came O’Berry v. O’Berry, 36 Ill App2d 163, 183 NE2d 539, a unanimous decision of the Second Division of this court, approving an order on the father to pay for four years a substantial part of the tuition of his “normal child” at Ohio State University. Defendant there raised the point that he should not be required to support an adult daughter unless it be shown that she would be unable to maintain herself after reaching majority. The court disposed of this contention by reference to similar argument raised in the Maitzen case, and said: “We adopt the opinion in that case as authority sustaining the order requiring the defendant here to contribute an additional amount toward the university education of (his daughter) for a period of four years.” Another case in which this court approved the validity of an order requiring a form of child support to continue past majority is Saxon v. Saxon, 24 Ill App 116, 120, 164 NE2d 248. There the father had been ordered in 1955 to pay life insurance premiums until 1964 on a policy under which his daughter Linda was the beneficiary. She became of age in 1957 and was married. Thereafter the defendant petitioned to be relieved of making the payments and his petition was denied. On appeal this court, by Justice Kiley, said: We see no merit, either, in the contention of defendant on appeal that the court had no jurisdiction to order defendant to pay the premiums on the life insurance for benefit of an adult child. The fact that Linda was an adult at the time of the order is not vital. Maitzen v. Maitzen, 24 Ill App2d 32, 1st Dist. The Illinois cases do not stand alone. A number of authorities from other states were cited in Maitzen, and in 36 New York University Law Review 634 (1961), citing Maitzen, the comment was made that “in the area of child support, there is a decided trend to order the father to provide for college education.” 1 It is a truism that in this country the luxuries of yesterday are the necessities of today, and it would seem that the matter of higher education, more than almost any other subject, equates itself completely and appropriately with Justice Holmes’ “felt necessities of the time.” In mentioning such a trend and development of the law I do not, myself, mean to he confusing the issue of jurisdiction with the issue of proper discretion in the ordering of payments for college education. It should he obvious, I believe, that the trend referred to could not he taking place in the absence of the requisite jurisdiction. I would reverse the order of the Circuit Court.   1 Article by Henry H. Foster, Jr., Professor of Law at tbe University of Pittsburgh School of Law.

=== CASE 2220894 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:59.947384+00 ===

504 N.W.2d 219 (1993)
STATE of Minnesota, Respondent,
v.
Steven M. HANSON, Appellant.
No. C3-92-2329.
Supreme Court of Minnesota.
August 16, 1993.
ORDER
Based upon all the files, records and proceedings herein,
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED (1) that the petition of the State of Minnesota for further review of the decision of the court of appeals be, and the same is, granted and (2) that the decision of the court of appeals, 501 N.W.2d 677, is reversed and the judgment of conviction of driving with a blood alcohol concentration of .10 or more is reinstated.
The court of appeals based the reversal of defendant's conviction on its conclusion that the chemical test results were the suppressible fruit of an unlawful stop or "seizure" of defendant. The court of appeals in effect held that if a police officer sees a car stopped on the shoulder of a highway at night and, with no reason to suspect criminal activity, drives up behind the car in order to see if the driver needs help, the use by the officer of his or her flashing red lights, even to warn oncoming motorists, will turn the encounter into a Fourth Amendment seizure and any evidence discovered  drunkenness of the driver, dead body in open view in the back seat, *220 etc.  will be the suppressible fruit of the unjustified "stop."
Under the so-called Mendenhall/Royer approach[1] which we follow in determining whether a "seizure" has occurred  see In the Matter of the Welfare of E.D.J., 502 N.W.2d 779 (Minn., 1993)  the question to be asked by the reviewing court is whether, looking at all of the facts, the conduct of the police would communicate to a reasonable person in the defendant's physical circumstances an attempt by the police to capture or seize or otherwise to significantly intrude on the person's freedom of movement. See Michigan v. Chesternut, 486 U.S. 567, 572-75, 108 S. Ct. 1975, 1978-80, 100 L. Ed. 2d 565 (1988).
The problem with the court of appeals' decision is that it in effect says that whenever an officer turns on the squad car's flashing red lights before getting out and approaching an already stopped car, the officer turns the encounter into a seizure. It may be that in many fact situations the officer's use of the flashing lights likely would signal to a reasonable person that the officer is attempting to seize the person for investigative purposes. In this case, however, under all the facts, the officer's conduct would not have communicated to a reasonable person in these physical circumstances that the officer was attempting to seize the person. A reasonable person would have assumed that the officer was not doing anything other than checking to see what was going on and to offer help if needed. A reasonable person in such a situation would not be surprised at the use of the flashing lights. It was dark out and the cars were on the shoulder of the highway far from any town. A reasonable person would know that while flashing lights may be used as a show of authority, they also serve other purposes, including warning oncoming motorists in such a situation to be careful.
Accordingly, we reverse the court of appeals' decision and reinstate defendant's conviction.
NOTES
[1]  See United States v. Mendenhall, 446 U.S. 544, 554-55, 100 S. Ct. 1870, 1877-78, 64 L. Ed. 2d 497 (1980), and Florida v. Royer, 460 U.S. 491, 501, 103 S. Ct. 1319, 1326, 75 L. Ed. 2d 229 (1983).

=== CASE 9739771 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:20:38.759936+00 ===

MESCHKE, Justice.
The Disciplinary Board recommends a public reprimand of Donald R. Becker for negligently handling a client’s property. Because there was little or no actual injury after prompt restitution, we direct a private reprimand of Becker.
Becker became a member of the North Dakota Bar in 1983. Beginning October 1988, he represented Dennis Mees on several criminal charges. Mees paid Becker a $2,000 initial retainer, another $1,000 later, and $500 was due after sentencing. Around October 18, 1989, postal officials returned to Becker five pieces of Mees’s gold jewelry, three rings and two bracelets, seized at the time of Mees’s arrest. Mees asked Becker to deliver the jewelry to Mees’s fiancee in Texas. Becker agreed to do so.
Around November 28, 1989, Becker told Mees that the jewelry had been stolen from the console inside Becker’s car during the Thanksgiving holiday. Because it was doubtful that the jewelry could be recovered and, with the concurrence of Mees, to avoid further publicity before Mees’s impending sentencing on criminal charges, Becker made no police report.
Because the loss was not covered by Becker’s insurance, Becker agreed with Mees to forgo further payment for his work and to perform other legal services to offset the value of the jewelry. After considerable work, Becker discussed the continuing representation in July 1990 with Mees, then in prison. According to Becker, it was understood that the additional work had exceeded the worth of the jewelry, and that the arrangement would end with the completion of a pending name-change petition. In August 1990, Becker sent Mees a statement that itemized $6,421.78 in services, transfers, and expenses for Mees.
Mees wrote back, accusing Becker of stealing the jewelry. Mees later made a disciplinary complaint that Becker stole the jewelry.
In February 1991, formal disciplinary proceedings were begun against Becker for violating NDRPC 1.15 by failing to safe-keep the property of a client. From a stipulation, disciplinary counsel summarized the evidence to a hearing panel. The panel concluded that, because “the jewelry was missing and therefore could not be valued by an independent third party, ... the lawyer’s negligence ... caused injury or potential injury to a client.” The panel recommended that Becker be publicly reprimanded and assessed costs of $350. The *304Disciplinary Board unanimously adopted the panel’s findings and submitted that recommendation to this court for disciplinary action.
Becker admits the violation and does not contest the costs, but he argues that, “because the value of services, money and goods provided Mees was in excess of the value of the jewelry,” Mees suffered no “loss or potential loss.” Therefore, Becker argues, a private reprimand is the correct sanction.
The relevant part of NDRPC 1.15 says:
(a) A lawyer shall hold property of clients or third persons that is in a lawyer’s possession in connection with a representation separate from the lawyer’s own property. Funds shall be deposited in one or more identifiable interest bearing trust accounts.... Other property shall be identified as such and appropriately safeguarded.
Becker negligently failed to appropriately safeguard property that his client entrusted to him. That fact is undisputed, and the only question is what sanction applies.
This court adopted the North Dakota Standards for Imposing Lawyer Sanctions (NDSILS) in 1988 based on the American Bar Association’s Standards of Imposing Lawyer Sanctions (February 1986). See NDCC Court Rules Annotated 1009 (1992-93). The purposes of the standards are “to promote: (1) consideration of all factors relevant to imposing the appropriate level of sanction in an individual case; (2) consideration of the appropriate weight of such fact[or]s in light of the stated goals of lawyer discipline; (3) consistency in the imposition of disciplinary sanctions for the same or similar offenses....” NDSILS 1.3. Those purposes aid us in selecting the appropriate sanction.
Either of two related standards could apply here. NDSILS 4.13 says:
Reprimand is generally appropriate when a lawyer is negligent in dealing with client property and causes injury or potential injury to a client.
NDSILS 4.14 reads:
Admonition is generally appropriate when a lawyer is negligent in dealing with client property and causes little or no actual or potential injury to a client.
In the standards, “reprimand” means “public reprimand,” while “admonition” denotes “private reprimand.” NDSILS 2.4 and 2.5. The question here is the extent of the injury for selection of the correct sanction.
Ironically, this dispute about the correct sanction results in publicizing the sanction, even if we apply a private reprimand. See Disciplinary Board v. Amundson, 297 N.W.2d 433, 444 (N.D.1980) (“Private reprimands are issued by the Disciplinary Board, not this court, although we may review the decision of the Disciplinary Board to issue a private reprimand.”). Still, the public airing has the wholesome aspect of informing other lawyers, thereby discouraging similar carelessness. The differential in our decision lies largely in the severity of the offense on this lawyer’s record.
For sanction selection, an “injury” is
harm to a client, the public, the legal system, or the profession which results from a lawyer’s misconduct. The level of injury can range from “serious” injury to “little or no” injury; a reference to “injury” alone indicates any level of injury greater than “little or no” injury.
[[Image here]]
“Potential injury” is the harm to a client, the public, the legal system or the profession that is reasonably foreseeable at the time of the lawyer’s misconduct, and which, but for some intervening factor or event, would probably have resulted from the lawyer’s misconduct.
NDSILS Definitions at NDCC Court Rules Annotated 1010. Mees was clearly injured by Becker’s carelessness in carrying a client’s valuable property around in his car. In the end, however, little or no actual injury resulted to Mees after Becker’s restitution via legal services.
*305Recognizing the lack of actual injury, disciplinary counsel urges that the controlling factor is the “potential injury” to the profession. Disciplinary counsel argues it this way: “Had Becker not left the jewelry in the console, there would not be the dispute over its value or the nagging question, reflecting so poorly on the profession, of whether it really was stolen.”
Becker and Mees placed divergent values on the lost jewelry: $5,500 by Becker, and $8,840 by Mees. Becker testified that he impulsively obtained an appraisal by a local Fargo jeweler before the loss, speculating that he might be asked to accept the jewelry in lieu of fees. This appraisal “indicated that the retail value of the jewelry would be approximately $5,500.00 and a fair market value would be approximately ⅝ that amount.” On the other hand, Mees’s estimate came from a jeweler who sometimes appraised items sight unseen, and who had otherwise given Mees and his fiancee blank letterhead stationery “so that they could type up their own lists of jewelry and appraisals.” With Mees’s criminal record, disciplinary counsel concedes that Mees’s appraisal has “little credibility.”1 The clearest and most convincing evidence, the appraisal by a local jeweler for Becker, is practically an independent appraisal. See NDPRLDD 3.5(C) (standard of proof is clear and convincing evidence). This local appraisal placed the value of the jewelry at under $5,500.
If a sentimental value existed, Mees might yet have an unreimbursed injury, even after restitution. It was stipulated, however, that “Mees at one time observed that he would just as soon have his cash as a nest egg and have fees paid by the lost jewelry.” If the jewelry had more than a monetary value to Mees, he would not have been so agreeable to offsetting its loss for services and to delaying his complaint to the channels of discipline. No sentimental value affects our analysis.
Disciplinary counsel examined Becker’s files to appraise the work done for Mees. The work included defending federal criminal proceedings, where Mees was convicted and sentenced for mail fraud, aiding and abetting, possession of firearms by a convicted felon, false oath, and failure to disclose; defending later state criminal charges, where Mees was convicted and sentenced for theft of property and bail jumping; resisting revocation of Mees’s insurance license in Texas; resisting enforcement of a lien against the property of Mee’s fiancee; and performing various other miscellaneous services, including resisting collection claims against Mees and his wife, assisting his wife and stepdaughter on some claims, presenting a name-change petition for Mees, and paying some shipping charges, as well as making some cash payments to, and purchases for, Mees in the amount of $523; all totaling $6,421.78.
Disciplinary counsel concedes that “the additional work done far exceeded what one might expect as incidental to represen*306tation in criminal proceedings for a flat fee, ...” and that the amounts charged by Becker were reasonable. Thus, Becker’s legal work adequately compensated for the lost jewelry.
Uncharacteristically, the hearing panel and Disciplinary Board did not address aggravating and mitigating circumstances, as NDPRLDD 3.1(F) requires: “Mitigating or aggravating circumstances which affect the nature or degree of discipline to be imposed in a matter shall be fully set forth in its report.” Disciplinary counsel urges that “it is plain” that Becker’s earlier disbarment in 1977 by the Supreme Court of Arizona “is entitled to weight in aggravation” under NDSILS 9.22(a). We disagree.
Arizona disbarred Becker for a completely unrelated type of offense. Disciplinary counsel concedes that her investigation confirms Becker’s full disclosure and the extensive investigation that was made when he applied for admission in North Dakota. He was admitted to practice in this state, and has not been disciplined here. In fact, another gold watch and some tools were later returned by postal officials to Becker, safeguarded by him, and delivered for Mees. No pattern of misconduct is present. Becker’s remote conduct does not aggravate this unintentional violation.
“The least culpable mental state is negligence, when a lawyer fails to be aware of a substantial risk that circumstances exist or that a result will follow, which failure is a deviation from the standard of care that a reasonable lawyer would exercise in the situation.” Prefatory material to the current Model Standards For Imposing Lawyer Sanctions, ABA/BNA Lawyers’ Manual on Professional Conduct at 01:805-806 (Published by the American Bar Association and the Bureau of National Affairs; 6-17-92). Under NDSILS 9.32(d), mitigating factors include “timely good faith effort to make restitution or to rectify consequences of misconduct.” While services, rather than money, are not ordinarily an acceptable form of restitution, it was agreed upon in this case. Here, coming after completion of agreed restitution, the lateness of the complaint lessens its impact.
Becker readily made restitution before Mees complained to disciplinary authorities.
Lawyers who make restitution voluntarily and on their own initiative demonstrate both a recognition of their ethical violation and their responsibility to the injured client.... Such conduct should be considered as mitigation....
Model Standards For Imposing Lawyer Sanctions 9.4, Commentary, ABA/BNA Lawyers’ Manual on Professional Conduct at 01:841. See also Matter of Walton, 251 N.W.2d 762 (N.D.1977) (prompt restitution is an important mitigating factor). By promptly acknowledging his carelessness, readily making restitution, and fully cooperating in the disciplinary process, Becker has rectified his negligence and compensated for the injury.
Accordingly, we conclude that Mees suffered little or no actual injury, and that there is no practical injury to the profession. We order that Donald R. Becker be privately reprimanded, and that he pay costs of $350.
VANDE WALLE, C.J., and LEVINE and SANDSTROM, JJ., concur.
. Dennis Mees is well known to this court. See State v. Mees, 196 N.W.2d 399 (N.D.1972) (dismissing State’s appeal from an order quashing nine drug charges of a ten-count grand jury indictment against Dennis Mees, leaving a perjury count standing); State v. Mees, 272 N.W.2d 61 (N.D.1978) (affirming denial of post-conviction relief from criminal charges of armed robbery, kidnapping, and aggravated assault); Matter of Mees, 465 N.W.2d 172 (N.D.1991) (reversing denial of a prisoner’s petition for change of name).
Charlotte Skjonsby Mees, his wife then and a witness interviewed for this proceeding, is also known to this court from her unusual role in a series of cases. See State v. Skjonsby, 319 N.W.2d 764 (N.D.1982) (affirming Richard Skjonsby's conviction of attempted murder of Charlotte Skjonsby in the bathroom of a murdered man’s motel room); State v. Skjonsby, 338 N.W.2d 628 (N.D.1983) (reversing summary dismissal of Richard Skjonsby’s application for post-conviction relief from his convictions of the murder of the man and the attempted murder of Charlotte); Application of Kraemer, 411 N.W.2d 71 (N.D.1987) (disbarment of one of the attorneys who had represented Richard Skjons-by); State v. Skjonsby, 417 N.W.2d 818 (N.D.1987) (denial of post-conviction relief to Richard Skjonsby on his convictions of murder of the man and the attempted murder of Charlotte). According to 417 N.W.2d at 823, Kraemer was "romantically involved with Charlotte Skjonsby, whom Richard Skjonsby considered to be his common-law wife, and was representing Charlotte in a tort action against the Bilt-more Hotel, where the shooting had occurred.”

=== CASE 9739772 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:20:38.76463+00 ===

NEUMANN, Justice,
concurring in result.
I concur in the result. My only concern is that the Court’s opinion seems to suggest Becker’s restitution eliminates both the actual and the potential injury to his client, and thereby changes this from a NDSILS 4.13 case, requiring public reprimand, to a NDSILS 4.14 case, requiring only a private admonition. I believe the definition of potential injury in the NDSILS makes it clear that potential injury is harm that is reasonably foreseeable at the time of the lawyer’s misconduct. (Emphasis added.) The effect of Becker’s later restitution, therefore, cannot be to eliminate the potential harm, which was determined at the time of the misconduct. Rather, the effect must be a subsequent mitigation of the negligent misconduct itself. I see this as a case in which Becker’s negligence in *307dealing with his client’s property caused potential injury, and therefore justifies public reprimand under NDSILS 4.13, while his restitution is a factor which justifies a reduction in the degree of discipline to be imposed, pursuant to NDSILS 9.32(d). The restitution does not eliminate the potential harm, and thus somehow turn this into a NDSILS 4.14 case.
While my argument may appear to be a niggling distinction without a difference in the present case, I fear that a less rigorous analysis and application of our standards in this case may return to haunt us in subsequent cases in which the facts may be more complex, and the resulting sanction less appropriate.

=== CASE 9739773 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:20:40.32912+00 ===

*48Cutter, J.
This is a petition for a writ of mandamus to compel the Secretary of the Commonwealth to provide blanks for subsequent signers on a petition for a referendum upon, and suspension of, St. 1963, c. 506. That statute provided for an increase in salary and expense allowances for members of the General Court. The petitioners also have asked that the Treasurer and Receiver General be restrained from making any payments under the act. The single justice ordered that the blanks be issued without prejudice, denied the prayer for a restraining order, and reserved and reported the case for the consideration of the full court. The question presented is whether the act is an “emergency” measure.
In 1918, the Massachusetts Constitution was amended to provide in art. 48 of the Amendments, The Referendum, I, “No law passed by the general court shall take effect earlier than ninety days after it has become a law, excepting laws declared to be emergency laws and laws which may not be made the subject of a referendum petition, as herein provided.” Then follows II (as amended by art. 67), “A law declared to be an emergency law shall contain a preamble setting forth the facts constituting the emergency, and shall contain the statement that such law is necessary for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health, safety or convenience. A separate vote, which shall be recorded, shall be taken on the preamble, and unless the preamble is adopted by two-thirds of the members of each House voting thereon, the law shall not be an emergency law. Upon the request of two members of the Senate or of five members of the House of Representatives, the vote on the preamble in such branch shall be taken by call of the yeas and nays. . . .” (emphasis supplied). Next follows a provision, not now relevant, for a statement by the Governor in declaring an act an emergency measure. The amendment also provides, in III, §§ 3 and 4, for a referendum both on emergency laws and other laws not within the excluded matters. It permits the suspension of the statute pending the outcome of the referendum only if it is not an emergency law. *49Thus, the petitioners are entitled to blanks calling for the suspension of St. 1963, c. 506, if the statute is not an1 ‘ emergency law.”
Statute 1963, c. 506, provides for increased allowances (§§ 5 and 6)1 and for increased salaries (§ 4) for 1963. It also provides for increased annual compensation (§§ 1 and 3) and increased expense allowances (§2) beginning January 1,1964.
The preamble to St. 1963, c. 506, refers only to the increased allowances (and not to the salary increases). It reads, “Whereas, The deferred operation of this act would tend to defeat its purpose, which is in part to provide forthwith for the payment of increased allowances for expenses, travel, lodging and meals to members of the General Court, therefore it is hereby declared to be an emergency law, necessary for the immediate preservation of the public convenience.” The petitioners contend that the preamble is defective for failure to state facts constituting the emergency. The respondents maintain that the preamble is adequate and that the General Court’s judgment as to its constitutional sufficiency is conclusive upon this court.
The case presents constitutional questions of importance and difficulty. Our deliberations have resulted in a diversity of views among the six Justices participating in the decision. The Chief Justice, because of illness, was unable to be present at the arguments and has not taken part in the decision.
*501. At the outset, we are met with the question whether there is judicial review of the adequacy of the preamble in c. 506 under art. 48. On this issue, the members of the court are divided.
Mr. Justice Kirk and Mr. Justice Spiegel are of opinion that the recitals in an emergency preamble are left by art. 48 wholly to the Legislature, and present no justiciable question. See Yont v. Secretary of the Commonwealth, 275 Mass. 365, 366; Davison v. Johonnot, 7 Met. 388, 395-396, quoted below, fn. 5.
Mr. Justice Spalding, Mr. Justice Whittemore, Mr. Justice Beardon, and the writer of this opinion hold that whether such a preamble complies with the requirements of art. 48 is a justiciable question and that it is our constitutional duty to pass upon that question, when and if properly raised in the course of litigation by one entitled to raise it. Horton v. Attorney Gen. 269 Mass. 503, 507. See Prescott v. Secretary of the Commonwealth, 299 Mass. 191, 196-197.
Although all the participating judges, except Mr. Justice Whittemore, concur in the result, the reasons hereinafter set forth are those expressed by Mr. Justice Spalding, Mr. Justice Beardon, and the writer of this opinion.
2. The vital question is whether the preamble to c. 506 adequately sets “forth the facts constituting the emergency.” La deciding this issue we, of course, must presume that the Legislature intended a statement that would comply with the requirements of art. 48, The Beferendum, II. This legislative action is entitled to the same presumption of regularity and validity that is given to the substance of statutes when they are attacked on constitutional grounds. Hall-Omar Baking Co. v. Commissioner of Labor & Indus. 344 Mass. 695, 700, and cases cited.
(a) The Massachusetts constitutional provisions with respect to so called emergency preambles, and the related referendum, differ from those in effect in certain other States. One principal difference is that, in Massachusetts, the justification for legislative action making a statute immediately *51effective may rest upon general aspects of “public convenience” as well as upon more serious situations affecting “the public peace, health [or] safety.”2 The term “emergency,” under the Massachusetts constitutional provision, thus has a somewhat artificial and unnatural meaning, for most members of the public probably would not regard the needs of mere ‘ ‘ public convenience ’ ’ as giving rise to a true “emergency.” See Prescott v. Secretary of the Commonwealth, 299 Mass. 191, 200, where this general subject is discussed. Cf. e.g. Maine Const. (1955), art. IV, part Third, §§ 16,17; Ark. Const. Amend. No. 7, § 1.
In Massachusetts also, unlike the situation in some States, the adoption of an emergency preamble does not prevent the measure to which the preamble is attached from being subject to referendum at the next election. Cf. e.g. Morris v. Goss, 147 Maine, 89, 104, 110; Ohio Const. Art. II, §§ lc, Id; State ex rel. Schorr v. Kennedy, 132 Ohio St. 510, 511-512. The principal consequences in Massachusetts of adopting a so called “emergency” preamble are to make the measure effective upon its passage rather than ninety days thereafter, and to prevent the operation of the measure from being suspended until after the next biennial election. We must recognize, in considering our own Constitution, that the position taken by courts in some other States3 *52in reviewing emergency preambles in part may have been induced by the more rigid constitutional definitions of “emergency” there applicable and, to some extent, by the more significant practical consequences of the adoption of such a preamble.
(b) A determination that a statute should, for reasons of public convenience alone, take effect at once rather than after the lapse of ninety days is so obviously a matter of legislative policy that no court should disregard or question the determination unless, in the manner of its adoption or in substance, there has been plain violation of some constitutional mandate. The discretion involved in determining whether an immediate effective date is “necessary for the immediate preservation of the public . . . convenience” is so broad that any judicial review is inevitably extremely limited. “Public convenience” is a comprehensive term. It would be difficult for a court to say that the Legislature was plainly wrong in deciding to put a statute into effect at once, if reading the statute as a whole brings to mind any substantial basis for believing that the public convenience would be served by having the statute in effect during the ninety days immediately following its passage.
(c) There is no indication that the Constitutional Convention attached any special importance to the words ‘‘ setting forth the facts constituting the emergency.” Nothing in the debates (see fn. 2) suggests that these words were *53given any consideration whatsoever in the discussion of what is now art. 48. All that appears is that the words were in the most detailed original proposal for a very long amendment and were retained.
(d) In the absence of indication that special significance was attached by the Constitutional Convention to the provision for stating the facts, it is apparent that the provision must be construed with reference to the circumstance that “public convenience” will justify the adoption of an emergency preamble. Slight grounds will warrant the Legislature in concluding that public convenience will be served by making the act effective at once. Accordingly, little is needed to satisfy the requirement for a statement of facts.
(e) This view was taken by the first Legislature which had to deal with such preambles. Article 48 of the Amendments became effective shortly after the 1917-1918 Convention. In 1919 the Legislature began to employ, in stating the facts constituting the so called emergency, a recital that deferred operation of the particular act would tend to defeat its purpose. For convenience this general form of statement is hereafter referred to as the standard statement. Such a standard statement was used in that year in a number of statutes.4 This legislative practice, contemporaneous with the adoption of art. 48, is strong indication that legislators, familiar with what had gone on in the Constitutional Convention, regarded the words, “a preamble setting forth the facts constituting the emergency,” as requiring nothing but the minimum standard statement. This *54view may have rested upon the realization that a very slight basis for legislative action is necessary where “public convenience” alone is involved.
Contemporary usage, of course, is not conclusive of correct constitutional interpretation, and even long continued disregard of a clear constitutional provision cannot change its meaning. See Ayer v. Commissioner of Admn. 340 Mass. 586, 595-596; Stockburger v. Jordan, 10 Cal. 2d 636, 648-649. Nevertheless, the long continued practice by another branch of our tripartite government is entitled to very great weight in interpreting what art. 48 requires. See Portland Bank v. Apthorp, 12 Mass. 252, 257; Opinion of the Justices, 126 Mass. 557, 594; Fitzgerald v. Selectmen of Braintree, 296 Mass. 362, 367. We should hesitate at this late date to say that art. 48 compels more. See the statement in 1844 by Dewey, J. in Davison v. Johonnot, 7 Met. 388, 395-396.5
(f) The practice which began in 1919 has now become widely accepted. Today many preambles set forth no other basis, or little more basis, for the emergency than the standard statement, augmented frequently by a paraphrase or summary of the statutory purpose. See e.g. St. 1963, cc. 71, 128,141,161,188, 219, 239, 247, 258, 259, 290. Accordingly, we must recognize (1) that a decision that this preamble is insufficient will run counter to at least a frequent legislative practice of over forty years, and (2) that we may create doubts6 as to the validity of many comparable emergency *55preambles adopted over the period since 1919. Possible ‘practical consequences of a decision that the standard preamble is inadequate should not lead us to acquiesce in a substantive violation of art. 48, but we also should not overemphasize deficiencies of form if the substance of the reasons which led to making the statute effective at once are reasonably apparent from reading the preamble with the statute as a whole.
3. For over a decade after art. 48 became effective, no court decision dealt with the problem directly. The first case to discuss the matter was in 1931, when in Yont v. Secretary of the Commonwealth, 275 Mass. 365, 366, the court considered very briefly an emergency preamble, which contained the standard statement. Chief Justice Eugg, after quoting the standard statement language, said, “By virtue of this preamble, the act became effective forthwith. ’ ’ This sentence was not necessary to the decision, because the measure then under consideration was within the ‘ ‘ excluded matters” described in The Referendum, III, § 2, of art. 48. The case may have been taken, however, as giving sanction to the standard statement form of preamble.7
In Opinion of the Justices, 286 Mass. 611, 614, 623, this court considered 1934 Senate Bill No. 317, entitled, “An Act further regulating the use of traps and other devices for the capture of fur-bearing animals and providing for local option thereon.” A proposed emergency preamble contained little more than the standard statement. At page 623, the Justices said, “The emergency preamble of the proposed bill sets forth facts constituting the emergency to be that the deferred operation of the act would ‘in part defeat its purpose to terminate without further delay the uncertainty which has attended its subject matter’ and declares that it is ‘necessary for the immediate preservation of the public convenience.’ ” This preamble says little, if anything, *56more than the preamble in the present case, although from it one may infer that there had been some troublesome uncertainty which would continue unless the measure should become effective immediately.
In three other cases, the court, without any discussion of the problem, assumed that acts with very brief emergency preambles took effect upon their enactment. See O’Donnell v. Registrar of Motor Vehicles, 283 Mass. 375, 378 (“deferred operation . . . would, in part, defeat its purpose,” see St. 1928, c. 344), Pittsley v. David, 298 Mass. 552, 554 (“would cause substantial inconvenience,” see St. 1936, c. 49), and McNear v. Director of the Div. of Employment Security, 327 Mass. 717, 721 (“Necessary readjustments . . . have been too long delayed and the deferred operation . . . would further delay,” St. 1947, c. 440). The opinions do not set out the preambles and do not suggest that the problem, now under discussion, was considered.
Two cases deal directly with the sufficiency of emergency preambles or declarations. Prescott v. Secretary of the Commonwealth, 299 Mass. 191. Russell v. Treasurer & Recr. Gen. 331 Mass. 501, 503-504. In each case the emergency provision was held adequate.
The Prescott case discussed the effectiveness of the Governor’s declaration8 that “delayed operation . . . will result in inconvenience to the public and to . . . officials . . . who in . . . framing . . . their annual budgets must be certain as to the financial requirements for each budget item involving public expenditures for governmental activities” (p. 195). Although it deemed the recital adequate to state *57an emergency, the court said (p. 202), as to the provision in art. 48 calling for a statement of facts, “It may well be that failure to comply with this requirement would render a statement ineffective .... No such case is presented. One purpose, at least, of this requirement is to place on record the grounds of the Governor’s action for the information of the citizens to whom he is answerable. ... It may . . . have some tendency to show an intention that his action shall be subject to judicial review ... on the face of his statement. And, so far as judicial review may be had, the facts set forth exclude from consideration, as justifying the Governor’s action, any emergency other than that upon which he relies as constituted by those facts.” The court then (p. 203) assumed that the Governor’s action was “subject to judicial review with respect to the sufficiency of the facts set forth by him,” and said that his action in declaring the emergency “cannot be held invalid unless, giving effect to every presumption in its favor, it is wholly without support in the facts set forth.” The court, in determining (pp. 203-204) whether the facts recited revealed an emergency of public convenience, looked beyond the recitals to the substance of the statute, and also took notice of other laws to see how municipal and town finances would be affected by the statutory changes for which the act provided.
In the Russell case, 331 Mass. 501, the court held adequate a recital (p. 503) that “deferred operation of this act would tend to defeat its purpose,’’ which was “to alleviate the severe shortage of rental housing . . . which shortage has caused a serious emergency detrimental to the public peace, health, safety and convenience . . ..” The court said (pp. 503-504): “Although, technically, it is the purpose of the act which is stated as a fact, the statement amounts to a declaration that there is a severe shortage of rental housing . . . which has caused a serious emergency and that the purpose of the act is to alleviate this shortage.” Despite the statement in the preamble that there was a housing shortage, the court looked also (p. 504) to § 1 of the statute, which recited facts concerning the shortage.
*58There is thus no instance in which a Massachusetts emergency preamble or declaration has been declared inadequate. In several decisions very brief preambles of the type before us have been assumed to be adequate. In the Prescott case and in the Opinion of the Justices (286 Mass. 611, 614, 623) vague preambles were regarded as sufficient, although resort to other statutes was necessary to explain the conclusions of fact expressed in the preambles. Our decisions provide no clear standard for determining whether a preamble is inadequate. With recognition that there is little in our cases to guide us, we consider what is essentially the standard statement in St. 1963, c. 506, viz. that delayed operation will tend to defeat the statutory purpose, augmented by a summary of the relevant purpose, “which is in part to provide forthwith for . . . increased allowances for expenses, travel, lodging and meals to members of the General Court.” We must determine whether that augmented standard statement is sufficient in itself as a reason for advancing the measure’s effective date or sufficiently refers to, or incorporates by reference, any legislative determinations of fact apparent from examining the statute as a whole.
4. We consider the augmented standard statement to be a conclusion of fact, viz. that a ninety day delay in the measure’s effective date would tend to defeat that part of its purpose which was to provide “forthwith” a new scale of allowances. This statement is true for obviously the new scale of allowances could be paid “forthwith” only if the measure should become effective at once. The statement also designated and referred to the particular portion of the measure which gave rise to the adoption of the preamble.
Implicit in the enactment of c. 506 was a legislative finding that the old scale of allowances was insufficient and that a higher scale was proper. The adoption of the emergency preamble and the enactment of § 7 (making §§ 4, 5, and 6 effective upon the passage of the act, see fn. 1, supra) implied that the Legislature found it to be in the public interest and for the public convenience to have the new scale of *59allowances take effect at once. The substance of these implied findings might have been set out directly in the preamble in such form as, “The Legislature concludes that the present scale of allowances for expenses, travel, lodging, and meals to members of the General Court is inadequate and that a higher scale is proper now and should be paid forthwith. ’ ’ It would probably not be contended that such a sentence was insufficient under art. 48. Certainly, we could not say that such a statement had no conceivable foundation in fact, having in mind the rising trend in recent years of costs of board, lodging, and travel, nor could it be said that there was plainly no ground for the legislative conclusion that public convenience would be served by having the new scale go into effect at once. The matter would be within the area of policy judgment in which the Legislature is responsible not to the courts but to the people, who can express their judgment at the next election.
An express statement, such as has been outlined above, of course, would be an appropriate and literal compliance with art. 48. The augmented standard statement found in c. 506, however, says substantially the same thing by implication, by referring to the statutory purpose and to the act itself. When the preamble and the body of c. 506 are read together, it is apparent that the Legislature concluded that a new scale of allowances was required at once and that, if the objective of paying the new scale forthwith was to be achieved, the act must become effective at once.
The issue really comes down to a question of form as against substance. We are not prepared to hold that art. 48 requires a statement in the preamble, in precise verbiage, of what the preamble, read with the act and in the light of its purpose, necessarily imports. Such a construction of the language of art. 48 is not required by anything in its origin or history. It would not be in conformity with the reasonably consistent practice of a coordinate branch of State government for nearly half a century. It would place undue weight on form alone. For all the reasons discussed above, we hold that the augmented standard statement in the preamble satisfies art. 48.
*60We have given consideration to the decisions in other States (see fn. 3, supra). Many of them relate to constitutional provisions somewhat different from art. 48, in one respect or another. They give a more rigid interpretation of the requirement to state the facts constituting the emergency than we think is proper in the light of the history of art. 48 and the legislative practice and court decisions since 1919.
As stated above, Mr. Justice Kirk and Mr. Justice Spiegel concur in the result.
The emergency preamble of St. 1963, c. 506, is sufficient, so that the statute was effective forthwith. An order is to enter directing the Secretary of the Commonwealth to take no further steps for the referendum on the statute as a non-emergency measure.
So ordered.
Section 5 provides that, in addition to the expense allowance under G. L. c. 3, § 9B, as inserted by St. 1953, c. 263, § 1 ($400' per year, payable $50 on the first day of each session and $50 on the first day of each following month), each member of the General Court shall for 1963 receive for expenses $200, payable $25 on the first day of each month and the balance, if any, on the last day of the session. Section 6 provides for “the balance of” 1963, increases in the other allowances under c. 3, § 9B, as follows: (1) for members living less than forty miles from the State House (a) for travel, an increase from seven cents a mile to eight cents a mile; (b) for attendance, an increase from $4.50 to $7 per day; (2) for those living forty miles or more from the State House who do not elect allowances at the increased rates already mentioned, an increase in the allowance for a weekly round trip from seven to eight cents a mile and in the allowances for room and board from $9.50 to $15. These allowances are payable on weekly vouchers. Section 7 provided that §§ 1, 2, and 3 should become effective on January 1, 1964, and that §§ 4, 5, and 6 should become effective on the passage of the act.
In Bulletin No. 6, The Initiative and Referendum, prepared by the Commission to Compile Information and Data for the Use of the Constitutional Convention, Bulletins, 1917-1918 Convention, vol. 1, 183, 203-205, there was discussion of “emergency” requirements in the referendum provisions of other States, and it was said, “The definition of 'emergency measures’ which has found widest acceptance is: 'measures immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health, or safety. ’ ” This, of course, is a much more strict requirement than the “public convenience” standard of art. 48. The term “public convenience” was included in the “emergency” section of the first proposal for an initiative and referendum amendment submitted to the convention. See Convention Doe. No. 7, p. 5. That section was not altered in respects here material by the report of the committee on initiative and referendum. See Convention Doc. No. 335, dated July 23, 1917. There was only casual and uninformative discussion of the emergency section on the convention floor. See Debates, Const. Conv. 1917-1918, vol. 2, pp. 4, 497-498, 509-510, 783-784, 902-903, 948-949.
In two States, Arkansas and Maine, where the Constitution does not regard “public convenience” as a basis for an emergency preamble, it has been held necessary to state the facts constituting the emergency. See Jumper v. Mc-Collum, 179 Ark. 837, 839-840; Gentry v. Harrison, 194 Ark. 916, 920-922; *52Fulkerson v. Refunding Bd. 201 Ark. 957, 961-962; Mann v. Lowry, 227 Ark. 1132, 1139-1140; Payne v. Graham, 118 Maine, 251, 256. A very brief statement suffices. Morris v. Goss, 147 Maine, 89. Opinion of the Justices, 153 Maine, 469, 474. See also Maine Employment See. Commn. v. Charest, 158 Maine, 43, 50. California seems also to reach a similar result. Stockburger v. Jordan, 10 Cal. 2d 636, 642-643. Davis v. County of Los Angeles, 12 Cal. 2d 412, 418-423. Hollister v. Kingsbury, 129 Cal. App. 420, 422-425. Behneman v. Alameda-Contra Costa Transit Dist. 182 Cal. App. 2d 687, 690-692. The latest ease in Ohio, dealing with an ordinance, appears consistent with the Maine cases. Youngstown v. Aiello, 156 Ohio St. 32, 36-37, but see State ex rel. Schorr v. Kennedy, 132 Ohio St. 510, 512-514. See Graham v. Dye, 308 Ill. 283, 286-291. In Greenberg v. Lee, 196 Ore. 157, 161-162, 182-186, a somewhat meager emergency preamble in an ordinance was sustained under a statutory^ provision requiring that the municipal legislative body “specify with distinctness the facts and reasons constituting such emergency, ’ ’ but the court stated that a conclusion of fact was at least required. Cf. Hill v. Taylor, 264 Ky. 708, 716-718. Cases on the general subject are discussed in annotations, 7 A. L. B. 519; 110 A. L. B. 1435.
For statutes in which there was no amplification of the standard statement, see St. 1919, ee. 13, 55, 119, 125, 270, 273, 295, 322, 324, 332, 359; Sp. St. 1919, cc. 244, 245. For statutes repeating to some extent the purpose of the act in the preamble and indicating some urgency in accomplishing that purpose, see St. 1919, ce. 120, 138, 139, 151, 164, 190, 283, 316, 342. For preambles that also state an underlying fact, discernible in the body of the statute, see St. 1919, c. 61 (“There is need of a law authorizing . . . memorials ... [to servicemen])”; c. 126 (“It is fitting that a day should be set apart to celebrate the home-coming of . . . [servicemen]).’’ For preambles that recited a fact not readily apparent in the body of the act, see St. 1919, e. 257 (“present scarcity of houses and buildings’’) ; Sp. St. 1919, e. 246 (“The quarters provided for by this act are needed at once”). For a statute strikingly similar in substance and form to St. 1963, e. 506, see St. 1919, e. 273, “An Act to regulate the mileage allowance of members and certain employees of the general court, ‘ ’ where the standard statement was used.
“. . . [W] e have an uninterrupted course of legislation of a similar character, for the period of sixty four years that have elapsed since the adoption of the constitution which is supposed by the demandant to contain provisions controlling and restraining such exercise of legislative power. It has been again and again said by this court . . . that the construction of the constitution, given by the legislature by a long continued course of legislative acts, ought to have great weight in the consideration of a question like the present; and is not to be overruled unless manifestly erroneous. The vast amount of property, now held under titles derived from similar legislative acts, should lead us to proceed most cautiously in the investigation of this subject, and to deal with it in a liberal spirit, when called upon judicially to declare that this course of legislation conflicts with the constitution, and that all . . . acts of this character are of no validity.”
In view of the result which we reach, we do not need to determine whether such doubts as may exist could be removed by ratifying legislation, nor need we consider whether it is open to litigants to question the sufficiency of an emergency preamble as to which no referendum under art. 48 has been sought within the ninety day period.
The title and the substance of St. 1931, e. 122, considered in the Yont case, showed that it was designed to accelerate highway construction “in order to alleviate the present unemployment emergency.” Those who join in this statement of reasons think the Yont case decided no more than that the bill was within the excluded matters. See the Yont case, at p. 366.
Article 48, The Referendum, II, provides that the Governor may cause a law to “take efEeet without suspension, or if such law has been . . . suspended [cause] such suspension . . . [to] terminate” by filing with the Secretary of State a statement of the emergency and “setting forth the facts constituting the emergency.” Such statements by the Governor (see e.g. St. 1956, cc. 556, 705, 718; St. 1958, cc. 557, 606; St. 1962, cc. 429, 598; St. 1963, cc. 62, 377, 395, 525, 564, 665, 749, 821) have on occasion set out with greater particularity (than in most legislative emergency preambles) the facts constituting the emergency which is being declared. It may be that this desirable practice has been based not upon any sense of constitutional necessity but in the belief that, where the Legislature has not attached an emergency preamble, the Governor should explain why he, acting alone, has declared an emergency.

=== CASE 9739774 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:20:40.334519+00 ===

Whittemore, J.
(dissenting) I am unable to find in the preamble to St. 1963, c. 506, any statement “setting forth the facts constituting the emergency” as the Constitution requires. Nor, as I read it, is there any such statement in the body of the statute which provides, in part, for payments of increased allowances in the 1963 session. An implication that supporting facts underlie the statute does not appear to me to be enough.
The facts that probably constituted the emergency of public convenience and that led to the enactment of St. 1963, c. 506, with its emergency preamble, come to mind when the statute is read. They include the general increase in the cost of board, room, and travel and the burden of long legislative sessions. These facts are not stated, however, as of course they could have been. Indeed, if the preamble in c. 506 were to be held inadequate, such facts could be stated in legislation to be enacted, which, I think, could serve to confirm the payments made under c. 506, and those to be made in the period until the referendum.
I read the Prescott case, 299 Mass. 191, 202, as construing a statute with an express recital in the preamble, the Russell case, 331 Mass. 501, 503-504, as construing a statute *61with such a recital in the preamble and in the body of the statute, and the Yont case, 275 Mass. 365, 366, as speaking of a statute with an express recital of an emergency fact in the title adequately incorporated in the preamble by reference.
Long continued legislative practice certainly reinforces the solemn obligation that exists in every case in which an act of a coordinate branch of the government is put in issue, that is, to indulge every presumption in support of the validity of the act. Notwithstanding my recognition of this obligation and my regard for the views of my colleagues, I am unable to conclude that the preamble to St. 1963, c. 506, is constitutionally adequate.

=== CASE 2220903 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:00.143287+00 ===

46 Ill. App. 2d 232 (1964)
196 N.E.2d 700
Fettes, Love & Sieben, Inc., an Illinois Corporation, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
Anna Simon, Defendant-Appellant, and Harold Beider, American National Bank and Trust Company of Chicago, As Trustee Under Trust No. 37009 and Unknown Owner and Owners, Defendants.
Gen. No. 49,069.
Illinois Appellate Court  First District, Second Division.
February 4, 1964.
Kahn, Adsit & Arnstein, of Chicago (John F. McClure, of counsel), for appellant.
Ader & Ader, and Gunn, Davidson & Brantman, all of Chicago (Zeamore A. Ader, of counsel), for appellee.
MR. PRESIDING JUSTICE BURKE delivered the opinion of the court.
*233 This action was commenced by Fettes, Love & Sieben, Inc., a plumbing and heating contractor, to foreclose a mechanic's lien claim against both the owner and the tenant of certain real estate improved with a building in which it removed fixtures from three bathrooms and installed plumbing to make nine bathrooms. The owner, Anna Simon, appeals from a decree enforcing a mechanic's lien in the amount of $4,948.87 against the premises and the reservation of a power to enter a personal judgment for any deficiency.
The three story building in which the alterations were made is located at 443 West Barry Avenue in Chicago. The building was being used as a girls' club. Harold Beider, the tenant, desired to add bathrooms to the building. The alterations were completed in the latter part of December 1959.
The owner, Anna Simon, had no dealings with the plaintiff concerning the alterations. Her husband, Joseph Simon, came to the premises to collect on a nonsufficient funds rent check which had been presented by the tenant Beider. At that time Beider pointed out to Joseph Simon the work in progress.
[1, 2] The plaintiff contends that it proved that the contract, express or implied, had been made with the owner, or with Joseph Simon, her husband, who had been authorized by her to contract on her behalf, or that Anna Simon "knowingly permitted" the improvements to be made. Ill Rev Stats 1963, c 82, § 1.
Proof of the existence of the marital relation does not establish the husband's agency for his wife. The agency of the husband is a question of fact to be proved by direct or circumstantial evidence. There is no presumption that the husband has authority to act for the wife. In an action against the wife to hold her responsible for the act or contract of her husband, plaintiff has the burden of showing the agency and *234 authority of the husband or a ratification by the wife. See 41 CJS Husband and Wife, Secs 69 and 70.
This court noted in McFadden v. Crumb, 316 Ill. App. 447, 45 NE2d 68, that even where, as in that case, the husband, held himself out as the agent of his wife, that persons dealing with him would be bound at their peril to ascertain not only the fact of the agency but also the extent thereof. The plaintiff's claim for a mechanic's lien was upheld in Mutual Const. Co. v. Baker, 237 Ill. App. 596, but in that case the owner had for some time acted as general agent for the building. The court pointed out, 602: "The owner will be held to have knowingly permitted repairs or alterations contracted for by a tenant to be done, where notice or knowledge of such work comes to an agent of the owner and such agent is in general charge of the property, although the agent might not have authority broad enough to permit him to make a contract for such work himself which would be binding on the principal in the absence of specific approval by the latter."
In Johns-Manville Corporation v. LaTour D'Argent Corp., 277 Ill. App. 503, the mechanic's lien was upheld but there also the agent had general charge of the collection of rents and the operation of the building.
In the case of Bingaman v. Dahm, 307 Ill. App. 432, 30 NE2d 509 and Young v. Bergner, 243 Ill. App. 473, the mechanic's liens were sustained but in those cases the property was owned by the husband and wife jointly. In the Bingaman case the improvements were open and visible and in the Young case the parties lived quite close to the property. The instant case does not present a situation of joint ownership. The property was solely owned by the wife. The husband was sent to collect on a non-sufficient funds rent check. He visited the premises only on one occasion during the progress of the work. This was for the purpose *235 of collecting the amount of the rent check from the tenant.
The plaintiff relies upon the case of Gass v. Carducci, 37 Ill. App. 2d 181, 185 NE2d 285, to uphold the decree. In that case the plaintiff's mother suffered personal injuries when the door of the automobile in which she was riding came open, throwing her to the street. The operator of the car was her daughter. The plaintiff was helping the defendant daughter take the daughter's son to a doctor for treatment. This court in affirming the judgment for plaintiff stated that the husband's knowledge of the defective door was circumstantial evidence of the daughter's probable knowledge of the defect. Under the circumstances it was fair to assume that the husband would notify the wife of the existence of the dangerous condition. The liability was predicated upon the breach of the common law duty to maintain the automobile in a proper working condition. The failure to correct the serious and known defect of the door's locking mechanism was the proximate cause of the plaintiff's injuries and it was this knowledge by the husband of the defect that was imputable to the wife.
The Carducci case involved personal injuries to the plaintiff and resulted from a dangerous condition which had been known in advance and the decision in that case is thus not pertinent to this inquiry. No duty existed on the part of the husband in the instant case to inform his wife of work which was being performed upon the premises.
Ill Rev Stats 1963, c 82 (the Mechanic's Lien Act) § 1 states: "Any person who shall by any contract or contracts, express or implied, or partly expressed or implied, with the owner of a lot or tract of land, or with one whom such owner has authorized or knowingly permitted to contract for the improvement of, or to improve same ... shall have a lien ... for the *236 amount due to him for such material, fixtures, apparatus, machinery, services or labor, and interest from the date the same is due."
The foundation of a mechanic's lien is the contract with the owner of the land for the improvement thereof and the furnishing of material and labor according to the contract, in connection with the Statute giving the lien. Granquist v. Western Tube Co., 240 Ill. 132, 88 N.E. 468. The contract for the improvements must either have been made with the owner or with one whom the owner has authorized or knowingly permitted to have done the work for him.
The owner is presumed to have "knowingly permitted" where he knew and failed to protest and accepted the benefits of the improvements. Janisch v. Reynolds, 254 Ill. App. 569; Young v. Bergner, 243 Ill. App. 473; Mutual Const. Co. v. Baker, 237 Ill. App. 596. In the Janisch case there was a decree finding a mechanic's lien against the defendant-owner. Her husband had without her knowledge entered into an express contract with the plaintiff for work to be performed upon the premises. The defendant-wife returned to the premises and remained in the building during the course of the improvements. In the present case there was neither any contract entered into on the wife's behalf nor did she knowingly allow the improvements to be made.
In the case of Young v. Bergner, supra, the property was jointly owned by the husband and wife. The defendants also were held to have notice of the improvements because the residence in which they lived during the time the work was in progress was located within 200 yards of the work site. While in the Mutual Construction Co. v. Baker case, supra, the lien was sustained, the owner was held to have knowingly permitted the work to be contracted for by her lessees because her son was her general agent in the management *237 of the premises and knew that the improvements were being contracted for.
The defendant in the present case did not enter into any contract, either express or implied with the plaintiffs nor did she perform any acts which would indicate that she gave her husband authority to act for her as her agent. She can not be said to have knowingly permitted the alterations to be made on the premises since there was no evidence that she knew the work was being undertaken nor did she acquiesce in accepting the alleged benefits. On the record presented plaintiff cannot enforce its claim under the Mechanic's Lien Act against her property. This opinion does not affect the judgment against Harold Beider who has not appealed. The decree is reversed and the cause is remanded with directions to enter a decree in favor of Anna Simon.
Decree reversed and cause remanded with directions.
FRIEND and BRYANT, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9739775 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:20:41.249721+00 ===

MR. JUSTICE BURMAN delivered the opinion of the court. In this action, plaintiff, Administratrix of the Estate of John J. De Leo, deceased, sought to recover from defendant, in Count I of the complaint, the sum of $30,000 for pecuniary injuries sustained by the next of kin by reason of the wrongful death of John J. De Leo, allegedly caused by defendant. In Count II plaintiff sought recovery of $5,000 for hospital and funeral bills incurred. A trial was had before a jury and verdicts were returned under Count I in the sum of $17,800 and under Count II in the sum of $1,884.40. Defendant appeals from the judgment entered by the Court on these verdicts. In his brief the defendant has raised no questions as to the pleadings, nor does he seek to contest the judgment in the sum of $1,884.40 rendered against him under Count II. In addition, although liability was contested in the trial court, the defendant in this appeal has conceded his responsibility to respond for damage in some amount to the plaintiff under the allegations in Count I. The defendant does, however, contend that the amount of the contested judgment is greatly excessive; that it is the result of prejudicial conduct on the part of the trial judge; and that it is the result of errors committed at the trial in the admission and exclusion of evidence. The defendant also contends that it was error not to grant a continuance which he requested both before the assignment and trial judges, and that the trial judge entered a void order when he allowed witness fees to plaintiff. The facts of the case are as follows. The decedent, John J. De Leo, was struck and killed by an automobile operated by defendant. Decedent left as his next of kin, John A. De Leo and Kate De Leo, his father and mother, and several brothers and sisters. The plaintiff, Eleanor L. Ferraro, a sister of the decedent, was duly appointed administratrix and filed this suit against defendant on March 15, 1961. The decedent was a single man, thirty-five years of age and lived with his parents, as did his sister, Virginia De Leo, an unmarried daughter and her minor child. Although decedent had several brothers and sisters it was admitted that none of them sustained any substantial pecuniary loss as the result of his death. John A. De Leo, the father of decedent, was 71 years of age at the time suit was commenced. He had retired in 1959, but was still engaged in part-time work. Kate De Leo, decedent’s mother, was 74 years of age and a housewife. The defendant first contends that where the decedent was an adult, and the next of kin are also adults, as in the case at bar, the latter, in order to recover more than nominal damages must adduce an evidentiary basis for a verdict, and there is no presumption in that case of a pecuniary loss from the death alone, even though the next of kin are lineal. To support this position our attention is called to the case of Barrow v. Lence, 17 Ill App2d 527, 151 NE2d 120. In this wrongful death action the evidence showed that the married daughter was living with her husband in their own home separate and apart from her parents and that her deceased parents had contributed no support nor rendered any services on her behalf. Upon this record the Appellate Court for the Fourth District reversed the verdicts and judgments entered in the consolidated death actions and required a remittitur or a new trial since they found that the verdicts were excessive and the result of passion and prejudice. The Appellate Court in a long answer to a petition for rehearing attempted to set out the law in terms of presumption of pecuniary loss in wrongful death cases. The court stated: Sometimes there is reference to a presumption in favor of lineal next of kin, but always the decisions speak of an evidential basis for the fixing of damages, without reliance on any presumption. For this reason, we conclude the so-called presumption has no importance, except in the case of death of a child who has not yet formed habits of industry, nor a pattern of earning ability. This attempt to remove the presumption of pecuniary loss in favor of lineal next of kin except in the case of a child was neither sustained by precedent nor was it to be long-lived. A few months before the court made its decision in Barrow, the Supreme Court handed down its decision in Hall v. Gillins, 13 Ill2d 26, 147 NE2d 352. In that case, Mr. Justice Schaefer, speaking for the court wrote: The term “pecuniary injuries” has received an interpretation that is broad enough to include most of the items of damage that are claimed by the plaintiffs in this case. Each plaintiff alleges deprivation of support as well as deprivation of the companionship, guidance, advice, love and affection of the deceased. Loss of support is of course an element of damages under the statute. Indeed so far as these plaintiffs are concerned, since they are the widow and a lineal kinsman, “a presumption of pecuniary loss obtains from the relationship alone, sufficient to sustain a verdict and judgment awarding substantial damages without proof of actual loss.” We can only assume that when the Supreme Court speaks of an operative presumption that this presumption is of some importance and validity. It is true, as was pointed out by the court in Barrow, that in many cases in which the presumption is mentioned, there was additional evidence of pecuniary loss and the presumption became only a legal principle available, but not relied upon by the plaintiff. However, the unmistakable conclusion remains that the presumption in favor of pecuniary loss and in favor of the lineal next of kin is a viable concept in Hlinois. The Appellate Court for the Third District held in Dodson v. Richter, 34 Ill App2d 22, 180 NE2d 505 that a verdict in the wrongful death action in the amount of $20,500 was not excessive. The husband had brought suit and the defendant contended that the plaintiff failed to establish that the death of his wife resulted in any pecuniary loss to her next of kin and consequently it was claimed that the proof was insufficient to sustain a verdict for more than nominal damages. There the decedent was forty-seven years of age, in good health and living with her family, consisting of her husband and three children. The Appellate Court, after reviewing Barrow v. Lence, said: If in such an action the next of kin are lineal kinsmen of the deceased, the law presumes some substantial damages from the relationship alone. (Emphasis ours.) However, where the next of kin are collaterals, their damages are only such as are proved. In other words, the death alone is presumed to result in “pecuniary injuries” to the next of kin who are lineal descendants of the deceased and whether they were in the habit of claiming and receiving pecuniary assistance from the deceased becomes an immaterial question. ILP Death, Sec 30; Howlett v. Doglio, 402 Ill 311, 83 NE2d 708; Hall v. Gillins, 13 Ill2d 26, 147 NE2d 352; Dukeman v. Cleveland, C. C. & St. L. R. Co., 237 Ill 104, 86 NE 712.  "We have shown that aside from an attempted departure from the general rule in Barrow, the courts of this state have held that there is a presumption in favor of pecuniary loss and substantial damages which operates in favor of the lineal kinsmen of the victim in a wrongful death action. The question would thus seem to be whether the prospective beneficiaries here, the parents of the decedent, are to be considered according to the law of Illinois, as lineal or collateral next of kin. A collateral heir is one who is not of the direct line of deceased, but comes from a collateral line, as a brother, sister, an uncle, an aunt, a nephew, a niece, or a cousin of deceased. Corpus Juris Secundum tells us that, “A lineal heir is one who inherits in a line ascending or descending from a common source as distinguished from a collateral heir.” 26A CJS Des and Dist See 19. This would certainly appear to include the parents of the decedent. The next line, however, includes the statement, “Sometimes, the term ‘lineal heir’ is deemed to mean descendants.” See for example Ernst v. Rivers, 233 Mass 9, 123 NE 93. This confusion in the law arises since under the common law of descent, which followed the feudal system, the mother and father and all persons in the ascending line could not inherit. Cooley’s Blackstone, 4th Ed, 601-4. But even in England, this archaic rule was changed in 1833-by the statutes of 3 and 4 Wm IY ch 106. In Illinois the rule has been settled since the early cases of Beard v. Skeldon, 113 Ill 584 and Willis Coal & Mining Co. v. Grizzell, 198 Ill 313, 65 NE 74. In the latter case, which involved a statute giving the “lineal heirs” among others the right to sue for injuries suffered by coal miners, the court was asked to decide whether a father could sue under this statute for the “wrongful death” of his son. The court said: Lineal consanguinity is that relation which exists among persons where one is descended from the other, as between the son and a father or the grandfather, and so upward in the ascending line, and between the father and the son or the grandson, and so downward in a direct descending line (citing authority). The deceased left no child, children, descendants of children or adopted child or children, and no mother. Benton Grizzell, the father, was the only “lineal heir” of said Thomas Lee Grizzell, the deceased, hence the right of action rests in the appellee Benton Grizzell, alone. (Emphasis added.) In McFadden v. St. Paul Coal Co., 263 Ill 441, 105 NE 314 the- Supreme Court in interpreting the same statute simply said: “In this case there was no widow, and the father and mother, as lineal heirs, were the only persons authorized to bring suit under the act” (emphasis added). Also see Holliday v. O’Gara Coal Co., 203 Ill App 89, 94. We conclude that there is a presumption of pecuniary loss in favor of the lineal heirs of the deceased in a wrongful death action from the relationship alone, and that the deceased’s parents are such lineal next of kin. The presumption upon which the plaintiffs have a right to rely has been conclusively shown, but as was pointed out by the court in Barrow, this case, like many others, does not need to rest on a presumption of substantial pecuniary loss; rather, there is extensive evidence of actual pecuniary loss suffered by the decedent’s parents. There is testimony that the decedent was capable of and did a substantial amount of work around the house. This work included such things as building a fence, extending the garage, making repairs on the property and premises and the performance of chores and heavy labor for his elderly parents. In various cases the loss of services of this kind formerly performed by the deceased have provided the basis for recoveries in wrongful death actions. Stejskal v. Darrow, 55 ND 606, 215 NW 83; Brouse v. United States, 83 F Supp 373; and Dodson v. Richter, 34 Ill App2d 22, 180 NE2d 505. In addition to the services performed by the decedent there is evidence in the record that he generally gave $20 per week to his parents and paid $135 per month on the mortgage indebtedness on the home in which his family resided, and while working for the C. and D. Tomato Company he contributed $60 a week to his parents. The defendant’s other contentions are all of a more or less procedural nature and although we find none which would result in a reversal of the trial court’s judgment we shall discuss them each in turn.  The defendant contends that it was error to refuse to grant the defendant’s written motion for a continuance which was presented before the assignment judge and before the trial judge. That motion among other things alleged that the deceased died on February 11, 1961, and suit was commenced on June 30, 1961; that after a pretrial conference the matter upon petition filed by plaintiff was on September 15, 1961, advanced for trial; that subsequently on January 24, 1962, counsel for plaintiff filed a statement of Issue and Readiness and defendant’s counsel explains that he made no objection since his adversary at that time had promised to furnish him with additional discovery information. The petition went on to allege that when the case was called for trial on February 14, 1962, the counsel for defendant stated that he was not ready for trial because he had not been furnished the discovery information which had been promised to him and that instead he had been frustrated in his attempt to get this information by the lack of plaintiff’s cooperation and that thus he was not adequately prepared for trial. Defendant’s motion for continuance was denied and the matter proceeded to trial before Judge Clark, a visiting judge, on March 26, 1962, and after four days of trial a mistrial was declared. The cause was then reassigned by the assignment judge to Judge Dan Roberts for trial on March 30, 1962, at which time defendant’s counsel again requested a continuance representing to the court that there was a variance between the answers given by plaintiff to written interrogatories and the evidence to be offered. He represented that this was the reason for the granting of the mistrial before Judge Clark and he reasserted that without this information he could not properly he prepared on the question of damages. Judge Roberts, as had Judge Clark before him, as well as the two assignment judges, denied defendant’s motion and the case again proceeded to trial. As to the request for a continuance after the case was reached for trial under the assignment system, and after defendant’s acquiescence to it being moved above the black line, we think, that the granting or refusal of a request for a continuance was clearly a matter within the sound discretion of the trial judge. Leathers v. Leathers, 13 Ill2d 348, 148 NE2d 773; Roberts v. McDaniel, 22 Ill App2d 485, 161 NE2d 47.  Subsequently, during the trial, the defendant objected to the testimony of employers Albert Bina and Fritz Prueter on the grounds that they were not listed as employers in the answer filed on June 29, 1961, in response to the interrogatory seeking that information. After a lengthy hearing in chambers the objection was overruled by Judge Roberts. We have examined the record and it reveals that although Albert Bina’s name was not listed as one of decedent’s employers, a letter was sent on September 14, 1961, to the defendant’s attorney by plaintiff’s attorney enclosing a withholding tax statement of the deceased which furnished this information. Thus we see that the defendant was not surprised and had this information in his possession a full six months before the date of the trial. As to Fritz Prueter, his testimony showed that he was in the landscaping business and he employed the deceased on the average of from three to ten hours per day depending on the weather, and that this employment began on May 16, 1960, and ended in November of that year. He said that he paid the decedent in cash at the end of each day at the rate of $1.25 per hour and that he did not deduct any withholding tax. In her answer to interrogatories, the plaintiff administrator, whose knowledge in the matter was apparently based on hearsay or second-hand information, stated that to her knowledge the decedent was self-employed as a landscaper. We think that the defendant failed to prove that there was frand or concealment on the part of plaintiff. The objection to the testimony of both Bina and Prneter presented questions of a discretionary nature which could only be answered by the trial judge. We cannot say under the facts and circumstances presented here that the trial judge abused his discretion in permitting the witnesses to testify.  It is also charged that the trial judge exhibited prejudice against the defendant throughout the trial and repeatedly demonstrated bias which resulted in a jury verdict which was excessive. From a thorough search of the record, we can only conclude that the trial judge had a difficult case to try, one which was emphasized by the constant objections made by defendant’s counsel throughout the trial. Many of defendant’s objections were made in relation to the two points just discussed; failure to obtain a continuance and the overruling of his objections as to the testimony of Bina and Prueter. These objections were strenuously made during the trial and on oral argument before us. We can only conclude that counsel persisted in taking these positions because he sincerely felt he was right and the trial judge was wrong. The record, however, shows that the trial judge, although he ruled against the defendant on these points, did not do so in a curt or offhanded manner. Instead the record is replete with evidence of a conscientious and patient judge under very trying circumstances. We see no purpose in reporting the specific remarks of the judge under the facts and circumstances in this case.  The defendant also contends that the trial court committed error in allowing parol testimony by the parents and sister (administrator) of decedent to the effect that the parents were the owners of the house at 8639 Center Street in which they and the decedent resided. This testimony was given in support of the evidence by the parents that the decedent had contributed sums of money for the payment of the mortgage on that property. The title to this property was in the name of their daughter and son-in-law who were not living at the Center Street address. The parents testified that they purchased this home and made a down payment of $6,000 with $3,000 in cash and with a check for $3,000 withdrawn from their account at a savings association, but title was not taken in their names nor did they execute the purchase money mortgage which was taken on the property. Title was taken in the names of their daughter and son-in-law and they explained that this was done because they were unable to obtain a loan for the reason, they were told, that they were too old, on pension and the father was not working steadily, and therefore, they took title in the names of their children. Defendant insists that the parol testimony is a mere conclusion and should have been stricken as against the parol evidence rule, citing eases. We do not feel that the title to the property was the vital issue between the parties as was the case in all of the authorities which the appellant brings to our attention, and thus we see no need to discuss them in disposing of this point. In the case of Northern Assur. Co. v. Chicago Mut. Bldg. Ass’n, 198 Ill 474, 64 NE 979, the court permitted the introduction of parol evidence to vary or contradict a deed of conveyance. Our Supreme Court in that case had this to say at page 478. “The rule of evidence referred to by counsel, that parol testimony is inadmissible to contradict or vary a written instrument, applies only to the parties to the instrument or their privies. (1 Greenleaf on Evidence, sec 279; Silsbury v. Blumb, 26 Ill 287; Harts v. Emery, 184 id. 560; 17 Am & Eng Ency of Law,—1st ed—453.)” We think it was proper under all the circumstances in the case at bar for the plaintiff to offer evidence to show that her parents purchased the house they lived in, but out of necessity and convenience made other arrangements.  Finally, the defendant alleges error in the court’s refusal to compel a witness to testify and sustain an objection to his testimony. The defendant attempted to elicit testimony from the Chief of the Taxpayer’s Service Branch of the Internal Revenue Service concerning a search that he made in pursuing at their request the tax returns of the decedent for the years 1957 to 1960, inclusive. The witness refused to answer because of instructions and regulations of his department. The record discloses that the plaintiff had furnished authorization to the defendant to obtain copies of these returns. An Assistant United States Attorney for our District informed the court that he objected to the witness giving the information sought by the defendant on the basis of Treasury Regulations. The trial judge in a discussion in chambers which takes up ten pages of the trial record very patiently listened to arguments on this question and then sustained the objection. We consider this ruling to be within the discretion of the court and do not feel that the court abused its discretion.  The Wrongful Death Act authorizes a recovery of such damages as the jury shall deem fair and just compensation “with reference to the pecuniary injuries resulting from such death.” It is worthy of note that our Legislature has consistently increased the statutory limit in action resulting from wrongful death from $5,000 to $10,000 to $15,000 to $20,000 to $25,000 and now to $30,000. The matter of excessive damages in earlier cases was necessarily based upon the then existing limitation. Here the jury returned a verdict for $17,800 and the trial judge entered judgment on the verdict. Across the nation, substantial awards to a parent or parents have been sustained in eases which are factually not dissimilar from the case at bar. Bolino v. Illinois Terminal R. Co., 355 Mo 1236, 200 SW2d 352 ($13,500); Dow v. State, 183 Misc 674, 50 NYS2d 342 ($10,000 to mother only); Henderson v. National Mut. Cas. Co., 168 Kan 674, 215 P2d 225 ($10,000 both parents); Gordon v. Pappas, 227 Minn 95, 34 NW2d 293 ($8,500 both parents). In the case of Stejskal v. Darrow, 55 ND 606, 215 NW 83 the Supreme Court of North Dakota was asked by the appellant to declare excessive a judgment obtained by a father on account of the wrongful death of his daughter. The Court in affirming the judgment said: It is impossible in such cases to ascertain with mathematical exactness the value of such services as may be considered by the jury. The best that can be done is to make an approximation thereof. The jury has the right to take into consideration all of the circumstances, p 85. Bearing this principle in mind and after a careful review of the entire record we feel that substantial justice has been done between the parties and on that basis an appeals court will affirm the correct verdict and judgment even though some error may have been committed. We have also considered the objection to the other alleged errors including the allowance of subpoena costs and in our view they do not warrant consideration for they are quite without merit. We find no error compelling reversal in this record and thus the judgment of the Circuit Court is affirmed. Affirmed. MURPHY, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9740431 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:35:23.478848+00 ===

Dissenting Opinion.
Jackson, J.
— I dissent from the majority opinion herein for the reason that appellant’s motion for a new trial, on the grounds that the verdict was not supported by sufficient evidence, and that the verdict of the jury is contrary to law, was well taken and should have been sustained.
Despite the fact that the deceased was attended by a number of physicians during her illness there was not a single one of them who testified that she was suffering from arsenic poisoning, nor in fact is there any direct evidence that she died of such poison. Dr. Steussey testified that in his opinion, based on his post-mortem examination, there was no evidence that Lois Byrd died of natural causes or of a disease. Dr. Forney, over objection of appellant, testified that there was a sufficient quantity of arsenic, found in the tissues and specimens (obtained from the body of Lois Byrd) to cause death.
*461Thus, we are confronted with the question, did she die of poison, of the flu her mother thought she had, or did she die of the massive (400,000) units of pencillin, one-half grain of streptomycin and three sulpha drugs administered to her without a test to determine if she was allergic thereto? The doctor testified concerning the above as follows:
“Q. What about these 400,000 units you gave her?
“A. If she was sensitive to it, it could destroy her.”
The doctor further testified that if Lois Byrd was allergic to penicillin it would be known “within five or ten minutes or from five to ten days, depending on whether it was immediate.” The record discloses the patient received the penicillin on March 1, 1961, and died March 12,1961.
The State, in its brief and oral argument, made much of the fact, and the majority opinion stresses that, as stated in the majority opinion, “[o]n one occasion the defendant walked nine or ten blocks through deep snow from his house to the home of the wife’s parents carrying prepared orange juice in a glass jar. Within a few minutes after the deceased drank some of this orange juice she vomited and became worse, and, when she said she didn’t want it, the defendant took it away with him.” The State and the majority opinion would leave the inference the appellant was so determined to accomplish his wife’s death that he would wade snow and brave all elements to accomplish that purpose. Let’s look at the record to see what actually happened then, this being the evidence of the mother of Lois Byrd testifying as a witness for the State of Indiana, “[i]t was a bad snowy day and Warren walked over. She called him and *462asked him to bring her false teeth and some, orange juice and he came over and stayed for dinner. He gave her a glass of orange juice, but it didn’t stay down and she said T shouldn’t have drank that Donald Duck orange juice.’ I told Warren and he said: ‘I’ll take this back if she doesn’t want it’ and he took it away with him.”
The majority opinion also stresses the fact that a bottle of ant killer, containing a percentage of arsenic, was found behind the furnace in appellant’s home. There is no evidence in the record as to how such bottle came to be placed where found or who placed it there.
Reference is made to testimony concerning appellant’s refusal to take a lie detector test on advice of counsel. Such reference, at the trial and here,., is . inappropriate.
If the jury, was convinced that Lois Byrd died of arsenic poisoning we are- then confronted with the question, who administered the arsenic to Lois Byrd that caused her death? The burden was upon the State to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the appellant did, and the jury evidently found that there was sufficient evidence, as a verdict of first degree murder was returned.
The case comes to this Court upon the record. The appellant insists there is not sufficient evidence to sustain the verdict, and, although this Court cannot weigh the evidence in arriving at its conclusion, if it finds there is no evidence contained in the record to sustain the verdict and judgment, then.it not only has the power and authority, but it becomes its solemn duty to say so and reverse the judgment. Osbon v. State (1938), 213 Ind. 413, 13 N. E. 2d 223.
*463In the case' at bar thé appellant took the stand in his own behalf and denied poisoning his wife; .the State failed to prove that. the Dixie Cup in which the malted milk was contained was free from poison at the time it was delivered to the appellant for the use of the deceased. It is not shown in the record that the Dixie Cup in which the malted milk was contained, and from which the deceased is alleged to have drunk, is the same cup about which Dr.. Forney testified. The record discloses two paper cups were the subject of the toxicologist's analysis, but neither was identified with the appellant nor were they introduced in evidence. Certainly that burden of proof must be required of the State.
" If mere opportunity to murder is sufficient to convict then the life and liberty of many innocent people may be easily sacrificed. The law requires more than mere opportunity. It requires evidence to prove guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. It will not permit a mere possibility because of opportunity to take life or liberty. It does not require direct evidence, but if not direct, then the circumstantial, evidence must be such as to exclude every other reasonable hypothesis except that of guilt.” Osbon v. State (1938), 213 Ind. 413, 424, 13 N. E. 2d 223.
There is no motive disclosed by the record for the appellant to have poisoned his wife. On the contrary the record discloses, ’ without' dispute, a very satisfactory marital relationship existed between appellant and the deceased, the uncontradicted evidence being that they displayed great affection • for each other.
This Court has said in the case of Schusler v. The State (1868), 29 Ind. 394, 395:
' “. . . That the deceased, one /o/m Frederick; came to his death by violence is' cónclusivély *464shown; that the death was caused by the appellant is attempted to be established by circumstantial evidence. To sustain such a conviction, the facts proved must be susceptible of explanation upon no reasonable hypothesis consistent with the innocence of the person charged. Although the mysterious crime cannot be solved from the evidence, except upon the supposition of the defendant’s guilt, still a conviction cannot follow. The life or liberty of a person cannot be le-galy sacrificed on the ground that only by regarding him as guilty an explanation is afforded of the perpetration of a proved offense. . . .”
In the instant case there is a total lack of evidence to sustain the verdict and judgment.
“____[A]nd when it is thus found that there is not in the record evidence to sustain the finding of the jury and judgment of the court the cause should be reversed.” Osbon v. State (1938), 213 Ind. 413, 428, 13 N. E. 2d 223.
It is only too apparent that the conviction of appellant was obtained and is here being affirmed on. assumption, inference and opportunity.
The judgment should be reversed with instructions to grant the motion for a new trial.
Bobbitt, J., concurs.
Note. — Reported in 185 N. E. 2d 422.

=== CASE 9739776 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:20:41.254344+00 ===

ENGLISH, P. J., specially concurring: I agree that the judgment should be affirmed. I also agree that there was basis in the evidence to sustain the amount of the judgment, even though some of the testimony concerning decedent’s monetary contributions to his parents appears to have been greatly exaggerated, if not downright perjurious.* Since there was, however, other sufficient evidence to support the verdict, I consider both unnecessary and incorrect the statements in the majority opinion to the effect that the presumption of pecuniary injury in favor of lineal kinsmen is applicable to the facts of this case. I am in agreement with the scholarly opinion of the Fourth District Court in Barrow v. Lence, 17 Ill App2d 527, 151 NE2d 120. The points covered in that opinion were so skillfully set forth that I shall not attempt to restate them here. As I read it, the language of the courts in Hall v. Gillins, 13 Ill2d 26, 147 NE2d 352 and Dodson v. Richter, 34 Ill App2d 22, 180 NE2d 505 ** takes nothing from the Barrow opinion. The contrary comments of the majority, and their reliance on these cases indicate, I believe, a misunderstanding of what was said in Barrow. I conclude that the presumption in question is not appropriately invoked in the case at bar.   Decedent’s sister testified that in 1959 and 1960 he gave to his parents $20 per week in cash and made a monthly mortgage payment on their behalf in the amount of $135. Employers for whom decedent worked during those years testified (on behalf of plaintiff) that his earnings averaged less than $40 per week.    The complaint in Hall sought to establish “hitherto unrecognized common law rights of action for the destruction of the family unit” wholly outside the wrongful death action provided by statute. The plaintiffs were the widow and nine-year-old child of the decedent. Dismissal of the complaint was affirmed. Dodson was a wrongful death action brought on behalf of a widower and three minor children for the death of their wife and mother. The opinion recites the very extensive services which had been performed for the benefit of the family by the decedent.

=== CASE 9739777 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:20:42.162748+00 ===

Mr. Justice House delivered the opinion of the court: .. Petitioner was granted a writ of error to review an order of the circuit court of Cook County quashing the writ of certiorari previously issued by said court to review an award by the Industrial Commission in favor of respondent, James Wright. On respondent’s application for adjustment of claim, the arbitrator awarded compensation to be paid by petitioner, Republic Steel Corporation, arising from an accident' of. April 20, 1960. On January 25, 1962, the Industrial Commission affirmed the award, ordered it to stand as the decision of the commission and fixed bond at $20,000. Republic filed its praecipe for a writ of certiorari and presented its surety bond for $20,000 to the clerk of the circuit court in apt time. The corporate surety was one approved by standing order of the court. The clerk checked the surety and the identification of the attorney-in-fact who executed the bond on its behalf and said to counsel presenting it, “Its O.K.”. However, he did not sign the statement on the face of the bond reading: “The foregoing bond and securities are hereby approved,” nor did he make any other formal record of his approval of the bond. The praecipe and bond were both marked “filed” and the bond was registered the following day. Respondent’s motion to quash the writ for lack of jurisdiction, on the ground that there was no approval by the clerk of the bond or surety endorsed on the bond, was allowed and this appeal is from the order quashing the writ. Section 19(f) of the Workmen’s Compensation Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1961, chap. 48, par. 138.19) provides in part “* * * the surety or sureties of said bond shall be approved by the clerk of said court,” and has been in effect without substantial change since it was added by amendment in 1917. The provision for approval by the clerk was construed by this court in Village of Glencoe v. Industrial Com. 354 Ill. 190, to be jurisdictional and it was held that the record must affirmatively show approval of the bond. This holding has been construed by the parties, and' apparently by the bench and bar, to require that approval' be signified by the clerk’s signature on the bond. The case before us is indistinguishable from Glencoe. This is conceded by petitioner, but it asks that the holding in the Glencoe case be reconsidered and, upon reconsideration, overruled. Apparently the same arguments were advanced and the same cases cited to this court in Glencoe that have •been advanced and cited here,. However, we have.the .advantage of observing the trend in the intervening thirty years. The tendency is to simplify procedure, to honor substance over form and to prevent technicalities from depriving a party of the right to be heard. This is exemplified by the Practice Act, which became effective just a few days after the Glencoe decision became final, and its liberal interpretation by the courts since that time. The statute does not require written approval by the clerk on the face or any other part of the bond. Where, as here, the clerk accepts a bond tendered to him and files it without objection, there is a presumption of approval and it is unnecessary for him to indorse his approval upon the bond to satisfy the statute. The holding in Village of Glencoe v. Industrial Com. 354 Ill. 190, is overruled in so far as it requires formal written approval of a bond by the clerk. This view is more nearly in accord with the holdings relative to approval of bonds on appeal, (Waldo v. Averett, 1 Scam. 487; Commerce Vault Co. v. Hurd, 73 Ill. App. 107; Barker v. Smith, 90 Ill. App. 595; Smith v. Ammen, 101 Ill. App. 144,) which indicate that acceptance of the bond by the proper officer constitutes approval of the bond. The order of the circuit court of Cook County quashing the writ of certiorari is reversed and the cause is remanded, with directions to the court to proceed with a hearing on the merits. Reversed and remanded, with directions.

=== CASE 9739778 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:20:42.166477+00 ===

Mr. Justice Underwood, dissenting: The factual situation in this case is identical with that in Village of Glencoe v. Industrial Commission, 354 Ill. 190, decided in 1933, and there has been no change in the governing statute. While I doubt that I would have reached the conclusion in Glencoe which the Court there announced, the construction of the statute there adopted has stood unchanged for thirty years, and the General Assembly has not deemed an amendment of the statute necessarv. This Court has repeatedly observed that a statutory construction long acquiesced in by the legislature will not be changed by judicial fiat solely because the present members of the Court believe a contrary result more desirable. Neff v. George, 364 Ill. 306, 309; Heimgaertner v. Benjamin Electric Mfg. Co., 6 Ill.2d 152, 166, 167; People ex rel. Spiegel v. Lyons; 1 Ill.2d 409, 414; Republic Steel Corp. v. Industrial Commission, 26 Ill.2d 32, 46, 47. Petitioner seeks only a change in existing law. Its arguments in support thereof, under our form of government; are properly addressed to the legislative branch. Departure from this principle serves only to lessen the certainty and stability of the law. I therefore must respectfully dissent from the majority view.

=== CASE 9739779 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:20:42.723744+00 ===

JOHNSON, Circuit Judge.
PROCEDURAL HISTORY AND ISSUES
Defendant Scott Davi (Davi) was found guilty of two counts of first degree murder, three counts of first degree burglary, and one count of first degree rape. In a subsequent court trial, the Honorable R.D. Hurd found Davi to be a habitual offender pursuant to SDCL 22-7-7. Davi received four life sentences without parole, a fifteen year sentence and a twenty year sentence, all sentences to run concurrently. Davi appeals,1 alleging trial court error in the following respects:
(1) Admission of hearsay evidence, denying Davi his right to confront witnesses and his right to a fair trial.
(2) Admission of prior bad act testimony, denying Davi a fair trial.
(3) Admission of hearsay statements that Diane was afraid of Davi and plain error in failing to give continuing admonitions and cautionary instructions regarding this evidence.
(4) Failure to grant motion for mistrial based on prosecutorial misconduct.
(5) Failure to grant motion for JNOV based on insufficient evidence to support the verdict.
(6) Error based on cumulative effect of trial court error.
We affirm the convictions on all counts but remand to the trial court with the direction that it vacate one of the sentences for first degree murder in light of Wilcox v. Leapley, 488 N.W.2d 654 (S.D.1992).2
STATEMENT OF FACTS
Scott Davi (Davi) and Diane Davi (Diane) married in April 1988, and divorced in February 1990. Despite the divorce, the couple continued to date and sometimes slept together. Although Davi had relationships with other women, he became angry and jealous whenever Diane saw other men.
Diane severed the relationship in early October 1990, when she learned that Davi’s live-in girlfriend, Maren Defoe, was pregnant. Davi would not let the relationship end. He followed her to work, waited by her car and made numerous phone calls to her apartment and her parents’ home. Diane’s annoyance at Davi’s persistence eventually turned to fear.
During the weekend of October 20-22, 1990, Diane and her son Chad stayed at Diane’s parents’ house because of her growing fear of Davi. In the middle of the night on October 22, Diane’s apartment was burglarized. The perpetrator slashed her waterbed and her son’s. The only item missing from the apartment was a vibrator which Davi had given Diane as a gift and which she kept in a location known only to Diane and Davi. The box to this item was found on the floor and later thrown in the *848trash by Diane. Significantly, within ten days, investigators would find the vibrator box next to Diane’s body.
Diane promptly obtained an ex parte domestic abuse protection order from Judge Robert Amundson who scheduled a hearing for November 5, 1990. Davi was served with the order the same day. Concerned about the consequences of the protection order, Davi contacted his parole officers, Pamela Jarding and Rick Holloway, who told Davi to stay away from Diane.
Despite the protection order, Diane continued to receive harassing and hang-up phone .calls. On October 25, she called the police who came to her apartment to investigate the complaint. During the police visit Davi called her at least twice, once saying “Sorry, wrong number” and once ringing and then hanging up. The next day Diane asked her landlord to change the locks on her apartment because she knew Davi still had a key.
On October 29 at 4:00 a.m., in direct violation of the protection order, Davi confronted Diane as she entered her work place at Harold’s Photography. He gave her a music box and said, “Diane, please don’t send me back to prison.”
Also during this time period, Davi told several people, including Sharon Ferrucci, Diane’s close friend, that “he wasn’t going to give Diane up” and “he did not want Diane to go.” At the same time, he was very angry at Diane for rejecting him— angry enough to think about killing her. He told his ex-girlfriend, Kelly Davis, that he had purchased a crossbow with 170 pounds of pressure and that he was going to shoot Diane between the eyes with it.3 He also told Davis that “he knew a man out of Sioux City that could or would kill Diane.”
On November 1, Davi anonymously sent Diane another music box, twelve red roses and one yellow rose. On November 2, the day of her death, Diane worked a 4:30 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. shift and then returned to her apartment. Just after she left Harold’s, Diane’s co-worker, Becky Livingston, saw Davi’s blue sports car drive by Harold’s.
When Diane arrived at home she made several phone calls to friends and a nurse at the clinic. The last contact she made with anyone prior to her murder was at 12:05 p.m. Around 12:30 p.m. a co-worker, Richard Moerke, dropped by Diane’s apartment. When he knocked on the door no one answered although he could hear noises inside the apartment. Moerke went around the back of the apartment and saw that the screen was pulled back from Diane’s bedroom window but thought this was from the earlier break-in.
Diane’s body was discovered on her bed about 5:30 that afternoon. She had been brutally beaten, raped and strangled. A few weeks later her family discovered that her wedding rings, given to her by Davi, were missing from the apartment, following the November 2 murder.
At the trial, Davi presented alibi evidence that he was at the Sioux Empire Mall at the time of the murder. However, two eyewitnesses had seen Davi sitting in his car outside Diane’s apartment at two different times on November 2.
ISSUE I
WHETHER DAVI WAS DENIED HIS RIGHT TO A FAIR TRIAL AND HIS RIGHT TO CONFRONT WITNESSES WHEN THE TRIAL COURT ADMITTED HEARSAY EVIDENCE UNDER THE RESIDUAL HEARSAY RULE?
Davi argues that the trial court erred when it admitted hearsay statements and that admitting such statements violated his right to a fair trial and his right to confront witnesses. The trial court allowed various witnesses to testify to statements made by Diane during the two weeks preceding her death, admitting these statements under the residual hearsay exception, SDCL 19-16-35.
*849Several witnesses testified that Diane had reported to them that a vibrator, given to her by Davi and last used by her and Davi, was missing after the October 22 burglary, and that she had kept it in a secret location in her apartment. Several witnesses testified to statements by Diane that she believed Davi had burglarized her apartment, slashed the waterbeds and stolen the vibrator.
Officers Polzien and Menkevich testified to statements Diane made to them that she had been receiving hang-up and harassing phone calls and that she believed Davi had made them.
The trial court received into evidence Diane’s handwritten petition for a domestic abuse protection order, in which she stated she believed Davi had burglarized her apartment and would continue to abuse her because he had “flipped.” In addition, various witnesses testified to statements made by Diane that Davi had pleaded with her not to send him back to prison after the protection order had been issued.
Right to a Fair Trial
Although the hearsay rule provides that hearsay statements are inadmissible, the exceptions to the general rule are numerous. Hearsay which does not fall within one of the specific exceptions to the general rule may be admissible under SDCL 19-16-35, the residual hearsay rule, if certain conditions are met.4
The primary requirement of SDCL 19-16-35 is that the declarant be unavailable to testify at trial. In addition, such hearsay must meet five criteria in order to be admissible under this rule:
(1) There must be sufficient “circumstantial guarantees of trustworthiness.”
(2) The hearsay must provide evidence of a “material fact.”
(3) The hearsay must be “more probative” than other available evidence.
(4) The “general purposes of these rules and the interests of justice” must be served by admission of the hearsay.
(5) The adverse party must have notice.
Matter of R.S.S., 474 N.W.2d 743, 749 (S.D.1991).
In addition to the express language of our statute, this Court has previously laid out several additional factors to be considered by the trial court in determining the admissibility of hearsay evidence:
(1) the written or oral nature of the evidence;
(2) the character of the statements;
(3) the declarants’ relationship to the witness;
(4) the declarants’ motivation in making the statements;
(5) the circumstances under which the declarants made the statements.
State v. Luna, 378 N.W.2d 229 (S.D.1985).
In reviewing the trial court’s admission of hearsay evidence, we use an abuse of discretion standard. We will uphold the decision of the trial court unless it is clear that the court abused its discretion in admitting the hearsay evidence. “Although the ultimate decision to admit or not admit evidence is reviewable under the ‘abuse of discretion’ standard, the court’s preliminary determination of whether the hearsay evidence is reliable will not be overturned unless it is clearly erroneous.” Matter of *850R.S.S., supra, 474 N.W.2d at 749 (citing State v. Luna, supra).
At a pretrial motion hearing the court determined the reliability of each statement, and then weighed the probative value of the statement against its prejudicial impact.
The court found the statements about the missing vibrator, which had been taken in the October 22 burglary, reliable because they were made to a police officer in his official capacity, and that similar statements to friends were reliable because of the personal nature of the subject matter. Additionally, the fact that the empty vibrator box was found next to her body provided further indicia of reliability. The court found that the statements were relevant to the issues of motive and identity. We find sufficient evidence in the record that the trial court did not abuse its discretion in admitting the hearsay statements concerning the missing vibrator.
The court found that the statements by Diane to Officer Menkevich that Davi had burglarized her home were reliable because they were made to a police officer, that false reporting was a crime, and because people are generally truthful and honest in statements to police officers. The court then found these statements extremely relevant, and although prejudicial, not unfairly prejudicial for the limited purpose of showing identity. The court reserved ruling on the admissibility of similar statements to friends until it heard the testimony in camera.5
The court allowed Diane’s statements of hang-up and harassing phone calls and her stated belief that Davi was making the calls as evidence of motive. The court reasoned that Diane was sufficiently familiar with her ex-husband’s voice and that evidence of such calls, after the restraining order was obtained, demonstrated Davi’s continuing obsession with Diane. The court found these statements admissible for the limited purpose of motive.
The court stated it was not concerned with the reliability of the statements contained in Diane’s petition for a protection order, granted by Judge Amundson, but instead focused on the probative value and potential prejudice. The court decided that the statements would be admissible with a limiting instruction that they were to be received for Diane’s state of mind only and not as evidence that anything alleged in the protection order actually happened. As to a portion of the statements in the protection order which the court found to be unduly prejudicial to Davi, the court held that it be stricken.
The trial court failed to make a reliability finding on Diane’s statements to several people that Davi had approached her before work, given her a music box, and asked her not to send him back to prison. Instead, the court focused on the purpose for admitting the statements and reflected upon the probativeness and the prejudicialness. After lengthy discussion with counsel, the court held that the statements were admissible for the purpose of proving motive, finding the statements probative on Davi’s motive to commit the murder. The court found these statements were not unfairly prejudicial and did not violate Davi’s constitutional right against self-incrimination.
Davi argues that the admission of the above statements was prejudicial and allowed the jury to conclude that the Davi not only committed the burglary on October 22, but also committed the murder on November 2. It cannot be denied that these statements were prejudicial. Any statement against a defendant is prejudicial. However, the court found that these statements were not unfairly prejudicial and found that the probative value outweighed the prejudicial impact. Although the statements may have invited the jury to conclude that Davi was the one who murdered Diane, the court specifically noted that there were other reasonable inferences which defense counsel could argue.
*851Although not a perfect record, we cannot say that the trial court abused its discretion in allowing these hearsay statements. Looking at the motion hearing record as a whole, there is adequate proof that the trial court met the requirements of SDCL 19-16-35 and the additional safeguards of State v. Luna, supra. We would advise in the future that trial courts enter written findings and orders to assist meaningful appellate review.
Right to Confront Witnesses
Davi also claims that even if the hearsay statements were properly admitted under the residual hearsay rule, SDCL 19-16-35, the trial court erroneously admitted them in violation of his constitutional confrontation rights.
The right to confront witnesses is a basic state and federal right.6 In Idaho v. Wright, 497 U.S. 805, 110 S.Ct. 3139, 111 L.Ed.2d 638 (1990), the United States Supreme Court addressed the constitutional protections of the confrontation clause. In Wright the defendant was charged with two counts of lewd conduct with a minor. At trial, the defendant’s three year old child was found to be unavailable to testify due to her young age. Statements made by the child to a doctor were admitted under the residual hearsay exception. The defendant was convicted on both counts and appealed the conviction concerning the three year old child based on the denial of her right to confront witnesses. The Idaho Supreme Court reversed the defendant’s conviction and the United States Supreme Court affirmed the reversal.
The court began its analysis by recognizing its earlier rule laid out in Ohio v. Roberts, 448 U.S. 56, 100 S.Ct. 2531, 65 L.Ed.2d 597 (1980).
Once a witness is shown to be unavailable, “his statement is admissible only if it bears adequate indicia of reliability. Reliability can be inferred without more in a case where the evidence falls within a firmly rooted hearsay exception. In other cases, the evidence must be excluded, at least absent a showing of particularized guarantees of trustworthiness.”
Id. at 66, 100 S.Ct. at 2539, 65 L.Ed.2d at 608 (footnote omitted).
The Wright Court found that the particularized guarantees of trustworthiness could not be equated with the equivalent guarantees of trustworthiness required to admit hearsay evidence under the residual hearsay exception. The court stated:
Hearsay statements admitted under the residual exception, almost by definition, therefore do not share the same tradition of reliability that supports the admissibility of statements under a firmly rooted hearsay exception. Moreover, were we to agree that the admission of hearsay statements under the residual exception automatically passed confrontation clause scrutiny, virtually every codified hearsay exception would assume constitutional stature, a step this Court has repeatedly declined to take, (citations omitted).
Id. 497 U.S. at 817-818, 110 S.Ct. at 3148, 111 L.Ed.2d at 653-654.
In Wright, the court stated that the “particularized guarantees of trustworthiness” required for admission under the confrontation clause must be drawn from the totality of circumstances surrounding the making of the statement and rendering the declarant particularly worthy of belief. Wright, 497 U.S. at 820, 110 S.Ct. at 3149, 111 L.Ed.2d at 656.
The court found that the various statements made by Diane contained the “equivalent guarantees of trustworthiness” as well as the “particularized guarantee of trustworthiness” required for both the residual hearsay rule and the confrontation clause.
*852The court found on the record that the hearsay statements were both reliable and probative. The statements to various police officers were reliable because it is a crime to falsely report to police officers. In addition, the court found that the statements concerning the vibrator were trustworthy because of the personal nature of the subject.
We hold that the trial court did not err in admitting these hearsay statements. Although we hold that Davi’s rights under the confrontation clause were not violated, any alleged error, if established, would not give rise to reversal. In Wright, the Supreme Court stated, “[W]e think the presence of corroborating evidence more appropriately indicates that any error in admitting the statement might be harmless ...” Id. 497 U.S. at 822-823, 110 S.Ct. at 3150-3151, 111 L.Ed. at 657.
The prosecution presented much corroborative evidence which would indicate, as in Wright, that any error in admitting the hearsay statements would be harmless. Evidence that the vibrator was never found, but its empty box was found near Diane’s body supports Diane’s statements concerning the missing vibrator. Jim Hanson’s eyewitness testimony which identified Davi at Diane’s apartment corroborates Diane’s statements that she believed Davi had burglarized her apartment on October 22, and were further bolstered by her similar statements on her application for a domestic abuse protection order. Davi’s own admissions of calling Diane and hanging-up supports Diane’s statements of the same nature. Evidence of the music box and Davi’s parole officers’ testimony that Davi was very concerned about his parole status after he was served with the protection order, as well as Davi’s own admission, supports Diane’s statements that Davi gave her a music box and asked her not to send him back to prison.
This independent evidence was corroborative, and the statements were, if anything, cumulative. Davi’s counsel never raised this objection and therefore, it will not be considered. Davi was not denied his right to a fair trial or his right to confront witnesses by admission of hearsay evidence.
ISSUE II
WHETHER DAVI WAS DENIED HIS RIGHT TO A FAIR TRIAL WHEN THE TRIAL COURT ADMITTED PRIOR BAD ACTS EVIDENCE?
Davi next argues that the trial court erred in admitting certain bad acts evidence used for the impermissible purpose of painting him as a bad person. The prosecution offered, and the court permitted evidence of prior bad acts under SDCL 19-12-5.7
The trial court permitted evidence that Davi had gone to George Murray’s apartment one morning after Diane had spent the night there. Davi pounded on the door until Diane finally let him in. After Davi entered, he demanded if George had slept' with Diane and yelled at George, “If I can’t have her, nobody can.” Davi then proceeded to slap Diane, knock her down on the couch and forcefully drag her out of Murray’s apartment. The court also allowed evidence that Diane had been receiving harassing and hang-up phone calls from Davi, and that Davi had broken into Diane’s apartment on October 22 and vandalized her property.
Before admitting prior bad acts, the court must determine:
(1) That the proffered evidence is relevant; and
(2) That the probative value of the evidence exceeds its prejudicial effect.
State v. Kerkhove, 423 N.W.2d 160 (S.D.1988); State v. Thomas, 381 N.W.2d 232 (S.D.1986); State v. Reutter, 374 N.W.2d *853617 (S.D.1985). “Even if prior bad act evidence is found to be relevant to a material issue in the case under SDCL 19-12-5, it may still be excluded if its prejudicial effect substantially outweighs its probative value.” Matter of R.S.S., 474 N.W.2d at 747 (citing SDCL 19-12-3); State v. Klein, 444 N.W.2d 16 (S.D.1989). The trial court must perform the probative-prejudicial balancing on the record. State v. Eagle Hawk, 411 N.W.2d 120 (S.D.1987).
As we have stated in numerous cases, if we find that the trial court has made the required evaluation and findings on the record, our standard of review is abuse of discretion. Matter of R.S.S., supra; State v. Itzen, 445 N.W.2d 666 (S.D.1989); State v. Klein, supra; State v. Bradley, 431 N.W.2d 317 (S.D.1988); State v. Basher, 468 N.W.2d 413 (S.D.1991).
The court heard the evidence and arguments regarding the admissibility of the incident at George Murray’s apartment. The court found that the evidence was relevant to show Davi’s state of mind and continuing obsession with Diane. Although these purposes are not explicitly stated in SDCL 19-12-5, they are proper purposes for bad acts evidence. As stated before, “the list of exclusions in this statute is not exhaustive as evidenced by the language ‘such as.’ ” State v. Werner, 482 N.W.2d 286, 289 (S.D.1992); State v. Dale, 439 N.W.2d 98, 109 (S.D.1989).
The court next balanced the probativeness with the prejudice involved in admitting the evidence. Under the impression that the incident had occurred the summer prior to the murder, the court found the evidence to be unfairly prejudicial because the remoteness of the event diluted its probative value, painting Davi as a bad person rather than relating to an element of the offense. The prosecution then represented that the incident had occurred about one month prior to the murder and that Davi had said to Murray, “If I can’t have her, nobody can.” After reconsideration, the court found that the probative value did outweigh the prejudice.
Davi argues that because the court’s initial balancing took time into consideration its determination rested solely on that factor when it reconsidered the incident. However, “[pjroximity in time and similarity of conduct are only factors that may be considered by the trial judge in deciding whether to admit evidence of prior bad acts; they are not requirements for admission.” United States v. Drew, 894 F.2d 965, 970 (8th Cir.1990), cert. denied, 494 U.S. 1089, 110 S.Ct. 1830, 108 L.Ed.2d 959 (1990).
The court also found that particular evidence, elicited from Officer Menke-vich, was admissible under SDCL 19-12-5. The court found that Diane’s statements to Officer Menkevich were relevant to the issue of Davi’s motive, as they showed Davi’s obsession with Diane even after the protection order was in existence. Next, the court weighed the evidence and found that the probative value outweighed the prejudice to Davi.
The court found that the evidence relating to the October 22 burglary was relevant. The court found this evidence extremely relevant to the issue of identity of the murderer. In weighing the probative value against the prejudice, the court recognized that such evidence was prejudicial, but not unfairly prejudicial. In addition, although this evidence could raise an inference that the same person that burglarized Diane’s apartment murdered her, it was also evidence that went to prove an element in the October 22 burglary charge and was thus not bad acts evidence. Since all counts were tried together, this evidence was extremely relevant and probative on the jury’s determination of that count.
We find that the court did make the necessary findings of relevancy and proba-tiveness required by SDCL 19-12-5 when it allowed bad acts evidence against Davi. The court did not abuse its discretion in admitting such evidence.
Davi raises a plain error assertion because his counsel failed to object at trial to the admissibility of the incident at George Murray’s apartment. Since we have deter*854mined that the court did not err in admitting the bad acts, we need not address this claim.
ISSUE III
WHETHER DAVI WAS DENIED HIS RIGHT TO A FAIR TRIAL WHEN THE TRIAL COURT ADMITTED HEARSAY STATEMENTS REGARDING DIANE’S FEAR OF DAVI?
Davi’s argument on this issue is twofold. First, he alleges that the court erred when it admitted several hearsay statements showing Diane’s fear of Davi in the weeks preceding her death. Second, Davi alleges that even if these statements were properly admitted, it was plain error for the court not to issue continuing admonitions and cautionary instructions.
Admissibility of Hearsay Statements
The court admitted the hearsay ■ statements under SDCL 19-16-7.8 Before such evidence is admitted the court must find, on the record and outside the presence of the jury, that the evidence is relevant and probative. Bradley, supra.
In the pretrial motion hearing, the court found the statements to be relevant to show Diane’s state of mind prior to her death. The trial court did not espouse any other purpose for the admission of these statements. The potential problem that arises upon admission of statements regarding the decedent’s fear of a defendant is that the jury will likely misuse these statements as evidence of the state of mind of the defendant rather than the decedent. This is exactly what Davi argues occurred in this case. In United States v. Brown, 490 F.2d 758, 774 (D.C.Cir.1973), the court found that in order for extra judicial hearsay declarations to be relevant and admissible to show the state of mind of the victim, the victim’s state of mind must be relevant to some material issue in the case. Examples of issues that would justify an inquiry into the victim’s state of mind were claims of self-defense, suicide, accidental death or any other plausible issue. Id. at 766.
In this case there were no claims of self-defense, suicide or accidental death which would invite inquiry into Diane’s fear of Davi. Although the court specifically stated that evidence regarding Diane’s fear of Davi was not being admitted for the purpose of proving the identity of the murderer, it appears that identity of the murderer was the only reason these statements were admitted.
In Bradley, 431 N.W.2d 317, evidence of the decedent’s fear of the defendant was admitted on the issue of whether the decedent was actually murdered because there was no physical evidence of the cause of death. We upheld the trial court but stated, “Had the ‘fear’ applied only to identity, reversal might be in order, per Brown, as the victim’s state of mind has nothing to do with identity — it’s really putting the cart before the horse.” Id. at 325.
Use of the victim’s fear of defendant is an improper use as applied only to identity. We hold that it was error for the trial court to admit the testimony of several witnesses regarding Diane’s fear of Davi prior to her death. The only issue this hearsay evidence supported was identity of the murderer. This was an improper use of the hearsay statements per our opinion in Bradley.
The error of the court does not warrant reversal, however, because the error was harmless. Substantial evidence was presented which, if believed, would independently prove that Diane was afraid of Davi. Evidence was presented that Diane was staying on and off with her parents, including the weekend of the October 22 burglary, and was riding to work with a coworker instead of driving alone. Dorothy *855Pederson testified that she had picked Diane up for work on the morning of October 22 and that when they arrived at Harold’s Davi was waiting in his car for Diane, who was dropped off at the door where other co-workers were ready to lock the door behind her as she ran in. Diane had intended to apply for a protection order against Davi even before she was aware that her apartment had been burglarized. Diane applied for the protection order the same day she discovered the burglary. Diane’s landlord testified that she had requested him to change the locks on her apartment door because Davi had a key to her apartment, and that the locks were then changed. In addition, Sharon Ferruc-ci, a close friend of Diane’s, testified that she and Diane had worked out a code to alert Ferrucci if Davi was in Diane’s presence. Diane’s stating, “How’s your rabbit?” to Ferrucci would indicate that Davi was in the apartment and that Ferrucci should call the police. Ferrucci also testified that Diane and her son did not accompany Ferrucci and her children to the mall for the traditional Halloween party, because she did not wish to run into Davi. Officer Menkevich testified that she had investigated Diane’s complaint that she had been receiving harassing and hang-up phone calls from Davi.
All of this evidence independently establishes that Diane was afraid of Davi and was taking deliberate actions to avoid Davi. This evidence properly invited the jury to infer that Diane was afraid of Davi. We hold that although it was error for the trial court to admit the hearsay statements regarding Diane’s fear of Davi for the purposes of identity, the error was harmless as the evidence was cumulative of other evidence presented independently at trial.
Admonitions and Cautionary Instructions
Davi next argues that even if the hearsay statements regarding Diane’s fear of Davi were admissible, the court erred when it failed to give continuing admonitions and cautionary instructions to the jury to consider the statements for a limited purpose. Davi’s trial counsel did not object to the lack of limiting instructions nor did it offer any limiting instructions of its own. By failing, to object, Davi did not preserve this issue for appeal so he asserts plain error.
Our South Dakota legislature has created the plain error rule in SDCL 23A-44-15.9 In State v. Brammer, 304 N.W.2d 111, 114 (S.D.1981), we addressed the plain error rule and stated, “To recognize the rule, however, is not to say that every error that occurs at trial rises to the level of plain error, for the plain error rule must be applied cautiously and only in exceptional circumstances.” Our inquiry must be whether or not the error affects Davi’s substantial rights and thereby prejudiced him.
In light of our finding that there was sufficient evidence in the record to show that Diane was afraid of Davi, independent of Diane’s statements of fear of Davi, we hold that this is not an appropriate place for the plain error rule. No substantial rights of Davi’s were affected by the court’s failure to give cautionary instructions and admonitions. The inference of Diane’s fear of Davi was raised by substantial independent evidence.
ISSUE IV
WHETHER DAVI WAS DENIED HIS RIGHT TO A FAIR TRIAL DUE TO PROSECUTORIAL MISCONDUCT?
Davi next asserts that he was denied his right to a fair trial because of prosecutorial misconduct. Prosecutorial misconduct implies a dishonest act or an attempt to persuade the jury by use of deception or by reprehensible methods. State v. Ashker, 412 N.W.2d 97, 103 (S.D.1987).
Davi cites several incidents of alleged prosecutorial misconduct, but we *856must specifically address his assertion that the state deliberately violated an alleged oral agreement between the state and the defense not to use evidence that Davi had lied to his parole officers when asked if he had been in contact with Diane. When the evidence was elicited at trial during Davi’s cross-examination, defense counsel did not object. The next day defense counsel objected and moved for mistrial. The court heard from both sides and found that the limits on the testimony regarding Davi’s false statements to his parole officers had been interpreted differently by each side. As the motion for mistrial had not been preserved by timely objection, it was proper for the court to deny the motion for a mistrial. We cannot say that the prosecutor’s acts were dishonest or attempted to persuade the jury by use of deception or by reprehensible methods. We are unable to say that any acts of the prosecutor resulted in prejudice so harmful as to have an effect upon the jury’s verdict or Davi’s rights.
In several instances where Davi cites prosecutorial misconduct, the state’s actions were in direct response to Davi’s own closing argument. The admonitions given by the court served to curtail any improper inference the jury may have taken from the closing arguments. We have reviewed the rest of Davi’s assertions and find them to be unfounded.
ISSUE V
WHETHER THERE WAS SUFFICIENT EVIDENCE TO SUPPORT THE JURY’S VERDICT.
Davi asserts that the court erred when it failed to grant Judgment Notwithstanding the Verdict (JNOV) for the following reasons: (1) there was insufficient evidence to show that Davi was at the scene of the crime; (2) there was no direct physical evidence linking Davi to the scene of the crime; (3) Davi’s alibi was given no weight by the jury contrary to law; and (4) the jury accepted the loose, flimsy and fictional arguments of the prosecution and ignored the appropriate burden of proof.
We have firmly established what our standard of review is for determining whether there was sufficient evidence to support the jury’s verdict. “In determining the sufficiency of the evidence on appeal in a criminal case, the issue before this court is whether there is evidence in the record which, if believed by the jury, is sufficient to sustain a finding of guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.” State v. Davis, 401 N.W.2d 721, 722 (S.D.1987); State v. Ashley, 459 N.W.2d 828 (S.D.1990). In making our determination, this Court will accept the evidence and the most favorable inferences fairly drawn therefrom, which will support the verdict. State v. Sondreal, 459 N.W.2d 435 (S.D.1990).
Looking at the entire record, there is sufficient evidence which, if believed by the jury, would sustain a finding of guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. On the burglary count, the state provided the testimony of Jim Hanson who testified that he saw Davi walking away from Diane’s apartment at 3:00 a.m. on October 22, 1990. This evidence, if believed by the jury, placed Davi at the scene of the first burglary. On the rape, murder and burglary charges on November 2, 1990, the state provided testimony from Virginia Woldt and Deanna Thuringer, both tenants of Diane’s apartment building, who saw Davi parked outside of Diane’s apartment within a three hour span of the probable time that she was murdered. If believed by the jury, this testimony was sufficient to place Davi at the crime scene.
Second, Davi asserts that there was no direct physical evidence linking Davi to the scene of the crime. The state provided evidence regarding tests done on the semen stain which was found on Diane’s thigh. The result of these tests eliminated 80% of the male population. Davi was within the remaining 20% of the male population that could have committed the rape and murder. That is physical evidence. In addition, circumstantial evidence is sufficient to sustain a murder and rape conviction. The state may prove all elements of the crime, including intent, by circumstantial evidence. State v. Ashker, *857412 N.W.2d 97 (S.D.1987). There was an abundance of circumstantial evidence which, if believed by the jury, would sustain the convictions of Davi.
Third, Davi states that his alibi was given no weight by the jury contrary to law. Whether or not the jury believes a witness’s testimony is within the province of the jury. The jury may reject in whole or in part a witness’s testimony, including the defendant’s. This is not contrary to law as provided by the jury instructions. The jury was within its province in rejecting the testimony of the alibi witnesses and believing the witnesses that placed Davi at the scene of the murder.
Fourth, Davi asserts that the jury accepted the loose, flimsy and fictional arguments of the prosecution and ignored the appropriate burden of proof. The court instructed the jury of the burden of proof required and that the state had to prove Davi’s guilt beyond a reasonable doubt on each and every count. Davi argues that a conviction on circumstantial evidence cannot be sustained if the circumstances do not exclude every other reasonable hypothesis except that of the guilt of the defendant. This assertion is contrary to South Dakota law. In State v. Ashley, 459 N.W.2d at 832, we said that “to support a conviction of circumstantial evidence, it is not necessary to exclude every hypothesis of innocence.” As we have previously stated, the jury was the trier of fact and found that there was sufficient evidence in the record to support Davi’s convictions. We agree that there was sufficient evidence in the record to support these convictions. We hold that the court did not err in denying Davi’s motion for JNOV.
ISSUE VI
WHETHER DAVI WAS DENIED HIS RIGHT TO A FAIR TRIAL BASED ON THE CUMULATIVE EFFECT OF THE TRIAL COURT’S ERRORS?
Davi asserts that cumulative error by the court denied him his constitutional right to a fair trial. We have previously held that the cumulative effect of errors by the trial court may support a finding by the reviewing court of a denial of the constitutional right to a fair trial. McDowell v. Solem, 447 N.W.2d 646 (S.D.1989). See also State v. Dokken, 385 N.W.2d 493 (S.D.1986); State v. Bennis, 457 N.W.2d 843 (S.D.1990). The question we must decide is whether, on a review of the entire record, Davi was provided a fair trial. As we have said numerous times, the defendant is not entitled to a perfect trial but rather a fair one. State v. Smith, 477 N.W.2d 27, 35 (S.D.1991); McDowell v. Solem, supra.
In light of our determinations on the foregoing issues and from our review of the entire record, we believe that Davi did receive a fair trial.
MILLER, C.J., and WUEST and HENDERSON, JJ., concur.
SABERS, J., concurs in part and dissents in part.
JOHNSON, Circuit Judge, for AMUNDSON, J., disqualified.
. Davi’s appellate counsel is different than that at the trial court level. Similarly, the state has new counsel at the appellate level.
. At oral argument we granted leave for the parties to submit supplemental briefs on the question of multiple convictions for one murder. Counsel agreed in their briefs that based upon Wilcox v. Leapley, supra, Davi could only be convicted on one charge of murder.
. Police searched Davi’s apartment subsequent to his arrest and found a loaded crossbow and several arrows.
. SDCL 19-16-35 provides:
A statement not specifically covered by any of §§ 19-16-30 to 19-16-34, inclusive, but having equivalent circumstantial guarantees of trustworthiness, is not excluded by § 19-16-4 if the declarant is unavailable as a witness and if the court determines that
(1) the statement is offered as evidence of a material fact;
(2) the statement is more probative on the point for which it is offered than any other evidence for which the proponent can procure through reasonable efforts; and
(3)the general purposes of these rules and the interests of justice will best be served by the admission of the statement into evidence. However, a statement may not be admitted under this section unless the proponent of. it makes known to the adverse party sufficiently in advance of the trial or hearing to provide the adverse party with a fair opportunity to prepare to meet it, his intention to offer the state*850ment and the particulars of it, including the name and address of the declarant.
. The trial court did hear the testimony of Sharon Ferrucci outside the presence of the jury. As to the other witnesses, there was no outside hearing, but defense counsel made no objection to the witnesses’ testimony at the time of trial.
. The Sixth Amendment to the Constitution of the United States provides, in part:
In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right ... to be confronted with the witnesses against him[.]
Art. VI, § 7 of South Dakota’s Constitution provides:
In all criminal prosecutions the accused shall have the right to ... meet the witnesses against him face to face[.]
. SDCL 19-12-5 provides:
Evidence of other crimes, wrongs, or acts is not admissible to prove the character of a person in order to show that he acted in conformity therewith. It may, however, be admissible for other purposes, such as proof of motive, opportunity, intent, preparation, plan, knowledge, identity, or absence of mistake or accident.
. SDCL 19-16-7 states:
A statement of the declarant's then existing state of mind, emotion, sensation, or physical condition, such as intent, plan, motive, design, mental feeling, pain, and bodily health, is not excluded by § 19-16-4, even though the de-clarant is available as a witness, but a statement of memory or belief to prove the fact remembered or believed is excluded unless it relates to the execution, revocation, identification, or terms of declarant's will.
. SDCL 23A-44-15 provides:
Plain errors or defects affecting substantial rights may be noticed although they were not brought to the attention of a court.

=== CASE 9739781 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:20:43.386692+00 ===

Shepherd, J.
Defendant was originally charged with armed robbery, MCL 750.529; MSA 28.797, and possession of a firearm during the commission of a felony, MCL 750.227b; MSA 28.424(2). Following a jury trial, he was convicted of armed robbery and sentenced by the trial court to one hundred to two hundred years in prison. After this Court affirmed the conviction and sentence, 180 Mich App 433; 447 NW2d 755 (1989), the Supreme Court reversed in part the judgments of the trial court and the Court of Appeals and remanded for resentencing, 434 Mich 903 (1990). On remand, the trial court sentenced defendant to a prison term of fifty to one hundred years. Thereafter, a successor trial judge denied a motion for rehearing. Defendant again appeals his sentence. We vacate the sentence and remand for resentencing.
i
In People v Milbourn, 435 Mich 630, 635-636; 461 NW2d 1 (1990), the Supreme Court set forth the principle of proportionality, requiring sentences imposed by trial courts to be proportionate to the seriousness of the circumstances surrounding the offense and the offender. The Court, pp 653-654, stated:
The trial court appropriately exercises the discretion left to it by the Legislature not by applying its own philosophy of sentencing, but by determining where, on the continuum from the least to the most serious situations, an individual case falls and by sentencing the offender in accordance with this determination. [Emphasis in original.]
In determining whether a sentence is propor*601tionate to the seriousness of the offense and the offender under the principle of proportionality, the Court in Milbourn, p 656, recommended the use of the sentencing guidelines:
The guidelines represent the actual sentencing practices of the judiciary, and we believe that the second edition of the sentencing guidelines is the best "barometer” of where on the continuum from the least to the most threatening circumstances a given case falls.
In reflecting actual sentencing practices, we note that the sentencing guidelines are nothing more than a description of what actually happens in seventy-five percent of the cases. As Mr. James McComb, a member of the Supreme Court guidelines staff, explained:
The first edition of the sentencing guidelines contains sentence recommendations that were based upon data collected during 1977 by the [Michigan Felony Sentencing Project]. To develop the sentence ranges found in the second edition, the variables as scored in the second edition were applied retrospectively, to the new data collected by the [Sentencing Guidelines Advisory Committee] from 1984 through 1987. In this way, it was possible to "fine-tune” the sentence recommendations so that they corresponded with actual sentencing practices.
Using data from over 50,000 actual cases the range of actual sentences, for each cell of each grid, was determined. Where possible, the ranges . were set so that they encompassed at least 75% of the actual sentences and that departures above and below would be of a similar magnitude. No attempt was made to make the recommended sentences more lenient or severe. Instead, the recommended ranges represent the current practice of the majority of the Michigan Circuit and *602Recorder’s Court judges. [McComb, An Overview of the Second Edition of the Michigan Sentencing Guidelines, 67 Mich B J 863, 866-867 (September, 1988).]
Thus, although the sentencing guidelines purport to give guidance to the trial courts on what an appropriate sentence ought to be, it is evident that the guidelines say nothing about the appropriateness of any given sentence, but merely reflect what judges have actually done in seventy-five percent of the cases. Within the guidelines’ range, sentences are presumptively neither excessively severe nor unfairly disparate. People v Broden, 428 Mich 343, 354; 408 NW2d 789 (1987).
A sentencing court is entitled to depart from the guidelines’ range whenever the recommended range is considered an inadequate reflection of the proportionate seriousness of the offense. People v Witcher, 192 Mich App 307, 308-309; 480 NW2d 636 (1991). Where a sentencing court departs from the guidelines’ range, it must articulate its reasons both on the record at sentencing and in the sentencing information report (sir). People v Fleming, 428 Mich 408, 428; 410 NW2d 266 (1987). In Milbourn, pp 659-660, the Court noted:
Where there is a departure from the sentencing guidelines, an appellate court’s first inquiry should be whether the case involves circumstances that are not adequately embodied within the variables used to score the guidelines. A departure from the recommended range in the absence of factors not adequately reflected in the guidelines should alert the appellate court to the possibility that the trial court has violated the principle of proportionality and thus abused its sentencing discretion. Even where some departure appears to be appropriate, the extent of the departure (rather than the fact of the departure itself) may embody a violation of the principle of proportionality.
*603In order to implement the Milbourn proportionality test, this Court set forth a three-part test in People v Harris, 190 Mich App 652, 668-669; 476 NW2d 767 (1991):
1. If the sentence is to be within the guidelines, where on the guidelines range should the sentence fall?
2. What unique facts exist that are not already adequately reflected in the guidelines, and why do such facts justify any departure from the guidelines?
3. If there is to be a departure, what should be its magnitude and the justification for the specific departure imposed?
We should point out that Harris does not impose any new requirements other than those found in Milbourn, but merely provides a systematic method for arriving at a sentence in accordance with the Milbourn standards. As we said in Harris, p 669.
The inquiry that we impose here will enable the trial judge to comply with the mandate of Milbourn in a manner that reduces the risk of irrational sentencing that is either too low or too high for the given case.
We do not hold that the [Harris analysis] must be followed to the letter in every case. However, all of the factors mentioned in the analysis are contained in Milbourn and must, in some manner, be included in the trial judge’s articulation on the record of the reasons for the sentence.
ii
In this case, the guidelines’ range was calculated by the trial court to be ten to twenty-five years or *604life. The fifty-year minimum sentence imposed by the trial court was thus twice the maximum of the guidelines’ minimum. In exceeding the. guidelines’ recommended range, the trial court stated on the record and in the sir that the reasons for the upward departure were the "protection of society” and "punishment.”
In our view, the trial court failed to adequately articulate reasons for its departure from the recommended guidelines’ range. Milbourn, supra. It is evident that under the Milbourn/Harris analysis, the trial court is required to make reasoned sentencing decisions. Here, the trial court’s "reasons” for exceeding the guidelines are nothing more than boiler plate language that does not tell us anything about why this particular defendant is being sentenced to a prison term twice the maximum of the guidelines’ minimum. Given that the guidelines are based upon what happens in seventy-five percent of the cases of armed robbery, the question is what is there about this case that makes it worse than seventy-five percent of the cases? Although the trial court cited defendant’s lengthy criminal history, his lack of a consistent and reputable work history, his questionable drug use, and his disciplinary problems while in prison, it made no effort to tell us why this particular defendant has to receive a sentence greater than those received in seventy-five percent of the cases, and, specifically, why must it be an additional twenty-five years?
We do not wish to imply that the court must make a precise analysis of how this case compares to seventy-five percent of all similar cases. The seventy-five-percent figure is itself nothing more than a guideline. It tells the trial court that a sentence at the outer limits of the guidelines covers seventy-five percent of similar situations *605and that there may be a departure if the case at hand is substantially worse than the average case of a similar nature.
Moreover, we note that there is nothing in the trial court’s remarks on the record or in the sir to indicate that this case involves circumstances that are not adequately embodied within the variables used to score the guidelines. Milbourn, supra, pp 659-660. Thus, even if departure were appropriate in this case, there is nothing on the record to indicate why the extent of the departure should be so great. By taking refuge in the boiler plate language of "protection of society” and "punishment,” the trial court failed to shed any light on these matters, abdicating its judicial function that requires it to engage in reasoned decision making.
The problem becomes particularly acute when we take into account that the guidelines as originally calculated in this case allow for a minimum sentence of anywhere between ten and twenty-five years. The actual sentence, therefore, could be not twenty-five, but forty years greater than a sentence that is presumptively valid under the guidelines. There is nothing in the guidelines that tells us where along the continuum from zero to seventy-five percent of the cases this case falls. All that one can say is that in approximately seventy-five percent of similar cases, the trial courts imposed a minimum sentence somewhere between ten and twenty-five years. Under these circumstances, the wider the range, the less reliable the guidelines are as a barometer. However, that is an aspect of the guidelines that we as a Court of Appeals cannot address. All we can do is .insist that trial courts attempt through reasoned decision making to bring the cases before them within the minimally precise requirements of the guidelines.
*606III
Under normal circumstances, we would simply remand the case to the trial court for articulation of how the sentence satisfies the Milbourn/Harris standards and whether defendant would be entitled to resentencing under those standards. People v Martin, 440 Mich 868; 486 NW2d 734 (1992), and People v Herron, 440 Mich 868; 486 NW2d 734 (1992). Because defendant was sentenced twice by the same trial judge, because that trial judge failed to exercise properly his judicial function, and because the proceedings on remand from this Court will be before a successor judge, we believe that it is necessary to vacate the sentence and remand for resentencing.
In remanding we are not saying that a sentence of fifty to one hundred years is inappropriate in this case. Contrary to defendant’s claim, such a sentence does not violate the requirements of People v Moore, 432 Mich 311; 439 NW2d 684 (1989). See People v Martinez, 193 Mich App 377; 485 NW2d 124 (1992). All we are saying is that the trial court did not adequately justify the sentence imposed. If on remand the trial court chooses to depart from the guidelines, it should comply with Milbourn and Harris by articulating its reasons on the record.
This was a serious offense and defendant deserves a lengthy prison term. Nevertheless, the guidelines were adopted not to allow criminals to avoid punishment but to bring order and rationality to sentencing. A guidelines’ range that allows a minimum sentence of twenty-five years acknowledges the seriousness of the offense. We respectfully suggest that a twenty-five-year prison term is a long sentence and not a mere slap on the wrist. The guidelines further allow a court to depart *607from the twenty-five-year minimum upon the reasoned exercise of sound discretion. It is the failure of such a process in this case that constrains us to remand for resentencing again.
The task of the trial court at the first resentencing was to determine whether a departure from the guidelines was appropriate. Its analysis on this point was minimal. Then, it was to determine the precise magnitude of the departure. In that respect, its analysis was almost nonexistent. The trial court gave an additional twenty-five years because of little more than the fact that defendant is a bad man who committed a serious offense. If appellate review of sentencing has any meaning, the Court of Appeals must be told by trial courts just how bad they view the defendant to be and why the particular magnitude of the departure from the guidelines’ range is required. It is not our function to search the record looking for a reason to affirm or reverse. It is the function of the trial court to furnish us with all of its reasons in a manner that we can readily see the merits or lack of merits of the sentencing decision.
On remand, we further note that the trial court should respond to defendant’s objections regarding the presentence report. However, contrary to defendant’s claim, the trial court may consider defendant’s juvenile record in sentencing him as an adult. People v Smith, 437 Mich 293; 470 NW2d 70 (1991). Finally, the trial court may also consider reversed convictions in imposing the sentence. People v Butts, 144 Mich App 637, 641; 376 NW2d 176 (1985).
Sentence vacated and case remanded for resentencing. We do not retain jurisdiction.
Fitzgerald, J., concurred.

=== CASE 9739782 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:20:43.39099+00 ===

Griffin, P.J.
(dissenting). This Court has again *608exceeded its authority by vacating defendant’s sentence and remanding the case for resentencing. No court has the authority to vacate a valid sentence. A remand for resentencing may be ordered only with regard to those sentences that are invalid. In re Dana Jenkins, 438 Mich 364, 369; 475 NW2d 279 (1991), People v Adams, 441 Mich 916; 497 NW2d 182 (1993), People v Martin, 440 Mich 868; 486 NW2d 734 (1992), and People v Herron, 440 Mich 868; 486 NW2d 734 (1992).
The majority’s opinion contains no finding that the sentence at issue is invalid. Rather, the focus of the majority’s opinion is that the trial court failed to articulate adequate reasons for the sentence imposed. Specifically, the majority vacates the sentence and orders resentencing because "the trial court’s 'reasons’ for exceeding the guidelines are nothing more than boiler plate language that does not tell us anything about why this particular defendant is being sentenced to a prison term twice the maximum of the guidelines’ minimum.” Ante, p 604. I disagree. Two sentences later in the majority’s opinion, Judge Shepherd summarizes the following additional reasons given for the sentence:
Although the trial court cited [1] defendant’s lengthy criminal history, [2] his lack of a consis- " tent and reputable work history, [3] his questionable drug use, and [4] his disciplinary problems while in prison, it made no effort to tell us why this particular defendant has to receive a sentence greater than those received in seventy-five percent of the cases, and specifically why must it be an additional twenty-five years? Ante, p 604.
The sentencing court also stated that the sentence was imposed in view of (5) the dangerousness of defendant, (6) for purposes of punishment, and *609(7) for the protection of society. The court noted (8) the aggravating facts of the crime, including an assault and battery upon and a threat to kill the victim, and (9) the defendant’s parole status at the time he committed this offense. I find the articulation more than sufficient to facilitate appellate review. A remand for further articulation is therefore unnecessary. People v Triplett, 432 Mich 568; 442 NW2d 622 (1989). People v Coles, 417 Mich 523, 549; 339 NW2d 440 (1983).
The majority suggests, in dicta, that sentencing courts should justify all sentences by comparing them with seventy-five percent of similar cases. If possible at all, such a task would be unduly burdensome and unworkable in practice.
With regard to the sentence itself, I find no abuse of sentencing discretion. People v Milbourn, 435 Mich 630; 461 NW2d 1 (1990). Defendant’s presentence report states, inter alia, the following:
Charles Jerome Benson is ... a consistently repetitive offender. His offenses are not harmless to others, such as shoplifting or loitering, but offenses meriting the label of capital crimes, that is, robbery armed. The within charge accounts for the subject’s tenth conviction for robbery armed. Just a few days ago, on 3-9-87, he was also convicted of the habitual offender statute out of Oakland County after initially being convicted of larceny over $100.00. In those cases, he received a 3-15 year prison term, for which he is now serving. His parole officer stated that the defendant was totally uncooperative on parole, failing to make any efforts to improve his situation.
PRIOR CRIMINAL RECORD:
Adult Record:
4-10-74
Detroit, Mi., Assault With a Dangerous Weapon, convicted of Aggravated Assault; 5-9-74, 3 years *610probation with the first 30 days in the Detroit House of Correction; 9-3-76, found guilty of Violation of Probation and given an 8 month term in the Detroit House of Correction.
6-28-77
Detroit, Mi., 8 Counts Felony Firearm; 2 years in prison one each count; 6-29-77, sentence vacated by the Court.
6-28-77
Detroit, Mi., 8 Counts Robbery Armed; a period of 10 years on each count; sentenced to 3-10 years on each count; paroled 2-26-81.
3-3-81
Detroit, Mi., Robbery Armed; 10-5-81, convicted of same; 11-6-81, 5-15 years, Docket No. 81-01632, paroled 12-2-85.
9-29-86
Ferndale, Mi., Larceny Over $100; pled guilty to same on 2-5-87; sentence vacated on 3-9-87 by Judge Lippit of the Oakland County Circuit Court in Pontiac, Docket No. 86-75884FH.
3-9-87
Pontiac, Mi., — Oakland County Circuit Court, Habitual Offender; 3-15 years, Docket No. 86-75884FH.
At the time of the within offense, the defendant was on parole, having been released from prison on parole on 12-2-85.
The sentencing guidelines do not adequately account for defendant’s extensive prior criminal record. The prior record variables of the sentencing guidelines do not address a prior criminal record as lengthy as the defendant’s. After a thorough review of the record and the presentence report, I find that defendant’s fifty- to one-hundred-year sentence is proportionate to the circumstances surrounding the offense and the offender. Milbourn, supra.
I would affirm defendant’s sentence and, therefore, respectfully dissent.

=== CASE 9739783 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:20:43.661533+00 ===

Hunter, P. J.
This action was commenced in the Lake Circuit Court by the trustee in bankruptcy of the Northern Indiana Oil Company, Inc. (appellant herein) alleging a conspiracy to defraud entered into by the appellees herein, and seeking to recover possession of real estate leased by the appellant, and the profits of said business during the period of the appellees’ illegal possession ; and the going business of the corporation. The cause was venued to the Jasper Circuit Court on the motion of defendant appellee Ohio Oil Company, and the issues presented here were raised by the filing of demurrers to appellant’s amended complaint and second amended second paragraph of complaint on behalf of the several defendant appellees, and the court’s rulings sustaining said demurrers. The court after sustaining the several demurrers, subsequently sustained the motion filed by the several appellees for an order denying the filing of plaintiff’s purported second amended complaint, third amended second paragraph of complaint, and motion for change of venue from the county, and then denied the motion for change of venue from the county tendered by the plaintiff appellant. The appellant alleges, as a basis for a reversal of the trial court’s determination, that the several demurrers were improperly sustained, and further that the trial court erred in granting the defendant appellees’ motion for an order *482denying the filing of appellant’s motion for a change of venue from the county. Since the commencement of the original action and during the pendency of this appeal, Robert H. Moore, the trustee in bankruptcy (plaintiff herein), has died and by order of this court on July 24, 1963, Stanley A. Tweedle was substituted as the trustee in bankruptcy of the Northern Indiana Oil Company, Inc.
In order to better understand the issues presented by this appeal, the various filings and actions taken under such filings are set forth in chronological order as follows:
(1) On May 24, 1960, the several demurrers of the defendant appellees to the appellant’s amended complaint and amended second paragraph of complaint were sustained by the Jasper Circuit Court.
(2) The appellant’s attorney by letter directed to the judge of the Jasper Circuit Court stated his intention to plead over by June 6,1960.
(3) No order book entry was ever made by the Jasper Circuit Court ruling the plaintiff appellants to plead by a date certain.
(4) On June 27, 1960, in vacation term the appellant tendered for filing to the judge of the Jasper Circuit Court, then and there present in the office of the clerk of said court, the following pleadings: (a) second amended complaint and third amended second paragraph of complaint, and (b) a motion for change of venue from the county, which the judge then entered upon the docket sheet of the cause.
(5) On September 12, 1960, the same being the first day of the September, 1960 term of said court the defendant appellees filed separate and identical motions in *483said court for an order: (a) denying the filing of plaintiff’s second amended complaint, plaintiff’s third amended second paragraph of complaint, and (b) plaintiff’s motion for change of venue from the county, and (c) motion for judgment, alleging in essence in support of their separate and several motions (1) that the plaintiff was in default for the reason that the plaintiff was granted time until June 6, 1960, to plead after the demurrers had been sustained and further that by reason of the fact that no pleadings had been filed by June 6, 1960, there was no cause of action pending upon which an issue of fact or law could be joined, and (2) that the court should refuse to file the motion and affidavit for the change of venue from the county for the reason that no action was then pending between the parties,, and that the motion was filed after the time for filing had expired under Rule 1-12B of the Supreme Court of Indiana. Prayer of said motion was for an order (1) refusing. to permit the filing of the amended pleadings tendered and the motion for change of venue from the county, and (2) praying for an entry of judgment for the defendant, Ohio Oil Company. On October 8, 1960, the Jasper Circuit Court sustained the motion of each of the defendants and denied the motion for change of venue from the county and the court entered judgment against the plaintiff.
On November 3, 1960, the plaintiff filed a motion to vacate the judgment entered by the court on October 8, which motion was overruled.
The appellant in his assignment of error alleges (1) the court erred in sustaining the demurrers of the several defendant appellees to the plaintiff appellant’s amended complaint and amended second paragraph of complaint, (2) the court erred in sustaining' the motion *484of the defendants for judgment, and (8) the court erred in denying the plaintiff’s motion for change of venue from the county.
It will be readily seen from the above resume of the facts that two questions are presented: (1) did the court err in sustaining the several demurrers to the plaintiff’s amended complaint and second paragraph of complaint, and (2) did the court err in denying the change of venue from the county?
The several appellees stated in demurrers to the amended complaint that the plaintiff appellant lacked the legal capacity to sue on behalf of Northern Indiana Oil Co., however, the appellant refers the court to the Federal Bankruptcy Act,. 11 U.S.C.A. §29 (e) which provides as follows:
“(e) A receiver or trustee may, within two years subsequent to the date of adjudication or within such further period of time as the Federal or State Law may permit, institute proceedings in behalf of . the estate upon any claim against which the period of limitation fixed by Federal or State law had not expired at the time of the filing of the petition in ' bankruptcy.”
This court is of the opinion that the above quoted statute is sufficient authorization to allow the appellant in this action to initiate the cause of action. This court is further of the opinion that the jurisdiction of the state court system is conferred by the Federal Bankruptcy Act, 11 U.S.C.A., §107 (e), which states:
“(e) For the purpose of any recovery or avoidance under this section, where plenary proceedings are ' necessary, any State court which would have had ■ jurisdiction if bankruptcy had not intervened and any court of bankruptcy shall have concurrent jurisdiction.”
*485An action in equity for damages and recovery of property based upon a conspiracy to defraud would be triable in the state courts in the normal situation, and the above quoted statute retains the necessary state court jurisdiction. The several appellees in this action are each subject to the jurisdiction of the state courts, inasmuch as the individuals are residents of the county in which the action was originally instituted, and the defendant appellee Ohio Oil Company has consistently carried on business within the county, thereby subjecting itself to the jurisdiction of the Lake Circuit Court for purposes of adjudicating controversies arising out of this business.
The demurrers to the amended complaint and second amended second paragraph filed by the several defendant appellees also alleged that the plaintiff appellant did not state sufficient facts to constitute a cause of action. The capacity of appellant Moore to initiate the action discussed herein has been conclusively shown by reference to the Bankruptcy Act, 11 U.S.C.A. §29 (e), supra. Therefore, the primary issue before this court is whether or not the demurrers were properly sustained because of the insufficiency of facts alleged in the amended complaint.
The amended complaint and the second amended second paragraph of complaint, after striking the captions, are set forth in their entirety as follows:
“For his amended complaint, plaintiff complains of defendants and each of them and says:—
1. Plaintiff is the duly appointed, qualified and acting trustee in bankruptcy of Northern Indiana Oil Company, Inc., under appointment of the United States District Court for the Northern District of Indiana, Hammond Division. He brings this action by direction of said court, on behalf of and in the right of said bankrupt and its creditors. The prop*486erty which is the subject matter of this action is located in Lake County, Indiana, and each of the individual defendants reside in said county. Ohio Oil Company is a corporation foreign to the State of Indiana but duly qualified to do business, there in.
2. Defendant Robert B. Fletcher now has in his possession and control property and money which rightfully belong to the estate of said bankrupt corporation and to the plaintiff as its trustee in bankruptcy, which he wrongfully withholds from the plaintiff. The nature of this property, and the manner and means by which Fletcher came into possession of it and has withheld it from the bankrupt and its estate down to the present time, are as follows:
3. The bankrupt, Northern Indiana Oil Company, Inc., which will afterwards be referred to in this complaint as “the corporation”, is an Indiana corporation, organized in 1937 by one A. B. Harris and defendant J. Ralph Snyder. From its inception down to the present time, Snyder has held legal title to all its capital stock except qualifying shares for directors. Snyder owned half of its capital stock in his own right and he held legal title to the other half in trust for Harris as equitable owner. From the beginning Snyder was, and still is, director and president of the corporation. From the beginning until the early part of January, 1945, Harris was director and manager. From the time of its organization down to the end of 1944 the corporation, by the expenditure of its money and the labor of its officers (principally Harris), succeeded in building up a valuable going business which, by the end of 1944, had an actual fair market value of at least $50,000.00, which now is worth more than $100,000.00. This business then consisted, and now consists, of two related parts: (1) operating parking lots in Gary, and (2) being the distributor in that area of the gasoline, oil and fuel oil of Ohio Oil Company. The latter was and is a nation-wide manufacturer of petroleum products which it sells to distributors such as this corporation, who in turn re-sell its products at retail or at wholesale through filling stations (called in the trade “out*487lets”) controlled by Ohio Oil Company or by the distributor. The acquisition, development and control of these “outlets” was and is of primary importance both to Ohio Oil Company and its distributors such as this corporation. To this end, Ohio Oil Company had actively collaborated with the corporation during that period in building up its parking lot and distributorship business, by means of Ohio Oil Company giving it money and aiding it in the acquisition of filling station sites, and Ohio Oil Company had become the corporations’ lessor on several of its most important and valuable filling station sites, without which its business would be ruined. Accordingly, in January, 1945, and thereafter, a situation existed whereby the corporation, in conjunction with Ohio Oil Company, had, by large capital expenditures, acquired and built up its going business as a joint adventure for the common benefit of Ohio Oil Company and itself. The going value of its business was dependent in large measure upon the continued cooperation and good faith of Ohio Oil Company toward the corporation, both as supplier of its products and as lessor, because the corporation had devoted years of effort and large amounts of its money to promoting the sale of Ohio Oil Company’s products under the latter’s trade name “Marathon” in Gary and at these sites.
4. By reason of the aforesaid nature of its business, the corporation’s assets consisted of: (a) tangibles, which were the least valuable part of its assets, comprising its physical equipment, trucks and a small inventory of petroleum products and accessories; (b) intangibles, which were the most valuable part of its business, consisting of its aforesaid distributorship for Ohio Oil Company’s “Marathon” products, its underlying leaseholds on the sites of its bulk plant, filling stations and certain of its parking lots, and its going business value.
5. In the latter part of December, 1944, defendant J. Ralph Snyder and his friend, the defendant Robert B. Fletcher, formed, and thereafter continued to carry out down to the present time, a plan and conspiracy with the object that: Said going *488business would be taken away from said corporation and placed in the hands of Fletcher. The corporation would be gotten rid of by being allowed to drift into bankruptcy. Thereby Snyder would get rid of the corporation which owned this business, and would get rid of Harris who was his co-owner of the corporation. Fletcher would take over and become the ostensible owner of the corporation’s $50,000.00 going business for a small consideration, in the neighborhood of $5,000.00. Fletcher would thereafter hold and operate the business ostensibly for himself as sole owner but actually for the joint benefit of himself as part owner and J. Ralph Snyder or the latter’s son (the defendant, Jack T. Snyder) as secret co-owner, thereby cheating and defrauding the corporation, its creditors, and also Harris, the equitable owner of half of its capital stock.
6. In furtherance of said plan and conspiracy, defendants J. Ralph Snyder and Robert B. Fletcher, entered into the following course of conduct and did the following acts, among others:
(a) In the latter part of December, 1944, Snyder approached his friend Fletcher, and the two of them orally agreed that Snyder would cause the corporation to turn over said business to Fletcher.
(b) In the first part of January, 1945 Snyder, by virtue of being able to vote the entire capital stock, voted Harris out of office as director, physically ousted him from his previously-held position as the corporation’s manager, and assumed sole physical and actual control of the corporation’s affairs.
(c) Under a purported “lease-option” dated January 26, but actually placed in operation on January 15, 1945, Snyder turned over the entire going business of the corporation to Fletcher as lessee for a term of one year with an option to renew for an additional year, and an option to purchase the leased property. The “lease-option,” drafted by the law firm which represented both Snyder and Fletcher, under Snyder’s direction, was drafted in such form that it purported to lease to Fletcher all its physical equipment and all the un*489derlying leaseholds where the corporation conducted its business, including its bulk plant, filling stations and parking lots, while making only indirect reference to the business. The actual intent and effect of that instrument was to turn over to Fletcher the corporation’s going business as an entirety by the device of placing him in possession of its physical equipment and business sites, so that he would automatically come into possession of the intangible (and most valuable) part of its assets, consisting of its business and its going value thereof. By the terms of this lease, Fletcher agreed to pay the corporation as rental the nominal sum of $50.00 per month plus assuming and agreeing to pay on behalf of the corporation the rentals on all the underlying lease-holds on the sites of the corporation’s business, including the sites of its bulk plant, filling station outlets and parking lots. This stripping the corporation of possession and use of its assets and giving it only a nominal rental income, precipitated its bankruptcy.
(d) Though the “lease-option” contained a requirement for Fletcher to deposit $5,000.00 with the corporation to guarantee his performance, Fletcher never did this but instead made the deposit with Snyder personally, and Snyder refunded it to him after the corporation’s bankruptcy, pursuant to some secret part of their plan and conspiracy, for which they used the pretended “lease-option” as a cloak.
(e) When an involuntary petition in bankruptcy was filed in said United States District Court against the corporation on April 26, 194$, three months after the date of the above lease, said J. Ralph Snyder, as the corporation’s president, filed schedules of its assets, sworn to by him, wherein he omitted to schedule the corporation’s ownership of said business which he had caused .the corporation to turn over to Fletcher three months earlier, or said lease to Fletcher, or any of the corporation’s said.underlying leaseholds upon its business sites.
(f) Thereafter, said J. Ralph Snyder and Fletcher, in person and by agents, in furtherance of said plan and conspiracy, continued to collabo*490rate and connive in the acts of Charles L. Surprise and Ohio Oil Company after these two started to aid the conspiracy as set forth in paragraphs 7 and 8, below.
7. Defendant Charles L. Surprise was appointed by said bankruptcy court as receiver of the corporation on April 28, 1945, it was adjudged bankrupt on May 14, 1945, and Surprise was appointed trustee in bankruptcy of the corporation on June 15, 1945. About the time of his appointment, the exact date being presently unknown to plaintiff, Surprise joined said plan and conspiracy and started to aid and collaborate with Fletcher and Snyder in carrying it out. In furtherance thereof he engaged in the following course of conduct and did the following acts, among others:
(a) Though he knew of the existence of unscheduled assets of the corporation, including the corporation’s ownership of said business, said lease to Fletcher, and the corporation’s said underlying leaseholds on its business sites, and knew of Snyder’s failure to schedule them, as above set forth in paragraph 6(e), he refrained from informing said bankruptcy court thereof, and refrained from taking any action to repossess said assets from Fletcher or to have the same sold for the benefit of the estate.
(b) On the contrary, Surprise persistently carried forward a program of letting Fletcher keep said going business and appropriate it as his own. As part of the program, Surprise falsely pretended that since the estate lacked cash funds for him to “operate” the business, he had no alternative but to let Fletcher keep it as his own, — well knowing but ignoring the fact that he could and should take steps to inform the Court of the situation and take steps to sell the business as a going concern and thereby obtain the value thereof for the estate.
(c) Further in aid of said program of letting Fletcher keep and appropriate said business as his own, Surprise repeatedly evaded, obstructed and rejected attempts by Harris to provide him with prospective purchasers, in the oil business, who *491were interested in purchasing the corporation’s business.
(d) Further in aid of said program, Surprise knowingly and purposely acquiesced in Fletcher’s conduct of obtaining renewals of the corporation’s underlying leaseholds on its business sites as Fletcher’s own, though he well knew that Fletcher was the corporation’s tenant of said business sites. Again Surprise refrained from bringing this matter to his Court’s attention.
(e) Further in aid of said program, Surprise made repeated attempts to aid Fletcher to obtain lawful ownership of the going business through the device of urging the Court to sell Fletcher the corporation’s physical equipment at a small price not exceeding $4,000.00 or $5,000.00, which would have resulted in an order indirectly letting Fletcher keep the business through having purchased the physical equipment of the business at a price less than 10% of the value of the business.
(f) Fletcher remained the tenant of the corporation (and Sruprise (sic) as its trustee) until January 1, 1947, in possession of its same leased assets and business and paying the same rental of $100.00 per month to Surprise, while Surprise, Fletcher and Snyder exhausted their efforts to obtain a judicial sale by the bankruptcy court of the corporation’s physical equipment to Fletcher and thereby vest Fletcher with color of lawful title to the corporation’s underlying leaseholds and business. By the latter part of 1946 it became apparent to them that those efforts to obtain judicial sanction were doomed to failure because of the persistent objections thereto by Harris and his attorney George Cohan. Then, in order to accomplish the same by different means, Surprise collaborated with Fletcher in trying to create and give out the false impression that Fletcher had been paying the $100.00 per month only as rent on the corporation’s second hand equipment, and that Fletcher was going to turn back to Surprise the equipment (then worn out and worthless) and sever relations with Surprise, while Fletcher quietly and unlawfully kept the corporation’s underlying leaseholds and busi*492ness with Surprise’s acquiescence and connivance, and while Surprise again refrained from bringing the truth of this situation to his Court.
(g) 'When Harris and his attorney, George Cohan, sought to bring Fletcher’s aforesaid unlawful withholding and mis-appropriation of the corporation’s assets to the attention of the bankruptcy court and sought to have the court compel Surprise to take action to repossess said business and underlying leaseholds from Fletcher, Surprise, by his pleadings and statements to the court, actively sought to obstruct said effort and persistently argued in favor of Fletcher’s adversely asserted claim to said assets against the estate, — all in secret furtherance of said program and in aid of said conspiracy.
8. Defendant Ohio Oil Company actively and effectively collaborated with and aided said Fletcher, Surprise and Snyder in carrying out said plan and conspiracy for the unlawful purpose of enabling Fletcher to obtain and mis-appropriate said going business from the corporation and its estate, in the following situation, and by means of the following course of conduct and acts, among others:
(a) As already stated in paragraph 3, in January, 1945 and thereafter, Ohio Oil Company was in a position to strangle and destroy the corporation’s going business, both because it was the supplier of the brand of petroleum products around which the corporation’s business had been built and also because it was the corporation’s lessor on its most important and essential filling station sites,— a situation which had grown up out of the aforesaid joint adventure of Ohio Oil Company and the corporation. These facts were well known to Ohio Oil Company. It also knew and was chargeable with knowing that the corporation had turned this going business and filling station sites over to Fletcher as its lessee, which had been done with its acquiescence and assent. It knew and was chargeable with knowing that Fletcher was wrongfully attempting to acquire an adverse ownership of said business and filling station leaseholds against his lessor, the corporation, notwithstanding his duty *493not to acquire adverse interests against his lessor and his legal disability so to do. It also knew and was chargeable with knowing of the aforesaid plan and conspiracy between Snyder and Fletcher (later joined in by Surprise) to enable Fletcher to get this going business and the sites thereof away from the corporation and mis-appropriate them.
(b) In said situation and with said knowledge, Ohio Oil Company aided and abetted Fletcher in thus acquiring adverse ownership of this business and sites which the corporation had leased to him, and it aided and abetted the aforesaid plan and conspiracy, by each of the following means: (1) By making and continuing to maintain the corporation’s wrongdoing lessee, Fletcher, its distributor in his own individual right. (2) By transferring to Fletcher, or renewing in Fletcher’s name, the corporation’s said leaseholds upon its said filling station sites. (3) While thus aiding Fletcher to wrongfully acquire said business and leaseholds adversely to the corporation and its estate, Ohio Oil Company also aided Fletcher, Snyder, and Surprise to prevent a sale of the corporation’s going business to any purchaser, by the device of pretending to refuse to deal with Surprise as trustee.
9. Plaintiff further says on information and belief, that defendant J. Ralph Snyder caused his secret part ownership in said business and leaseholds, which are ostensibly owned by Fletcher, to be originally placed in or transferred to his son, the defendant Jack T. Snyder, and the latter’s wife, Margaret Snyder, and that said Jack T. Snyder and Margaret Snyder (a) received and hold same for themselves as a gift from said J. Ralph Snyder without consideration, or (b) received and hold same in secret trust for him. They knew or were chargeable with knowing of the aforesaid rights therein of Northern Indiana Oil Company and of its Trustee in bankruptcy. Plaintiff further says, on information and belief, that said Jack T. Snyder and Margaret Snyder joined in the aforesaid conspiracy and aided and abetted it by means of thus receiving and concealing the part ownership in said leaseholds and business which came into their hands, either (a) for the benefit of themselves or *494(b) for the benefit of said J. Ralph Snyder or (e) for the benefit of persons presently unknown to the plaintiff. Accordingly, said Jack T. Snyder and Margaret Snyder have been made defendants for the purpose of answering and being examined concerning any right, title or interest which they received or have or assert in any of said business, leaseholds or property ostensibly owned by Fletcher which is the subject of this action, and to be examined and answer as to all their transactions with any of their co-defendants concerning said business, leaseholds and property.
10. By reason of the foregoing facts, plaintiff asserts:
(a) The above described business in its entirety which Fletcher now holds and operates, (including all underlying leaseholds on all business sites, parking lots and gasoline and oil outlets, and its distributorship for Ohio Oil Company’s products, together with all accruals thereof since he was put in possession on January 15, 1945), is now held by him as the wrongfully holding over tenant of the corporation and its estate.
(b) Further, Fletcher holds the above described business and property in its entirety as constructive trustee for the corporation and its estate.
(c) Fletcher, and any of the other defendants who have participated in the income or profits of said business, are accountable to the corporation and its estate for all the income and profits which have been derived from said business and property since the date Fletcher ceased paying rent therefor to the trustee, January 1,1947.
(d) As an incident to the repossession from Fletcher and subsequent sale of said going business as an asset of the corporation’s estate, defendant Ohio Oil Company is subject to the decree and orders of this Court in this cause for the purpose of complying with such orders as the Court may make for the purpose of transferring said distributorship and also any of said underlying leaseholds of which it is Fletcher’s lessor, to the plaintiff or to a proper purchaser of said business to whom the bankruptcy court may order the business *495sold. Defendant Ohio Oil Company, by reason of its aforesaid collaboration with and abetting of said conspirators whereby said business, including said distributorship and leaseholds, were wrongfully placed and retained in Fletcher’s hands, is equitably under a duty to aid the corporation’s estate and this Court in restoring to the estate said wrongfully withheld business and property, and is subject to the equity jurisdiction of this Court for all purposes in connection with such restoration and restitution.
(e) Defendants Fletcher and Snyder knowingly and fraudulently concealed from creditors in this bankruptcy proceeding the aforesaid property belonging to the estate of this bankrupt. Further, Snyder knowingly and fraudulently made false oath as the corporation’s president to the schedules of its property in said bankruptcy proceeding, as above explained in paragraph 6 (e). Further, Snyder as officer of the corporation, and in contemplation of a bandruptcy (sic) proceeding by or against the corporation, knowingly and fraudulently transferred to and concealed in the the (sic) hands of Fletcher said business and property of the corporation, by the means aforesaid. Defendants Surprise and Ohio Oil Company collaborated in and aided and abetted said concealments and transfers by Surprise and Fletcher, by the means aforesaid.
(f) Within the terms of Section 70e of the Bankruptcy Act (11 U.S.C.A. 70e) said transfer of the corporation’s business and property to Fletcher, which was made and suffered by the corporation at the direction of Snyder, was fraudulently against and voidable by creditors of the corporation having claims provable under the Bankruptcy Act, both by virtue of Federal and State law applicable thereto, to-wit: It was fraudulent and voidable under Section 67d(2) of the Bankruptcy Act (11 U.S.C.A. 107d(2) because it was made within one year prior to the filing of the petition in bankruptcy without fair consideration by a debt- or corporation which was and would be thereby rendered insolvent; and also because it was made without fair consideration by a debtor corporation for whose, business the property remaining in its *496hands was an unreasonably small capital; and also because it was made with actual intent by the corporation’s president, Snyder, to cheat, hinder, delay and defraud existing creditors of the corporation. It was also fraudulent and voidable under the Indiana Bulk Sales Law (Secs. 33-201 et seq. Burns’ 1949 Replacement) because Fletcher and the corporation (through Snyder) totally failed to do the acts specified in and required by said law. Thereby, said transfer of the corporation’s business and property which Snyder caused the corporation to make to Fletcher was and remains void as against the trustee of its estate, and all said business and property thus affected by the transfer, is and remains a part of the assets of the corporation’s estate, discharged and released from said transfer, and it has passed to the trustee for the benefit of the estate. Thereby the trustee is under a duty to, and is entitled to, reclaim and recover, such property or collect its value against Fletcher and any other of the defendants who may hold or have received it, — all by virtue of said Sec. 70e of the Bankruptcy Act (11 U.S.C.A. 70e).
WHEREFORE, plaintiff prays:
1. A decree that this plaintiff, as the trustee of said corporation’s bankrupt estate, is the owner of the above described property which is the subject of this action in all its aspects including said going business, underlying leaseholds and distributorship.
2. That this Court may take an account of all the income and profits of said entire business which have been derived by Fletcher or any of the other defendants therefrom since January 1, 1947, and decree that defendants pay over same to the plaintiff.
3. That the court make all necessary and proper orders against each of the defendants for the turning over of said going business, including its said leaseholds and distributorship, to the plaintiff.
4. That the court assume full equity jurisdiction over all the defendants and the entire business and property which is the subject matter of this action, for the purpose of granting to the plaintiff all *497just and equitable relief in the premises; and he prays for his costs.
George Cohan
Jay E. Darlington
Attorneys for Plaintiff”
(Tr. p. 57,1. 5 — p. 71,1. 6)
“For his second amended second paragraph of complaint, plaintiff complains of defendants and each of them and says:
1-9. The allegations of rhetorical paragraphs 1-9 inclusive of the foregoing First Paragraph of amended complaint are made a part hereof by reference.
10. By reason of the foregoing facts, and by reason of the aforesaid fraudulent acts and conspiracy of the individual defendants and defendant Ohio Oil Company, said Northern Indiana Oil Company and the plaintiff as its Trustee have been damaged by the resulting loss of the above described property, including said gasoline and oil distributing business and parking lot business in its entirety, together with all its underlying leaseholds and distributorship, together with the income, profits and accruals thereof. The individual defendants thus took advantage of their fiduciary relationships to cheat and defraud the cestui que trust, namely the corporation and the plaintiff as its Trustee, out of said property thus held by them in trust, in which wrong they were aided and abetted by the defendant Ohio Oil Company as aforesaid, — all to the actual damage of the corporation and the plaintiff Trustee in the sum of $150,000.00.
11. In addition to the aforesaid actual damages, plaintiff claims punitive damages against defendants and each of them by reason of the further facts that said wrong was committed by defendants and each of them with the fraudulent and collusive purpose of oppressing, cheating and defrauding the corporation and the plaintiff Trustee, and said wrong has imposed long and unjust hardship upon *498the corporation and the plaintiff Trustee beyond the aforesaid actual damages. Thereby plaintiff claims punitive damages against defendants and each of them in the additional sum of $100,000.00.
WHEREFORE, plaintiff prays a money judgment at law against defendants and each of them in the sum of $250,000.00, costs, and all further just and proper relief.
George Cohan
Jay E. Darlington
Attorneys for Plaintiff”
(Tr. p. 116,1. 20 — p. 117,1. 27)
The appellant contends that the amended complaint and second amended second paragraph state facts sufficient to base a cause of action for conspiracy to defraud. The general rule in this jurisdiction is well stated in the case of Domestic Block Coal Co. v. DeArmey (1918), 179 Ind. 592, 601, 100 N. E. 675, where our Supreme Court stated:
“In construing a complaint, where a demurrer is interposed, it will be deemed sufficient whenever the necessary allegations can be fairly gathered from all the averments, even though stated illogically and by way of argument. All facts will be deemed stated that can be implied from the allegations made, by fair and reasonable intendment, and facts so impliedly averred will be given the same force as if directly stated. (Cases cited.)”
The above cited general rule was modified as set forth in the case of Rodebaugh v. Rodebaugh (1923), 79 Ind. App. 324, 328, 138 N. E. 268, when this court stated:
“It is also contended that a complaint, seeking relief on the ground of fraud, must state the acts . which constitute the same. While this is true as a general rule, it is also true that, under the provisions of the statute, a conclusion of fact, stated in a complaint, shall be considered and held to be *499the allegation of all the facts required to sustain such conclusion, when the same is necessary to the sufficiency thereof, unless a motion is made to require, the plaintiff to state the facts necessary to sustain the conclusion alleged. (Cases cited.)”
The law of the case hereinabove stated is codified in Burns’ Annotated Statutes §2-1005 (Acts 1913, ch. 322, §1, p. 850; 1915, ch. 62, §1, p. 123.) The Supreme Court has further delineated the equitable considerations in a determination of a case of the type being discussed herein in the case of Smith v. Borden (1903), 160 Ind. 223, 228, 66 N. E. 681, wherein the court stated:
“ . . . the rule is well settled that a court in construing a pleading is not required to construe it most strongly against the pleader, but, in order to promote substantial justice between the parties, a liberal construction will be given. In determining the sufficiency of a pleading, we must consider it in regard to its general scope and as an entirety. (Cases cited.)”
Two cases of more recent origin, State ex rel. DeArmond v. Superior Court of Madison County et al. (1940), 216 Ind. 641, 25 N. E. 2d 642, and Cline v. Rodabaugh (1931), 97 Ind. App. 258, 179 N. E. 6, have established criterion to determine the particularity which is required in a complaint. In the DeArmond case, supra, the Supreme Court held that:
“It is a fundamental rule of the law of pleading and practice that a party claiming relief shall present the issue to be tried in such a manner as to invoke the jurisdiction of the court and advise the adverse party as to the nature of the demand, so that he may have an opportunity to meet the proof that may be offered to establish it.” p. 644.
Further, in the case of Cline v. Rodabaugh, supra, this court stated:
*500“A complaint is sufficient when it states the facts relied upon in such a manner that a person of common understanding will know what is intended. No greater particularity is required than the nature of the facts intended to be pleaded admit.” (our emphasis) City of LaPorte v. Osborn (1909), 43 Ind. App. 100, 86 N. E. 995; City of Huntington v. Stuver (1908), 41 Ind. App. 171, 83 N. E. 518.
The quotations from the DeArmond case, supra, and the Cline case, supra, assume much significance in the case presently before this court inasmuch as the appellant is involved in the difficult area of conspiracy. In the case of Roberts v. State (1919), 188 Ind. 713, 124 N. E. 750, the Supreme Court, in discussing the issue of conspiracy, stated:
“A conspiracy can seldom be made out by direct evidence, consequently, the necessity for the rule permitting it to be established by circumstantial evidence or by isolated and independent facts. Cook v. State (1907), 169 Ind. 430, 82 N. E. 1047.”
. . . “Any joint action on a material point, or collocation of independent but co-operative acts, by persons closely associated with each other, is held to be sufficient to enable the jury to infer concurrence of sentiment . . . Archer v. State (1886), 106 Ind. 426, 432, 7 N. E. 225.”
The scope of an allegation of fraud has been well-defined by the courts of this state. In Daily v. Showers (1937), 104 Ind. App. 480, 8 N. E. 2d 139, the opinion enunciated the following rule:
■■“Fraud in its generic sense, especially as the word is used in courts of equity, comprises all acts, omissions, and concealments involving a breach of legal or equitable duty and resulting in damage to another. Fraud has also been defined as any cunning or artifice used to cheat or deceive another. How*501ever, the wisdom of an exact legal definition of fraud has been questioned, and it has been stated that fraud is better left undefined, and some courts have said that the common law not only fails to define fraud but perhaps asserts as a principle that there shall be no definition. Further it is frequently stated that owing to the multiform character of fraud and the great variety of attendant circumstances no definition which is all inclusive can be framed, but each case must be determined on its particular facts. 26 C. J. sec. 1, p. 1059 and authorities there cited. Bigelow says, ‘Fraud consists in endeavor to alter rights, by deception touching motives, or by circumvention not touching motives.’ 1 Bigelow, on Fraud, p. 5.”
Further, in the case of Budd v. Bd. of Co. Comrs. of St. Joseph Co. (1939), 216 Ind. 35, 22 N. E. 2d 973, our Supreme Court stated:
“Fraud may be actual or constructive. Constructive fraud is a breach of legal or equitable duty which, irrespective of the moral guilt of the fraud feasor, the law declares fraudulent because of its tendency to deceive others, to violate public or private confidence, or to injure public interests. 26 C. J., p. 1061; Gorham v. Gorham (1913), 54 Ind. App. 408, 103 N. E. 16. . . . While fraud is never presumed, if the facts alleged show fraud, either actual or constructive, no positive averments of it are necessary. Holliday v. Perry (1906), 38 Ind. App. 588, 78 N. E. 877.”
The appellees contend that the amended complaint originally filed by the appellant fails to state a cause of action because it merely contains a series of epithetical expressions, irrelevant allegations, and conclusions of law. They (appellees) have cited authority to support their contention that allegations of this type will not be held sufficient to constitute a cause of action, if the complaint does not allege specific facts to establish the claim. In the case of
*502Greathouse v. Board of School Commissioners of City of Indianapolis (1926), 198 Ind. 95, 151 N. E. 411, the Supreme Court said:
“A demurrer for want of facts admits as true all facts that are well pleaded, but it does not admit conclusions of law and does not admit all the conclusions which may be drawn from such facts by the pleader. Such words as are the mere expression of the pleader’s opinion concerning the quality of the act, as a fact stated to have been done or the doing of which is contemplated, are not admitted as true and such expressions as ‘wrongfully, unlawfully, arbitrarily,’ cannot be considered in determining the sufficiency of the facts alleged in a complaint when a demurrer has been imposed for want of facts. Such expressions are merely vituperative or expressions of the opinion of the pleader as to the legality of the act so characterized. (Cases cited.)”
The appellees are relying upon the general rule herein-above stated to support their contention that neither the trial court nor this court, in ruling upon a demurrer, should consider fact conclusions which can be drawn from the facts alleged. This court agrees with the appellees to the extent that conclusions of law and irrelevant allegations should not be considered by the lower court when it rules on the sufficiency of a complaint, but this court does not concur in the contention of the appellees that conclusions of fact should not be considered when ruling upon the demurrer. Burns’ Annotated Statutes, §2-1005 (Acts 1913, ch. 322, §1, p. 850; 1915, ch. 62, §1, p. 123), pertinent provisions of which are quoted below, clearly states that such conclusions of fact can be considered by the court.
“ . . . all conclusions stated therein shall be considered and held to be the allegation of all the facts required to sustain said conclusion when *503the same is necessary to the sufficiency of such pleading, paper or writing:. .. ”
This section of the statute also notes the remedy which a defendant may use to require the plaintiff to allege facts to sustain the alleged conclusions of fact. The clause further states:
“Provided, That, as against conclusions, only the following remedy is given, that a motion may be made to require the party filing such pleading, paper or writing to state the facts necessary to sustain the conclusion alleged, said motion setting out wherein such pleading, paper or writing is insufficient. If no such motion is made and ruled upon, all objections on account thereof are waived. Burns’ §2-1005, supra.” (our emphasis)
In the case at bar, the several appellees filed motions to strike parts of the amended complaint, and these motions were overruled by the lower court. Inasmuch as the appellees failed to file a motion to require the appellant plaintiff to allege facts to support the conclusions, this court is of the opinion that the appellees’ objection to the lower court’s consideration of the conclusions of fact which were alleged in the amended complaint has been waived under the previously quoted provisions of Burns’ §2-1005, supra. The appellees did not plead correctly on this question at the trial court, and therefore have not laid a proper foundation for restraining the scope of consideration by this court on appeal of the conclusions of fact alleged by the appeallant plaintiff in his amended complaint. The conclusions of fact which are contained in the amended complaint should properly be weighed by this court in its determination of the sufficiency of the amended complaint.
*504*503After close scrutiny of the amended complaint and second amended second paragraph with reference to the *504precedent rules of law quoted herein, the court is of the opinion that the amended complaint states sufficient facts to withstand demurrer. Further, in referring to the case of Cline v. Rodabaugh, supra, and the rule of law regarding the particularity necessary in a complaint, this court believes that the facts stated properly inform the defendants of the nature of the action, and indicate the areas wherein the defendants must present a defense. This court has stated a principle which is properly referred to in considering a cause of action of the type being considered herein.-In the case of Pierce v. Vansell (1905), 35 Ind. App. 525, 74 N. E. 554, the court stated:
“Considering all of the allegations of the pleadings, as disclosed by the record before us, we are of the opinion that they present a cause which appeals so strongly to equity that a triad should be had upon the merits, and the rights of the parties ought to be determined after hearing the evidence, and not upon demurrers to pleadings. Brown v. Brown (1894), 139 Ind. 653, 659.”
This court is of the opinion that the above quoted rule should be accorded substantial consideration, so that the rights of parties to an action in equity are not improperly determined without a full hearing of the evidence. This court further is of the opinion that the case at bar demonstrates equitable considerations that clearly require a full hearing on the merits of the cause of action alleged in the amended complaint. We therefore hold that the trial court erroneously sustained said demurrers.
The appellees urge that the trial court properly refused to accept the tendered second amended complaint, third amended second paragraph and motion for change of venue because there was no cause of action pending when the above mentioned plead*505ings were submitted for filing. The appellees allege that the cause of action lapsed when the appellant failed to file amended pleadings by the date stated in his letter. However, the record of this case does not show that the trial court entered upon the docket any ruling stating that the appellant must file amended pleadings by a certain date. Therefore, the position of the appellee is not wholly correct. Judge Flanagan, of our Supreme Court, speaking in the opinion in the case of Doughty et al. v. State Dept. of Pub. Welf. et al. (1954), 233 Ind. 475, 478, 121 N. E. 2d 645, said:
“A demurrer, sustained, does not take out the complaint. The ruling is only that the complaint as it stands is defective. The complaint stays, and the pleader has an absolute right to keep it there and amend it. §2-1010, Burns’ 1946 Replacement; Ewing et al. v. Patterson (1871), 35 Ind. 326; Guthrie v. Howland (1905), 164 Ind. 214, 224, 73 N. E. 259; Royal Ins. Co. v. Stewart (1921), 190 Ind. 444, 455, 129 N. E. 853.” (our emphasis)
The absolute right to plead over, as set forth above, has recently been reaffirmed in the case of Gibson et al. v. City of Indianapolis et al. (1982), 242 Ind. 447, 179 N. E. 2d 291. Judge Shake, in an opinion rendered by the Indiana Supreme Court has also stated this rule with more particularity in the case of State ex rel. Daily v. Harrison, Special Judge (1939), 215 Ind. 106, 18 N. E. 2d 770, in which he stated:
“After a demurrer to a complaint has been sustained, and after the time granted to o/mend has expired, and there is no request for further time, no cause of action is pending upon which an issue of law or of fact may be joined, and nothing remains for the court to do other than to enter a formal judgment.” (our emphasis)
This rule, as stated, is uniquely applicable to the case *506in Question. As previously stated, there was no ruling of the trial court limiting the time for filing an amended pleading. Therefore, the judgment entered on October 8, 1960, was erroneously rendered. This reasoning is supported by the case of The Chicago and Southeastern Railway Company v. Adams (1895), 12 Ind. App. 317, 39 N. E. 877, which stated:
“The court, upon overruling the demurrer, entered final judgment against appellant without ever having entered any rule to answer or made any order against it to plead over, and without any refusal to plead over. This was not the correct practice. (Cases cited).”
This court must iterate the above stated rule, and the recognition of this rule necessarily requires that we determine that the procedure of the trial court was improper, and jeopardized the interests of the appellant. There was no ruling by the trial court that the appellant was required to plead over by a certain date, and therefore no limitations upon the appellant’s absolute right to plead over were properly established. A letter addressed to the trial court by the appellant’s counsel stating an intention to plead over by a certain date cannot replace the necessity of an entry of such a ruling by the trial court. Therefore, we are of the opinion that the rendering of judgment on the demurrers was erroneous, and the judgment should be set aside.
Inasmuch as the demurrers were improperly sustained, and the judgment was rendered prematurely, the cause of action was not dismissed nor were the issues closed. The motion for change of venue from the county, presented by counsel for the appellant, should have been granted inasmuch as the filing was within the time period set forth in Supreme *507Court Rule 1-12B, the pertinent provisions of which are set forth below:
“In all cases where the venue of a civil action may now be changed from the judge or the county, such change shall be granted upon the filing of an unverified application or motion therefor by a party or his attorneys: Provided, however, a party shall be entitled to only one change from the county and only one change from the judge.
In any action except criminal no change of judge or change of venue from the county shall be granted except within the time herein provided. Any such application for change of judge or change of venue shall be filed not later than ten (10) days after the issues are first closed on the merits, or if the issues are closed without answer by operation of law,...” (our emphasis)
We note from the record that the motion for change of venue was denied but not stricken. The appellees state as a principle of law that “where a demurrer to a complaint is sustained and the plaintiff elects to file an amended complaint, no question of error in the sustaining of the demurrer can be raised on appeal”. Burns’ Indiana Statutes Annotated, §2-1010; Williams v. Williams, Admr. (1940), 217 Ind. 581, 29 N. E. 2d 557; Kimble v. Jolly (1940), 217 Ind. 698, 30 N. E. 2d 463; Inter State Motor Freight System v. Henry (1942), 111 Ind. App. 179, 38 N. E. 2d 909. This is indeed a novel theory for we are of the opinion that when the court sustained the motion objecting to the filing of said pleadings and motion for change of venue that in practical effect and for ail purposes of the record, the court was rejecting the filing of said amended pleadings. Therefore, we are of the opinion that the trial court had no right to consider or rule on the appellees’ several motions filed September 12, 1960, after a motion for a change of venue from the county had been *508filed particularly in the absence of any order book entry directing the appellant to plead further or amend by a date certain in term time prior thereto. It is undisputed that said motion for a change of venue was filed in the office of the clerk of the Jasper Circuit Court on June 27, 1960, in vacation, before the September, 1960 term of said court. It is also undeniable that the trial court must have concluded that said motion for a change was properly before the court as a matter of filing on the first day of the next succeeding term of said court, if not, there would have been no necessity for the court to make an order book entry denying said motion for a change on October 8, 1960. We hold that said motion was properly on file in the Jasper Circuit Court as of September 12, 1960, the first day of the September, 1960 term of said court. In State ex rel. Whitewater, etc. v. Hoelscher, Judge (1935), 208 Ind. 334, 196 N. E. 1, the court stated:
“We do not take seriously the contention that the trial court had a right to strike out the objections to the report after the motion for the change of venue was filed, and then refuse to grant the change because there was no issue pending . . . If the affidavit for a change from the county complied with the statute, the court was divested of jurisdiction to take any further action except to grant the change.”
The precedent case law regarding the granting of changes of venue has uniformly held that the duty to grant a motion for change of venue is mandatory upon the court if such motion is timely and is presented properly. State ex rel. Johnson v. Cody, Judge (1937), 212 Ind. 247, 8 N. E. 2d 971; State ex rel. Lindsey v. Beavers (1947), 225 Ind. 398, 75 N. E. 2d 660; State ex rel. Kealing v. Clay Circuit Court (1934), 207 Ind. 259, 192 N. E. 423. Therefore, inasmuch as the appellant’s *509motion for change of venue from the county satisfies the restrictive qualifications of Supreme Court Eule 1-12B, supra, we hold in the instant case that the trial court, in any justiciable matters yet to be disposed of under the state of the record, was divested of any further jurisdiction to act except to grant said motion for a change of venue from the county. State ex rel. Whitewater, etc. v. Hoelscher, Judge, supra.
This cause is therefore remanded to the trial court with instructions to set aside the judgment previously entered in favor of the appellees on October 8, 1960, to overrule the several demurrers of the defendants appellees and to sustain the motion for a change of venue from the county and for further proceedings not inconsistent with this opinion.
Mote and Pfaff, JJ., concur.
Kelley, J., not participating.

=== CASE 9739784 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:20:43.667839+00 ===

On Petition for Eehearing.
Hunter, P. J.
The appellees, as a basis for sustaining the petition for rehearing, have raised the issue of the appellant’s failure to comply with the terms of Section 70 (b) of the Bankruptcy Act, 11 U.S.C.A. 110 (b), which requires that a Trustee in Bankruptcy shall elect to assume or reject all executory contracts of the bankrupt within 60 days, or the contracts are deemed rejected. At the time of the initiation of the bankruptcy proceedings of Northern Indiana Oil Company, Inc., Charles L. Surprise was appointed Trustee in Bankruptcy, and he served in that capacity during the 60 day period set forth in Section 70(b) of the Bankruptcy Act, supra. As stated in our opinion the record fails to show that said trustee elected to assume the executory contracts, and the reasonable *510presumption is that the trustee thereby determined that the contracts should not be assumed. However, the plaintiff-appellant, who served as a subsequent trustee for the bankrupt company, has alleged in the amended complaint filed in the cause, that the original trustee, Charles L. Surprise, participated in the conspiracy by allowing Robert B. Fletcher to appropriate the business as his own, and by further failing to notify the bankruptcy court of assets of the bankrupt company in the possession of Mr. Fletcher which should have been listed on the schedule.
Inasmuch as the amended complaint contained allegations that Fletcher and Surprise conspired to take advantage of the bankrupt company by allowing the 60 day period to lapse, this court is of the opinion that that issue should also be decided in a full trial on the merits of the complaint. We recognized and supported the position of the appellant that equity will not permit the parties to retain the benefits of the alleged fraud, and this doctrine, we think, is applicable to the case at bar. This position is not to be interpreted as meaning that this court is attempting to thwart the functioning of the Bankruptcy Act, but merely means that such provisions should not be utilized ^as a shield to protect the perpetrators of an alleged fraud on creditors and interested parties.
The petition of appellees for rehearing is denied.
Note.—Reported in 196 N. E. 2d 422. Rehearing denied 197 N. E. 2d 183.

=== CASE 9739785 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:20:43.9249+00 ===

Per Curiam.
Daniel D. Schrein was found guilty in a jury trial of five counts of sexual assault of a child, a Class IV felony. The Nebraska Court of Appeals reversed Schrein’s convictions and remanded the cause for a new trial. State v. Schrein, 1 NCA 1581 (1992). The State petitioned for, and this court has granted, further review pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. § 24-1107 (Cum. Supp. 1992). We reverse the judgment of the Court of Appeals.
FACTUAL BACKGROUND
Schrein was a pediatrician practicing for many years in Omaha, where he also organized and coached a youth sports organization known as The Gladiators. In September 1990, Schrein was arrested on five charges of sexual assault of a child. Testimony at Schrein’s trial included that of 15 young men who claimed that Schrein had molested them. In addition, expert testimony was presented which contradicted Schrein’s claim that his actions were a normal part of treating his young male patients. Defense witnesses included Schrein himself, numerous former patients, members of The Gladiators and their parents, and an Omaha pediatrician who testified regarding the treatment of young males. The jury found Schrein guilty on all five counts.
Schrein appealed his conviction to the Court of Appeals. In that appeal, the principal question was the admission of a Redbook magazine article on pedophilia offered by the State to rehabilitate the testimony of one of the State’s witnesses, Sgt. Kenneth Bovasso. During direct examination, Sergeant Bovasso testified that he supervised the robbery and sexual assault unit of the Omaha Police Division and had worked on the Schrein case. On cross-examination, Sergeant Bovasso testified as follows:
*138Q-... Didn’t you talk to [M.M.]?
A- Yes, I said I did, yes.
Q- Wasn’t there some discussion with her about pedophiles?
A-Yes.
Q- Didn’t you give her literature on pedophiles?
A-1 told her that we— .
Q- Just answer yes or no. Did you tell her that Dr. Schrein was a pedophile?
A-No.
Q- Did you make that implication?
A-1 — No.
Q- Why did you give her literature on pedophiles?
A- Because we were investigating a case possibly of that nature.
Q- Okay. And you were convinced and told her that Dr. Schrein was a pedophile; isn’t that true?
A-1 didn’t tell her that Dr. Schrein was a pedophile.
On redirect, the prosecutor gave Sergeant Bovasso exhibit 60, a photostatic copy of the article regarding pedophilia published in the August 1987 issue of Redbook magazine and asked:
Q-... Officer, did you give that article to [M.M.]?
A-Yes.
Q- Did you give it to anybody else connected to the investigation?
A-Yes.
Q- Do you know who else or how many others?
A- Several others, but I know [another mother] got a copy of it.
Q- Is that a true and accurate copy of the article as you handed it out to [M.M.]?
A-Yes.
[Prosecutor]: I’d offer what’s been marked as Exhibit 60.
[Schrein’s lawyer]: I’ll object. It’s irrelevant____
THE COURT: Just a second, please. I believe on cross-examination, if I recall correctly, . . . you asked the *139officer about the materials that he gave.
[Schrein’s lawyer]: I asked him if he gave [M.M.] something on pedophilia....
THE COURT: With that in mind, I think the exhibit will be received. The objection, therefore, is overruled.
Exhibit 60 was a copy of a five-page article entitled “The Child Abuser: How Can You Spot Him?” which appeared in Redbook magazine in August 1987 and was coauthored by a professor of psychiatry and his wife. The lead-in paragraph, printed in large, bold letters, proclaimed:
He’s a man you trust. He’s a man your children trust. He’s a teacher, a coach, a Cub Scout leader — someone your family knows well. And he’s much more likely to sexually abuse little boys than little girls, according to a landmark study of 403 sex offenders. In this shocking report, the doctor who headed the research team offers a profile of the typical child abuser — and tells you how to protect your children.
Gene G. Abel & Nora Harlow, The Child Abuser: How Can You Spot Him?, Redbook, Aug. 1987, at 98. In this article, the authors state:
Most of us think that a child molester is a rather slimy individual — a stranger in town, sitting in his car near a schoolyard, luring children with candy. Our findings reveal that, on the contrary, the child molester is not a stranger, but is someone we know well. He often is a man we trust, a man our children trust.
Many child molesters try to move themselves into positions or occupations within the community that will allow them to spend time alone with children without attracting much notice. Molesters often become youth ministers, day-care workers, Boy Scout leaders, teachers, Big Brothers and pediatricians.
. . . And indeed, among physicians — as among youth ministers, day-care workers and teachers — there are exceedingly few men who are child molesters. But there are a few. Of the several hundred molesters I’ve treated in the last two years, one was a school physician, two were child psychiatrists, another was a pediatrician.
*140(Emphasis supplied.) Id. at 99. Finally, the article suggests that parents can spot a child molester by watching for typical operating procedures that include spending excessive amounts of time with children and arranging to take trips alone with children; seeking out positions, such as school physician or coach, that will allow them to spend time alone with children; and abusing the privileges of their positions to engage children in inappropriate activities.
Later, after exhibit 60 had been received in evidence, the exhibit was the subject of an in-chambers discussion:
[Schrein’s lawyer]: My question is: What was the purpose of the offer? What were they trying to prove with that offer? Unless they can give you some representation of relevance then it shouldn’t be admissible. For example, Judge, if they offered a Playboy magazine simply because I asked the question and they offered it, you wouldn’t let the Playboy in because you’d have to have something relevant to this case. And I’m saying what does that article got [sic] to do with whether Dr. Schrein’s guilty of the charges?
THE COURT: It has nothing to do with whether the doctor’s guilty or innocent of these charges, but it has everything to do with what the officer did in his interviews with regard to [M.M.] and what he did in connection with others. And in view of the previous testimony on cross-examination with regard to what he distributed, I think it becomes relevant.
When M.M. testified as a witness for Schrein, she did not recall that Sergeant Bovasso had implied that Schrein was a “pervert.” M.M. mentioned nothing about the magazine article as a part of Sergeant Bovasso’s interview of M. M.
In his appeal to the Court of Appeals, Schrein contended that the magazine article was both irrelevant and unfairly prejudicial. The State argued that the article was relevant to the question of whether Sergeant Bovasso had made improper suggestions to the parents with whom he had spoken and that these suggestions were passed along to their children, thus encouraging them to testify falsely. In its brief on appeal, the State asserted: “What was this sinister material that this officer *141was distributing to upset children and their parents? It was only an article from a popular women’s magazine.” Brief for appellee at 35-36.
A second issue on appeal involved the testimony of Schrein’s nurse, Myra Langenfeld, regarding her opinion about a picture hanging in one of Schrein’s examining rooms which depicted a teenager or young man in a standing position with no shirt but wearing hip-huggers, or low-cut jeans. According to Langenfeld, the boy in the picture “had his head tilted back and a smile on his face. And Dr. Schrein referred to it as a ‘cocky smile.’ ” Schrein’s lawyer did not object to Langenfeld’s description of the picture. However, when Langenfeld was asked what she did not like about the picture, Schrein objected that it was “immaterial, irrelevant. It has nothing to do with this case. It’s a conclusion on the part of the witness.” The court overruled the objection but allowed Schrein’s lawyer to ask several foundational questions. During his foundational examination, Schrein’s lawyer asked Langenfeld if there was anything obscene about the picture. She replied, “I thought it looked sexy.... It looked suggestive to me.... I don’t think it was appropriate.” At the end of his foundational examination, Schrein’s lawyer again objected to Langenfeld’s testimony because she had admitted that she knew nothing about art and, therefore, her opinion of the picture was irrelevant. His objection was overruled. After the foundational examination, the State, over Schrein’s relevancy objections, continued questioning Langenfeld about her opinion of the picture. She testified that she was “embarrassed” by the picture and that she had told Schrein that she did not care for the picture.
COURT OF APPEALS’ DECISION
The Court of Appeals stated:
The important fact was that Bovasso passed out literature on pedophilia. Beyond that, the exact wording of the literature had perhaps an infinitesimal impact on the credibility of Bovasso and had no material value to any issue of consequence in the case.
Bovasso, his credibility, and the nature of the literature he distributed were not facts of consequence in this case. *142They were not matters in issue. They were not within the range of the litigated controversy. The testimonial evidence given at trial contained the factual evidence of consequence. Evidence concerning factual questions about the literature Bovasso passed out was irrelevant because matters related to Bovasso’s distribution of literature were not material facts on which the case turned.
State v. Schrein, 1 NCA 1581, 1588-89 (1992). The Court of Appeals also stated:
Had it been material and probative, exhibit 60 still should not have been admitted into evidence because relevant evidence may be excluded if its probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice, see Neb. Evid. R. 403, Neb. Rev. Stat. § 27-403 (Reissue 1989), and the article’s dubious probative value was dwarfed by its prejudicial effect____
The trial court abused its discretion and erred by admitting exhibit 60, because the article was irrelevant to any material issue of fact, and its tendency to create unfair prejudice substantially outweighed whatever probative value it may have possessed.
1 NCA at 1589-90. Concerning the picture in Schrein’s examining room, the Court of Appeals held: “The tendency of the testimony about the picture to create unfair prejudice substantially outweighs any probative value it might arguably have. The court should have excluded the testimony concerning the picture.” 1 NCA at 1593. Finally, the Court of Appeals concluded:
The judgment of the district court is reversed, which reversal results, first, from the unbridled prosecutorial zeal in offering the Redbook article (with strategically placed underlining) and, second, from the failure of the trial court to intercept the magazine article, which was of dubious relevancy, but was obviously extremely prejudicial to the appellant, Schrein, and potentially highly inflammatory to the jury.
1 NCA at 1594.
*143ASSIGNMENTS OF ERROR
In its petition for further review, the State asserts that the Court of Appeals erred by concluding that the magazine article should not have been received into evidence and holding that testimony regarding the picture in Schrein’s examining room should have been excluded.
ADMISSION OF THE MAGAZINE ARTICLE
The trial court held that although the article “has nothing to do with” whether Schrein is guilty or innocent of the charges against him, “it has everything to do with what the officer did in his interviews with regard to [M.M.] and what he did in connection with others. And in view of the previous testimony on cross-examination with regard to what he distributed, I think it becomes relevant.”
Under Neb. Rev. Stat. § 27-106 (Reissue 1989):
(1) When part of an act, declaration, conversation or writing is given in evidence by one party, the whole on the same subject may be inquired into by the other. When a letter is read, all other letters on the same subject between the same parties may be given. When a detached act, declaration, conversation or writing is given in evidence, any other act, declaration or writing which is necessary to make it fully understood, or to explain the same, may also be given in evidence.
(2) The judge may in his discretion either require the party thus introducing part of a total communication to introduce at that time such other parts as ought in fairness to be considered contemporaneously with it, or may permit another party to do so at that time.
Because § 27-106 is concerned with the danger of admitting a statement out of context, additional evidence is admissible only if it qualifies or explains the previous testimony. See Chirnside v. Lincoln Tel. & Tel. Co., 224 Neb. 784, 401 N.W.2d 489 (1987). In addition, under § 27-106, when defense counsel leaves a false impression, the trial court may allow the use of otherwise inadmissible evidence to clarify or complete an issue opened up by defense counsel. United States v. Womochil, 778 F.2d 1311 (8th Cir. 1985). See, also, U.S. v. Durham, 868 F.2d *1441010 (8th Cir. 1989), cert. denied 493 U.S. 954, 110 S. Ct. 366, 107 L. Ed. 2d 352.
Section 27-106 is included in article 1, the “General Provisions” section, of the Nebraska Evidence. Rules. As explained by the drafters’ comment, the predecessor to § 27-106 was applied repeatedly to admit explaining matter that otherwise might not have been admissible as hearsay, opinion, or the like. See Spani v. Whitney, 172 Neb. 550, 110 N.W.2d 103 (1961). Furthermore, although § 27-106 differs from Fed. R. Evid. 106, the drafters of the Nebraska rule believed that there was no significant difference between the rules and that the Nebraska rule was simply a more accurate statement of the rule of completeness. See Rule 107 cmt. (Tentative Draft 1973). Thus, federal decisions and commentary may be helpful in determining the scope of admissibility of evidence under Nebraska’s Rule 106.
Because § 27-106 applies only if part of the act, declaration, conversation, or writing has been “given in evidence,” we must first determine whether Schrein introduced the Redbook article during his cross-examination of Sergeant Bovasso. In Durham, the defendant, on direct examination, elicited testimony from a witness that an unnamed man had been looking for the murder victim on the day of his death. During cross-examination, the government elicited testimony from the same witness that the unnamed man was in fact a landlord or Realtor who was looking to lease or sell the victim property. On appeal, Durham argued that the latter testimony was inadmissible hearsay and that it prejudiced him because it rebutted his theory that someone else had committed the murder. The Eighth Circuit held, however, that Durham’s direct examination could have led the jury to believe that the unnamed man had committed the murder, and that the government must be afforded the opportunity to clear up that false impression.
In Schrein’s case, during cross-examination of Sergeant Bovasso by Schrein’s lawyer, Sergeant Bovasso was asked a series of questions regarding his conversation with M.M. during his investigation of Schrein, including two questions relating to the Redbook article: “Didn’t you give her literature on pedophiles?” and “Why did you give her literature on *145pedophiles?” Schrein’s lawyer also asked if Sergeant Bovasso had implied that Schrein was a pedophile, to which Sergeant Bovasso responded, “No.”
The State contends that Schrein’s mention of the article served to introduce it into evidence, just as in Durham, the mere mention that an unnamed man had been looking for the murder victim on the day of his death was sufficient to open the door to further testimony on the subject.
However, our inquiry does not stop there. According to the advisory committee’s notes, one of the purposes behind federal Rule 106 is to allow a party to correct a misleading impression created when part of a statement is taken out of context. In U.S. v. Velasco, 953 F.2d 1467 (7th Cir. 1992), the Seventh Circuit held that under federal Rule 106, the trial court must determine whether the additional evidence which the proponent seeks to admit is relevant to the issues in the case and, furthermore, the trial court need admit only that part of the evidence which qualifies or explains the evidence offered by the opponent. See, also, United States v. McCorkle, 511 F.2d 482 (7th Cir. 1975), cert. denied 423 U.S. 826, 96 S. Ct. 43, 46 L. Ed. 2d 43; U.S. v. Pendas-Martinez, 845 F.2d 938 (11th Cir. 1988). As the Velasco court explained, the test under federal Rule 106 is conjunctive:
Once relevance has been established, the trial court then must address the second half of the test, and should do so by asking (1) does it explain the admitted evidence, (2) does it place the admitted evidence in context, (3) will admitting it avoid misleading the trier of fact, and (4) will admitting it insure a fair and impartial understanding of all of the evidence.
Velasco, 953 F.2d at 1475. See, also, United States v. LeFevour, 798 F.2d 977 (7th Cir. 1986).
The State contends that Schrein’s questioning of Sergeant Bovasso left the jury with the false impression that the literature which Bovasso distributed “contained something sinister about doctors and pedophiles” which had improperly influenced witnesses. Brief for appellee in support of petition for further review at 4. Therefore, the State asserts that the article was necessary to rehabilitate the testimony of Sergeant Bovasso and was admissible under § 27-106.
*146In admitting the article, the trial court explained that although the article
[had] nothing to do with whether the doctor’s guilty or innocent of these charges ... it has everything to do with what the officer did in his interviews with regard to [M.M.] and what he did in connection with others. And in view of the previous testimony on cross-examination with regard to what he distributed, I think it becomes relevant.
Thus, according to the trial court, although the article was not relevant to the ultimate issue in the case, it was necessary to explain what Sergeant Bovasso had done during his investigation of Schrein, the very subject of Schrein’s cross-examination. Thus, cross-examination of Sergeant Bovasso opened the door for the magazine article. This explanation conforms with the purpose of § 27-106.
The State also complains about the finding of the Court of Appeals that the article was unfairly prejudicial to Schrein. See Neb. Rev. Stat. § 27-403 (Reissue 1989).
As Wright and Graham point out:
The rule at common law was that the opponent was entitled to put in the whole on the same subject if it was relevant. The only limitation was that if the remainder was not only inadmissible but was prejudicial to the proponent, the judge had discretion to exclude it____
. . . [I]f the material sought to be required for completeness is such that prejudice to the proponent or another party or the danger of confusion of the jury outweighs the explanatory value of the material, the judge can refuse to admit it. Whether we say that this is because Rule 403 is a Rule that applies even to the completeness doctrine or because the judge applies the elements of Rule 403 in making his determination of what “fairness” requires under Rule 106 is of little moment; the important thing is that this limitation on the common law rule is preserved.
21 Charles A. Wright & Kenneth W. Graham, Jr., Federal Practice and Procedure: Evidence § 5078 at 373, 378 (1977).
In the present case, however, we need not reach the issue of *147whether the Redbook article was unfairly prejudicial to Schrein. An objection, based on a specific ground and properly overruled, does not preserve a question for appellate review on any other ground. See Havlicek v. State, 101 Neb. 782, 165 N.W. 251 (1917). Thus, the trial court is required to weigh the danger of unfair prejudice against the probative value of the evidence only when requested to do so at trial. See, State v. Raywalt, 436 N.W.2d 234 (N.D. 1989); State v. Mark, 286 N.W.2d 396 (Iowa 1979); McClelland v. State, 84 Wis. 2d 145, 267 N.W.2d 843 (1978); U.S. v. Amaechi, 991 F.2d 374 (7th Cir. 1993), cert. denied 61 U.S.L.W. 3835 (U.S. June 14, 1993) (No. 92-8654); U.S. v. Searing, 984 F.2d 960 (8th Cir. 1993); U.S. v. Boney, 977 F.2d 624 (D.C. Cir. 1992); U.S. v. Wilson, 966 F.2d 243 (7th Cir. 1992); U.S. v. Gomez-Norena, 908 F.2d 497 (9th Cir. 1990), cert. denied 498 U.S. 947, 111 S. Ct. 363, 112 L. Ed. 2d 326.
Schrein objected to the admission of the Redbook article on the grounds of relevancy. The court properly overruled that objection. Had Schrein then interposed an objection on the grounds that the article was unfairly prejudicial, the trial court would have been required to determine whether the otherwise admissible evidence should have been excluded because it was unfairly prejudicial. The trial court was not asked to do so. Because Schrein did not object to the article on the grounds of unfair prejudice, see § 27-403, the trial court had no obligation to exclude it on those grounds. Therefore, although Schrein argued on appeal that the article “was devastating to the defense” and left the defendant “mortally wounded,” brief for appellant at 28, 30, the issue of unfair prejudice was not reviewable on appeal.
ADMISSION OF THE PICTURE
The State also argues that the Court of Appeals erred in ruling that testimony about the picture in defendant’s examining room should have been excluded.
Under Neb. Rev. Stat. § 27-402 (Reissue 1989), “[e]vidence which is not relevant is not admissible.” “Relevant evidence” is defined as “evidence having any tendency to make the existence of any fact that is of consequence to the determination of the action more probable or less probable than it would be without *148the evidence.” Neb. Rev. Stat. § 27-401 (Reissue 1989). Furthermore, as the Court of Appeals correctly noted, in order to be admissible, nonexpert opinion testimony must be “ ‘(a) rationally based on the perception of the witness and (b) helpful to a clear understanding of [the witness’] testimony or the determination of a fact in issue.’ ” State v. Schrein, 1 NCA 1581, 1593 (1992) (quoting Neb. Rev. Stat. § 27-701 (Reissue 1989)). Thus, only if Langenfeld’s opinion was rationally based on her perception and would tend to make it more or less probable that Schrein had sexually assaulted his patients was her opinion regarding the picture relevant and admissible.
However, we need not determine the basis of Langenfeld’s opinion or its probative value because, as noted above, an appellant cannot object to the receipt of evidence to which it did not so object at trial. See Havlicek v. State, supra. Schrein did not object to the testimony of Langenfeld in which she described the picture, nor did he object when, in response to his own question, she stated that she thought the picture was “sexy,” “suggestive,” and “inappropriate.” Any additional testimony regarding Langenfeld’s opinion of the picture elicited during direct examination was cumulative and, therefore, would constitute harmless error even if inadmissible. Thus, the Court of Appeals erred in concluding that Langenfeld’s testimony about the picture should have been excluded.
CONCLUSION
For the foregoing reasons, the Court of Appeals erred in holding that the magazine article and the testimony concerning the picture were inadmissible and, therefore, erred in reversing the convictions of Schrein. Therefore, we reverse the judgment of the Court of Appeals and remand this cause to the Court of Appeals with direction to reinstate the judgments on the five convictions of Schrein.
Reversed and remanded with direction.

=== CASE 9739786 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:20:43.929571+00 ===

Shanahan, J.,
dissenting.
The majority misapplies Neb. Evid. R. 106, Neb. Rev. Stat. § 27-106 (Reissue 1989), in Schrein’s case.
On cross-examination, Bovasso testified that during his investigation, he spoke with M.M. and mentioned something *149“about pedophiles” in general, but denied that he had stated or implied to M.M. that Schrein was a pedophile. Moreover, in cross-examining Bovasso, counsel never asked about the identity or contents of any “literature” which Bovasso had given to M.M. during their conversation. However, on redirect examination of Bovasso, and over Schrein’s relevance objection, a copy of the Redbook article which Bovasso had given to M.M. was received in evidence.
Nebraska’s Rule 106 is a principle of completeness and is designed to prevent an act, declaration, conversation, or other writing from being presented in part when another related part of the act, declaration, conversation, or writing is necessary in fairness to supply the entire context so that the parts may be simultaneously considered together as a whole. Thus, the objective of Rule 106 is elimination of mistake or prevention of a misleading initial impression when matters are taken out of context.
For admission under Rule 106, the additional material must be related to the same subject matter and must “tend to explain, modify, qualify or otherwise shed light on the part already received.” Michael H. Graham, Handbook of Federal Evidence § 106.1 at 57 (3d ed. 1991). See, also, U.S. v. Sweiss, 814 F.2d 1208 (7th Cir. 1987) (the part sought to be admitted must be relevant to the issues and only that part or those parts that qualify or explain the part in evidence may be admitted to avoid misleading the fact finder and ensure a fair understanding of the evidence).
“Relevant evidence means evidence having any tendency to make the existence of any fact that is of consequence to the determination of the action more probable or less probable than it would be without the evidence.” Neb. Evid. R. 401, Neb. Rev. Stat. § 27-401 (Reissue 1989). “To be relevant, evidence must be rationally related to an issue by a likelihood, not a mere possibility, of proving or disproving an issue to be decided.” State v. Lonnecker, 237 Neb. 207, 210, 465 N.W.2d 737, 740-41 (1991). Accord, State v. Salamon, 241 Neb. 878, 491 N.W.2d 690 (1992); State v. Coleman, 239 Neb. 800, 478 N.W.2d 349 (1992); State v. Lomack, 239 Neb. 368, 476 N.W.2d 237 (1991).
Validation of the State’s introduction of the magazine article *150under Rule 106 is not supplied by defense counsel’s “opening the door.” As expressed in 1 Jack B. Weinstein & Margaret A. Berger, Weinstein’s Evidence ¶ 106[01] at 106-10 (1992): “[Fed. R. Evid.] 106 is designed to protect the adversary and not to provide a method to subvert other exclusionary rules.” Weinstein and Berger further observe: -
The phrase “opening the door,” has been used with such a lack of discrimination, that it would probably be well to eliminate it. One party’s errors should not be used as an excuse to compound them. The court should not permit the trial to get out of control. Only if the evidence by one party needs to be met or explained away by the other side does its mere introduction provide independent warrant for the introduction of other evidence.
1 Weinstein & Berger, supra at 106-18. “ ‘Opening the door is one thing. But what comes through the door is another.’ ” United States v. Winston, 447 F.2d 1236, 1240 (D.C. Cir. 1971). In U.S. v. Brown, 921 F.2d 1304, 1307-08 (D.C. Cir. 1990), the court stated:
“Curative admissibility” is a shield, not a sword. Although the government may prevent a defendant from using rules of evidence to select and enter pieces of evidence wholly out of context, the government may not shore up a prosecution by pushing through the open door evidence not “necessary to remove any unfair prejudice” created by defense counsel’s tactics. In sum, the range of otherwise-inadmissible evidence that may be squeezed through an “open door” is limited.
Although Rule 106 may have allowed the State to elicit other parts of Bovasso’s conversation with M.M., the State instead introduced a document, the magazine article, as the balance of the “same subject” of inquiry during cross-examination of Bovasso. How a document becomes the balance of a conversation is unexplained and remains a puzzlement. Moreover, since Bovasso did not mention or imply that Schrein was a pedophile, in what way did the magazine article eliminate a mistake or prevent a misleading initial impression and thereby make Bovasso’s conversation with M.M. more comprehensible?
*151Admissibility of the Redbook article in Schrein’s case is subject to the general requirement of relevance. The State suggests that admission of the magazine article was a response to defense counsel’s challenge to Bovasso’s credibility and rehabilitated Bovasso’s testimony. Actually, in all his testimony concerning the conversation with M.M., Bovasso neither contradicted himself nor supplied any basis for impeachment and damage to his credibility. Just how the article, reciting that child molesters often become pediatricians and referring to psychiatric treatment for an unnamed pedophilic pediatrician, restored or buttressed Bovasso’s credibility is unexplained, undoubtedly because the Nebraska Evidence Rules provide no legitimate explanation. Whether the article influenced anyone in Bovasso’s investigation would be a conclusion premised on absolute speculation. Furthermore, the issue in Schrein’s case was whether he sexually assaulted five children. The article did not tend to prove that Schrein was guilty of the charges because the article presented only general information and contained nothing related to the specific acts involved in the charges against Schrein. Additionally, the record contains no evidence establishing that the article’s authors had sufficient expertise for the opinions and conclusions in the article; hence, an evidential foundation for relevance of the authors’ expressed opinions and conclusions is totally absent. The magazine article, which might have been entitled “Profile of a Pedophile,” stated that some pediatricians were child molesters. As a result of that characterization connecting pediatricians with pedophiles, the accusations against Schrein, a pediatrician, acquired some validity. In that manner, the Redbook article became a witness which Schrein was unable to confront and, therefore, could not cross-examine. Denial of Schrein’s right to inquire into such damaging evidence violated his rights to confront and cross-examine witnesses against him.
A conviction of any crime, even sexual assault of a child, must be based on relevant evidence consistent with a defendant’s constitutional rights of confrontation and cross-examination necessary for a fair trial. Although some may feel that Schrein “opened the door” for admission of the Redbook article, the door which actually opened was a *152trapdoor through which fell the constitutional rights to confront and cross-examine adverse witnesses and receive a fair trial. Therefore, the judgment of the Nebraska Court of Appeals should have been affirmed.
White and Caporale, JJ., join in this dissent.

=== CASE 2220931 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:00.735164+00 ===

357 N.W.2d 271 (1984)
SWIDEN APPLIANCE & FURNITURE, INC., Plaintiff and Appellant,
v.
NATIONAL BANK OF SOUTH DAKOTA, EAST BRANCH, Defendant and Appellee.
No. 14047.
Supreme Court of South Dakota.
Argued October 27, 1983.
Decided October 31, 1984.
*272 John E. Burke, Sioux Falls, for plaintiff and appellant; John F. Gridley, III, Sioux Falls, on brief.
Steven W. Sanford of Cadwell, Sanford & Deibert, Sioux Falls, for defendant and appellee.
MORGAN, Justice.
This appeal is from an action brought by Swiden Appliance & Furniture, Inc. (Swiden) against National Bank of South Dakota in Sioux Falls, East Branch (Bank), on alternative counts of negligence and breach of contract. A jury returned a verdict for Bank and Swiden appeals. We affirm.
Alick Swiden is the principal owner of Swiden, a "one man operation." He has been in business and sold goods through retail installment sales contracts since 1937. Between 1937 and 1974, Swiden sold consumer paper to several different banks. In January of 1974, Swiden began selling consumer paper in the form of its retail installment sales contracts to Bank because, according to Swiden, Bank agreed to provide certain collection services. Two documents outlined the parties' relationship.
The parties initially signed a Reserve Agreement under which Bank purchased all acceptable retail installment sales contracts that Swiden offered. This agreement provided for two bookkeeping accounts which could be debited when Bank withdrew funds from Swiden's checking account to make up for payments it did not receive from Swiden's retail installment sales contract customers. When Bank purchased Swiden's contracts, it paid an *273 amount equal to the principal due on the installment sales contract, less an amount paid into the Holdback Reserve Account, directly into Swiden's checking account.[1] The amount paid into the Holdback Account was separately agreed to between the parties and varied on each sale. The Holdback Account provided a bad debt reserve and was debited when a customer missed a payment.
Under the Reserve Agreement, Bank also set up a Differential Reserve Account. At the time of individual sales, Bank paid a percentage of the interest, or the financing charge due on each retail installment sales contract, into Swiden's checking account and credited the Differential Reserve. When a customer paid off a contract early, the amount of the unearned interest refund was debited to this reserve account. On a monthly basis, Bank received a percentage of the interest not paid into the Differential Reserve account over the life of the contract in consideration for its purchase of the paper. Once a year, Bank was to pay Swiden the amount by which the Differential Reserve exceeded fifteen percent of the total balance outstanding on all notes.
The Reserve Agreement allowed Bank to withhold payments to Swiden from either reserve account if Swiden was in any way indebted to Bank at the time of settlement, and to apply the reserves against any debt Swiden owed Bank. Swiden also agreed that if installments on any contract sold to Bank continued in default for ninety days it would repurchase the contract for an amount equal to the unpaid balance, less any unearned discount. Under the final relevant portion of the reserve agreement, Swiden waived his right to notice of nonpayment, repossession, and all other notices to which he was entitled by law.
The relationship between Swiden and Bank was further set out in a document entitled "Dealer Guaranty of Individual Retail Installment Contract." Swiden filled out and signed a separate individual guarantee for each retail installment sales contract that he sold to Bank. Under these agreements, Swiden unconditionally guaranteed that his customer would pay "each and every installment ... when due" and in the event of default Swiden was responsible, upon Bank's demand, for payment of any amount due. Bank could re-draw upon Swiden's checking account for the amount advanced to Swiden on that particular contract and debit one of the bookkeeping accounts, the Differential Reserve Account or the Holdback Reserve Account, as provided under the initial reserve agreement in the event a customer defaulted. Swiden agreed to pay immediately upon demand and waived the right to require Bank to proceed against his customer or the merchandise. Swiden's obligation under the individual guarantees was unconditional, unqualified, and continued until the individual installment sales contract was fully paid.
Early in the Swiden-Bank relationship, in fact by November of 1974, it became apparent that the default and delinquent payment rates on Swiden installment contracts were significantly higher than the same rates on other dealer contracts Bank purchased. Bank stopped purchasing Swiden's contracts in 1978 because of the unusually high rate of default. Bank continued servicing the previously purchased contracts until the last was paid off in February of 1980. At that time, the balances in Swiden's bookkeeping accounts were applied against an unrelated loan obligation Swiden owed Bank and Swiden's bookkeeping accounts were closed.
Toward the end of the relationship, Swiden discovered that Bank had not reassigned some contracts Swiden had repurchased under the recourse provisions of the agreement. At least one had been marked paid and mailed to the retail customer by Bank. In addition, the statute of limitations had run on several contracts, precluding collection.
*274 Swiden commenced this action against Bank for breach of contract and negligence claiming (1) that Bank had agreed to collect the contracts but had not informed him it was not doing so, and (2) that Bank had marked contracts paid and returned them to customers. Bank's answers assert the affirmative defenses of estoppel, ratification, contributory negligence, and failure to mitigate. At trial, Swiden's theory changed. At the close of Swiden's case-in-chief, the complaint was amended to conform to the proof. The amended complaint alleged that Bank breached its contracts with Swiden by failing to follow normal standards of the banking industry and that Bank negligently violated banking industry standards. Damages were alleged in the amount of $29,452. At trial, Swiden moved for directed verdict after its evidence was presented. The motion was denied and the case was submitted to the jury. A verdict was rendered for Bank. Swiden moved for judgment non obstante veredicto or, in the alternative, for a new trial. These motions were also denied and Swiden appeals from the judgment and denial of the motions.
Swiden frames the issues as follows: Is Bank liable to a seller/guarantor of a conditional sales contract for damages when Bank takes seller/guarantor's money to pay the contract under recourse and guarantee agreements, marks the contracts paid, and either sends them to the debtor or fails to reassign them to the seller/guarantor? Bank frames the issues as follows: Was the evidence introduced by Swiden and Bank such that reasonable minds could not draw differing inferences and conclusions as to whether (a) Bank breached the contract with Swiden or was culpably negligent for failure to return to Swiden certain installment sales contracts, (b) Bank's conduct was a proximate cause of damage claimed by Swiden, and (c) Swiden was contributorily negligent?
Bank's conduct is the sole issue on this appeal, in that both allegations of Swiden's amended complaint, breach of contract and negligence are based on Bank's alleged failure to follow normal accepted standards of the banking industry. We will, however, consider the allegations separately.
In support of his breach of contract argument, Swiden first cites SDCL 57A-1-205(3) [2] for the proposition that the only contracts formed between the parties were later supplemented and qualified through normal custom and usage in the trade and through a specific course of dealing between Swiden and Bank. The breach of contract question thus centers around the form of the contracts as well as the express terms of the two agreements. The existence and scope of a trade usage or course of dealing are questions of fact to be determined by the fact finder. Superior Foods, Inc. v. Harris-Teeter Super Markets, 288 N.C. 213, 217 S.E.2d 566 (1975). The jury did not find a usage of trade that superseded the original agreement in this case. In any event, obligations created under course of dealing and usage of trade are subordinate to any terms of an express agreement with which the parties' conduct or a trade usage disagree. SDCL 57A-1-205(4); see United States v. E.W. Savage & Son, Inc., 343 F. Supp. 123 (D.S.D.1972) (decided under South Dakota law that writings control over usage of trade or course of dealings). In this case, the written contract is embodied in the Reserve Agreement and the separate dealer guarantees of individual retail installment contracts. SDCL 57A-1-205(4) provides:
(4) The express terms of an agreement and an applicable course of dealing or usage of trade shall be construed wherever reasonable as consistent with each other; but when such construction is unreasonable express terms control both course of dealing and usage of trade and course of *275 dealing controls usage of trade. (Emphasis supplied.)
Under the Reserve Agreement and the individual guarantees, Swiden was "unconditionally," "absolutely," and "unqualified[ly]" obligated to pay Bank the amount of any defaulted or delinquent installments. The Reserve Agreement subordinated Swiden's right to the fund in his checking account that was related to the balance of the Reserve Accounts to Bank's right to set off for any indebtedness, direct or indirect, that Swiden owed Bank. Missed and delinquent installment payments guaranteed by Swiden under the recourse clause and indemnity clause thus became an indebtedness to Bank that could properly be offset and deducted from Swiden's accounts under the terms of the written contracts. Under these express contracts, Swiden also waived his right to notice of nonpayment, repossession, and all other notices. Consequently, in light of the clearly expressed Reserve Agreement terms covering Bank's rights and obligations, the testimony and evidence Swiden offered at trial to show that the standard of conduct and the usage in the trade constituted the contract was irrelevant and immaterial.[3]
The written guarantees specifically precluded both prior and potential unwritten agreements from superseding the individual guarantees. Swiden's liability under the Dealer Guaranty of Individual Retail Installment Contract that was signed upon the sale of each contract, could not be modified and Swiden was liable under those agreements for any default on any of his contracts, "without respect to any other agreements ... unless specifically agreed otherwise in writing." The usage of trade and course of dealing that Swiden asserts cannot rise to the level of a contractual obligation between these parties.
The two written documents did not impose any conditions or obligations upon Bank to collect accounts or return contracts. Bank's alleged oral agreement to collect Swiden's accounts and the custom of returning contracts testified to at trial are simply not consistent with the written agreements that Swiden signed and those agreements do not obligate Bank to a specific custom or usage. The express terms of the contracts control in the face of inconsistency. SDCL 57A-1-205(4). We affirm on this issue.
The negligence count also revolves around Bank's compliance or noncompliance with the standard of care in the banking industry and normal banking practices. Swiden's contention that Bank admits it violated "normal accepted banking practices and usage" is not supported by the trial transcript. Dave Hanten (Hanten), the bank manager, explained what he considered the normal banking procedure when consumer paper goes bad and is returned without recourse. While he admitted that Bank did not follow this "normal" procedure, he did not say that he considered this to be a normal situation. Swiden refers to SDCL 57A-4-103(5) as Bank's standard of care and the proper delineation of Bank's duty to Swiden. Article 4 of the Uniform Commercial Code covers bank deposits and collections, the payment or nonpayment of items, drafts and checks by depository, payor, intermediary and collecting banks. This case involves the sale of retail installment sales contracts and does not fall within the scope of SDCL ch. 57A-4. SDCL ch. 57A-9, Secured Transactions, controls this case. SDCL ch. 57A-9 applies to any sale of accounts or chattel paper. SDCL 57A-9-102(1)(b). SDCL 57A-9-104(f) provides an exclusion for contracts or chattel paper sold or assigned for the purpose of collection only. The sale of chattel paper in this case was not, however, for the purpose of collection only. A "collection only" assignment is a transaction that does not involve the advance of money. Daly v. Shrimplin, 610 P.2d 397 (Wyo.1980). In this case, Swiden received *276 the balance due on each contract, less the reserve amounts, at the time it sold the contract to Bank. Thus, Bank advanced money to Swiden and SDCL ch. 57A-9 applies. The principles set out in SDCL ch. 57A-1 apply to all of the chapters in Title 57A. SDCL 57A-1-205 provides that when express terms are inconsistent with an applicable course of dealing or usage of trade, the express terms control. SDCL 57A-1-205(4). The course of dealing between Swiden and Bank controls over the usage of other banks in discerning a standard. SDCL 57A-1-205(4). At trial, Bank primarily took the position that it had not violated its obligations under the express written agreements, the course of dealing between itself and Swiden, or the standard of conduct for the industry. In support of its position, Bank presented the testimony of a number of Bank employees who had worked on Swiden's account to show that Bank did all it could reasonably be expected to do in compliance with the proper standard and the written contracts Swiden signed.
Although Swiden testified at trial that his memory was vague and he did not recall signing any contracts with Bank or reviewing statements with Bank employees, he did recall receiving monthly bank statements. In opposition to Swiden's vague memory, Bank introduced three loan officers who testified regarding their working relationships with Swiden. Tom Marchetti (Marchetti) handled Swiden's account and consumer paper for Bank from 1974 to 1976. Marchetti testified that during that time he telephoned or personally visited Swiden to discuss past due and defaulted retail installment contracts before Swiden honored his guarantees by making payment on those contracts. Marchetti also telephoned Swiden's customers to request payment and he called upon Swiden only when an account was deemed uncollectable. Marchetti also identified letters he sent Swiden in which he enclosed contracts that were reassigned to Swiden and debited to his account. These letters notified Swiden of certain delinquent installments for which his account was debited.
Jim Crawford (Crawford), a collector for Bank from 1975 to 1976, testified that when accounts became delinquent he either telephoned Swiden or visited him. Swiden either made the payments in cash and it was credited against the individual contract account, or Swiden requested that it be charged against his checking account. Like Marchetti, Crawford identified letters he sent to Swiden regarding debits to Swiden's account for installment payments on dealer contracts. Howard Priesz (Priesz) worked for Bank and collected on Swiden accounts for about six months. Priesz testified that Swiden's account was debited for delinquent and defaulted installments only when Bank's collection efforts failed. Priesz also testified that before accounts he worked on were debited for delinquencies or defaults Swiden or one of his employees was contacted personally to determine which accounts would be debited.
Terry Kappes (Kappes) worked at Bank's East Branch from 1977 to 1978 and made collections on Swiden customer contracts. He sometimes debited the Swiden checking account for past due payments and he explained the process involved in debiting the account. First, a debit ticket including the preparer's name, the total dollar amount, the customer account numbers with the individual dollar amounts, and the customers' names was prepared. Second, Swiden or an employee was contacted, usually by telephone, and told which accounts were debited. Third, a credit entry corresponding to the debit was made and the original debit slip went to the individual accounts with the credits. A copy of the debit ticket was then sent to Swiden. Handwritten abbreviations on the back of some of the debit ticket copies mailed to Swiden indicated that he or an employee had been aware of the debits to his checking account which were indicated on the slips. Finally, the original debit slips were returned to Swiden with his monthly bank statement. The debits were made all at once at month's end; one debit was done for all of the accounts that became over thirty days past due during that month. Therefore, *277 debit slips typically showed a total on the front and a list of individual customer names and amounts on the back.
Finally, Renae Goltz (Goltz), who worked for Bank on Swiden's accounts from 1975 to 1978, testified that Bank provided Swiden with a weekly computer printout listing his delinquent accounts and each customer's amount past due. She stated that she spoke with Swiden at least weekly and also periodically over the phone. As a counterpoint to Swiden's vague memory, Goltz kept written notes on each customer she collected from and the amount debited to Swiden's account for the payment. She refreshed her memory from those notes. Goltz testified that Swiden directed her to debit his checking account for payments he made on his customers' contracts, for payments his customers made directly to him, and for payments made on contracts after Swiden repossessed the merchandise. Goltz also testified that she had returned defaulted contracts to Swiden. The jury determines the witnesses' credibility. Finch v. Christensen, 84 S.D. 420, 172 N.W.2d 571 (1969). In this case, the jury chose to believe Bank's witnesses.
Hanten, Bank's manager, testified that Swiden had a copy of each contract and had access to all of the contract originals whenever he wanted them. Hanten further testified that Swiden could have called the bank at any time and found out the balance of his reserve accounts, the extent of debits against his checking account, and the individual customer responsible for the debit. The written agreements are unclear as to whether Bank or the customer was to get the retail sales contracts after the installments were paid. In this case, possession of the original retail installment sales contracts was irrelevant. See SDCL 19-18-3. Swiden's right to recover any guarantee or default payments from his customers was not defeated by Bank's inadvertent return of the contract original to the retail customer. Peoples Bank of South Carolina, Inc. v. Robinson, 272 S.C. 155, 249 S.E.2d 784 (1978). When Swiden made the payments, he acquired an immediate right of action against his defaulting retail customer regardless of who held the original installment sales contract. O.K. Door Company v. Lincoln Engineering Const. Co., 174 Neb. 682, 119 N.W.2d 153 (1963).
The testimony and evidence presented at trial clearly show that Swiden was repeatedly able to collect payments, obtain returns and repossess collateral without possession of the original contract. See SDCL 19-18-3. Witnesses for both parties, Hanten for Bank and Carrol Flowers of United National Bank for Swiden, testified that the procedures and mechanics of consumer paper sales vary from bank to bank and there is no generally accepted banking practice or established standard of care. The standard is especially difficult to pin down when the customer makes some payments on the contract and the dealer makes others. Swiden could not foreseeably have been damaged by Bank's failure to return the contracts to Swiden or by Bank's return of the contracts to the retail customers. Swiden was free to collect on the contracts at any time. We affirm on this issue.
A motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict relates back and is based upon the motion for directed verdict made at the close of the testimony. Raebel v. Fishers Grove Golf Course, Inc., 88 S.D. 20, 214 N.W.2d 785 (1974); SDCL 15-6-50(b). A directed verdict is proper only when the evidence is undisputed or such that reasonable minds could not draw different inferences or conclusions from the facts. Fajardo v. Cammack, 322 N.W.2d 873 (S.D.1982). Swiden moved for a directed verdict on the question of liability only and wanted to leave the damages question to the jury. Swiden would have thereby put the issues of proximate cause, contributory negligence, and breach of contract before the trial court. These legal conclusions rest upon substantial issues of material fact that are rightfully jury questions. In this case, the determination of whether Swiden's alleged loss was caused by Bank's failure to return the contracts, by Swiden's *278 failure to ask for them, or by Swiden's failure to pursue readily available legal remedies, were issues of fact for the jury to determine. There was considerable dispute in the evidence on these issues. The credibility of the witnesses was for determination by the jury. Finch v. Christensen, supra. The denial of Swiden's directed verdict motion and motion for judgment n.o.v., or for a new trial, was proper and the trial court's order is affirmed on that issue.
WOLLMAN and HENDERSON, JJ., and DUNN, Retired Justice, concur.
HOYT, Circuit Judge, acting for FOSHEIM, C.J., concurs.
WUEST, Circuit Judge, acting as Supreme Court Justice, not participating.
NOTES
[1]  A dealer's finance charge or time price differential and any filing fee or other charge paid by Bank were also deducted from the amount of the unmatured installments to arrive at the amount Bank paid into Swiden's checking account for the individual contracts.
[2]  SDCL 57A-1-205(3) provides:
(3) A course of dealing between parties and any usage of trade in the vocation or trade in which they are engaged or of which they are or should be aware give particular meaning to and supplement or qualify terms of an agreement.
[3]  Even if Swiden had established a usage of trade that correctly delineated Bank's standard of conduct here, the course of dealing between Bank and Swiden, to which Swiden at least acquiesced, would supersede as the proper standard of conduct. SDCL 57A-1-205(4).

=== CASE 2220940 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:00.914345+00 ===

44 Ill. App. 2d 412 (1963)
196 N.E.2d 528
Eleanor Virginia Neissl, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
Joseph P. Hartman, et al., the Unborn Children or Descendants of Children of Joseph P. Hartman and Mary Margaret O'Hallaron and the St. Louis Union Trust Company and Joseph P. Hartman, Trustees Under the Will of Joseph B. Hartman, Deceased, Defendants-Appellees. Diana Sheehan, et al., and the Unborn Children or Descendants of Children of Eleanor Virginia Neissl, Defendants-Appellants.
Gen. No. 63-O-3.
Illinois Appellate Court  Fourth District.
November 25, 1963.
Rehearing denied December 30, 1963.
Murray & Stephens, of Centralia, for appellants.
John F. O'Connell and Walker & Williams, of East St. Louis, for appellees.
CULBERTSON, P.J.
This is an appeal from a decree of the Circuit Court of St. Clair County, construing a certain portion of a *413 will. The will provided in part that the testator's children are given the power to appoint a portion of the trust created by the will, to their "own child or children, or descendants of child or children." The Court below entered a decree construing the words "child or children" as used in the paragraph of the will under consideration, to be limited to natural children, excluding adopted children. This appeal is taken from that decree. It is contended on appeal in this Court that the words "child or children" when read in context with the entire will and in view of the law of Illinois at the time of the execution of the will, were used by the testator to include adopted children and their descendants, and that that construction should have been applied by the Trial Judge.
The decedent, Joseph B. Hartman, died on November 4, 1939, leaving surviving his widow and four children (including plaintiff). His will was admitted to probate on November 9, 1939, and had been executed on October 7, 1939. All four of his children were married at the time of his death. Plaintiff, who was married on September 11, 1939, less than a month before the execution of the will, had a stepdaughter whom she later adopted, living in her home. There was no evidence in the record to show that the decedent had any knowledge that plaintiff had a stepchild or that she contemplated adopting the stepchild.
The will of decedent gave the home and household effects to his widow, and placed the balance of his estate in trust to be held, first, for the use of the widow, and after her death, for his children and descendants of any deceased child unless the deceased child should have by appointment, otherwise directed. One paragraph specifically provides that after the death of the widow of decedent, the trustees were to hold the trust estate in equal shares for the benefit of testator's children, with a proviso that the share of *414 any of testator's children who may then be deceased or which thereafter died shall "unless said deceased child shall have by appointment ... otherwise directed, go to his or her living descendants." Another paragraph further provides that the testator directs that his four children shall have power by deed, will, or codicil, to appoint or designate which of their "child or children, or descendants of child or children," shall be entitled to their interest in the trust.
It is pointed out that this is a case which could not arise in any will written since 1945 for the reason that the Legislature had since provided (1959 Ill Rev Stats, c 4, § 11-2), that henceforth in determining the meaning of a written instrument an adopted child should be deemed a natural child unless the contrary intent plainly appears in the instrument. The question before the Trial Court was what the testator meant by use of the word "child" when he gave his own children the power of appointment with respect to the share of the trust established by his will.
The defendants-appellees had also contended that the Court of Equity could not assume jurisdiction to construe a will which was unambiguous, on the basis that the language was so clear in the present will as to be unambiguous.
At the time the will under consideration was executed, the law of this State prohibited an adopted child from taking property from either lineal or collateral kindred of the adopting parent per stirpes, or property expressly limited to the body of the adopting parent (1939 Ill Rev Stats, c 3, § 165; c 4, § 5). The Supreme Court of this State has indicated that unless there is a manifest intention to the contrary, the presumption will be applied that the testator intended his property should go in accordance with the law of descent and distribution (Dahmer v. Wensler, 350 Ill. 23, 182 N.E. 799; Dell v. Herman, 365 Ill. 261, 6 NE2d 159).
*415 On appeal in this Court the plaintiff cites the case of Munie v. Gruenewald, 289 Ill. 468, 124 N.E. 605. In that case the testator knew of the adopted child long before the will was executed and always treated the adopted child in the same manner as he treated his own grandchildren. The Court in that case emphasized the fact that the child was adopted seven years before the testator made his will and ten years before his death, and there was a clearly expressed conduct towards this child during the lifetime of the testator to show that it was his intention to include her in the word "child" under the will. The Court in that case, at page 474, underscores the distinction when it says that in cases where other Courts have held that the word "children" did not include an adopted child, the basic reason for such conclusion was that the testator could not have intended the adopted child to be so included either because the child was adopted after the testator's death or after the making of the will.
It is apparent under the record that the testator could not have had an adopted child in contemplation when the will was executed since there was no adopted child at such time. So far as the record shows, apparently the testator did not even know of the child who was living with the daughter. Considering the will as a whole in the light of the applicable law at the time of its execution and at the time of the death of the testator, we must conclude that the construction of the Circuit Court that the intention of the testator when referring to "children" did not include the adopted child was proper. The decree of the Circuit Court of St. Clair County will, therefore, be affirmed and this cause will be remanded to such Court for further proceedings relating thereto.
Affirmed, and remanded.
SCHEINEMAN and HOFFMAN, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9739789 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:20:52.121314+00 ===

Per Curiam.
Defendants Wayne County Prosecuting Attorney, Chief Assistant Prosecuting Attorney, and John Doe, Assistant Prosecuting Attorneys (defendants) appeal by leave granted from a circuit court order denying defendants’ motion for summary judgment. Pursuant to GCR 1963, 806.3(2), the following facts were adopted.
Plaintiff was arrested on November 5, 1980, by Highland Park Police officers. The officers came to the home of plaintiffs mother to question her about an automobile registered in her name. When plaintiff admitted to occasionally driving the car, the officers arrested him without a warrant.
Plaintiff was held by the Highland Park Police officers for more than 30 hours and was questioned by police officers from the City of Detroit.
At the end of this interrogation on November 5, plaintiff was turned over to Detroit police officers. He was questioned again for more than 56 hours while in custody of the Detroit Police Department. During that time, plaintiff made statements which tended to incriminate him in certain murders. He claims that these statements were solely a product of the “brutal interrogations”. Plaintiff claims that *365his statements were not based on his personal knowledge but, rather, that he was merely providing details about the murders which were fed to him by the officers.
At the conclusion of the Detroit Police Department interrogation, plaintiff was charged with the murders of four prostitutes.
In December, 1980, one Donald Murphy was arrested and confessed to three of the four murders with which plaintiff was charged. In addition to Murphy’s confession, there was physical evidence connecting him with the crimes. Some police officers urged the release of plaintiff since they now thought plaintiff was not the perpetrator of the murders.
The police officers having the power of decision, however, refused to release plaintiff, and the defendant prosecutor refused to drop the charges.
On or about January 8, 1981, defendant Carnovale, the chief assistant prosecuting attorney, made the following statement before newspaper, television and radio reporters:
"Based on a rather lengthy investigation, we have concluded that we are proceeding in the correct direction and we intend to continue proceeding in that direction. There will be no dismissals at this time of any charges against Payton.”
This statement was published on or about January 9, 1981, in numerous newspapers and broadcast on numerous television and radio stations.
Subsequently, plaintiff’s incriminating statements and admissions were suppressed by Judge Warfield Moore of Detroit Recorder’s Court on the ground that plaintiff had been held too long without being charged and brought before a magistrate. Soon after the suppressions, all murder *366charges against Payton were dismissed by Judge Moore. Plaintiff claims that the dismissal occurred on or about March 20, 1981. Defendants take issue with plaintiff regarding the time and date of the dismissal.
Plaintiff further claims that after the dismissal of the charges the following statement was made by defendant Cahalan, the prosecuting attorney, at a press conference:
"If there is any justice in the criminal justice system, I am confident that Mr. Payton will stand trial.”
This statement was published in the Detroit Free Press and the Detroit News and broadcast by television and radio stations in the Detroit area on or about March 31, 1981. The Detroit Free Press republished this statement on or about January 18, 1982.
Plaintiff thereafter filed this lawsuit alleging, among other counts, that the statements made to the news media by Carnovale and Cahalan constituted slander per se because each maliciously and falsely accused plaintiff of serious crimes. Plaintiff argued that, contrary to 42 USC 1983, his federal civil rights were violated as were his rights under the state law of defamation.
Defendants moved for summary judgment pursuant to GCR 1963, 117.2(1), on the grounds that they were absolutely immune from the civil liability for their actions. In an opinion dated December 1, 1982, the trial court denied the motion with respect to plaintiff’s claim of defamation under state law. Regarding plaintiff’s claim under 42 USC 1983, the motion was denied without prejudice.
On appeal, defendants argue that the trial court *367erred by denying defendants’ motion for summary judgment, the trial court having held that defendants were not entitled to absolute immunity from civil liability. We agree with defendants that the trial court should have granted the motion.
In Imbler v Pachtman, 424 US 409; 96 S Ct 984; 47 L Ed 2d 128 (1976), the United States Supreme Court considered whether a prosecutor is immune from civil suit for damages under 42 USC 1983. In a limited holding, the Court concluded that a prosecutor is absolutely immune from civil suits arising out of the initiation, prosecution, and presentment of the state’s case. Imbler, supra, p 431. The Court reasoned that such activities were "intimately associated with the judicial phase of the criminal process”, and thus were activities which deserved the same degree of immunity as that provided under common law. Imbler, supra, p 430. The Court identified various considerations in support of its holding. The threat of suits, for example, would undermine the prosecutor’s performance in that every decision would be clouded by considerations of his own potential liability for damages. Further, "unique and intolerable burdens” would be imposed if prosecutors were required to defend a decision requiring the exercise of discretion. Imbler, supra, pp 424-426. Thus, in considering the applicability of the defense of absolute immunity, the focus is on the functional nature of the prosecutor’s activities which are the basis of the lawsuit rather than his status as a prosecutor. Imbler, supra, p 430.
In applying the rule established in Imbler, the federal courts have sought to distinguish between activity which is quasi-judicial in nature, and thus absolutely immune, and that which is essentially investigative or administrative, and thus entitled *368to only the protection of the lesser qualified, good faith immunity. McSurely v McClennan, 697 F2d 309, 318 (DC App, 1982); Taylor v Kavanagh, 640 F2d 450, 452 (CA 2, 1981). As noted in Gray v Bell, 712 F2d 490, 499 (DC App, 1983), "[delineation of the precise scope of protected advocatory conduct beyond the boundaries established in Imbler has proved to be exceedingly difficult” and "requires more than the mechanical application of labels”. Taylor, supra, p 452. The following considerations have been identified as helpful in examining the functional nature of prosecutorial conduct and identifying activities which are essentially quasi-judicial: "the physical and temporal relationship of the activity in question to the judicial process, the degreé to which the acts depend upon legal opinions and/or discretionary judgments, and the extent to which the acts at issue are primarily concerned with the prosecutor’s role as an advocate”. (Footnotes omitted.) Wilkinson v Ellis, 484 F Supp 1072, 1081 (ED Pa, 1980). A consideration which is especially relevant to the facts of this case was identified in Gray v Bell, supra, as follows:
"In examining [the prosecutor’s] conduct, we shall look first to whether it was sufficiently adversarial to evoke strong resentment and thus frequent retaliatory litigation. Perhaps the best measure of this is the phase of the proceedings at which the disputed conduct occurs. The prosecutor is far more likely to be the target of vindictive hostility once he has initiated criminal proceedings; in the post-indictment phase of the proceedings, he is generally required to do and say things on the public record that may cast suspicion and ultimately the criminal sanction on some individual. The prosecutor’s role in these circumstances is plainly advocatory.” Bell, supra, p 500 (Emphasis in original; foot*369note omitted.) See also Strong v Slaton, 510 F Supp 161 (ND Ga, 1981).
An application of the considerations set out above to the facts of this case leads us to conclude that the prosecutors are absolutely immune from liability under 42 USC 1983 for the statements in question. Both statements were made after the plaintiff had been charged and arraigned in connection with the murder of four prostitutes. As the defendant notes, Mr. Carnovale’s statements were made over ten weeks before the plaintiffs incriminating statements were suppressed. Defendant Cahalan’s statement was made subsequent to the suppression but at a time when the prosecution against Mr. Payton was continuing. Thus, both statements bore a close "physical and temporal relationship” to the judicial process. Wilkinson, supra, p 1081. Furthermore, both statements were intended to inform the public that the prosecution of Mr. Payton would continue. Thus, the statements were related to and depended upon the "legal opinions and/or discretionary judgments” of the prosecutor’s office. Wilkinson, supra, p 1081. Further, the statements were primarily concerned with the prosecutor’s role as an advocate, since they related to the public the decision of the prosecutor’s office to continue pursuing, on behalf of the people of the State of Michigan, investigation of Mr. Payton.
The final, and most important, consideration is "the phase of the proceedings at which the disputed conduct occurs”. Bell v Gray, supra, p 500. As stated in Bell, this factor is "perhaps the best measure” of whether the prosecutor’s conduct was sufficiently adversarial to evoke strong resentment and frequent retaliatory litigation, thus justifying the application of absolute immunity to the prose*370cutor’s conduct. Bell, supra, p 500. As mentioned earlier, both statements were made subsequent to the plaintiffs arraignment on the charges and at a time when the prosecution of Mr. Payton was proceeding at full speed. The statements were in fact designed to inform the public that the prosecution would continue despite developments which clearly weakened the prosecution’s case. The defendants thus found themselves at the state of the proceedings where they are "generally required to do and say things on the public record that may cast suspicion and ultimately the criminal sanction on some individual”. Bell, supra, p 500.
The trial court also erred in denying the motion for summary judgment under state law. A persuasive argument on this point came out of the Supreme Court of Indiana in Foster v Pearcy, 270 Ind 533; 387 NE2d 446 (1979), cert den 445 US 960; 100 S Ct 1646; 64 L Ed 2d 235 (1980), a case which involved facts similar to those at hand. In Foster, the prosecutor issued a statement to the press indicating that the plaintiff was part of a nationwide heroin ring, had grossed $18,000 per week from his heroin business, and had been indicted as a result of a two-month investigation. Foster, p 534. The court concluded that the prosecutor was absolutely immune from civil liability since he was duty-bound to keep the public informed of his investigative, administrative, and prosecutorial activities. Thus, where a prosecutor’s acts are reasonably within the general scope of his authority, no liability can attach. Foster, p 538.
This conclusion was echoed in a recent Michigan Court of Appeals decision, Davis v Eddie, 130 Mich App 284; 343 NW2d 11 (1983). While Davis involved a claim of false arrest and imprisonment rather than defamation as a result of a press *371release, this Court stated that "[w]here a prosecutor’s actions are within the scope of his prosecutorial functions and duties, his acts are quasi-judicial in nature and he has absolute immunity regarding the performance of those functions and duties”. Davis, p 286. In reaching this conclusion, the Davis Court relied upon the following observation from Bloss v Williams, 15 Mich App 228; 166 NW2d 520 (1968):
" 'The public interest requires that persons occupying such important positions and so closely identified with the judicial departments of the government should speak and act freely and fearlessly in the discharge of their important official functions * * Citing Yaselli v Goff, 12 F2d 396, 406 (CA 2, 1926).” Davis, supra, pp 286-287.
The Davis Court also noted that the duties and functions of a prosecutor are not strictly or narrowly construed, again citing the following passage from Bloss:
" 'The prosecutor’s powers and duties include not only those expressly set forth in the statute but also such additional functions as may be necessarily implied from those specifically mentioned.’ Bloss, supra, p 233, citing 27 CJS District and Prosecuting Attorneys, § 10.” Davis, supra, p 287.
Thus, Michigan law also favors the Imbler policy of protecting the prosecutor’s independence of judgment from harassment due to the constant threat of potential litigation. Since the statements in question were clearly uttered while the defendants were performing prosecutorial functions and duties, their acts were quasi-judicial in nature and thus absolutely immune from liability.
Reversed.

=== CASE 2221090 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:03.966162+00 ===

369 Mass. 860 (1976)
343 N.E.2d 876
COMMONWEALTH
vs.
CARLOS BOTELHO.
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Suffolk.
December 2, 1975.
March 5, 1976.
Present: HENNESSEY, C.J., QUIRICO, KAPLAN, & WILKINS, JJ.
Alan L. Kovacs, Assistant District Attorney, for the Commonwealth.
Paul A. D'Agostino, Jr., for the defendant.
KAPLAN, J.
The defendant Carlos Botelho is under indictment for the murder in the first degree of Lawrence S. Salvucci. The defendant moved before trial to suppress in-court and out-of-court identifications of him by one Marie Kearney. After an extended hearing, a judge of the Superior Court made findings and allowed the motion. The Commonwealth applied for interlocutory appeal pursuant to G.L.c. 278, § 28E, and leave was granted by a single justice of this court.
1. The judge's findings, amplified by some details taken from the transcript, yield the following picture of the Kearney confrontations and identifications. The murder occurred on March 5, 1974, at approximately 2 A.M. in the lobby of the Cockatoo Lounge in Cambridge. Mrs. Kearney worked in the lounge several evenings a week as a cocktail waitress, but this night she went to the lounge to socialize, arriving about nine thirty. She had three or four full drinks of Scotch whiskey in a "rock" glass and stayed after closing to assist Lawrence Salvucci, one of the managers, in straightening up the bar. They heard a noise and Salvucci went out to the lobby to investigate. He returned, jumped over the bar to get something, and went out again. Mrs. Kearney followed him into the *862 lobby, which is shared by several bars and a restaurant. She saw two men above her on the balcony where the offices of the complex are located. She indicated to Salvucci where the men were. As Salvucci ran up the stairs toward them, one of the men drew a gun and shot and killed him. Mrs. Kearney turned and ran back through the Cockatoo, out a fire exit, and to the desk area of a neighboring motel. Police were summoned but arrived too late to pursue Salvucci's assailants.
Mrs. Kearney had viewed the men on the balcony for approximately a minute (by her estimate) at a distance of twenty-five to thirty feet under subdued illumination. She was able to give the police only a general description of the gunman  "a white male, approximately five foot ten, early twenties, long brown hair, brown jacket on." (In fact, as the judge noted, the defendant had black hair.) After taking Mrs. Kearney's story, the police drove her to Watertown Square to view two suspects, but she said they were not involved because both had beards. The police then took her to the Cambridge and later to the Arlington police stations to view photographs (the defendant's picture was not among them). She did not match any to her recollection of the gunman though she picked out several pictures as resembling the second man. After dawn she went to the home of a friend, but was unable to sleep.
Meantime an Arlington police officer suggested to the Cambridge police that the defendant's photograph be shown to Mrs. Kearney. The officer knew that the defendant worked in a car wash near the Cockatoo, thought his reputation was bad, and believed he fit the description. It may be that the officer's attention was attracted to the defendant because the officer was to appear in the District Court of Lowell that day to prosecute the defendant for motor vehicle offenses.
Mrs. Kearney appeared at the Cambridge police station about noon and examined an array of photographs that included a picture of the defendant. She failed to *863 identify him. The judge examined the picture and concluded that it reasonably represented the defendant although it had been taken one or two years previously.
The Cambridge police then told Mrs. Kearney that she would be taken to Lowell to view a suspect. The Arlington police officer who was prosecuting the defendant had learned that the defendant and a brother worked part time in the motel next to the Cockatoo, and that the defendant recently had acquired some money. Therefore the officer had recommended that the witness view the defendant. He arranged to have the defendant held in custody in Lowell on a capias that had issued when the defendant failed to arrive on time for his court engagement. Mrs. Kearney, accompanied by her friend John Esposito, a barman at the Cockatoo, was brought to the Lowell court house. Cambridge officers spoke briefly there with an assistant district attorney who advised them not to display the defendant to the witness in the court room  the court room would be empty except for the handcuffed defendant and two court officers. Instead, the Cambridge officers contrived to display the defendant as he left the court house. Mrs. Kearney and Esposito were taken in a car to a court house parking lot where they could have a view of the rear entrance. Mrs. Kearney then observed the defendant as he came out the door between two court officers, both dissimilar in appearance to the defendant. The defendant's hands were secured and he walked within a few feet of the car on a bright sunny day. The police officer who was with Mrs. Kearney testified that she said, "That's positively not him. His hair is too long and his complexion is too dark." Mrs. Kearney testified at the suppression hearing, with Esposito agreeing, that she said, "It looks exactly like him featurewise only his hair is too dark." She testified as well, however, that she thought at the time that the defendant's complexion also was not the same as the gunman's. In any event she informed the police that she could not identify the defendant as the gunman.
*864 Several days later Mrs. Kearney was seated at the bar of the Cockatoo. She testified at the suppression hearing that she went to the Cockatoo because she did not want to be alone, although she had testified earlier at the probable cause hearing that her purpose was to see if the man who killed Salvucci would come into the lounge. The defendant, who was apparently working that night at one of the other bars in the complex, was sent to the Cockatoo to borrow a cocktail shaker.[1] Mrs. Kearney observed the defendant from a distance of eight to ten feet in the intimate lighting of the lounge, and after he left, she called over Esposito and said, "That's him, John."
The police arrived within minutes and arrested the defendant. They brought him handcuffed before Mrs. Kearney and she identified him as Salvucci's killer (as she subsequently did at the probable cause hearing). The police did not inquire at the time why she had been unable to identify him in Lowell but she testified at the suppression hearing that she had not realized the defendant was the man because of a difference in lighting.
When testimony was concluded on the motion to suppress, the prosecution acknowledged that the Lowell confrontation was suggestive. Counsel argued, however, that the subsequent identifications by Mrs. Kearney should be admitted because all believable evidence should reach the jury and the case for exclusion was not strong enough here. The judge, without challenge by the Commonwealth, framed the issue before him thus: whether the subsequent identifications should be excluded "on the grounds that [they] had no independent origin." In ruling on the motion, the judge summarized the evidence and found that "the Commonwealth has failed *865 to establish by clear and convincing evidence that the in-court identification and, in fact, the identification at the probable cause hearing were based on observations other than the ... [observations of the defendant subsequent to the crime]. The Court finds that the probable cause identification and the in-court identification were tainted as a result of impermissible confrontations prior [there]to." The judge added, "The circumstances of the confrontation were so [un]necessarily suggestive that they did create the extreme likelihood that the identification was tainted and that the government has failed to establish by clear and convincing evidence otherwise."
On its application for interlocutory appeal the Commonwealth stated both that the judge applied an improper standard of law, and that his decision to suppress was not supported by the evidence. But in its brief in this court the Commonwealth argued only the latter issue.
2. The judge followed the procedure and standard derived from the Wade-Gilbert-Stovall cases[2] as generally *866 understood. In brief resume: When it appears that the prosecution intends to use an eyewitness of the crime to identify the defendant at trial, the defendant may show at a suppression hearing that the witness was subjected by the State to a confrontation that was unnecessarily suggestive and thus offensive to due process. If this is established, then the prosecution is barred from putting the particular confrontation in evidence at the trial[3]  there is a "per se" exclusion. Further, the prosecution is limited to introducing at trial only such identifications by the witness as are shown at the suppression hearing not to be the product of the suggestive confrontation  the later identifications, to be usable, must have an independent source. It would be open to the defendant, however, if he chose, to attempt to attack and weaken the prosecution's case at trial by introducing the suggestive confrontation and arguing to the trier that it did corrupt any later identifications including the in-court identification.[4]
*867 In deciding whether a particular confrontation was unnecessarily suggestive, the judge is to consider "the totality of the circumstances surrounding it" (Stovall, 388 U.S. at 302). This has been understood to refer to the episode itself; it does not extend to a consideration of the witness's entire connection with the case to determine whether the confrontation, although set up in such a way as to be unnecessarily suggestive, was nevertheless reliable, and therefore usable  for example, because the witness had a clear perception of the offender and would not be misled by a one-on-one confrontation or the like.[5]
Finally, as to burdens, it is for the defendant to establish, apparently by a preponderance, that a given confrontation was unnecessarily suggestive. See Commonwealth v. Fancy, 349 Mass. 196, 202 (1965) (general rule that burden on motion to suppress evidence is on moving party);[6] Sobel, Assailing the Impermissible *868 Suggestion: Evolving Limitations on the Abuse of Pre-trial Criminal Identification Methods, 38 Brooklyn L. Rev. 261, 289 (1971). If the defendant sustains his burden, then, should the prosecution desire to offer identification testimony, it must assume the burden of establishing by "clear and convincing evidence" that the proffered identification has a source independent of the suggestive confrontation. See Wade, 388 U.S. at 240; Commonwealth v. Finn, 362 Mass. 206, 208 (1972); Commonwealth v. McGrath, 361 Mass. 431, 437-438 (1972); Commonwealth v. Kazonis, 356 Mass. 649, 651-653 (1970); United States v. Sanders, 479 F.2d 1193, 1198 (D.C. Cir.1973); People v. Caruso, 68 Cal. 2d 183, 189-190 (1968) (en banc); People v. Damon, 24 N.Y.2d 256, 261 (1969); N. Sobel, supra note 4, § 38, at 70.[7]
Analyzing the evidence before him in the light of these precepts, the judge below concluded that none of the identifications could be put in evidence by the prosecution at trial. Our function on review is to consider whether the evidence supported the judge's findings of fact, due respect being paid to his superior opportunity to observe and weigh the testimony; then we are to see whether the findings justify the judge's decision in law. See Commonwealth v. Stanley, 363 Mass. 102, 104 (1973); Commonwealth v. Murphy, 362 Mass. 542, 547 (1972); Commonwealth v. Frank, 357 Mass. 250, 254 (1970).
The fact findings here are clearcut and substantially beyond dispute. Do they permit a conclusion that the *869 Commonwealth had not sustained its burden of establishing that the witness's identifications derived from a source independent of the tainted confrontations? Some of the relevant considerations are: "(1) The extent of the witness' opportunity to observe the defendant at the time of the crime; prior errors, if any, (2) in description, (3) in identifying another person or (4) in failing to identify the defendant; (5) the receipt of other suggestions, and (6) the lapse of time between the crime and the identification." Commonwealth v. Ross, 361 Mass. 665, 671 n. 2 (1972), judgment vacated on other grounds, 410 U.S. 901 (1973), quoting from Allen v. Moore, 453 F.2d 970, 975 (1st Cir.), cert. denied, 406 U.S. 969 (1972); see United States v. Wade, 388 U.S. 218, 241 (1967); cf. Neil v. Biggers, 409 U.S. 188, 199-200 (1972).
With regard to the witness's opportunity to view the defendant at the scene of the crime, her observation of the killing was over a substantial distance in dim lighting when she was influenced by alcohol. Her description of the gunman after the incident was not only very general, but also did not accurately describe the defendant because of the difference of hair color. Although the time between the crime and the two observations  the second display of pictures at the Cambridge police station and the showup at Lowell  was short, the witness had no certainty that the defendant was the man; at the Lowell showup she even mentioned the defendant's features that distinguished him from the gunman. Only after this parading of the defendant past the fatigued witness in a suggestive fashion did she begin to fix on him. As to the witness's slowly developed assurance in her identification, the Supreme Court's statement about suggestive photographic displays is pertinent: "[T]he witness ... is apt to retain in his memory the image of the photograph rather than of the person actually seen." Simmons v. United States, 390 U.S. 377, 383-384 (1968). See Grano, note 12 infra, at 747: "In psychological terms, the witness's mental image of the defendant *870 formed after careful viewing at the identification procedure probably overshadows his or her earlier mental image of the actual offender." (Footnote omitted.) See also Eisenberg & Feustel, note 11 infra at 660.
The present case resembles Foster v. California, 394 U.S. 440 (1969), where identification procedures were found to violate due process. There a defendant, charged with armed robbery, was first displayed to the witness in a three-man lineup in which he stood out from the others by the contrast of his height and by the fact that he was wearing a leather jacket like that worn by the robber. As the witness could not positively identify the defendant, the police allowed a one-on-one confrontation, at which the witness still was not sure of the identification. Only at a lineup some days later did the witness identify the defendant as the robber. The Court noted that "[t]he suggestive elements in this identification procedure made it all but inevitable that [the witness] would identify petitioner whether or not he was in fact `the man.' In effect, the police repeatedly said to the witness, `This is the man.'" Id. at 443. The findings here indicate that the Lowell court house and postarrest confrontations had a similar effect.[8]
We conclude that the judge's suppression of all the identifications was warranted and should stand.
3. As noted above, the prosecution has not urged the adoption of a procedure or standard departing from the Wade-Gilbert-Stovall cases and their elaboration which have guided decision in this Commonwealth.[9] We *871 observe, however, that Neil v. Biggers, 409 U.S. 188 (1972),[10] and some cases decided in its wake, e.g., United States ex rel. Kirby v. Sturges, 510 F.2d 397 (7th Cir.), cert. denied, 421 U.S. 1016 (1975), suggest that an approach differing from the strict "independent source" analysis may be constitutionally permissible.
The crime and trial in the Biggers case were pre-Stovall. The defendant, accused of rape, had been observed by the victim briefly, at the time of the attack in her home, under illumination from another room, and subsequently in the moonlight after she had been forced to go outside. The victim gave the police a general description and then identified the defendant seven months later at a showup in which the defendant was accompanied only by police officers. The victim was permitted to testify about the showup identification although that in itself had taken place under suggestive conditions: "per se" exclusion was not called for, according to the Court, because in the Court's view the identification was reliable. "[T]he central question," the Court thought, was "whether under the `totality of the circumstances' the identification was reliable even though the confrontation procedure was suggestive." 409 U.S. at 199. Although not acknowledging that the case departed from prior law, the Court may thus have expanded "the totality of the circumstances" as found in Stovall, where the phrase appeared to refer only to the first stage inquiry about the conditions of the challenged confrontation and any police justification for it, to take in external evidence that the witness was not misled by the police practice. See United States ex rel. Pierce v. Cannon, 508 F.2d 197, 204 n. 11 (7th Cir.1974). It can be thought to follow from Biggers that there is no shift of burden from defendant to the prosecution as under *872 Wade-Gilbert-Stovall. See Pulaski, supra note 5, at 1112, 1116.[11] "Suggestiveness" and reliability would be interwoven and the defendant's burden would persist throughout. We may add that Biggers would tend toward a rule of either total admission or exclusion of all the evidence regarding identifications by a witness; at least it would seem that if the identification at a suggestive confrontation is found reliable, then subsequent identifications would also appear reliable. See Government of the Virgin Islands v. Navarro, 513 F.2d 11, 16-18 (3d Cir.), cert. denied, 422 U.S. 1045 (1975) (semble); United States ex rel. Kirby v. Sturges, 510 F.2d 397, 403 n. 17 (7th Cir.), cert. denied, 421 U.S. 1016 (1975); Hennessey and others, supra note 2, at 30.
The Biggers case is a hard one to construe, and overall there is a serious doubt whether the approach was intended to apply at all to post-Stovall confrontations.[12] The doubt arises from a passage in the Biggers opinion, *873 reproduced in the margin,[13] which suggests that a standard stressing "reliability" was appropriate to a period antedating the Court's first expressed constitutional concern over identification testimony, while a stricter rule should apply thereafter designed in part to deter the police from using improper procedures. See Recent Developments, note 16 infra, at 1179. A recent case, Brathwaite v. Manson, 527 F.2d 363 (2d Cir.1975) (Friendly, J.), after a comprehensive analysis, concludes that Biggers applies only to pre-Stovall identifications and was not intended to alter the law as to later cases.[14]
4. We think this is not an appropriate case in which to attempt to decide whether a Biggers approach as sketched above should be applied to a post-Stovall identification.[15] The Commonwealth has chosen not to *874 argue for such a position and may be held to abandon it for purposes of the case on analogy to the rule which holds that the defense abandons an assignment of error which it does not argue. See Commonwealth v. Caine, 366 Mass. 366, 367 n. 1 (1974).
It may, indeed, be that the Commonwealth upon consideration would elect to forgo any immediate advantage it might derive from a Biggers approach and prefer a regime which clearly discountenances suggestive confrontations. The point is well made by Judge McGowan in a comment on the Wade rule as to uncounseled lineups: "There are ... real benefits to be realized by the prosecution, and the public it represents, in presenting evidence of a pretrial identification made under conditions which vouch for its fairness and, hence, its probable accuracy. An identification made at a lineup with counsel present is more likely to impress the jury than any number of vehement assertions from the witness stand that the defendant is the man. In appearing to construe the Sixth Amendment broadly, therefore, the Supreme Court may conceivably have caused the conviction ratio to increase." McGowan, Constitutional Interpretation and Criminal Identification, 12 Wm. & Mary L. Rev. 235, 241 (1970). A refusal to press for change in the Biggers direction may on mature reflection appear to the Commonwealth to be in its best longrange interests; we should not peremptorily assume the contrary. It is noteworthy that the codification by the American Law Institute of the subject of identification is consonant with the stricter rule. A Model Code of Pre-Arraignment Procedure § 160.7 (Proposed Official Draft 1975).[16]
*875 Strictly, then, we need not undertake to decide whether the identification in question here would be properly excluded by the judge if an hypothesized Biggers standard were applied. But the analysis of the case at point 2 above would suggest the likelihood that the defendant could sustain a burden of showing that the witness's final identifications of him lacked reliability. This view is strengthened by the judge's emphatic statement that "[t]he circumstances of the confrontation were so [un]necessarily suggestive that they did create the extreme likelihood that the identification was tainted...."
Order affirmed.
NOTES
[1]  The manager of the other bar, who sent the defendant on the errand, knew at this time that Mrs. Kearney had viewed the defendant at the Lowell court house.
[2]  United States v. Wade, 388 U.S. 218 (1967). Gilbert v. California, 388 U.S. 263 (1967). Stovall v. Denno, 388 U.S. 293 (1967). In these cases the Supreme Court first manifested its concern with the fact that "the confrontation compelled by the State between the accused and the victim or witnesses to a crime to elicit identification evidence is peculiarly riddled with innumerable dangers and variable factors which might seriously, even crucially, derogate from a fair trial." United States v. Wade, 388 U.S. at 228.
In Wade the Supreme Court held that a post-indictment lineup was a critical stage of the prosecution at which the accused had a Sixth Amendment right to counsel. The Court held, however, that the prosecution was entitled to have the witness identify the defendant in court if it could establish "by clear and convincing evidence that the in-court identifications were based upon observations of the suspect other than the lineup identification." 388 U.S. at 240. With regard to the uncounseled lineup itself, the Court adopted in Gilbert a per se rule that testimony offered by the prosecution concerning the lineup must be excluded. In Stovall the Court held that Wade and Gilbert would not be applied retroactively. But the Court ruled in a brief statement that identifications might nonetheless be suppressed on due process grounds; the question was whether "the confrontation ... was so unnecessarily suggestive and conducive to irreparable mistaken identification that [the defendant] was denied due process of law." 388 U.S. at 301-302. Because Wade and Gilbert were subsequently confined to postindictment corporeal identifications (see United States v. Ash, 413 U.S. 300 [1973]; Kirby v. Illinois, 406 U.S. 682, 688-690 [1972]), the defendant here does not challenge the identifications on the basis of the Sixth Amendment bar. See Hennessey & others, Constitutional Rights of the Accused, 60 Mass. L.Q. 18, 28-31 (1975).
[3]  In the present case it happens the prosecution would have no motive to offer the suggestive confrontation at the Lowell court house because the witness did not identify the defendant as the gunman at that time.
[4]  See the summary statement in Clemons v. United States, 408 F.2d 1230, 1237 (D.C. Cir.1968) (en banc), cert. denied, 394 U.S. 964 (1969), indicating that the procedure on due process violations (Stovall) was assimilated to that for violations of the Sixth Amendment (Wade and Gilbert). See note 2 supra. See also Commonwealth v. McGrath, 361 Mass. 431, 434-438 (1972); Commonwealth v. Kazonis, 356 Mass. 649, 651-653 (1970); N. Sobel, Eye-Witness Identification: Legal and Practical Problems §§ 5-10, 35-40 (1972).
Because the Supreme Court's decision in Kirby v. Illinois, 406 U.S. 682 (1972), undercut the application of Wade and Gilbert to preindictment identifications, see Commonwealth v. Horton, 365 Mass. 164, 177 & n. 3 (1974) (Hennessey, J., concurring), the procedures set out in Wade and Gilbert have had continuing vitality chiefly in their adaption to the due process context.
[5]  Such evidence, external to the confrontation, rather enters necessarily into the second stage if that is reached  consideration of the question whether the witness's ability to identify had an independent source. See Pulaski, Neil v. Biggers: The Supreme Court Dismantles the Wade Trilogy's Due Process Protection, 26 Stan. L. Rev. 1097, 1112-1113 (1974); N. Sobel, supra note 4, § 37, at 66-68 (1972). If external evidence were considered in evaluating the suggestiveness of a confrontation, it would seem that the second-stage inquiry would be superfluous. This point has not always been observed by courts. See Note, Pretrial Identification Procedures  Wade to Gilbert to Stovall: Lower Courts Bobble the Ball, 55 Minn. L. Rev. 779, 787 (1971).
[6]  In Commonwealth v. Antobenedetto, 366 Mass. 51, 56-57 (1974), we held that when a search is made without a warrant, the burden of establishing its reasonableness is on the Commonwealth because such searches "are presumed in the first instance to be unreasonable." Id. at 57. No similar presumption of unnecessary suggestiveness has been adopted as to police-arranged confrontations.
[7]  As to the introduction of a standard intermediate between "preponderence" and "beyond a reasonable doubt," see the discussion in Stone v. Essex County Newspapers, Inc., 367 Mass. 849, 870-871 (1975), and Quirico, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part, at 872-877.
[8]  For similar fact situations, see, e.g., United States v. Sanders, 479 F.2d 1193 (D.C. Cir.1973); United States v. Gambrill, 449 F.2d 1148, 1150-1159 (D.C. Cir.1971); Harris v. State, 350 A.2d 768 (Del. 1975).
[9]  See Commonwealth v. Ferguson, 365 Mass. 1, 6-7 (1974); Commonwealth v. Ross. 361 Mass. 665, 670-676 (1972), judgment vacated on other grounds, 410 U.S. 901 (1973); Commonwealth v. McGrath, 361 Mass. 431, 434-438 (1972); Commonwealth v. Kazonis, 356 Mass. 649, 651-653 (1970).,
[10]  A majority of five joined in the main opinion and three Justices concurred in part and dissented in part. The division was on a matter irrelevant to our present discussion. See note 14 below.
[11]  Evidence which on the Wade-Gilbert-Stovall formulation would be relevant in showing that the witness's capability to identify the offender had a source independent of the suggestive confrontation would be the same as the evidence that, under Biggers, would show the suggestive identification to be reliable. Compare note 5 above. See Eisenberg & Feustel, Pretrial Identification: An Attempt to Articulate Constitutional Criteria, 58 Marq. L. Rev. 659, 668 (1975).
[12]  Not applicable to post-Stovall confrontations: see Brathwaite v. Manson, 527 F.2d 363, 368-371 (2d Cir.1975); United States v. Jones, 517 F.2d 176, 180 (D.C. Cir.1975); Smith v. Coiner, 473 F.2d 877, 882 (4th Cir.), cert. denied, 414 U.S. 1115 (1973) (but see a decision by another panel, Stanley v. Cox, 486 F.2d 48 [4th Cir.1973], cert. denied, 416 U.S. 958 [1974]); Thomas v. Leeke, 393 F. Supp. 282, 286-287 (D.S.C. 1975); Grano, Kirby, Biggers, & Ash: Do Any Constitutional Safeguards Remain against the Danger of Convicting the Innocent, 72 Mich. L. Rev. 719, 776-779 (1974); cf. Flaherty v. Vinzant, 386 F. Supp. 1170, 1173 n. 3 (D. Mass. 1974). Applicable: see United States ex rel. Kirby v. Sturges, 510 F.2d 397, 405-409, 407 n. 32 (7th Cir.), cert. denied, 421 U.S. 1016 (1975); Harris v. State, 350 A.2d 768, 773 (Del. 1975); Dobson v. State, 24 Md. App. 644, 654 (1975).
[13]  "The purpose of a strict rule barring evidence of unnecessarily suggestive confrontations would be to deter the police from using a less reliable procedure where a more reliable one may be available, and would not be based on the assumption that in every instance the admission of evidence of such a confrontation offends due process. Clemons v. United States, 133 U.S. App. D.C. 27, 48, 408 F.2d 1230, 1251 (1968) (Leventhal, J., concurring); cf. Gilbert v. California, 388 U.S. 263, 273 (1967); Mapp v. Ohio, 367 U.S. 643 (1961). Such a rule would have no place in the present case, since both the confrontation and the trial preceded Stovall v. Denno, supra, when we first gave notice that the suggestiveness of confrontation procedures was anything other than a matter to be argued to the jury." 409 U.S. at 199.
[14]  Judge Friendly found his construction was "powerfully supported," id. at 368, by analysis of the citations in the passage reproduced at n. 13. He drew support from the decisions of other courts in point, id. at 369, and from the setting of Biggers in the sequence of Supreme Court and lower court decisions that commenced with Wade and Stovall.
We observe that Judge Friendly's conclusion is confirmed by the comment of the three Justices who concurred in part and dissented in part in Biggers (see note 10 supra). They said the question before the Court concerned "a pre-Stovall identification obtained as a result of an unnecessarily suggestive showup." 409 U.S. at 202.
[15]  This court has cited the Biggers case only once and that without having to consider whether it presented an issue regarding the proper analysis of identification testimony. Commonwealth v. Torres, 367 Mass. 737, 740 (1975).
[16]  The Model Code outlines procedures to be followed by law enforcement agencies in respect to identification. See §§ 160.1-.5. If violation of the procedures is substantial, then the particular identification must be suppressed. § 160.7(1). If the defendant moves to suppress an identification because of a violation of the Code, then the burden is on the prosecution to qualify the identification for admission; ordinarily the showing is to be by a preponderance, but if the law enforcement agency has not taken steps in good faith to comply with the Code, or if in the particular case officers have failed to comply diligently and in good faith with sections of the Code requiring records of the identification, then the "clear and convincing" standard is imported. § 160.7(5). If an identification is suppressed, then any subsequent identification is suppressed unless the prosecution can show by clear and convincing evidence that that identification is not based on or significantly influenced by the prior identification. § 160.7(4).
See also the commentary favoring the stricter rule deriving from Wade. Grano, supra n. 12, at 782-783; Pulaski, supra n. 5, at 1120; Recent Developments, Identifications: Unnecessary Suggestiveness May Not Violate Due Process, 73 Colum. L. Rev. 1168, 1180 (1973).

=== CASE 9739819 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:21:41.623742+00 ===

TODD, Justice.
Rudolfo Torres has been comatose and dependent on life support systems since July 14, 1983. A conservator was appointed for Mr. Torres and on March 9, 1984, a hearing was held before the Hennepin County Probate Court to determine the appropriate level of medical care for Mr. Torres. Mr. Torres’ interests were represented in that proceeding by his conservator and by court-appointed counsel. All attorneys involved have performed in the finest traditions of the legal profession in adversely presenting the issues to the probate court and this court. After hearing the arguments of counsel and considering the medical evidence, the probate court au*334thorized the conservator to order removal of Mr. Torres' respirator. That decision was appealed by Mr. Torres’ court-appointed counsel. We affirm.
On June 2, 1983, Mr. Torres, age 57, was injured in a two-story fall at his residence. He was admitted to the Hennepin County Medical Center with extensive chest and head injuries. He was treated for those injuries and by July 14, 1983, he was able to follow simple commands, make one-word responses, and walk with assistance.
On July 14, 1983, Mr. Torres was found in the early hours of the morning with a “posey” around his neck, in a state of complete cardiopulmonary arrest. A “po-sey” is a restraining device which straps a patient into a hospital bed to keep the patient from falling out. The posey had been attached to a stationary, rather than a movable part of the bed, and had strangled Mr. Torres when the back part of the bed came forward.
Mr. Torres was resuscitated but was found on examination to have severe anoxic, encephalopathy; that is, he had suffered massive and irreversible brain damage due to a lack of oxygen. Mr. Torres was then placed on a respirator, on which he has remained dependent. At the March 6, 1984 hearing before Judge Melvin J. Peterson of the Hennepin County Probate Court, counsel for Mr. Torres and the Hennepin County Medical Center stipulated that Mr. Torres has a potential cause of action based on negligence against the Hennepin County Medical Center.
Mr. Torres is comatose. He is not, however, “brain dead” under the traditional definition (i.e. a cessation of all brain functions) because laboratory studies show a “poor but definite cerebral [blood] flow” and “very rudimentary evidence of low me-dullary brain stem function.”
In his order of April 6, 1984, Judge Peterson found that:
Aside from spontaneous twitching of his tongue and intermittent twitching of his left thumb, [Mr. Torres displays] no motor movement, either spontaneously or in response to central or acral pain. He appears to have no reflexes, no toe signs, no corneal response, nor other indication of motor response. After these several months have passed, there is no evidence of cortical functions and only very rudimentary evidence of low medul-lary brain stem function. Some respiratory efforts and the twitching are noted. The medical evidence indicates within a reasonable medical certainty that Rudol-fo Torres has sustained massive irreversible cerebral cortical and brain stem damage and has no reasonable chance of any recovery. That he will not recover as a mentating human being and will not recover consciousness nor regain an ability to communicate or respond or regain any ability to use any of his extremities. The medical evidence submitted supports the proposition that the maintenance of the breathing functions through the use of a respirator should be discontinued. The foregoing conclusions are supported by the medical opinion of Dr. Steven Lebow, who was appointed as an independent medical examiner by the Court. The patient will continue indefinitely to be unresponsive and in a vegetative state until he dies. The prognosis for his recovery is nil. The patient is therefore totally incompetent and cannot participate in any degree or manner whatsoever in any decision-making process.
Court involvement in the case of Rudolfo Torres began with the appointment of attorney at law Timothy Regan to represent Mr. Torres in a conservatorship proceeding initiated by the Hennepin County Medical Center. On October 5, 1983, Judge Peterson appointed Michael J. O’Loughlin conservator of the person and estate of Mr. Torres. Neither the conservator nor the attorney appointed to represent Mr. Torres was authorized by the court to bring suit on behalf of Mr. Torres. The conservator was granted the power “to petition the court for approval to discontinue treatment or withhold treatment, if deemed by the conservator to be in the conservatee’s best interests.” The court also extended the appointment of Mr. Regan, permitting him *335to represent Mr. Torres in later proceedings.
At a prehearing conference on January 6, 1984, Mr. Torres’ conservator requested a full evidentiary hearing be held to determine the appropriate level of medical care for Mr. Torres. The hearing requested was held on the motion of'the Hennepin County Attorney on March 9, 1984. Present at that hearing were Mr. Regan, the court-appointed counsel for Mr. Torres; Marilyn Maloney and George Elwell, Assistant Hennepin County Attorneys, appearing on behalf of the Hennepin County Medical Center; Michael J. O’Loughlin, the conservator of Mr. Torres; and Joseph G. Beaton, Jr., counsel for the conservator.
Four witnesses testified at the hearing.
Mr. O’Loughlin, the conservator, urged the court to permit removal of Mr. Torres’ respirator. His recommendation was based partly on his perception of what Mr. Torres would want and partly on the prognosis of Dr. Steven S. Lebow, the neurologist he had hired to examine Mr. Torres.
David Torres, Rudolfo’s first cousin, testified that he had seen Rudolfo “at least once a week” since 1972 and based on his knowledge of his cousin’s beliefs, he believed Rudolfo would want to have the respirator removed. David Torres also stated that he had no interest in pursuing' any claim he might have as Rudolfo’s cousin against Hennepin County.
James Garrity, Rudolfo' Torres’ best friend, testified as to Mr. Torres’ unwillingness to wear a pacemaker and his belief that Mr. Torres would want to have the respirator removed.
Dr. Ronald E. Cranford, a nationally respected neurologist, gave testimony on Mr. Torres’ medical condition. He stated that Mr. Torres has no chance of regaining consciousness.
Dr. Cranford was questioned about his work on the David Mack case.1 Officer Mack regained consciousness despite Dr. Cranford’s prognosis that he would not. Dr. Cranford explained that Mack’s “recovery” was highly unusual and that Mr. Torres is “more severely and extensively brain damaged” than David Mack.
After noting some of the differences in the two cases, Dr. Cranford was asked to predict the consequences of removing Mr. Torres’ respirator. He replied:
That’s hard to know for sure. We think he probably can’t sustain respirations for any variable period of time, but we can’t say with any degree of certainty. He could die within a few minutes; he may continue for hours or days, probably not weeks.
Dr. Cranford also testified that he did not believe Mr. Torres should be “weaned” from the respirator despite the suggestion that “weaning” be tried. He recommended that the respirator be removed.
The testimony of Dr. Cranford does not differ in any significant way from the deposition testimony of Dr. Lebow, the neurologist hired by the conservator to examine Mr. Torres. Dr. Lebow believes Mr. Torres will die if the respirator is removed and that it should be removed because Mr. Torres has “no chance of recovering as a mentating human being.”
The record also includes the reports of three area Biomedical Ethics Committees which outline the procedures they would use to determine the appropriate treatment for someone in Mr. Torres’ condition.2 *336These reports support the recommendation of Drs. Cranford and Lebow that Mr. Torres' respirator be removed.
The only known living relatives of Rudol-fo Torres are his cousin, David Torres, who testified at the hearing, and Rudolfo’s aunt, Louise Valdez Torres. Ms. Torres, age 78, raised Rudolfo from infancy and resides in Corpus Christi, Texas. Ms. Torres was informed of the proceedings, but was unable to attend because of her advanced age and poor health. Ms. Torres did send a letter indicating her awareness of Mr. Torres’ condition and her belief that he “would not wish to be sustained by mechanical devices.” This letter was never received into evidence. Judge Peterson, however, took notice of it as part of the file from previous hearings.
On April 6, 1984, Judge Peterson issued an order granting the conservator authority to have Mr. Torres removed from the respirator even though it may result in his death. Judge Peterson further ordered that Mr. Torres be cared for in a manner maintaining human dignity until natural death.
Mr. Regan, attorney for Mr. Torres, appealed Judge Peterson’s order to the Court of Appeals. This court granted a petition for accelerated review. Judge Peterson’s order has been stayed during the pendency of this appeal.
The issues presented are:
1. Does the court have the authority to order discontinuance of medical life support procedures when death may result from that discontinuance?
2. Was the order of the probate court clearly erroneous in light of the evidence before it?
1. Whether a court has the authority to order discontinuance of medical life support systems is a question of first impression in Minnesota. Many other states, however, have already confronted the issue. Those courts which have considered the question have, for the most part, followed the lead provided by the New Jersey Supreme Court in its widely publicized decision, In Re Quinlan, 70 N.J. 10, 355 A.2d 647 (1976), rev’g 137 N.J.Super 227, 348 A.2d 801 (Ch.Div.1975), cert. denied, 429 U.S. 922, 97 S.Ct. 319, 50 L.Ed.2d 289 (1976).
Quinlan arose out of a dispute between Karen Quinlan’s father and her doctor over what medical care was appropriate for Karen who was diagnosed as being in a chronic, vegetative state. Quinlan, at 18, 355 A.2d at 651. Karen’s father sought to be appointed guardian of his daughter’s person and estate for the announced purpose of removing her life supports. Karen’s doctor opposed their removal because he was concerned that removing them might violate medical ethics and expose him to malpractice liability. Id.
The trial court appointed Karen's father guardian of her estate, but refused to appoint him guardian of her person thereby precluding him from authorizing removal of Karen’s life support systems. On appeal, the New Jersey Supreme Court reversed the trial court and appointed Karen’s father guardian of her person with the specific right to authorize disconnection of her life supports. Id. at 53, 355 A.2d at 671. The court conditioned the guardian’s right to order removal of Karen’s life support equipment upon the concurrence of her family in that decision and upon her doctor’s determination that Karen has no reasonable hope of ever emerging from her comatose state. The court also required the doctor’s opinion to have the support of a hospital “Ethics Committee”. Finally, the court held that no criminal responsibility or malpractice liability could be imposed upon any person involved in the disconnection process. Id. at 54-55, 355 A.2d 671-72.
*337The facts in this case are somewhat different. Unlike Karen Quinlan, Rudolfo Torres has no immediate family. His physician recommends, rather than opposes, the removal of his life supports. Three independent hospital “Ethics Committees” have already concurred in the decision of Mr. Torres’ physician. Lastly, the lower court, upon conclusion of an adversarial hearing, has authorized the conservator (guardian) to remove Mr. Torres’ respirator. Thus, we are directly confronted with the authority of the court to issue such an order.
The appellant maintains that neither trial courts nor conservators are authorized by Minnesota’s guardianship statutes, Minn.Stat. § 525.539 et seq. (1982), to order the termination of a conservatee’s life support systems. In fact, the Minnesota Legislature has “taken pains,” he argues, to carefully limit the scope of a conservator’s authority over a conservatee’s medical care. The relevant statutory provision, Minn.Stat. § 525.56, subd. 3 (1982) provides that:
The duties and powers * * * which the court may grant to a conservator of the person include, but are not limited to: * * * (4)(a) The power to give any necessary consent to enable the ward or eon-servatee to receive necessary medical or other professional care, counsel, treatment or service, except that no guardian or conservator may give consent for psy-chosurgery, electroshock, sterilization or experimental treatment of any kind unless the procedure is first approved by order of the court as provided in this clause, (emphasis added)
Id.
Appellant insists, on the basis of this language, that the conservator may only be given the power to consent to necessary medical care and argues that a conservator’s order to remove a conservatee’s life supports is not a “consent to necessary medical care.”
Appellant’s argument may accurately describe the scope of a conservator’s power if the conservator is granted only the power set forth at Minn.Stat. § 525.56, subd. 3 (4)(a) (1982). The language cited, however, does not purport to limit the power of a probate court to grant a conservator greater authority over the medical care of the conservatee. The provision cited simply requires the conservator to have court approval before consenting to more controversial medical procedures on behalf of the conservatee.
Respondents contend that a conservator must have the power to refuse treatment on behalf of the conservatee, if the conservator’s “consent” is to have meaning. They argue that a conservator’s order to remove a conservatee’s life supports may be equated with a refusal to consent to further medical treatment.
We agree with respondents’ contention that Minn.Stat. § 525.56, subd. 3 (4)(a) (1982), grants the guardian greater authority over the medical care of the conservatee than simply the power to consent to medical care. The provision in (4)(a) is qualified by its lead-in sentence which states that the “duties and powers * * * which the court may grant to a conservator of the person include, but are not limited to” those specifically described. Id., subd. 3. Thus, we believe that if the conservatee’s best interests are no longer served by the maintenance of life supports, the probate court may empower the conservator to order their removal despite the absence of a specific provision in Minn.Stat. § 525.56 (1982) which authorizes the court to do so. These same powers may be granted to a conservator by the court. Id., subd. 3 (1982).
The probate court’s authority to issue such an order may be upheld as an exercise of its jurisdiction under the Minnesota Constitution. Article VI, § 11 of the Minnesota Constitution requires that “Original jurisdiction in law and equity for * * * all guardianship and incompetency proceedings, * * shall be provided by law.” This court has held that “while the Legislature may regulate the practice in probate court, it cannot deprive that court of its constitutional jurisdiction by failing to make provision by statute for the exercise thereof.” *338State ex rel. Preis v. O’Brien, 186 Minn. 432, 435, 243 N.W. 434, 435 (1932). We believe this constitutional grant of jurisdiction to the Minnesota Probate Courts necessarily includes the authority to hear cases regarding the removal of a conserva-tee’s life support systems.
The trial court based its order, in part, on its power to grant declaratory relief. The Minnesota Legislature enacted Minnesota’s Uniform Declaratory Judgments Act, Minn.Stat. § 555.01 et seq. (1982) “to afford relief from uncertainty and insecurity with respect to rights, status and other legal relations * * Minn.Stat. § 555.12 (1982). Insofar as the Legislature has also directed that the Act “be liberally construed and administered”, Id., it too provides authority for the probate court’s order of April 6, 1984.
A final source of the probate court’s authority to order removal of a conserva-tee’s life supports lies in Minnesota’s Patients’ and Residents of Health Care Facilities; Bill of Rights, Minn.Stat. § 144.651 (Supp.1983). The Patients’ Bill of Rights guarantees, among other things, the right of patients “to participate in the planning of their health care” Id., subd. 10 and the right “to refuse treatment.” Id., subd. 12. The statute also provides that “Any guardian or conservator * * * may seek enforcement of these rights on behalf of a patient * * Minn.Stat. § 144.651, subd. 1 (Supp.1983). When read together, these provisions implicitly provide the probate court with authority to decide whether a conservatee’s life support systems should be terminated.
Under Minnesota law, a probate court must act in the “best interests” of the ward or conservatee in a guardianship proceeding. In re Schober, 303 Minn. 226, 230, 226 N.W.2d 895, 898 (1975). Appellant argues, as a matter of law, that the “best interests” of a conservatee cannot be served by the removal of life supports when doing so may result in the conserva-tee’s death. This argument has an appealing simplicity; it has little support, however, among those who have considered the plight of individuals like Mr. Torres.
The President’s Commission for the Study of Ethical Problems in Medicine and Biomedical Research devotes a full chapter of its 1983 report, Deciding to Forego Life-Sustaining Treatment, to consideration of patients who have permanently lost consciousness. The Commission’s conclusions regarding the interests of such patients are worth quoting in full:
The primary basis for medical treatment of patients is the prospect that each individual’s interests (specifically, the interest in well-being) will be promoted. Thus, treatment ordinarily aims to benefit a patient through preserving life, relieving pain and suffering, protecting against disability, and returning maximally effective functioning. If a prognosis of permanent unconsciousness is correct, however, continued treatment cannot confer such benefits. Pain and suffering are absent, as are joy, satisfaction, and pleasure. Disability is total and no return to an even minimal level of social or human functioning is possible.
Any value to the patient from continued care and maintenance under such circumstances would seem to reside in the very small probability that the prognosis of permanence is incorrect. Although therapy might appear to be in the patient’s interest because it preserves the remote chance of recovery of consciousness, there are two substantial objections to providing vigorous therapy for permanently unconscious patients.
First, the few patients who have recovered consciousness after a prolonged period of unconsciousness were severely disabled. The degree of permanent damage varied but commonly included inability to speak or see, permanent distortion of the limbs, and paralysis. Being returned to such a state would be regarded as of very limited benefit by most patients; it may even be considered harmful if a particular patient would have refused treatments expected to produce this outcome. Thus, even the extremely small likelihood of “recovery” cannot be *339equated with returning to a normal or relatively well functioning state. Second, long-term treatment commonly imposes severe financial and emotional burdens on a patient’s family, people whose welfare most patients before they lost consciousness, placed a high value on [sic]. For both these reasons, then, continued treatment beyond a minimal level will often not serve the interests of permanently unconscious patients optimally.
(Commission’s Report at 181-183).
By guaranteeing the right of a patient to refuse medical treatment, Minn.Stat. § 144.651, subd. 12 (Supp.1983), the Minnesota Legislature has recognized that a patient’s “best interests” may not be served by continued medical treatment. Expressing a similar regard for the rights of an incompetent, the Legislature has prohibited a conservator from consenting to medical care which would violate the known conscientious, religious, or moral beliefs of the conservatee. Minn.Stat. § 525.-56, subd. 3 (4)(a) (1982). Thus, simply equating the continued physical existence of a conservatee, who has no chance for recovery, with the conservatee’s “best interests” appears contrary not only to the weight of medical authority, but also to those indications of legislative opinion which exist. At a minimum, any determination of a conservatee’s “best interests” must involve some consideration of the con-servatee’s wishes.
The authority of a trial court to order the removal of a conservatee’s extraordinary life supports is closely intertwined with the right of an incompetent to forego life sustaining treatment. Those jurisdictions which have already considered the issues raised on this appeal have uniformly upheld the right of an incompetent to refuse life sustaining treatment and the authority of their trial courts to order the removal of an incompetent’s life supports at the request of the incompetent’s guardian or conservator. Severns v. Wilmington Medical Center, Inc., 421 A.2d 1334 (Del.1980); John F. Kennedy Memorial Hospital, Inc. v. Bludworth, 452 So.2d 921 (Fla.1984), aff’g, 432 So.2d 611 (Fla.Dist.Ct.App.1983); Superintendent of Belchertown State School v. Saikewicz, 373 Mass. 728, 370 N.E.2d 417 (1977); In re Quinlan, 70 N.J. 10, 355 A.2d 647 (1976), cert. denied 429 U.S. 922, 97 S.Ct. 319, 50 L.Ed.2d 289 (1976); In re Storar, 52 N.Y.2d 363, 420 N.E.2d 64, 438 N.Y.S.2d 266 cert. denied, 454 U.S. 858, 102 S.Ct. 309, 70 L.Ed.2d 153 (1981); Leach v. Akron General Medical Center, 68 Ohio Misc. 1, 426 N.E.2d 809 (1980); In re Colyer, 99 Wash.2d 114, 660 P.2d 738 (1983).
The right of an individual to forego life sustaining treatment has been based upon a constitutional right of privacy and/or the common law right to be free from invasions of one’s bodily integrity. The individual’s right to refuse treatment also includes the right to order the disconnection of extraordinary life support systems. These rights have not been considered absolute and have been balanced against the right of a state to protect its citizens. Those state interests which have been identified include — (1) the preservation of life; (2) the prevention of suicide; (3) the protection of innocent third parties; and (4) the preservation of the ethical integrity of the medical profession. See, Comment, Law at the Edge of Life: Issues of Death and Dying, 7 Hamline L.Rev. 431, 440 (1984). The individual’s right of privacy may be overridden, however, only if the state’s interest are compelling. Severns v. Wilmington Medical Center, Inc., 421 A.2d 1334 (Del.1980); Superintendent of Belchertown State School v. Saikewicz, 373 Mass. 728, 370 N.E.2d 417 (1977); In re Storar, 52 N.Y.2d 363, 420 N.E.2d 64, 438 N.Y.S.2d 266, cert. denied, 454 U.S. 858, 102 S.Ct. 309, 70 L.Ed.2d 153 (1981); In re Colyer, 99 Wash.2d 114, 660 P.2d 738 (1983).
Every jurisdiction which has considered the position of someone like Mr. Torres has permitted a guardian to assert the right of the incompetent to order the disconnection of life supports. We conclude that under the constitutional and statutory authority presently existing, the Minnesota courts have the power to authorize a conservator *340to order the removal of a conservatee’s life support systems.
2. Having concluded that the court had authority to issue its order, we must now determine if that order was clearly erroneous under the facts of this case.
In the present case, those interests of the state which might be served by having Mr. Torres maintained on a respirator are not, on balance, compelling. Therefore, we may focus our discussion on appellant’s claim of trial court error.
Appellant’s attacks on the order itself fall into three general categories. First, he contends that the order does not serve Mr. Torres’ “best interests”. Secondly, he argues that Mr. Torres’ right to due process was violated. Thirdly, he maintains that the order was based on speculative and hearsay evidence which should not have been considered.
Appellant claims that “no conceivable interest of Mr. Torres could be served by his being deceased.” This assertion rests, in part, upon the fact that Mr. Torres cannot feel pain and, thus, his death will not prevent future suffering. Appellant’s argument neglects the possibility that Mr. Torres might not want his life prolonged without a hope for recovery. Society’s concern for the right of an individual to die with dignity has already prompted the enactment of “right to die” legislation in eleven states. Comment, Law at the Edge of Life: Issues of Death and Dying, 7 Hamline L.Rev. 431, 436 (1984). Mr. Torres may well have wished to avoid, as one writer vividly put it, “The ultimate horror [not of] death but the possibility of being maintained in limbo, in a sterile room, by machines controlled by strangers.” Steel, The Right to Die: New Options in California, 93 Christian Century [July-Dec. 1976].
Appellant contends that Mr. Torres’ best interests are not served by an order which will effectively eliminate the claims he may have against Hennepin County or others as a result of the July 14, 1983 accident at the Hennepin County Medical Center. Appellant notes that a wrongful death claim against Hennepin County would survive Mr. Torres’ death, but feels that it may have no value “in view of the fact that Mr. Torres apparently had no dependents.” Any determination of Mr. Torres’ best interests, however, should not be confined to financial considerations alone. In addition, the record discloses that the Hennepin County Medical Center has reexamined its policies concerning the use of poseys in an effort to prevent a reoccurrence of the tragic accident which left Mr. Torres comatose. As. a consequence, we believe that the trial court did not clearly err in determining that Mr. Torres’ best interests would be served by its order.
Appellant also challenges the trial court’s order on due process grounds. He objects to the fact that it was Hennepin County and not the conservator who filed the petition requesting an evidentiary hearing “on the medical care to be provided to Rudolfo Torres.” While this is true, the conservator did suggest that a full eviden-tiary hearing be held. Appellant also assails the manner in which the conservator asserted Mr. Torres’ right to forego life sustaining treatment. Nonetheless, it is clear that the conservator believes that Mr. Torres would want to have the respirator removed.
Appellant's due process challenge rings hollow in light of the facts: A full eviden-tiary hearing on the recommended care of Mr. Torres was held. Full and complete notice was given to all concerned. All interests were represented at the hearing. The testimony of the conservator, the examining physicians, and the family and friends of Mr. Torres was heard. Finally, Judge Peterson, who presided at the hearing, was satisfied that Mr. Torres would have chosen to forego life sustaining treatment were he able to speak.
Appellant’s last contention is that the “trial court erred in admitting speculative and hearsay evidence of little probative value.” Appellant objected, at the hearing, to the testimony of David Torres, Mr. Torres’ cousin, when asked for his impression as to *341what Mr. Torres’ wishes might be. Appellant also objected to the conservator’s testimony regarding similar opinions expressed by Mr. Torres’ aunt in a letter to the court. That letter was a part of the court’s file but was never offered into evidence.
Appellant argues that the evidence regarding Mr. Torres’ views on life sustaining treatment “falls far short of the evidentiary standard which ought to be met for a life and death issue such as the present.” Respondents claim that the probate judge should be given wide latitude in admitting testimony because “the proceeding is not by its nature an adversarial one.” Under Minnesota law, rulings on the admissibility of evidence are left to the sound discretion of the trial court. Colby v. Gibbons, 276 N.W.2d 170, 175 (Minn.1979). The record in this case does not support a finding that the trial court abused its discretion. We conclude that the trial court’s order was not clearly erroneous under the facts of this case.
The medical profession can now artificially maintain the heart and lung functions of a patient whose brain is partially or wholly destroyed. While this capability is commendable, it creates a wide variety of legal, medical, and ethical problems.3 This case has presented the court with an opportunity to consider a number of issues of great societal concern. We have declined to do so at this time, however, since we believe the legislative process would be a superior method of insuring public input into such vital questions.
We hold under the facts in this case that a court order was necessary,4 that the conservator had the right to issue his substituted judgment for that of the comatose conservatee, and that the court’s order permitting the removal of Mr. Torres’ respirator was not clearly erroneous.
Affirmed.
. David Mack was a Minneapolis police officer who was shot after entering a home in an attempt to execute a search warrant. Officer Mack, like Rudolfo Torres, was diagnosed by Dr. Cranford as being permanently comatose. Officer Mack, however, regained consciousness. The President's Commission for the Study of Ethical Problems in Medicine and Biomedical and Behavioral Research noted that Macks’ recovery was highly unusual. See Deciding to Forego Life-Sustaining Treatment at 179.
. A hospital biomedical ethics committee is "a multi-disciplinary group of health care professionals within a health care institution that has been specifically established to address the ethical dilemmas that occur within that institution. At the present time, these dilemmas frequently concern the treatment or non-treatment of patients who lack decision-making capabilities.” R. Cranford and A. Donderal, The Emergence of Institutional Ethics Committee, Law, Medicine, and Health Care (Feb. 1984). Comprised of *336physicians, nurses, therapists, clergy, social workers and attorneys who represent a variety of disciplines, interests and points of view, these committees are uniquely suited to provide guidance to physicians, families and guardians when ethical dilemmas arise. R. Cranford and P. Jackson, Neurologists and the Hospital Ethics Committee, 4 Seminars in Neurology 15 (March, 1984).
. See e.g. Comment, Law at the Edge of Life: Issues of Death and Dying, 7 Hamline L.Rev. 431, 434 (1984); President’s Comm'n for the Study of Ethical Problems in Medicine and Biomedical and Behavioral Research, Defining Death, Medical, Legal and Ethical Injury in the Determination of Death, (July 1981).
. At oral argument it was disclosed that on an average about 10 life support systems are disconnected weekly in Minnesota. This follows consultation between the attending doctor and the family with the approval of the hospital ethics committee. It is not intended by this opinion that a court order is required in such situations.

=== CASE 2222428 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:38.486513+00 ===

3 Mass. App. Ct. 511 (1975)
335 N.E.2d 367
COMMONWEALTH
vs.
KENNETH JACKSON.
Appeals Court of Massachusetts, Hampden.
September 8, 1975.
October 7, 1975.
Present: HALE, C.J., GRANT, & ARMSTRONG, JJ.
David A. Sonenshein for the defendant.
John T. McDonough for the Commonwealth.
HALE, C.J.
This case comes to us on appeal (G.L.c. 278, §§ 33A-33G) from convictions of kidnapping (indictment 22784), assault with a dangerous weapon (indictment 22785), and rape (indictment 22786), all arising out of a single incident. The defendant was arraigned on September 22, 1969, on these and four unrelated indictments.[1]
We consider the assignments of error which were briefed. Those assignments concern (1) the refusal of the trial judge to ask questions concerning racial prejudice on voir dire; (2) the denial of the defendant's motion to suppress "any and all identification of the defendant" by the victim; and (3) the denial of the defendant's motions to dismiss for lack of a speedy trial. For the reasons set out below we affirm the convictions.
Evidence was introduced at trial which showed that on the evening of August 21, 1969, the defendant picked up the victim, a hitchhiker, at the Copley Square, Boston, entrance to the Massachusetts Turnpike. He drove west on the Turnpike, exiting at Palmer (Exit 8). He then drove onto a side road, bound and blindfolded the victim, *513 and forcibly raped her at knifepoint. The victim identified the defendant at a lineup identification on September 17, 1969, at the Hampden County Jail in Springfield. Counsel for the defendant observed the lineup.
Prior to trial an evidentiary hearing was held on each of the motions which are the subjects of the assignments of error. We shall discuss the evidence affecting each assignment as we consider them separately.
1. During the course of the pre-trial hearing the trial judge denied the defendant's motion to ask the jurors a list of twenty-three questions on voir dire. Among those questions were three which related to racial prejudice.[2] The judge denied the requested questions ruling, in substance, that they were either irrelevant or encompassed by the statutorily mandated questions on bias and prejudice. G.L.c. 234, § 28, as in effect prior to its amendment by St. 1973, c. 919.
The defendant's assertion of a denial of due process by the judge's refusal to ask questions concerning racial prejudice on voir dire is controlled by the opinion of the Supreme Judicial Court in Commonwealth v. Lumley, 367 Mass. 213 (1975). See Commonwealth v. Anderson, ante, 463, 465-466 (1975). The facts of the present case are not materially distinguishable from those in Lumley.
2. The defendant also argues that the trial judge committed reversible error in (1) denying the defendant's motion to suppress the victim's in-court identification which, it is contended, was infected by an improperly conducted lineup; and (2) admitting testimony by the victim and the police at trial concerning that lineup. He also contends (3) that the admission of the pre-trial identification requires us to reverse. See Gilbert v. California, 388 U.S. 263, 272-274 (1967); Commonwealth v. Mendes, 361 Mass. 507, *514 509-510 (1972). Since the defendant's counsel observed the lineup, testimony about that identification is admissible unless the lineup was conducted in a manner so unnecessarily suggestive and conducive to mistaken identification that the defendant was denied due process of law. Neil v. Biggers, 409 U.S. 188, 198 (1972). See Commonwealth v. Wheeler, ante, 387 (1975). See also Stovall v. Denno, 388 U.S. 293, 302 (1967).
The trial judge conducted an extensive pre-trial hearing on the conduct of the lineup. At the hearing the judge had before him photographs of the participants in the lineup and heard conflicting evidence introduced by the defendant and by the prosecution witnesses. In particular, the trial judge heard testimony from which he could have found that the participants in the lineup possessed similar physical characteristics, that uniformed guards touched several men other than the defendant during the lineup, and that the defendant had not been singled out. He denied the motion to suppress evidence without making specific findings of fact. The Supreme Judicial Court has strongly encouraged trial judges to make specific findings of fact about the conduct of lineups. Commonwealth v. Frank, 357 Mass. 250 (1970). Commonwealth v. Murphy, 362 Mass. 542 (1972). However, the denial of the motion to suppress evidence in the present case depended only on a resolution of widely divergent versions of the conduct of the lineup. It is implicit in the judge's ruling that he accepted the Commonwealth's version of the lineup. In the present case evidence of all the details of the lineup was introduced before the trial judge. His ruling resolved the conflict. As was pointed out in Commonwealth v. Murphy, 362 Mass. at 550-551 (Hennessey, J., concurring), "In particular, it is inappropriate to ask us to reverse a judge's findings involving credibility, since he saw the witnesses and we did not." Contrast Cooper v. Picard, 428 F.2d 1351 (1st Cir.1970) (remanded for an evidentiary hearing as the trial judge had failed to make findings of fact and no evidence had been taken at trial about certain details of the lineup).
*515 3. The defendant's assertion of a denial of his constitutional right to a speedy trial requires a more detailed analysis. Such a claim must be measured by a delicate balancing of the four factors listed by the United States Supreme Court in Barker v. Wingo, 407 U.S. 514, 530-533 (1972): the length of delay, the reasons for delay, the defendant's assertion of his right, and the prejudice to the defendant. Commonwealth v. Horne, 362 Mass. 738 (1973). The thirty-eight months' period between arraignment and trial in the present case certainly is long enough to trigger serious concern. Commonwealth v. Gilbert, 366 Mass. 18, 21 (1974). A summary of the events of that interval is essential to a resolution of the defendant's claim of a denial of a speedy trial. The defendant moved for a speedy trial on February 13, 1970. The case was continued on February 19 for the appointment of counsel. The defendant's first counsel, Mr. Edward F. McBride, Jr., of the Massachusetts Defenders Committee, withdrew at that time. On March 3, 1970, Mr. John Teahan, also of the Massachusetts Defenders Committee, was assigned. A Superior Court judge allowed the speedy trial motion on March 18, 1970. On March 27, 1970, the defendant filed a series of motions. A motion for a bill of particulars was allowed. A clerk in the district attorney's office testified at the pre-trial hearing on November 14, 1972, that the Commonwealth had been prepared to go to trial on March 3, 1970, but that the defendant had not been prepared at that time because he was not represented by counsel and was seeking additional witnesses. Further evidence was available to the trial judge from which he could conclude that the Commonwealth had been prepared to try the case at all times after March 3, 1970. Mr. Teahan withdrew as counsel on May 5, 1970, following a dispute with the defendant. The court then offered to appoint Mr. Henry Quarles as counsel, but during the course of that summer disagreements arose between the defendant and Mr. Quarles, who then withdrew from the case and no appointment was made.
The defendant again appeared in court on September 18, 1970, and Mr. Jerome Farrell was suggested as counsel. *516 He conferred with the defendant, but the defendant refused to accept him. On September 21, 1970, the judge offered to appoint any member of the bar of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts who would agree to be the defendant's lawyer. The defendant testified at the pre-trial hearing that he then wrote to a number of attorneys but none of them would accept his case. The defendant's next recorded appearance in court was on February 16, 1972. At that time a motion to dismiss for lack of a speedy trial was offered. That motion was denied by a second judge, but an order for a speedy trial was issued. On March 13, 1972, the defendant was brought before a third judge for the appointment of counsel, and the case was continued to March 23 to allow the defendant time to find counsel. Trial counsel was appointed in June. Several motions for discovery and a second motion for a bill of particulars were filed on June 29, 1972, and July 24, 1972. Some of those were referred to the trial judge; others were disposed of by a fourth judge. On September 13, 1972, the defendant filed another motion for speedy trial or dismissal. A fifth judge allowed the motion as to speedy trial but denied it as to dismissal and on September 21, 1972, denied a further motion for dismissal based on the denial of the right to counsel. In his endorsement to the motion that judge noted, "Repeated attempts to provide counsel rejected by defendant." We consider this to be a finding. Trial began on November 14, 1972.
In denying the defendant's motions to dismiss for lack of a speedy trial, the trial judge found: "[T]he delay was not purposeful or oppressive on the part of the Office of District Attorney. The delay was not occasioned by culpable governmental conduct on the part of the District Attorney's Office or the Commonwealth. I find the defendant has not been prejudiced, having in mind the entire docket, having in mind the three years it's been proceeding, having in mind the 156 entries, 36 motions, 10 lawyers spoken about, 8 judges taking part in the proceedings, letters to attorneys, letters from attorneys, the testimony of the defendant, I find and rule that there has been no *517 conduct on the part of the Commonwealth that has been detrimental to the defendant, and I therefore dismiss the motions." Absent a demonstration of culpability on the part of the Commonwealth in delaying trial, "the burden ... [is] on the defendant to show that the government unreasonably caused a prejudicial delay." Commonwealth v. Gilbert, 366 Mass. at 22. The defendant's claim that he was prejudiced by the loss of memory of his alibi witnesses was advanced before the trial judge. The defendant made no showing, however, that his witnesses' memories would have been better at an earlier date.[3] The trial judge's finding that there had been no prejudice will not be disturbed here.
The defendant asserted his right to a speedy trial on a number of occasions during the proceedings, including February, 1970, April, 1970, February, 1972, and September, 1972. The numerous changes of counsel caused by the defendant's refusal to accept various court-appointed counsel brought about much of the delay, as the trial judge found. In September of 1970, the first Superior Court judge, apparently abandoning hope of appointing acceptable counsel, offered the defendant the opportunity to find his own counsel, whom the court would then appoint. The defendant failed to obtain such counsel. Although the defendant testified that he reported his failure to find counsel to that judge, the trial judge was not required to believe him. The trial judge's finding that the defendant failed to carry the burden of showing that the Commonwealth unreasonably caused the delay has ample support in the evidence.
The first Superior Court judge's efforts to find acceptable counsel for the defendant far exceeded the requirements imposed by the Constitution or by court rule (see S.J.C. *518 Rule 3:10, 351 Mass. 791 [1967]). A defendant has no constitutional right to particular appointed counsel. Commonwealth v. Blasser, 2 Mass. App. Ct. 754, 759 (1975), and cases cited. It has been held that the Commonwealth's duty to provide counsel is satisfied if competent counsel is assigned; if the defendant refuses assigned counsel, he must either procure his own, or appear pro se. Commonwealth v. Drolet, 337 Mass. 396, 401 (1958). While the defendant appeared as co-counsel in July, 1972, he had at all times during the proceedings insisted that he have court-appointed counsel appear for him.
Delays caused by a defendant's action do not give rise to a right of dismissal for lack of a speedy trial. As the Supreme Judicial Court said in Commonwealth v. Gilbert, 366 Mass. at 22, "While it is true that `[a] defendant has no duty to bring himself to trial,' Barker v. Wingo,... [407 U.S. at 527], he cannot rightly complain if his own or his counsel's actions are substantially responsible for the prosecution's failure to press for the earliest possible trial date."
In view of the defendant's failure to show that the delays were attributable to factors other than his inability to find counsel acceptable to him and the failure to show prejudice on account of the delay, we affirm the denials of the motions to dismiss for lack of a speedy trial.
Judgments affirmed.
NOTES
[1]  The other four indictments were tried separately. On October 17, 1969, the defendant was convicted on all four indictments and was sentenced to the Massachusetts Correctional Institution, Walpole. See Commonwealth v. Jackson. ante, 288 (1975).
[2]  The proposed questions were: "10. Do you have feelings either of hostility or of good will toward Black people in general? ... 16. Would you be able to give a Black defendant the same presumption of innocence that you would give to a White defendant? ... 20. If you were a Black defendant in this case, would you be satisfied having you as a juror in this case?"
[3]  The defendant's evidence disclosed that on April 23, 1970, an investigator employed by the Massachusetts Defenders Committee, represented that he had interviewed two witnesses named by the defendant and that those witnesses were unable to recall whether they were with the defendant on the day of the crime. The investigator was unable to locate other vaguely described potential alibi witnesses. The defendant's own efforts to locate one of the witnesses were futile.

=== CASE 9739790 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:20:52.125547+00 ===

*372T. M. Burns, J.
(concurring). While I concur in the result reached by the majority, I would not hold that the prosecutor is cloaked with absolute immunity while making statements to the press. I agree with the trial court that defendants merely have a qualified privilege to make the statements in question, but disagree with the trial court’s finding that there was an issue of fact based upon plaintiff’s allegation of malice.
I would prefer to rely on the reasoning stated in Walker v Cahalan, 97 Mich App 346; 296 NW2d 18 (1980), rev’d on other grounds 411 Mich 857; 306 NW2d 99 (1981), cert den 454 US 1032; 102 S Ct 570; 70 L Ed 2d 476 (1981). Prosecutors acting in discretionary matters in the course of their official duties enjoy only a qualified privilege and not an absolute immunity. 97 Mich App 355-356. Clearly, both statements in question could be reasonably construed as statements on the merits of the case and, therefore, making the statements to the press cannot be deemed to be within the scope of a prosecutor’s duty. I note that Marrero v City of Hialeah, 625 F2d 499 (CA 5, 1980), and Helstoski v Goldstein, 552 F2d 564 (CA 3, 1977), further support my position.
While I believe defendants are only protected by a qualified privilege, I feel that the trial court committed error requiring reversal since there was no factual issue as to whether defendants published the statements with actual malice.1 Plaintiff merely alleges actual malice. There was not enough evidence offered to allow a jury to draw an inference that defendants committed the alleged defamation with actual malice. Plaintiff failed to set forth sufficient facts to raise a factual issue *373regarding malice.2 I would therefore reverse the trial court’s finding that there was a factual issue regarding whether defendants acted with malice.
In finding that there is no material factual issue, I do not rely on Mr. Cahalan’s affidavit. Walker v Cahalan, 411 Mich 857.
VandenToorn v Bonner, 129 Mich App 198, 210; 342 NW2d 297 (1983).

=== CASE 2220951 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:01.117277+00 ===

357 N.W.2d 234 (1984)
UNION STATE BANK, Plaintiff and Appellee,
v.
William WOELL, individually and d/b/a Turning Point Manufacturing and Turning Point Manufacturing, Inc., a corporation, Defendants and Appellants, and
G.L. Ness Agency, Defendant.
Civ. No. 10673.
Supreme Court of North Dakota.
October 30, 1984.
*235 DeMars, Turman & Johnson, Fargo, for plaintiff and appellee; argued by Joseph A. Turman, Fargo.
Ramlo Law Office, Fargo, for defendants and appellants; argued by Robert A. Ramlo, Fargo.
SAND, Justice.
William Woell and Turning Point Manufacturing, Inc. (hereinafter collectively referred to as "Woell"), appeal from a summary judgment entered on 29 February 1984, in favor of Union State Bank. We dismiss the appeal.
Woell has developed a product called a "Supportable" which is a portable table to be used with various power tools. Desiring to mass market his invention, Woell, a long-time customer of Union State Bank, sought financing for the project through the Bank. Woell alleges that the president of the Bank made numerous assurances that long-term financing would be available when needed if the product could be marketed on a national scale.
The Bank did provide financing for development, testing, and preliminary manufacturing of the product. On 4 November 1982, Woell signed a promissory note in the amount of $4,673.49, and on 15 March 1983, Woell executed another promissory note in *236 the amount of $39,763.65.[1] The notes were secured by security agreements on various machinery and a $100,000 purchase order from Shopsmith, Inc.
On 10 September 1983, Woell held an auction sale and sold some of the machinery pledged as security for the notes.[2] Representatives of the Bank appeared at the auction and demanded that the auctioneer pay over the proceeds to the Bank. The auctioneer instead deposited the proceeds with the district court.
The Bank subsequently served a summons and complaint on Woell, seeking judgment on the notes and payment of the auction proceeds on deposit with the court. Woell filed an answer and counterclaim. The answer was a general denial, and the counterclaim sought damages for the alleged wrongful conduct of the Bank in terminating financing of the project, interfering with the auction sale, and intentionally destroying Woell's business.
The Bank moved for summary judgment, and the court severed the counterclaim and granted summary judgment for the Bank on the notes. The judgment also allowed the Bank to withdraw the funds on deposit with the court, totaling $29,871.41. The order for judgment contains a certification pursuant to Rule 54(b), N.D.R.Civ.P., that there was no just reason for delay of entry of final judgment, and judgment was entered on 29 February 1984.
Woell appealed from the judgment, alleging that material questions of fact exist which preclude summary judgment in this case. We conclude, however, that the Rule 54(b) certification was improvidently granted and we must therefore dismiss the appeal without reaching the merits.
We have noted a marked increase in the use of Rule 54(b) certifications, perhaps in response to a line of recent cases in which we have dismissed appeals for lack of proper certification.[3] Those cases, however, were not meant to imply that a Rule 54(b) certification should be routinely granted in every case. Rather, the import of those cases is that this Court will not consider an appeal in a multi-claim or multi-party case which disposes of fewer than all claims against all parties unless the trial court has first independently assessed the case and determined that a Rule 54(b) certification is appropriate.
Even if the trial court does make the requisite determination under Rule 54(b), we are not bound by the court's finding that "no just reason for delay exists." We will sua sponte review the court's certification to determine if the court has abused its discretion. Giese v. Engelhardt, 175 N.W.2d 578, 583 (N.D. 1970); Mitzel v. Schatz, 167 N.W.2d 519, 526 (N.D.1968); see also Sears, Roebuck and Co. v. Mackey, 351 U.S. 427, 437, 76 S. Ct. 895, 901, 100 L. Ed. 1297, 1307 (1956) (discussing Rule 54(b), F.R.Civ.P.). Upon a determination by this Court that the trial court has abused its discretion in certifying under Rule 54(b), we will set aside the certification. At that point, there is no final order or judgment for us to review.
Rule 54(b) was derived from the corresponding federal rule. See Rule 54(b), N.D.R.Civ.P., Explanatory Note. We therefore look to the legislative history of the federal rule and interpretive federal caselaw for guidance in construing our Rule. See, e.g., State v. Manke, 328 N.W.2d 799, 802 (N.D.1982); State v. Jenkins, 326 N.W.2d 67, 69-70 n. 4 (N.D.1982); Hawkins Chemical, Inc. v. McNea, 319 *237 N.W.2d 152, 155 (N.D.1982); State v. Holy Bull, 238 N.W.2d 52, 55 (N.D.1975).
Federal Rule 54(b) was adopted with the intent that it be construed to preserve the long-standing policy in the federal courts against piecemeal appeals. Rule 54(b), F.R.Civ.P., Notes of Advisory Committee on 1946 Amendments; Curtiss-Wright Corp. v. General Electric Co., 446 U.S. 1, 8, 100 S. Ct. 1460, 1465, 64 L. Ed. 2d 1, 11 (1980). This Court has stated that the purpose of our Rule is to discourage piecemeal disposal of multi-claim litigation. Striegel v. Dakota Hills, Inc., 343 N.W.2d 785, 786 (N.D.1984); Hennebry v. Hoy, 343 N.W.2d 87, 90 (N.D.1983); Hawkins Chemical, Inc. v. McNea, supra, 319 N.W.2d at 156; Minch v. City of Fargo, 297 N.W.2d 785, 788 (N.D.1980); Berg v. Kremers, 154 N.W.2d 911, 913 (N.D.1967).
Rule 54(b) certifications should not be entered routinely or as a courtesy or accommodation to counsel. Page v. Preisser, 585 F.2d 336, 339 (8th Cir.1978); Panichella v. Pennsylvania Railroad Co., 252 F.2d 452, 455 (3d Cir.1958), cert. denied, 361 U.S. 932, 80 S. Ct. 370, 4 L. Ed. 2d 353 (1960); see also Wright, Miller & Kane, Federal Practice and Procedure: Civil 2d § 2659 (1983). The Advisory Committee Notes to the Rule make it clear that use of Rule 54(b) is reserved for the "infrequent harsh case."[4] Rule 54(b), F.R.Civ.P., Notes of Advisory Committee on 1946 Amendments; see also Jasmin v. Dumas, 726 F.2d 242, 244 (5th Cir.1984).
In considering an application for a 54(b) order, the trial court is to exercise its discretion, "weighing the overall policy against piecemeal appeals against whatever exigencies the case at hand may present." Panichella v. Pennsylvania Railroad Co., supra, 252 F.2d at 455. Upon requesting Rule 54(b) certification, the burden is upon the proponent to establish prejudice or hardship which will result if certification is denied. See Allis-Chalmers Corp. v. Philadelphia Electric Co., 521 F.2d 360, 365 (3d Cir.1975). The trial court is to weigh the competing equities involved and take into account judicial administrative interests in making its determination whether or not to certify under the Rule. Curtiss-Wright Corp. v. General Electric Co., supra, 446 U.S. at 8, 100 S. Ct. at 1465, 64 L.Ed.2d at 11.
Our review of the trial court's certification in this case is hindered by the fact that the court's order merely recites the language of the Rule[5] without listing specific factors which support the court's decision to certify under the Rule. Numerous federal courts have stated that a proper exercise of the trial court's discretion under Rule 54(b) requires more than mere recital of the language of the Rule, and that the trial court should articulate in writing the reasons supporting its decision. See, e.g., Hayden v. McDonald, 719 F.2d 266, 269 (8th Cir.1983); Explosives Supply Co., Inc. v. Columbia Nitrogen Corp., 691 F.2d 486 (11th Cir.1982); Morrison-Knudsen Co., Inc. v. Archer, 655 F.2d 962, 965 (9th Cir. 1981); Bank of Lincolnwood v. Federal Leasing, Inc., 622 F.2d 944, 948-949 (7th Cir.1980); U.S. General, Inc. v. City of Joliet, 598 F.2d 1050, 1051 n. 1 (1979); Allis-Chalmers Corp. v. Philadelphia *238 Electric Co., supra, 521 F.2d at 364. There are distinct benefits in requiring such a statement from the trial court:
"The benefit of such a reasoned statement is not merely that, as stressed in Gumer [v. Shearson, Hammill & Co., Inc., 516 F.2d 283 (2d Cir.1974)], it will aid us in discharging our duty to review the district court's exercise of discretion in issuing the certificate ... but that it will aid the district judge himself. A decisionmaker obliged to give reasons to support his decision may find they do not; `the opinion will not write.'" Arlinghaus v. Ritenour, 543 F.2d 461, 464 (2d Cir.1976). (Citations omitted.)
Although we agree that it is the better practice for the trial court to provide a written statement showing the basis of its decision, we will not remand to the trial court for a statement of reasons if we can determine the basis of the court's decision to certify under Rule 54(b) from the record. See Alcan Aluminum Corp. v. Carlsberg Financial Corp., 689 F.2d 815, 817 (9th Cir.1982); Bank of Lincolnwood v. Federal Leasing, Inc., supra, 622 F.2d at 949.
We find it unnecessary to remand to the district court for a statement of reasons in this case, because the basis of the court's ruling is apparent from the record. In granting the request for a 54(b) order, the court stated:
"Well, I'm basing my ruling on the following: I have an action in contract. I find that there are no material facts or the Parole Rule evidence [sic] would not allow the introduction of evidence on that issue, anyway. The counterclaim is tortious, completely a different action. The counterclaim, for all practical purposes, could be brought as an individual claim; therefore, I will enter judgment on plaintiff's complaint as to the notes."
It is apparent that the court based its ruling solely on the fact that the main action and the counterclaim were grounded in separate theories, contract and tort respectively, and that the counterclaim could have been brought as a separate action.[6]
The mere fact that claims are grounded in separate legal theories and could have been brought separately does not make this the "infrequent harsh case" contemplated by the drafters of the Rule. A widely accepted, although not all-inclusive, list of relevant factors in 54(b) cases has been compiled by the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit:
"In reviewing 54(b) certifications, other courts have considered the following factors, inter alia: (1) the relationship between the adjudicated and unadjudicated claims; (2) the possibility that the need for review might or might not be mooted by future developments in the district court; (3) the possibility that the reviewing court might be obliged to consider the same issue a second time; (4) the presence or absence of a claim or counterclaim which could result in setoff against the judgment sought to be made final; (5) miscellaneous factors such as delay, economic and solvency considerations, shortening the time of trial, frivolity of competing claims, expense, and the like. Depending upon the facts of the particular case, all or some of the above factors may bear upon the propriety of the trial court's discretion in certifying a judgment as final under Rule 54(b)." Allis-Chalmers Corp. v. Philadelphia Electric Co., supra, 521 F.2d at 364. (Footnotes omitted.)
It is clear that, considering the appropriate factors, certification under Rule 54(b) was improper in this case. The claims raised in the main action and counterclaim arose from the same series of transactions and occurrences, are logically related legally and factually, and are closely intertwined. See Para-Chem Southern, Inc. v. M. Lowenstein Corp., 715 F.2d 128, 133 (4th Cir.1983); Morrison-Knudsen Co., *239 Inc. v. Archer, supra, 655 F.2d at 966; Allis-Chalmers Corp. v. Philadelphia Electric Co., supra, 521 F.2d at 364-365. It is likely that an appeal will be taken after the unadjudicated counterclaim is decided, which would involve the same factual situation as the present appeal. Hayden v. McDonald, supra, 719 F.2d at 270. The presence of the counterclaim also raises the possibility of a set-off against the summary judgment entered in favor of the Bank. Allis-Chalmers Corp. v. Philadelphia Electric Co., supra, 521 F.2d at 364.
We are also concerned that the outcome on the trial of the counterclaim could affect the trial court's decision on the main action, possibly rendering the issue on this appeal moot. See Para-Chem Southern, Inc. v. M. Lowenstein Corp., supra, 715 F.2d at 132-133; Allis-Chalmers Corp. v. Philadelphia Electric Co., supra, 521 F.2d at 364. A jury finding of fraud, duress, or coercion in the procurement of the notes in question would cast serious doubts over the validity of the summary judgment in the Bank's favor on the notes. By treating the judgment on the notes as interlocutory, it remains subject to revision by the court at any time before the entry of judgment adjudicating all claims between all parties. See Rule 54(b), N.D.R.Civ.P.
There were no unusual or compelling circumstances presented to the court which dictated immediate entry of a separate judgment. See Morrison-Knudsen Co., Inc. v. Archer, supra, 655 F.2d at 966; Brunswick Corp. v. Sheridan, 582 F.2d 175, 183 (2d Cir.1978). As previously stated, the burden is upon the party requesting 54(b) certification to establish that it will suffer prejudice or hardship if certification is denied. Allis-Chalmers Corp. v. Philadelphia Electric Co., supra, 521 F.2d at 365. The Bank failed to meet that burden.
We conclude that certification under Rule 54(b) was inappropriate, and the district court abused its discretion in ordering entry of final judgment. The appeal is dismissed, with directions to the district court to vacate that portion of its 29 February 1984 Order for Summary Judgment which certifies the judgment as final pursuant to Rule 54(b). Each party will bear its own costs on appeal.
ERICKSTAD, C.J., and VANDE WALLE, PEDERSON and GIERKE, JJ., concur.
NOTES
[1]  It appears that these notes were consolidations of prior loans.
[2]  Woell alleges that other items of personal property, which were not pledged as security for the note, were also sold at the auction. Woell also alleges that he had informed the Bank of the auction and the Bank had agreed not to interfere with the sale.
[3]  See, e.g., Fee v. Richmond Manufacturing Co., 346 N.W.2d 290 (N.D.1984); Martinson v. Raugutt, 346 N.W.2d 289 (N.D.1984); Rippley v. Sande, 344 N.W.2d 490 (N.D.1984); Anderson v. State, 344 N.W.2d 489 (N.D.1984); Striegel v. Dakota Hills, Inc., 343 N.W.2d 785 (N.D.1984); Hennebry v. Hoy, 343 N.W.2d 87 (N.D.1983); City of Minot v. Central Avenue News, Inc., 325 N.W.2d 243 (N.D.1982).
[4]  We note that the United States Supreme Court, in Curtiss-Wright Corp. v. General Electric Co., 446 U.S. 1, 9-10, 100 S. Ct. 1460, 1466, 64 L. Ed. 2d 1, 12 (1980), stated that the phrase "infrequent harsh case" is not, in isolation, a workable or entirely reliable benchmark for appellate review. The court noted, however, that the phrase was an accurate description of cases qualifying for Rule 54(b) certification. We believe that the language "infrequent harsh case" accurately reflects the stated intent of Rule 54(b) to carry out the policy against piecemeal appeals while affording litigants a remedy in the exceptional case where immediate appellate review would be in the "interest of sound judicial administration." Curtiss-Wright Corp. v. General Electric Co., supra, 446 U.S. at 10, 100 S. Ct. at 1466, 64 L.Ed.2d at 12 (quoting Sears, Roebuck and Co. v. Mackey, 351 U.S. 427, 437, 76 S. Ct. 895, 901, 100 L. Ed. 1297, 1307 (1956)).
[5]  The Order for Summary Judgment contains the following language: "... and it further appearing to the court that pursuant to Rule 54(b) of the North Dakota Rules of Civil Procedure that there is no reason for delay of the entry of the final judgment in this matter, ..."
[6]  The counterclaim, which arises from the same transactions and occurrences as the main action and is "logically related" to it, is a compulsory counterclaim under Rule 13(a), N.D.R.Civ.P. See Aasen v. Forsberg, Inc., 346 N.W.2d 294, 296 (N.D.1984); Leo Lumber Co. v. Williams, 191 N.W.2d 573, 574 Syll. ¶ 7 (N.D.1971).