=== CASE 9738025 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:40:55.510044+00 ===

REYNOLDSON, Justice
(dissenting).
I respectfully dissent from the majority’s holding in division III. The evidence was wholly inadequate, in my view, to generate a jury issue relative to plaintiff’s skiing apparel. It was clothing customarily worn by persons exposed to water in cooler weather.
Defendant as owner (and now held to be operator) of the motor boat had no hesitation in towing plaintiff, so clothed, nor did defendant warn or caution plaintiff in any way. Apparently he did not consider the rubber garment inappropriate until some time after the event. His belated reasoning now is the equivalent of telling someone given a “hot-foot” that had he been barefooted, he would have felt the heat in time to avoid the burn; or contending a farm employee was negligent on a cold winter day in wearing heavy, insulated coveralls which prevented him from feeling and avoiding the tractor’s exposed power takeoff shaft before it gripped his clothing and injured him.
If defendant was not negligent in causing plaintiff to become entangled in the rope, plaintiff’s attire was immaterial. If defendant was negligent, I find no evidence in this record which would justify a finding plaintiff should have anticipated that negligence in selecting his skiing equipment. Ordinarily, ■ .one may presume exercise of due care by others. Jorgensen v. Horton, 206 N.W.2d 100, 105 (Iowa 1973); Conrad v. Board of Supervisors of Lee County, 199 N.W.2d 139, 144 (Iowa 1972).
The standard of conduct which ordinarily applies in negligence cases is the care “of a reasonable man under like circumstances.” Restatement (Second) of Torts § 283, quoted in Kastler v. Iowa Methodist Hospital, 193 N.W.2d 98, 101 (Iowa 1971). Taking at face value defendant’s testimony that although he knew plaintiff’s wet suit was inappropriate and diminished plaintiff’s sensory perception he nonetheless towed him without complaint, defendant was under obligation to exercise additional care to compensate for plaintiff’s handicap. See generally 2 Harper and James, The Law of Torts § 16.12, p. 941; Prosser, Law of Torts § 34, pp. 180-81 (4th Ed. 1971).
Submitting plaintiff’s contributory negligence to the jury on this issue was error.
I would reverse and remand for new trial.

=== CASE 2213212 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:28.808208+00 ===

15 Cal.App.2d 350 (1936)
MARGARET E. FAIRES, Appellant,
v.
TITLE INSURANCE & TRUST COMPANY (a Corporation), Respondent.
Civ. No. 1915.
California Court of Appeals. Fourth Appellate District.
July 10, 1936.
Margaret E. Faires, in pro. per., G. C. De Garmo, W. M. Crane and A. W. Sorenson for Appellant.
H. A. I. Wolch and Carroll Allen, as Amici Curiae on Behalf of Appellant.
Arch H. Vernon, Earl E. Johnson, Lawrence L. Otis and Gilbert E. Harris for Respondent.
Marks, J.
Plaintiff sought to recover from defendant $1428.57 paid by her as part of the purchase price of a large tract of land in Los Angeles County. Her original subscription to a fund used in this purchase was $1,000. She paid $428.57 in assessments. The action is grounded solely on the failure of defendant to secure from the corporation *352 commissioner of California a permit to issue securities. Judgment went for defendant and this appeal followed.
In March, 1926, Arthur A. Weber secured an option to purchase this land for the purpose of subdividing it. It was determined that $350,000 in cash was necessary to finance the transaction. An escrow was opened with defendant wherein plaintiff and over one hundred others paid into escrow the $350,000 prior to October 29, 1926, and probably before the last of August of that year. Each subscriber signed similar escrow instructions. The instrument signed by plaintiff, omitting the description of the property, is as follows:
"Title Insurance and Trust Company,"
"Los Angeles, California."
"Gentlemen:"
"I, Margaret E. Faires, have joined with various other persons in the purchase of that certain real property hereinafter described, which property I desire to have conveyed to your Company in Trust for subdivision purposes, and to have my interest in such purchase set forth as a beneficiary in the Declaration of Trust which is to be issued by you."
"I, therefore, hand you herewith the sum of $1,000.00, which you are hereby authorized to use as part of the initial payment for said property, when you are in a position to execute your usual form of Declaration of Trust to cover said property in which I am shown as a First Beneficiary thereunder in the same proportion that the above sum bears to $350,000.00, said Declaration to be approved and signed by me before the use of this money."
"The purchase price of said property is to be $1,648,318.50, on a basis of 732.586 acres @ $2250.00 per acre, of which $200,000.00 is to be the initial payment above referred to, the remainder to be secured under said Declaration; any variation in the amount of acreage to be adjusted at the same rate per acre."
"You are to be governed in the preparation of the Declaration of Trust and the closing of this Escrow by instructions from E. O. Myers, Geo. W. Ley and Arthur A. Weber. ..."
"Dated at Los Angeles, Calif., this 16th day of July, 1926."
"(Signed) Margaret E. Faires,"
"1408 Chapman Bldg. Los Angeles." *353
Negotiations between the representatives of the subscribers, who formed what we may term the syndicate for the purchase of the real estate, and the representatives of defendant, followed, and resulted in the execution, on October 29, 1926, of a declaration of trust by the defendant as trustee and members of the syndicate, including plaintiff, as beneficiaries. A deed dated October 9, 1926, was placed in escrow on October 22, 1926, and delivered and the agreed portion of the purchase price, $200,000, actually paid prior to October 29, 1926. The balance of the money subscribed by the members of the syndicate, $150,000, which was to be used to improve the land, was transferred from the escrow account to the trust fund.
From the portions of the declaration of trust before us and the comments of counsel, it would seem to be in the usual form of a general subdivision trust where the owners of property place its legal title in a trustee for the purpose of subdivision, improvement and sale. The trustee was not to share in the general profits of the venture but was to receive fixed fees for services rendered. All net profits were to be shared by the beneficiaries in clearly determined proportions. The only evidence of the interest of any member of the syndicate in the trust was contained in the declaration of trust, though defendant did write a letter to each beneficiary similar to one sent to plaintiff under date of November 23, 1926, which is as follows:
"Dear Madam:--"
"Our Declaration of Trust No. S-7170, covering approximately 846 acres in the Santa Monica Bay District, known as 'Miramar Estates', has been completed and executed by all parties interested therein. This instrument recites you as a First Beneficiary to the extent of 10/3500ths and as a Second Beneficiary to the extent of 10/3500ths."
"The Declaration of Trust, containing all of the signatures, and all other papers relating to this transaction up to this date are on file in the office of the undersigned, where they can be seen at any time by the Beneficiaries."
"Yours very truly,"
"Title Insurance and Trust Company,"
"By L. F. Schaefer."
"Assistant Trust Officer." *354
[1] Plaintiff was a licensed and practicing attorney at law and it should be presumed that before she signed the declaration of trust she not only read that document but understood its factual and legal effect. She was a member of the original syndicate that furnished the money with which to purchase the land and thus put the machinery of the entire transaction in motion. She nominated and appointed three of her associates to act as her agents "in the preparation of the declaration of trust and the closing of this escrow". Knowledge acquired by an agent during the agency and within its scope is imputed to the principal. It would seem strange if these agents, or some of them, actively engaged in completing the trust did not know at the time that a permit for the transaction had not been issued by the commissioner of corporations. Plaintiff, an attorney at law, was acquainted with all the details of the transaction which were set forth in the declaration of trust which she signed. She should have realized in 1926, the necessity of a permit from the commissioner of corporations, if such permit were necessary. We might suggest that as plaintiff was one of the original members of the syndicate that purchased the land and made the speculation possible, intending to profit by it, that it was as much her duty as it was the duty of anyone else connected with the transaction to see that a permit was obtained if one were necessary. However, the trial court found that she gained actual knowledge of the lack of a permit in 1931. From the view we take of the case we do not need to question this finding or put our decision on any of the grounds just suggested.
[2] We know of no rule of law that prohibits two or more persons joining together to purchase land. We know of no reason why those thus purchasing land may not, as a matter of convenience, place its title in a trustee. The legal effect of the elements of the transaction before us may be thus analyzed: The members of the syndicate furnished the money with which to acquire title to land and placed this money in escrow with defendant. At that time defendant was nothing more than an escrow holder. The necessary portion of the purchase price to acquire legal title to the land was paid out of escrow to the owner and title taken in the name of defendant, trustee. This was prior to the execution of the declaration of trust. Under familiar principles *355 of law, a resulting trust immediately arose in favor of those furnishing the consideration paid to the owner. (Sec. 852, Civ. Code.) The interests of those furnishing the purchase money were then immediately fixed and determined by operation of law. [3] When the declaration of trust was executed thereafter, an express trust came into being. The beneficiaries received nothing more than that which they already owned under the resulting trust. They merely had written evidence of their respective interests with the powers of the trustee clearly defined. There was no sale to them of any interest in the trust estate at the time of the execution of the declaration of trust as "sale" is defined in subdivision 9 of section 2 of the Corporate Securities Act, as in effect in 1926. (Stats. 1925, p. 962.) Defendant did not at that time transfer any interest in property to any member of the syndicate. The members already owned those interests. No "pecuniary consideration called a price" was paid by any member of the syndicate to plaintiff for an interest in the property. The money for such interests had been paid to the owner prior to the execution of the declaration of trust while defendant was merely an escrow holder. Defendant received no part of the purchase price of the land. In so far as defendant was concerned, the transaction did not come within the terms of the Corporate Securities Act in effect at that time. (See Bernesen v. Fish, 135 Cal.App. 588 [28 PaCal.2d 67].)
[4] The declaration of trust contained the provision that the interest of the beneficiaries should be personal and not real property. Plaintiff urges that this provision effected a sufficient change in the interest of the beneficiaries to bring the transaction within the provisions of the Corporate Securities Act. It is probably true that this effected the conversion of an interest in real estate into personal property. It is also evident that this was done merely for convenience in administering the trust and in deeding out lots to purchasers. The actual quantum of the interest of each beneficiary was not changed and there was no sale of any interest at that time, nor was there any offering of any interest to anyone. This conversion of an interest in real property into personal property should not be held to affect the rights of the parties in so far as such rights are here involved. *356
[5] The only definition of a security in the Corporate Securities Act applicable here would seem to be subsection "d" of subdivision 7 of section two of that act (Stats. 1925, p. 962), which defined a security as "any instrument offered for sale, or sold, or issued to the public by any company ..." There is an entire lack of any evidence that defendant either offered for sale or sold or issued to the public any instrument or other evidence of interest, or interest in the trust. The membership of the syndicate was filled and the list closed long before the trust was created. Defendant did not solicit membership in this syndicate. It merely served as the channel through which the purchase money passed from the subscribers to the land owner. If soliciting membership in this syndicate was a violation of the corporate Securities Act plaintiff should have sought her remedy against those engaged in such solicitation and not against defendant who did not solicit.
Judgment affirmed.
Barnard, P. J., concurred.
Jennings, J., being absent, did not participate herein.

=== CASE 2213213 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:28.808579+00 ===

25 Mass. App. Ct. 605 (1988)
521 N.E.2d 420
COMMONWEALTH
vs.
RICHARD R. CAVALLARO.
No. 86-1345.
Appeals Court of Massachusetts, Bristol.
September 11, 1987.
April 13, 1988.
Present: GRANT, PERRETTA, & SMITH, JJ.
Ellen A. Howard, Committee for Public Counsel Services, for the defendant.
Ronald A. Pina, District Attorney, Dana A. Curhan & Cynthia A. Vincent, Assistant District Attorneys, for the Commonwealth.
PERRETTA, J.
At the defendant's jury trial on an indictment charging him with operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of liquor, the key and disputed issue was whether, at *606 the time of his arrest, the defendant was operating the vehicle. The arresting officer testified that when he arrested the defendant, he was in the driver's seat of his truck. Although the truck was well into a parking lot of a twenty-four hour service station, the engine was running. The defendant testified that he arrived at the service station, went inside the attendant's building, and bought cigarettes. He and the attendant, with whom he was friendly, then went outside, got into the truck, and were there chatting for about forty-five minutes. The engine was not running. During this period, the defendant drank four or five cans of beer. In instructing the jury, the judge stated in critical part that there is "operation" of a vehicle "within the meaning of the law, when ... [the vehicle] is stopped in the ordinary course of its operation...." In the context of this case, we conclude that the instruction was misleading and, without clarification, created a substantial risk of a miscarriage of justice. We reverse.
I. The Evidence.
We recite the evidence more fully. Shortly before 2:00 A.M. on June 11, 1984, Seekonk police officer George Casey drove into the parking lot of the station which he described as "bigger than the average gas station." There were two vehicles in the lot, the attendant's car which was parked close to the building and the defendant's tow truck, which was pulled up to and parallel with the car. The defendant sat behind the wheel, and the attendant was in the passenger's seat. Casey stated that the engine was running and that he had to tell the defendant to turn it off.
In direct contradiction of Casey's testimony, the defendant related that, in the middle of the evening, he had consumed two beers while at home watching television. A little after 1:00 A.M. he drove to the gas station, pulled into the lot, turned off the engine, and went into the attendant's building to buy cigarettes. He began a conversation with the attendant, with whom he was friendly. A short time later, the two went outside and got into the defendant's truck, where the defendant drank beer and they sat talking until Casey's arrival about forty-five minutes later.
*607 To strengthen his assertion that he had not left the engine running throughout this time, the defendant described the weather as hot and humid. This weather and time period would have caused the truck to overheat had the engine been idling while he and the attendant sat and talked. He added that, considering the cost of gas at that time (June, 1984), he would never have let the engine idle for forty-five minutes.
II. The Jury Instructions.
In the present situation, there is no evidence which would warrant a reasonable inference that the defendant's ability to drive had been diminished before he arrived at the gas station. Compare Commonwealth v. Hilton, 398 Mass. 63, 68 (1986); Commonwealth v. Otmishi, 398 Mass. 69, 70-71 (1986); Commonwealth v. Colby, 23 Mass. App. Ct. 1008, 1010-1111 (1987). In those cases there was no reason to reach the issue of whether the defendant was operating the stopped vehicle because there was evidence that warranted a reasonable inference that the defendant had previously driven the vehicle while intoxicated. The evidence of this defendant's intoxication is limited to the time he spent at the gas station. Consequently, whether he drove while under the influence of intoxicating liquor depends upon whether his truck was "in operation" during the time period when he was stopped at the station.
The only instructions given by the trial judge relevant to that determination were as follows:
"The expression `operation of a motor vehicle' covers not only all the well known and easily recognized things drivers do as they travel on a street or highway, but also any act which would tend to set the car in motion. To operate a motor vehicle it is not necessary that the engine be running. The manipulation of any mechanical part of the vehicle, or use of any electrical agency, which, alone or in sequence, will set in motion the motor power of the vehicle is sufficient in law to constitute operation. Furthermore, a driver continues to operate his motor vehicle, within the meaning of the law, when it is stopped in *608 the ordinary course of its operation, or even for some mechanical reason such as a stalled engine or lack of gasoline."[1]
"Operation" has many meanings depending upon the context in which the term is used. See Boardman's Case, 365 Mass. 185, 192 n. 5 (1974), and cases therein collected. The instruction given in this case reflects three basic situations.
The first is illustrated by the case of Commonwealth v. Uski, 263 Mass. 22 (1928). In that case the defendant was convicted of operating his automobile while under the influence of liquor by a jury that was instructed that the defendant would be guilty of that offense if they found that he "got into his automobile which was standing in the street and manipulated the machinery of the motor for the purpose of putting the automobile into motion, the defendant being in the car and in a position to control its [movements], ... whether the automobile moved or not." Id. at 24. The court stated that "[a] person operates a motor vehicle within the meaning of G.L.c. 90, § 24, when, in the vehicle, he intentionally does any act or makes use of any mechanical or electrical agency which alone or in sequence will set in motion the motive power of that vehicle." Ibid.
This portion of the instructions was properly given. If the jury accepted Officer Casey's testimony (that the engine was running) their verdict could be based upon the penultimate sentence of the instruction ("the manipulation of any mechanical part of the vehicle, or use of any electrical agency, which *609 alone or in sequence, will set in motion the mot[ive] power of the vehicle is sufficient in law to constitute operation").
A second situation encompassed by the model instruction is that in which a vehicle is caused to move without the power of its engine. Thus, in Commonwealth v. Clarke, 254 Mass. 566 (1926), the defendant was held to have operated his motor vehicle when he "moved the gear shift from reverse into neutral, in consequence of which the car moved forward and down ... [an] incline." Id. at 567.
There is no suggestion that the defendant's truck was ever observed moving, with or without the engine running. It follows that the second sentence of the model instruction ("To operate a motor vehicle it is not necessary that the engine be running") was, at best, inapplicable to the facts of this case.
The third situation grows out of cases such as Commonwealth v. Henry, 229 Mass. 19 (1918),[2] where the court stated: "The word `operated' is not ... limited to a state of motion produced by the mechanism of the car, but includes at least ordinary stops upon the highway, and such stops are to be regarded as fairly incidental to its operation." Id. at 22.
If the jury believed the defendant's testimony that, when he arrived at the gas station, he shut the engine off and did not thereafter turn it on,[3] the phrase "stopped in the ordinary course of its operation" becomes crucial. The jury, however, were never instructed as to how that phrase was to be construed. "If a salient point of the case was not adequately covered and the attention of the judge was called to that fact at the close *610 of the charge, the exceptions must be sustained. The test of the charge is the impression created by it as a whole, and much must be left to the discretion of the judge." Commonwealth v. Benders, 361 Mass. 704, 707 (1972).
We are not saying that it was error to include the final sentence of the model instruction in the charge. We think to have omitted that sentence would have been unfair to the Commonwealth. However, it is the defendant's testimony which, if believed, makes the question whether the truck was "stopped in the ordinary course of its operation" a most "salient point." Ibid. Had the jury been instructed fully on the point, the defendant's guilt or lack thereof would have turned on the question whether the stop at the station was "fairly incidental to ... [the] operation" of the vehicle. Commonwealth v. Henry, 229 Mass. at 22. If they believed the defendant's testimony, it was open for the jury to find that, after purchasing his cigarettes, the defendant remained to visit with the attendant for a period of such duration that at the time of his arrest the stop at the station was no longer incidental to his operation of the truck. On the instruction given, the jury could have concluded that, although the truck was stopped at the time of the defendant's arrest, the stop was in the ordinary course of operation because at some point the defendant would have to leave the station. No matter how great that probability of departure, the when and the how of his leaving were matters of speculation. Compare Commonwealth v. Hilton, 398 Mass. at 67-68 n. 5, quoting from State v. Pritchett, 53 Del. 583, 598-599 (Del. Super. Ct. 1961).
No objection was taken to the instruction, but we conclude that the failure to instruct further and to explain the meaning of the phrase here at issue created a substantial risk of a miscarriage of justice. In the first instance, it took from the jury any consideration of the defendant's legitimate theory of defense to the indictment. Moreover, the jury recognized the importance of the issue. After twenty-three minutes of deliberations, they asked the trial judge: "We, the jury, request clarification of the operation section of the Mass. law as it pertains to this case." Clarification was not given. Rather than instructing *611 the jury along the lines of Commonwealth v. Henry, 229 Mass. at 22, that there is no operation of a vehicle within the meaning of the statute when the stop is not incidental to the driving, the judge repeated his earlier charge, the model instruction, with its troublesome final sentence. It is for these reasons that we conclude that, in the circumstances, reversal of the conviction is required.
III. Other Bad Acts.
In addition to the results of the defendant's breathalyzer test (.25) and Casey's testimony concerning the defendant's eyes, speech, and breath, there was evidence to show that, when arrested, the defendant threatened Casey's life, telling him that the next time he saw Casey directing traffic, he would run him over. The defendant objected to this testimony but was overruled. On cross-examination of Casey, the defendant elicited that Casey brought formal charges against the defendant for those threats and that the defendant pleaded guilty. Further, on cross-examination of the defendant, the prosecutor made fleeting reference to the facts that Casey had found a substance in the defendant's truck which the defendant tried to explain away to Casey as "white powder." Defense counsel took no objection and on redirect stated: "Why don't we get it out in the open." He then brought to the jury's attention the facts that, in addition to threatening a police officer, the defendant also had been charged with and pleaded guilty to possession of cocaine. There was a strategy: when guilty, the defendant was willing to say so. He now claims prejudice.
As these questions could recur at any retrial, we consider them. As to the evidence of the defendant's threats against Casey's life, we repeat the rule that "otherwise relevant evidence is not rendered inadmissible simply because it may indicate that the defendant has committed another offense." Commonwealth v. Roberts, 378 Mass. 116, 125 (1979). See also Commonwealth v. Palmariello, 392 Mass. 126, 138-139 (1984). We think that a trial judge could conclude that the threats were relevant to the question of whether the defendant was intoxicated (see Commonwealth v. Doyle, 12 Mass. App. Ct. 786, 796 [1981]) and that the probative value of the evidence *612 was not substantially outweighed by its potential for prejudice. See, e.g., Commonwealth v. Walden, 380 Mass. 724, 732 (1980); Commonwealth v. Lovell, 6 Mass. App. Ct. 172, 177-178 (1978).
We cannot predict what reference, if any, will be made to a "white powder" or to cocaine at any retrial. In the present instance, the matter arose in respect to the defendant's posture as a truthful man. The prosecutor was attempting to show that the defendant told Casey that the substance was "white powder" and that he knew that to be untruthful. The questions of relevance, probative value, and the potential for prejudice are best left for the trial judge to resolve on the basis of the state of the evidence at the time the issue arises, if it does. We will not say that the evidence would be inadmissible in all circumstances. See Commonwealth v. Fleury-Ehrhart, 20 Mass. App. Ct. 429, 434 (1985).
Judgment reversed.
Verdict set aside.
NOTES
[1]  Essentially, the instruction mirrors Model Jury Instructions for Criminal Offenses Tried in the District Court Department 3.06 (1981). In delivering the instructions, the judge in this case substituted the word "motor" for the word "motive" in the penultimate sentence of the model instructions. It should also be noted that the defendant, by written request, asked that the jury be instructed: "The expression `operation of a motor vehicle' covers not only all the well known and easily recognized things drivers do as they set the car in motion. The manipulation of any mechanical part of the vehicle, or use of any electrical agency, which alone or in sequence, will set in motion the motive power of the vehicle is sufficient in law to constitute operation." As can be seen, the critical difference between the instruction given and the one requested is that the defendant's proposed instruction requested, in effect, that the final sentence in the model instruction be omitted by the trial judge in charging the jury.
[2]  See also Cook v. Crowell, 273 Mass. 356, 358 (1930) ("It is settled law in this Commonwealth that a driver continues to operate a car on the highway during the time it is stopped in the ordinary course of its operation for soliciting trade or in calling for and delivering merchandise"); Blair v. Boston Elev. Ry., 310 Mass. 1, 3 (1941) ("The usual operation of the vehicle as it proceeded along its designated route included the ordinary stops for the reception and discharge of passengers")
[3]  Additionally, if the jury did not accept Casey's testimony, then there is no evidence on whether at the time of the defendant's arrest the keys were in the ignition or, even if there were such evidence, at what point the defendant put the keys in the ignition.

=== CASE 9738034 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:41:13.92673+00 ===

MESCHKE, Justice.
We consider whether an employee, who quits for self-employment after his regular job is made tentative and temporary, can later qualify for unemployment benefits. We hold that he can. Accordingly, we affirm the district court’s reversal of the denial of benefits to the employee.
Twin City Construction employed David Wahlstrom as a cabinet builder in 1981. In March 1985, Twin City closed its cabinet shop but kept Wahlstrom on to do other carpentry work and odd jobs.
In July 1985 talk about layoff began. Wahlstrom testified:
“A. ... They talked about it a couple of times and it never came about and never came about, because they always found more cleaning to do.
[[Image here]]
“Q. They had already told you that you’d be laid off in two weeks?
“A. Yes. Well, they’d been talking about it for weeks, actually. But then every time it came down to the last day, then they found some other cleaning or something to do so, you know, then me and my co-worker would be staying on.”
His supervisor testified that he had discussed layoff with Wahlstrom “the last couple months”:
“Q. Did you tell him when that would occur?
“A. It was never really definite. I said it could happen in a couple weeks or it may happen, you know, at the end of this week. It’s — it’s hard to say, you know, with time being it is that maybe something would have came up and we would have kept right on working for awhile longer, but the way it was looking here — that he was going to get laid off.
[[Image here]]
*694“Q. They [Wahlstrom and a co-worker] really had temporary work with you then?
“A. Yeah.
“Q. And you kept telling them that it was temporary?
“A. Yeah.”
On November 1, 1985, Wahlstrom left Twin City for self-employment as a carpenter. When that venture was unsuccessful, Wahlstrom sought unemployment benefits. Job Service denied benefits, ruling that Wahlstrom “had voluntarily left his employment for reasons which were not attributable to the employer.”
After hearing, a Job Service referee found:
“Beginning in July of 1985, the company did tell the claimant that they did not know how long his employment would last but that he would be laid off in the near future. The claimant was more or less working from week to week. On November 1, 1985, the claimant quit his employment when he had lined up some work as a self-employed carpenter. Approximately December 15, 1985, the claimant filed for benefits when he could no longer find work in self-employment. “The company did have further employment available for the claimant but would have discontinued his employment sometime during the month of November.”
The referee denied benefits, saying:
“The claimant voluntarily quit his employment because he believed he had found better employment. The company had additional employment available to the claimant. The employer did not cause the claimant’s unemployment and, therefore, under North Dakota law he is not entitled to benefits.”
On Wahlstrom’s appeal of the Job Service ruling, the district court recognized it was “a particularly hard case” but initially affirmed. Within two weeks, the district court reconsidered in the light of our then recent decision in Carlson v. Job Service North Dakota, 391 N.W.2d 643 (N.D.1986), reversed Job Service, and held that Wahlst-rom was eligible for unemployment benefits. The district court reasoned:
“It is clear that the Petitioner in this case would not have resigned but for the fact that he was being terminated or laid off. Since his layoff was then certain, the Petitioner was forced to try his hand at self-employment which lasted approximately 45 days. He quit a temporary job in an attempt to avoid unemployment.
[[Image here]]
“He should not be penalized for acting in good faith. Petitioner’s allegation that he quit his employment for reasons attributable to the employer is accurate, and the agency’s decision is not supported by its findings of fact and is not in accordance with the law. Petitioner acted in good faith and with no choice. He did not leave to seek better work; he left to be able to continue work. The Referee’s finding that ‘[t]he company did have further employment available for the claimant but would have discontinued his employment sometime during the month of November,’ and that he was ‘more or less working from week to week,’ makes it clear that his layoff or discharge was certain and that he quit before being terminated or laid off. Hence, the factual finding indicating that the company had further employment available for him as a finding of fact and reason for the decision does not support the conclusion that the Petitioner voluntarily quit.”
Job Service appeals, asking reinstatement of its ruling that Wahlstrom was not eligible for unemployment benefits. Job Service argues that since Wahlstrom left employment for self-employment, his reason for leaving was not attributable to his employer.
An employee who leaves employment “voluntarily without good cause attributable to the employer” is not entitled to unemployment benefits. N.D.C.C. § 52-06-02(1). We observed in Carlson v. Job Service North Dakota, 391 N.W.2d 643, 645 (N.D.1986) that “whether a person left employment ‘voluntarily’ is a mixed question of fact and law, where the evidence must *695support findings of fact which, in turn, must sustain the conclusion of ‘voluntariness.’ ” But, “it is not possible to determine accurately whether the act of a worker in leaving his job was voluntary unless one takes account of the causes which led to his action.” Crum, “Constructive Voluntary Quit” Disqualification — A Study in Employment Security, 44 N.D.L.Rev. 309, 311 (1968). To fairly apply the statutory disqualification, the findings and conclusions of Job Service, as the administrative agency responsible for administering unemployment benefits, must accurately identify the principal cause of an employee leaving employment. N.D.C.C. § 28-32-19.
Thus, in Carlson, supra, we ruled that a planned firing for job failings other than disqualifying misconduct was “good cause attributable to the employer,” which made a quit involuntary. On the other hand, in Ewert v. Job Service North Dakota, 403 N.W.2d 4 (N.D.1987), we held that a worker who quit “for purely personal reasons” before a planned seasonal layoff “left his most recent employment voluntarily without a good cause attributable to the employer.” In Ewert, we recognized that “[tjhere may be circumstances where a quit in advance of a layoff would be for ‘good cause attributable to the employer’.”
The findings show that the transformation of Wahlstrom’s once permanent and regular employment to something tentative and temporary was caused by his employer, not by his own doing. The employer changed the “rules” of his employment in the middle of the “game.” Thus, Wahlst-rom’s leaving his employment at Twin City was plainly and principally brought about by this pronounced uncertainty, “from week to week,” a reason attributable to the employer.
Since Wahlstrom left for self-employment, his conduct was consistent with a genuine desire to continue to work. There is nothing in the findings to suggest that he was trying to take advantage of unemployment benefits “for purely personal reasons” as in Ewert.
The administrative decision failed to take into account the unfavorable action of the employer, although the agency’s findings identified that action. An administrative agency must base its decision upon the record as a whole. Roberts v. North Dakota Workmen’s Compensation Bureau, 326 N.W.2d 702 (N.D.1982).
Therefore, we conclude, as the district court did, that the findings do not support the agency’s decision and that Wahlstrom left his employment at Twin City for a “good cause attributable to the employer,” which made his leaving involuntary.
Accordingly, the district court correctly reversed the denial of unemployment benefits to Wahlstrom.
LEVINE and GIERKE, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9738035 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:41:13.931096+00 ===

VANDE WALLE, Justice,
dissenting.
Except to note that “whether a person left employment ‘voluntarily’ is a mixed question of fact and law, where the evidence must support findings of fact which, in turn, must sustain the conclusion of ‘vol-untariness,’ ” little discussion can be found in the majority opinion of the standard of review applicable in appeals from decisions of administrative agencies. An examination of that standard, which applies to the review conducted by the district court on appeal as well as to this court, reveals that:
“1. We do not make independent findings of fact or substitute our judgment for that of the agency, but determine only whether a reasoning mind could have reasonably determined that the factual conclusions were supported by the weight of the evidence.
“2. We exercise restraint when we review administrative agency findings.
“3. It is not the function of the judiciary to act as a super board when reviewing administrative agency determinations.
“4. We will not substitute our judgment for that of the qualified experts in the administrative agencies.” Skjefte v. Job Service North Dakota, 392 N.W.2d 816, 817 (N.D.1986); Sec. 38-32-19, N.D.C.C.
Furthermore, when this court considers an appeal from a judgment of the district *696court reviewing the decision of an administrative agency, we review the decision of the agency, not the decision of the trial court. Skjefte, supra.
Although it may seem trite to constantly repeat these standards, it apparently is necessary to do so lest we rationalize, expressly or impliedly, that the court should really make the decisions which the Legislature has specified are to be made by the administrative agency.
Applying these standards of review to this case, I would reverse the decision of the district court and affirm the decision of Job Service North Dakota.
As the majority opinion notes, the district court apparently was influenced by this court’s decision in Carlson v. Job Service North Dakota, 391 N.W.2d 643 (N.D.1986). However, Carlson was a far different case from this. Carlson involved an employee who quit because she was told she was being fired for insufficient job performance and, as Justice Meschke, writing for the court, observed at page 646 of the reported decision: “[N]o purpose would be served by constructing a concept of ‘voluntariness’ that requires continuation of the necessarily unpleasant atmosphere between a fired employee and a frustrated supervisor.”
In this instance, however, the employer, Twin City Construction, closed the department in which Wahlstrom, the employee, worked, but nevertheless attempted to keep him employed by finding other work for him to do. We were informed that although this other work involved considerably less skill than was required in his position as a cabinetmaker, Twin City Construction continued to pay him at the same rate he earned while working as a cabinetmaker. I have difficulty in imagining two more different situations. Nor do I deem the statement in Ewert v. Job Service North Dakota, 403 N.W.2d 4 (N.D.1987), that “There may be circumstances where a quit in advance of a layoff would be for ‘good cause attributable to the employer,’ ” as being in any manner prophetic. Rather, it seems to me that it may be very difficult to rationalize a distinction between this case and Ewert in which a worker quit before a planned seasonal layoff. If the planned layoff is the key to these cases, there is no distinction. The only distinction between this case, Ewert, and Carlson is, in my estimation, the reason for the layoff. The concept of “voluntariness” is different for persons who are scheduled for planned layoffs that have nothing to do with job performance and those who quit because they are to be fired for insufficient job performance.
ERICKSTAD, C.J., concurs.

=== CASE 9738036 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:41:15.125754+00 ===

HOFFMAN, Judge.
Defendant-appellant Stephen Schrader in his capacity as the Mill Township Trustee appeals the entry of summary judgment in favor of plaintiff-appellee Mississinewa Community School Corporation (the School) in an action instituted by the School to obtain reimbursement for school fees paid by the School on behalf of children eligible for assistance pursuant to IND.CODE § 20-8.1-9-1 et seq. The parties submitted pleadings, motions and affidavits to the trial court. A hearing on the motion for summary judgment was held on March 19, 1987.
The facts reveal that for the relevant time period, 1979 to 1986, the School notified parents of the availability of financial assistance for those who applied and met the adopted financial guidelines. The School then provided books and supplies to students determined eligible. The applications were sent to Schrader for review of eligibility. The School then made a claim to the Trustee's Office for reimbursement of the funds provided to the eligible students.
For the relevant time period Schrader disallowed five of the applications for assistance because of financial ineligibility. Also Schrader refused to reimburse the School for assistance given to children whose parents did not comply with procedures instituted by Schrader. Schrader had adopted a procedure requiring a parent or guardian of the children who had received assistance to visit the Trustee's Office and sign a voucher certifying that the assistance was received. Thus, the School was not reimbursed for assistance paid to children whose parents failed to sign a voucher.
Schrader did not question the financial eligibility of those who failed to sign vouch*951ers and he did not claim that the vouchers were necessary for the Trustee's Office to obtain reimbursement from the State Board of Accounts. Instead, Schrader viewed the School book assistance as relief similar to that provided by grocers for which "vendors" vouchers are required. Schrader recognized that it was not the School's responsibility to secure the signatures on the vouchers.
The Mississinewa Community School Su-perintendant, Marcus Lane, testified that the State Board of Accounts had informed Lane that the form the School was using, a Form 521, was acceptable to the Board as authorization for payment. Additionally, Lane testified that the School's complaint for the unpaid claims did not include any claims the Trustee had disallowed due to financial ineligibility within the statutory 21-day period.
The trial court granted the School's motion for summary judgment and awarded the School $85,279.74. Schrader appeals from the entry of summary judgment.
On appeal Schrader presents three issues for review. As restated the issues are:
(1) whether the trial court erred in determining that Schrader could not condition reimbursement of the School upon the recipients' signing vouchers certifying that the benefits were received;
(2) whether the trial court erred in determining that the School's complaint was not barred by laches; and
(3) whether the trial court erred in determining that the recipients of the assistance need not be joined in the action as necessary parties pursuant to Ind.Rules of Procedure, Trial Rule 19.
Resolution of Schrader's first issue rests upon an interpretation of the school fee assistance statutes. The relevant statutes are IND.CODE § 20-8.1-9-3, IND. CODE § 20-8.1-9-7 and IND.CODE § 20-8.1-9-9. At the time of this action IND.CODE § 20-8.1-9-8 (1983 Supp.) (since amended) stated:
"If a parent of a child or an emancipated minor who is enrolled in a public school, in grades K-12, meets the financial eligibility standard under section 2 of this chapter, he may not be required to pay the fees for school books, supplies or other required class fees. Such fees shall be paid by the school corporation in which the child resides. Subject to seetion 7 of this chapter, the trustee of the township in which the child resides shall reimburse the school corporation for fees provided under this chapter."
IND.CODE § 20-8.1-9-7 (1984 Supp.) (since repealed) stated:
"(a) The trustee of the township in which the affected child resides shall reimburse the school corporation for the amount of aid authorized by this chapter unless the trustee determines that the parent's income exceeds the financial eligibility standards.
(b) The trustee shall notify the school corporation of his action within twenty-one (21) days of his receipt of the application. If the trustee does not notify the school corporation of his action within that time, the applicant is considered eligible.
(c) The trustee shall reimburse the school corporation according to a timetable which is mutually acceptable to him and to the school corporation, but reimbursement shall be made no later than July 31 following the school year in which the assistance was furnished, or within thirty (80) days of the trustee's receipt of the itemized statement from the school corporation, whichever is later."
IND.CODE § 20-8.1-9-9 (1982) (since repealed) stated in pertinent part:
"If a determination is made that the applicant is eligible for assistance, the trustee shall reimburse the school corporation for the cost of the student's fees, after the trustee has received a statement of the aid furnished. This statement must be made on a form approved by the state board of accounts."
IND.CODE § 20-8.1-9-3 mandated that the school pay the fees for books and supplies for children who were eligible for the *952assistance. Together IND.CODE §§ 20-8.-1-9-3 and 20-8.1-9-7 required the trustee of the township to reimburse the school unless the trustee determined that the financial eligibility standards had not been met. To obtain reimbursement the school was required only to provide the trustee with a statement on a form approved by the State Board of Accounts.
In the present case evidence was introduced that Schrader was given a Form 521 by the School when claims were made for reimbursement. Form 521 was the approved form by the State Board of Accounts. Rather than accepting the forms approved by the Board, Schrader imposed a further impediment to the School's reimbursement by requiring the recipients to sign vouchers. Although Schrader premised reimbursement upon the vouchers, he acknowledged that the School could not decline assistance to anyone who was financially eligible. Schrader's actions placed the School in an untenable position.
The record discloses neither action by Schrader to foree compliance with his procedures nor an indication that Schrader believed that he could force compliance. Schrader's procedures appeared to be completely voluntary with regard to the recipients. Only the School would suffer if recipients chose not to visit the Trustee's Office and complete the vouchers.
Schrader argues that the vouchers served the dual purposes of discouraging fraud by recipients and assuring that recipients received the assistance to which they were entitled. Schrader contends that the School should not be treated any differently than a vendor who claims to provide utilities or groceries to the recipients.
Key differences between vendors and the School exist. First, the School is under specific statutory compulsion to render the assistance. Second, the recipients of school fee assistance must complete an application which is forwarded to the Trustee's Office by the School. The fact that the children attend school and have supplies demonstrates that those entitled have received the assistance. If the recipients practice some fraud in applying for the assistance, Schrader's voucher system will not minimize or prevent the risk of such actions. Thus, the School should not be-treated as a vendor requiring "vendor's vouchers" as an antecedant to reimbursement by the Trustee.
In Wayne Twnp. v. Ft. Wayne Comm. Schs. (1978), 177 Ind.App. 271, 379 N.E.2d 497, this Court determined that IND.CODE § 20-8.1-3-28(a) (1971) (providing for temporary relief and since repealed) obligated the trustee to reimburse the school "for the amount of relief extended after receiving an itemized statement of such" assistance. 177 Ind.App. at 273, 379 N.E.2d at 499. Likewise, under the statutory provisions in place at the times relevant to this proceeding, the trustee was obligated to repay the school for the assistance provided after the school provided the trustee with the forms authorized by the State Board of Accounts. Consequently, the trial court did not err in determining that Schrader could not condition payment to the School upon the recipients' signing vouchers certifying that the benefits were received.
Next Schrader contends that the summary judgment was improper in this case because a genuine issue of material fact remains as to his affirmative defense of laches. On appeal from a summary judgment this Court must determine whether the pleadings, affidavits and other evidence taken, if any, reveal genuine issues of material fact when viewed in a light most favorable to the non-moving party, and whether the trial court correctly applied the law. Gibraltar Mut. Ins. Co. v. Hoosier Ins. Co. (1985), Ind.App., 486 N.E.2d 548, 550. However, the non-moving party may not rest on mere allegations or denials within the pleadings but must set forth by affidavit or otherwise some specific facts demonstrating an issue for trial. Yoder v. Cromwell State Bank (1985), Ind.App., 478 N.E.2d 131, 132.
Schrader alleges that because he had consistently, over the time period involved, refused to repay the School for assistance to recipients who did not sign vouchers, the School's claim is barred by laches. Laches is an equitable defense to a *953claim which contains three aspects: 1) inexcusable delay in asserting a right; 2) implied waiver arising from knowing acquiescence in the existing conditions; and 3) circumstances causing prejudice to the adverse party. City of Indianapolis v. Sherman (1980), Ind.App., 409 N.E.2d 1202, 1207. An allegation of delay alone, with no showing of prejudice suffered by the adverse party will not establish the defense of laches. Skerman, supra. Thus, Schrader failed in his burden to establish the defense and the trial court did not err in determining that no issue of material fact existed as to the defense.1
In his final argument Schrader claims that he is not the proper party to the lawsuit by the School. Schrader contends that the School should have sued the recipients who did not sign the vouchers and that in turn the recipients could have joined Schrader on the basis of indemnification. Further, Schrader alleges that the recipients should have been joined in the lawsuit pursuant to Ind.Rules of Procedure, Trial Rule 19 because Schrader faces substantial risk of incurring multiple litigation if the recipients initiate lawsuits. Therefore, ac cording to Schrader, the School has failed to present a claim upon which relief may be granted.
It has been settled that a school may initiate an action against a trustee to recover school fees advanced to those who meet the financial eligibility standards.
See State ex rel. City of Crawfordsville v. Union Civil Township (1944), 222 Ind. 267, 53 N.E.2d 159;
Wayne Twnp v. Ft. Wayne Comm. Schs., supra, 177 Ind.App. 271, 379 N.E.2d 497.
Additionally, the School in the present case has no basis for a lawsuit against the recipients who were eligible for the assistance. It is only Schrader's refusal to reimburse the School for the assistance that is at issue. Moreover, the recipients received the assistance and have no basis for a lawsuit against Schrader. Their rights are completely unaffected by Schrader's actions in not reimbursing the School. The trial court correctly determined that the School properly stated a claim against Schrader and that the recipients need not be joined as parties.
Accordingly, there being no error the trial court's entry of summary judgment in favor of the School is affirmed.
Affirmed.
CONOVER, J., concurs.
GARRARD, P.J., concurs with opinion.
. Whether or not the affirmative defense of laches would apply to a governmental agency was neither argued nor decided in the present - case.

=== CASE 2213156 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:28.122841+00 ===

15 Cal.App.2d 279 (1936)
BANK OF AMERICA NATIONAL TRUST AND SAVINGS ASSOCIATION et al., Petitioners,
v.
THE SUPERIOR COURT OF LOS ANGELES COUNTY et al., Respondents.
Civ. No. 11092.
California Court of Appeals. Second Appellate District, Division Two.
July 8, 1936.
Freston & Files and Swaffield & Swaffield for Petitioners.
Mott, Vallee & Grant and Hewlings Mumper for Respondents.
The Court.
This is an application for a writ of mandate by the petitioners against the Superior Court of Los Angeles County upon the ground that the respondent in a certain action pending therein entitled Glenn Winslow et al., Plaintiffs, v. Harold G. Ferguson Corporation et al., Defendants, *280 numbered 315558, denied a motion of the petitioner Bank of America to dismiss the entire action upon the ground that the said cause had not been brought to trial within five years after the date of the filing of the action as required by section 583 of the Code of Civil Procedure, and upon the ground also that judgment had not been entered against the defendants who had not answered said complaint as required by section 581a of the Code of Civil Procedure. An alternative writ was heretofore issued and the matter has been heard upon the demurrer of the respondent.
[1] After full consideration we are satisfied that the facts stated in the petition are not sufficient to warrant the relief prayed for or any relief. It appears that the court dismissed the said action as to the Bank of America and that said petitioner is not a party beneficially interested and therefore is not entitled to a writ of mandate. (La Mesa etc. Irr. Dist. v. Halley, 195 Cal. 739 [235 P. 999]; Graham v. Gillett, 156 Cal. 113 [103 P. 195]; 16 Cal.Jur. 850, and Ten-Year Supplement, vol. 7, p. 705.)
[2] The Metropolitan Trust Company is not entitled to a writ because it has as yet made no request upon the trial court for a dismissal. Before an appellate court will issue a writ of mandate compelling a superior court to act, a demand for action upon that court should have been made. (Price v. Riverside Land & Irr. Co., 56 Cal. 431; 16 Cal.Jur. 771.)
For the reasons stated the demurrer is sustained, the petition is denied and the alternative writ quashed and vacated.

=== CASE 2213160 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:28.174289+00 ===

6 Ill. App.2d 325 (1955)
127 N.E.2d 505
People of State of Illinois, Plaintiff-Defendant in Error,
v.
John Williams, Alias Slats Williams, Defendant-Plaintiff in Error.
Gen. No. 9,964.
Illinois Appellate Court  Third District.
May 16, 1955.
Rehearing denied July 21, 1955.
Released for publication July 21, 1955.
*326 *327 *328 *329 G.W. Horsley, and L.H. Lenz, both of Springfield, for defendant-plaintiff in error.
H. David Condron, State's Attorney of Adams county, and William J. Dieterich, Assistant State's Attorney, both of Quincy, for appellee.
MR. JUSTICE HIBBS delivered the opinion of the court.
The state's attorney of Adams county filed an information in the county court of that county charging that plaintiff in error kept and maintained at 223 North Third street, also known as the 223 Club, in the City of Quincy, a house of ill fame and place for the practice of prostitution and lewdness. The presiding judge of that county disqualified himself, and the county judge of Schuyler county presided at the trial. The jury found the defendant guilty and fixed his punishment at imprisonment in the county jail for one year and a fine of $200. A motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict was denied. An alternate motion for new trial consisting of 101 assigned errors was likewise denied and the defendant was sentenced in accordance with the verdict. The cause comes here by writ of error.
The principal contentions of the plaintiff in error are that the court erred in denying a motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict, in denying a motion for new trial, in the admission and exclusion of evidence and instructing the jury. By reason of such contentions it becomes necessary to set out in detail the evidence and the rulings of the court.
The conceded facts show that the plaintiff in error operated a tavern at the location stated. Prior to March 9, 1953 he and his wife, Audrie, were the owners in joint tenancy of the premises, but on the latter date conveyed the same to Bernice V. Lovelace, a sister of plaintiff in error, to whom no rent was paid. The city *330 and state liquor licenses for that location were issued to the father of Audrie. The entrance to the barroom was from Third street on the east. The bar ran along the south side of the room, and to the west there was an archway without doors which led to a second room, in which were wash and toilet facilities, and to the right a stairway led upstairs to certain quarters, consisting of three bedrooms and a bath. In the barroom were six tables and four chairs at each table, about fifteen stools at the bar, one or two juke boxes, a cigarette machine and two pinball machines. Helen Reeves, referred to in the record and known in the tavern by the name of Geraldine or Gerry Sims, was employed to work there by plaintiff in error on May 1, 1953 and Drucilla Warren, known in the record and in the tavern as "Lucky" Smith, was employed by the defendant's wife, Audrie, on June 1st of the same year. They occupied two of the upstairs bedrooms. On the evening in question, June 6, 1953, plaintiff in error was not present at the time of the occurrences hereafter related, but his wife was tending bar.
The state's attorney of Adams county engaged two deputy sheriffs of a neighboring county, named Bliven and Payne, to ascertain whether plaintiff in error was conducting a house of ill fame. Each was deputized as special deputy sheriff in Adams county. The arrangement made was in the nature of a raid. The two special deputies were to enter the 223 Club and about fifteen minutes afterward the city police were to blow a whistle and enter. The two deputies were given $20 and promised pay for their services. They entered the premises about 9:45 p.m. on June 6, 1953. What occurred thereafter is controverted.
According to the evidence adduced by the State, the Sims girl was then sitting at the bar with her arm around a customer. Each deputy sheriff ordered a glass of beer. While consuming their beverages at the bar, Sims came up to Bliven and asked if he would like *331 to go upstairs. The latter inquired if she had a girl for Payne. Whereupon Sims asked the wife of plaintiff in error then tending bar if "Lucky" was working, and upon receiving a negative answer brought "Lucky" Smith and the four of them went through the archway to the rear room, where the deputies were asked for money, and each paid $5 (marked money), which was then placed by the girls, or one of them, in a cigar box at the west end of the bar with a slip of paper. They then proceeded upstairs, Payne and Smith to one room, and Bliven and the Sims girl in another. Each girl directed her companion to undress and then went to the bathroom. On returning to their respective rooms, the girls proceeded to undress and were then arrested and handcuffed. Bliven permitted Sims to dress, but Payne refused to allow Smith to do so and threw a curtain around her. They were then taken downstairs and turned over to the Quincy police, who took them to police headquarters. After the raid one of the witnesses went back to the Club and found both plaintiff in error and his wife there, searched the register and cigar box, but found no money in either.
The defendant did not call his wife as a witness, but relied upon the testimony of Geraldine Sims, called as the court's witness, and of "Lucky" Smith. The Sims girl testified that her real name was Helen Reeves; that she had lived at Springfield all of her life; that when she came to Quincy, she did not know either the plaintiff in error or his wife or that there was such a place as the 223 tavern, but as she walked down the street, she saw a sign that a waitress was wanted, went in and was employed by Mrs. Williams; that she had never been a prostitute; that she received instructions not to take any money from men or to take them upstairs. She further stated that on the night of the raid "Lucky" Smith was menstruating and had gone upstairs alone; that she heard Smith holler and ran upstairs to see what was wrong, and when about half-way *332 up, a man threw handcuffs on her; that she had never agreed to give plaintiff in error one-half of her earnings that she made as a prostitute or in any other way; that she did not solicit any men; that she used the name, Geraldine Sims, because she didn't want it to get back to her family where she was working; that no man in the tavern that night gave her $5, nor did she put any $5 bill in the cigar box, nor did she invite any deputies or any other men to go upstairs; that after she was taken to the police station she was not questioned by anyone, was asked her name and where she lived, and then was taken upstairs in the county jail. During her cross-examination by the state's attorney she was asked if she did not in the presence of certain officers say that on the average she took in from the practice of prostitution at Williams' place $50 a week, of which she gave half to plaintiff in error. She denied making such statement and also denied she had been working there as a prostitute and further denied that the officer who arrested her gave her $5. This cross-examination was conducted over the objection of counsel for plaintiff in error.
"Lucky" Smith testified that her true name was Drucilla Warren, that she was twenty-two years old and her home address was Springfield, Illinois; that when she arrived in Quincy, she walked about town, stopped at the Williams tavern and asked if he could use her as a bartender. She accepted employment as a waitress, but never at any time had she been engaged in any activities of prostitution; that she never did take any men upstairs and have acts of intercourse with them; that on the day in question she was menstruating; that just before the raid she was sitting on a bar stool at the bar, but went upstairs to clean up and was in the bathroom in the nude when a man came to the door, grabbed her and put handcuffs on her; that he wouldn't let her put her clothes on, but she grabbed a curtain from the bathroom window  sort of a piece *333 of drape  and threw it around herself; that she did not take one of the two men upstairs with her that night; that he did not give her a $5 bill; that she did not put any $5 bill in a cigar box; that Sims had started upstairs when the handcuffs were put on her; and that she remained in the police station with Sims for about forty-five minutes before taken to the jail.
Both Sims and Smith testified that they were employed as barmaids and were paid at the rate of $18 per week plus tips and 10c for each drink the customers purchased for them, amounting to $1 or $2 a day, but each paid back to plaintiff in error $7 per week for their rooms and furnished their own food.
In rebuttal of the testimony of Sims the State produced three police officers of the City of Quincy, who testified that they were present in the office of the police matron of the City of Quincy on July 6, 1953 when Sims was interrogated following her arrest by the state's attorney, and that Sims admitted that she was employed at the Williams tavern as a prostitute and as such earned about $50 a week, half of which she gave to the defendant.
The court admitted over the objection of plaintiff in error the testimony of certain witnesses, three of whom were police officers, that the 223 Club, located at 223 North Third street, had a reputation as a house of prostitution. The grounds of the objection were that such evidence was immaterial and hearsay. The question of the reputation of such place was first injected into the cause by the plaintiff in error in the cross-examination of three of the People's witnesses. In order to establish that plaintiff in error was the operator of the tavern the State called among others, William Paul Carroll, C.F. Rost and Dorman E. Hall. Carroll testified that he was an employee of the Quincy Music Company and as such serviced a juke box at the tavern, at which time either the plaintiff in error or his wife was present and assisted in the checking and *334 dividing of the money. Notwithstanding the reputation of the place was not then in issue by the proofs, counsel for plaintiff in error brought out on cross-examination that Carroll did not see any prostitution or signs of prostitution being there carried on, and then was asked, "And the reputation of that place was good, wasn't it?", to which he replied to his knowledge it was. Rost also serviced a juke box there and testified substantially the same under direct examination as the witness, Carroll. On cross-examination counsel for the defendant developed that the witness never saw or heard of any prostitution being carried on there. Hall, the father-in-law of plaintiff in error testified that the city and state liquor licenses were issued to him, and that in obtaining the licenses he was merely helping out his son-in-law and daughter. However, on cross-examination he was asked, "Did he (Williams) have a good reputation there for running a respectable place without any prostitution going on?", and he answered, "So far as I know."
The case of People v. Newbold, 260 Ill. 196 and other cases are cited in support of the claimed erroneous ruling. The Newbold case, supra, was a prosecution under the same section of the criminal code and it was there said at page 200: "It was competent for the witness to testify to the reputation of the plaintiff in error but not to give an opinion as to whether he kept a disorderly house." However, it was later said in People v. Berger, 284 Ill. 47 at page 50: "Most authorities agree that on a prosecution for keeping such a house as this the State may prove the character of the inmates and frequenters of the house, and many courts hold it can prove the reputation of the house."
[1] We do not find it necessary to pass upon the admissibility of the reputation of the 223 Club. The plaintiff in error deliberately injected the issue into the case as above set forth and ought not to be heard to object to the propriety of adverse testimony offered *335 by the People to meet the issue he first inserted in the cause. In Kuhn v. Eppstein, 239 Ill. 555, the court say at page 557: "If the evidence for the appellee was incompetent so was that for the appellants, and they ought not to be heard to complain that evidence of the same character which they offered was not proper." To the same effect is Bogart v. Brazee, 331 Ill. 160, 181; Moore v. Schoen, 313 Ill. App. 367, 371. Although these cases were civil cases we believe the rule there announced is applicable to criminal prosecutions.
[2, 3] Plaintiff in error also contends he was unduly restricted in the cross-examination of the People's witnesses who testified as to the reputation of his place of business. The only question involved upon which comment should be made is the rulings that the cross-examiner might not inquire as to what specific persons had said it was a place of prostitution. The general rule is that the scope of the cross-examination is within the sound discretion of the court, and unless that discretion is abused there is no error committed in restricting such examination. (People v. Nakutin, 364 Ill. 563, 571; People v. Jones, 343 Ill. 291, 295.) The issue here made by plaintiff in error was the general reputation of his place of business in that community. What any one person might have said to any of the witnesses on that subject is not material, but under the issue thus made, his cross-examination was properly limited to the general reputation of the place in that community. Incidentally it should be mentioned that the court permitted witnesses to answer that their information came from various places about the city. The court did not abuse its discretion.
[4] It is next submitted that the conversations between Bliven, Payne, Sims, Smith and the defendant's wife, having taken place out of the presence of plaintiff in error, were not admissible, and the rulings of the court in that respect constituted prejudicial error. The principal case cited in support of that contention *336 is People v. Newbold, 260 Ill. 196. There the defendant was charged with keeping a common, ill-governed and disorderly house to the encouragement of fornication. A detective went to the home with two girls picked up on the street (not employees of the defendant) and the trial court admitted a conversation with them out of the presence of the defendant. We do not regard that case and similar cases as controlling under the facts and circumstances existing here. About three months before June 6, 1953 the plaintiff in error and his wife, then the owners of the premises at 223 North Third street, conveyed the same to his sister, to whom they paid no rent. The city and state liquor licenses were issued not to Williams, but to his father-in-law. The uncontradicted evidence shows that Mrs. Williams was the active agent of the defendant in the operation of the business and was on the day in question on duty tending bar. One of the girls was hired by Williams and the other by his wife, at meager wages, out of which they were required to pay for their own board and lodging. The tavern room opened through an archway without doors to a back room from which led an open stairway to the bedrooms and bath on the second floor, occupied by Sims and Smith. The uncontradicted evidence also shows a cigar box on the west end of the bar. The State's case showed the approach made by Sims to the deputy, the question to Mrs. Williams, "Is `Lucky' working?", her reply thereto, the bringing of "Lucky," the transaction in the rear room, the payment of the money and placing of it in the cigar box, the ascent of the stairway, the entry into the respective rooms, the use of the bathroom and undressing of the girls, the disappearance of the money in the cash box and cash register. All of this evidences a conspiracy of plaintiff in error and his wife and the two girls to conduct and operate a house of ill fame. In People v. Borrelli, 392 Ill. 481 at page 493, it is said: "The existence of a conspiracy may be proved not only *337 by direct evidence but also by inference from conduct, statements, facts and circumstances which disclose a common design on the part of the accused and others to act in pursuance of a common criminal purpose." To the same effect is People v. Link, 365 Ill. 266, 281, 282.
[5, 6] It is well established that where a conspiracy exists to violate the criminal laws that all conversations between coconspirators in carrying out the unlawful act or acts are admissible against the party on trial, even though made out of his presence. This is true notwithstanding the indictment did not charge a conspiracy. (Raymond v. The People, 226 Ill. 433, 436, 437; People v. Hedge, 284 Ill. 513, 516, 517; People v. Pavluk, 386 Ill. 492, 498.) Under these circumstances we conclude that the conversations between the employees of the defendant and the two deputy sheriffs and the conversation between Sims and Mrs. Williams, occurring at the 223 Club that evening, were admissible in evidence.
[7] The state's attorney moved the court to call Geraldine Sims as the court's witness, and in so doing represented that he could not vouch for her credibility, that she and "Lucky" Smith had each been released on bond and since then had been living at the home of plaintiff in error, that during the trial he had interviewed Sims and she had denied making certain statements at the police station on the night of June 6, 1953 concerning the nature of her employment in the 223 Club. Over the objection of counsel for plaintiff in error the motion was allowed and the action of the court in this regard is assigned as error. In People v. Laster, 413 Ill. 224 at pages 231 and 232, it is said: "The rule permitting the court to call an eyewitness was announced in Carle v. People, 200 Ill. 494, where it was said that when a state's attorney knows that a witness was present at the scene of a crime, but he has no confidence in the witness or doubts his veracity or *338 integrity, he is not obliged to call such witness. Then the court may call the witness, leaving him open for cross-examination by either side. We later announced that this rule should be confined within narrow limits, being adopted only where it is shown that otherwise there might be material injustice. (People v. Johnson, 333 Ill. 469.)" It was important to the People's case to establish that the two girls were in the employment of Williams and the nature of such employment. The admitted circumstances in the case warranted the state's attorney in saying to the court that he could not vouch for the credibility or integrity of the witness. Moreover during the cross-examination of this witness she denied the making of certain statements to the state's attorney in the presence of others in the police station concerning the nature of her employment, which clearly indicates that the state's attorney was justified in his statement that he could not vouch for her integrity or credibility. The showing made by the People was sufficient to justify the action of the court in calling the witness as a court's witness.
On cross-examination by the People this same witness admitted not only her employment but that of "Lucky" Smith, but denied she was engaged as a prostitute or as such earned $50 a week, half of which she gave to plaintiff in error and denied she solicited the deputy sheriff, who arrested her. Thereafter three police officers of the City of Quincy testified that at the police station on the evening in question in reply to questions of the state's attorney, Sims stated she was employed by plaintiff in error as a prostitute and earned $50 a week as such, half of which she paid to him, and did solicit the deputy sheriff. No question is raised as to the method or foundation laid for the impeachment of the witness, but complaint is made of the fact that over the defendant's objection in each instance, when the witness was testifying, the court told the jury that the testimony of such witness was not to *339 be considered as to the guilt or innocence of plaintiff in error but was to be considered only for the purpose of impeaching the credibility of the witness, Sims. It is contended that such statements by the court unduly emphasized the purport of the impeaching testimony.
[8, 9] Statements made by a witness out of the presence of the accused, inconsistent with his testimony on the trial are admissible for the purpose of impeaching the credibility of the witness, but cannot be received as proof of the innocence or guilt of the defendant. (Ritter v. People, 130 Ill. 255, 260; People v. Dascola, 322 Ill. 473.) In South Park Com'rs v. Ayer, 245 Ill. 402, the court say at page 410: "The court, in ruling upon the objections of counsel in the course of the examination of a witness, has the right to state the grounds which form the basis of its ruling," and concluded that such ruling was not within the statute which required instructions to the jury to be in writing. In People v. Dascola, 322 Ill. 473, the court quotes with approval Gould v. Norfolk Lead Co., 9 Cush. 346, as follows: "`It is no evidence whatever that the facts are as he formerly stated them, and though appeals are sometimes made to a jury that it is so, it is the province of the court to inform them (the jury) it is not so.'"
[10] The impeaching evidence was only admissible as affecting the credibility of the witness, Sims, and not as proof of the guilt of the accused. Unless the jury was advised of the limitation of such testimony, and for what purpose it was to be considered, the jury could well have believed it was proof of the guilt of the accused. It is true that the People offered and the court gave an instruction on that subject in its written charge, but we deem the statement of the court at the time the evidence came in as beneficial to the plaintiff in error instead of prejudicial.
It is also contended that the court erred in admitting impeaching testimony as to Sims on an immaterial *340 issue, such as her home and as to both Sims and Smith, as to where they lodged their first night in Quincy. In view of the conclusion hereinafter stated as to the condition of the record, we do not believe that the admission of such impeaching testimony, even if error, was prejudicial.
[11-13] In support of the contention that the verdict is contrary to the competent evidence, plaintiff in error cites People v. True, 235 Ill. App. 349; People v. Newbold, 260 Ill. 196; People v. Knaze, 297 Ill. App. 256. We do not regard these cases as decisive or persuasive, due to the factual differences that exist. We have heretofore set out the salient facts and circumstances in this cause, and they need not be here repeated. We have no doubt that guilt may be shown either by direct evidence, which in most cases of this character is impossible or impracticable, or by circumstances from which according to the rule of common sense and reason guilt is inferable. (People v. Berger, 284 Ill. 47, 50, 52.) We are satisfied that there is from this record no reasonable doubt of the guilt of plaintiff in error. This is true even though the conversation on the evening in question between Bliven, Payne, Sims and Smith and the defendant's wife are excluded from consideration. All the surrounding facts and circumstances and actions and things that the parties did that night compels the same conclusion. We recognize that a person charged with the commission of an offense must be proved guilty by the prosecution beyond all reasonable doubt, and that the defendant is not required to prove his innocence. It is noteworthy, however, that the defendant called certain witnesses on his own behalf, but failed to put his wife on the witness stand. It appeared that she was assisting in the operation of the business and was an agent of her husband in that regard. She was tending bar on the evening in question. She knew whether Sims asked if "Lucky" was working. She knew whether there was a cigar box on *341 the west end of the bar and whether the two girls were prostitutes and the place a house of prostitution. As to these subjects, she was a competent witness. (Sec. 6, Division XIII Criminal Code, Par. 734, Chap. 38, 1953 Illinois Revised Statutes [Jones Ill. Stats. Ann. 37.720].) The failure of the defendant to avail himself of his wife's testimony is merely an incident which confirms our conclusion as to the defendant's guilt.
Complaint is made of Instruction No. 1 and Instruction No. 10 given by the court on behalf of the People. Instruction No. 1 was as follows:
"The court instructs the jury that while it is proper to impeach or discredit a witness by proving statements made by such witness at some other time and place different from his testimony in the case on trial, still any statement that any witness may have made at such other time and place is not to be considered by you as any evidence of the guilt or innocence of the defendant. You should consider such evidence, if any has been shown, solely on the question of impeachment or discrediting of such witness."
Instruction No. 10 was as follows:
"The court instructs the jury that one method of impeaching a witness is by showing that he has made statements out of court or in court or other hearings, at variance with statements on the witness stand, and if the jury believe from the evidence, that any witness in this case has made statements at any other time or place at variance with his evidence in this case, you have a right to take such fact into consideration in determining the weight to be given the evidence of such witness."
[14] It is contended that the instructions are defective in that they fail to limit their application to material matters in issue in the case, and also particularly prejudicial because the court permitted the introduction of impeaching testimony as to Sims, on an *342 immaterial issue, such as her home, and as to both Sims and Smith, as to where they lodged the first night they were in Quincy. The material issues in the cause were properly defined by not only defendant's Instruction No. 5 but by People's Instruction No. 5. By both Instruction No. 10 tendered by the defendant and Instruction No. 12 tendered by the State, the jury was in substance told that if they believed any witness testifying on behalf of either side had wilfully and corruptly sworn falsely to any fact material to the issue in the cause, as defined in the instructions, they had a right to disregard the testimony of such witness, unless corroborated by other credible evidence. We believe that both People's Instruction No. 1 and Instruction No. 10 should have been limited to the material issues in the cause, but in view of the other instructions that were given on behalf of both the People and the plaintiff in error, and the nature and character of the proofs in the cause, the plaintiff in error was not prejudiced by the giving of such instructions. (People v. Thompson, 406 Ill. 323, 327.)
[15] In People v. DeRosa, 378 Ill. 557, the court say at page 563: "A particular instruction need not contain all the law either of the case or upon a given subject. It is sufficient if the series of instructions, considered as a whole, fully and fairly announces the law applicable to the theories of the People and of the defendant, respectively."
We have considered all other questions raised and find that plaintiff in error was not prejudiced by the rulings of the court, or the argument of the People to the jury. We are satisfied that the defendant received the kind of a fair and impartial trial he was entitled to have.
[16] The object of a review is not to determine whether the record is free from error, but to ascertain whether a just conclusion has been reached upon competent and sufficient evidence after trial in which *343 no error, prejudicial to the defendant's rights has occurred. (People v. Booker, 378 Ill. 334; People v. Shelton, 388 Ill. 56; People v. Vaughn, 390 Ill. 360; People v. Kennay, 391 Ill. 572.) While this record is not free from error, we do not believe the defendant was prejudiced by any rulings of the court. The competent evidence proved guilt beyond a reasonable doubt, so that the jury could not conscientiously have arrived at any other verdict. The judgment of the county court of Adams county is affirmed.
Judgment affirmed.

=== CASE 2213161 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:28.175963+00 ===

15 Cal.App.2d 256 (1936)
THE PEOPLE, Respondent,
v.
BERBIE L. BROCKMAN, Appellant.
Crim. No. 2867.
California Court of Appeals. Second Appellate District, Division One.
July 8, 1936.
Edgar T. Fee for Appellant.
U.S. Webb, Attorney-General, and Alberta Belford, Deputy Attorney-General, for Respondent.
Desmond, J., pro tem.
The defendant appeals from an order imposing sentences and judgments entered in a jury-waived case, in which she was found guilty on two counts the first charging attempted murder; the second, the crime of administering poison to a human being with intent to kill, as defined in section 216 of the Penal Code.
The trial judge imposed sentence at Tehachapi Women's Division of San Quentin State Prison on each of said counts, but ordered the sentences to run concurrently.
It is claimed, upon this appeal, that neither judgment is supported by the evidence adduced; also, that the court erred in finding defendant guilty on two counts and imposing punishment on both. The argument is that the only evidence which tended to prove attempted murder was the same evidence that tended to show the administration of poison with intent to kill; in other words, that, although charged in two counts, defendant could have been convicted of only one crime upon the evidence before the court.
[1] Having read the transcript, we find that there was ample evidence to support a finding that defendant administered strychnine to her son-in-law with intent to kill him. There was no evidence of any other attempt upon his life.
Section 664 of the Penal Code provides that attempted murder is punishable by a term in state prison of not more than twenty years. A violation of section 216 of the Penal Code, *258 administering poison with intent to kill, is punishable by a prison term of not less than ten years, which, of course, permits a life term as a maximum.
Since the court, as a matter of fact, found the defendant guilty of violating section 216 of the Penal Code, it was warranted in imposing a state prison sentence for the longer term, and since the sentences on both counts are to run concurrently the shorter term necessarily will be served at the same time. If error arose in the decisions and judgments it was rendered harmless by the act of the court in ordering the two sentences to be served concurrently. Since the defendant has not been adversely affected in any of her substantial rights by these proceedings, there is no ground for reversal. (Sec. 1404, Pen. Code.)
[2] While this case does not present the same points as People v. Koehn, 207 Cal. 605 [279 P. 646], we believe the direction to dismiss one count there resorted to may well be followed here. Accordingly, the judgment pronounced upon count I, which charged an attempt to commit murder, is set aside and vacated, not because the offense charged in that count was not proven, but because a valid conviction was had upon the same facts under the other count charging administration of poison with intent to kill. That conviction is to stand, and under the circumstances here, one conviction and only one should stand against the defendant. The trial court is directed to dismiss count I of the information.
The decision of the court as to count II, violation of section 216 of the Penal Code, is affirmed, also the judgment thereon.
York, Acting P. J., and Doran, J., concurred.

=== CASE 2213163 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:28.210316+00 ===

15 Cal.App.2d 676 (1936)
THE ANGLO-CALIFORNIA NATIONAL BANK OF SAN FRANCISCO (a Corporation) et al., Petitioners,
v.
THE SUPERIOR COURT OF GLENN COUNTY, Respondent.
Civ. No. 5616.
California Court of Appeals. Third Appellate District.
July 29, 1936.
Aaron N. Cohen for Petitioners.
Arthur Huston and Paul A. Lindley for Respondent.
Thompson, J.
This is a petition for a writ of mandamus to require the Judge of the Superior Court of Glenn County to dismiss an action numbered 5520 which was filed in that county February 5, 1935, and which is now pending therein between C. V. and Carrie Seidell, plaintiffs, and Anglo-California Trust Company et al., defendants, the court having denied defendants' application for a nonsuit and for judgment on the pleadings. The last suit was brought to cancel a trust deed and the foreclosure proceedings, which became the foundation of the litigation, on the ground that they are void. This writ is sought on the theory that a final judgment which was previously rendered in that county May 20, 1933, in a suit in unlawful detainer numbered 4992, between Edward F. Harris, plaintiff, who acquired the title to the real property on foreclosure sale thereof, and C. V. and Carrie Seidell et al., defendants, is res judicata of the issues which are presented in the pending action.
The petitioner in this proceeding contends that the trial court abused its discretion in refusing to grant defendant's motion for a nonsuit and for judgment on the pleadings in the action which is pending in the Superior Court of Glenn County, and that the writ should therefore issue.
[1] We are of the opinion the writ should be denied for the reason that it is not the province of mandamus to correct errors of law which occur in the trial of a cause, and if the trial court erred in refusing to grant defendants' motion for *678 a nonsuit and for judgment on the pleadings, those errors may be corrected on appeal. (Reidy v. Superior Court, 220 Cal. 111 [29 PaCal.2d 780]; People v. Pratt, 28 Cal. 166 [87 Am. Dec. 110]; People v. Superior Court, 114 Cal. 466 [46 P. 383]; Grivi v. Superior Court, 3 Cal.2d 463 [45 PaCal.2d 181].) In the Grivi case above cited it is said that "In so far as it [the petition for a writ of mandamus] seeks to avoid the force and effect of a judgment or order of the court it constitutes a collateral attack thereon". The case of Reidy v. Superior Court, supra, is determinative of this proceeding. That was a petition for a writ of prohibition to prevent the court from trying a suit on the very ground relied on in the present proceeding, to wit, that a judgment which was rendered in a previous action was res judicata of the issues presented in the pending suit. The writ was denied. The language of the Supreme Court in denying that writ applies with persuasive force to the facts of this proceeding. The syllabus concisely states the ground upon which that petition was determined, as follows:
"While the plea of a former judgment may be a complete defense and a bar to a pending action, the court in which the second action is pending has jurisdiction to pass upon the merits of said plea and to determine whether or not it is well taken; and res adjudicata must be affirmatively relied upon and shown in evidence and in some cases must be pleaded, but in no case is the plea in and of itself sufficient to oust the court of jurisdiction; and when a former judgment is pleaded, either in bar or as an estoppel on some issue, there immediately arises questions as to the identity of the parties, the validity of the judgment as shown by the judgment-roll, the legal effect to be given it and perhaps many other questions, which matters are for the determination of the trial court, and whether correctly or incorrectly determined, it is nevertheless the exercise of jurisdiction over the subject-matter and the parties."
The record of this proceeding indicates there has been much unwarranted litigation incident to the property which is involved herein. [2] We may not say, however, under the circumstances of this case, that the trial judge abused his discretion in refusing to grant judgment on the pleadings and in refusing a motion for nonsuit. The former suit, the determination of which is deemed to constitute res judicata *679 of the issues which are involved in this case, was an action of forcible entry and detainer, which is primarily a mere possessory proceeding in which actual title to the real property is ordinarily not an issue and therefore improperly considered. (12 Cal.Jur. 597, sec. 4; 26 C.J. 812, sec. 40; 8 Standard Ency. of Procedure, 1108.) Still there are certain cases of unlawful detainer in which, under the pleadings or particular facts involved, it becomes necessary and proper to determine title to the property incident to the right of possession. (Sec. 1161a, Code Civ. Proc.; Nineteenth Realty Co. v. Diggs, 134 Cal.App. 278 [25 PaCal.2d 522]; Mortgage Guarantee Co. v. Smith, 9 Cal.App.2d 618 [50 PaCal.2d 835].) In the former action in unlawful detainer, numbered 4992, which is deemed to constitute res judicata of the issues in the present proceeding, the Seidells set up a claim of title to the real property in both an answer and a cross-complaint which they filed. On motion the cross-complaint was stricken from the record. Without examining the pleadings and that entire record we are unable to determine whether title to the property was necessarily involved as an incident to the alleged unlawful detention of the property. We may, therefore, not say as a matter of law that the judge of the trial court abused his discretion in denying the motion for a nonsuit or for judgment on the pleadings. We are unable in this proceeding to hold that the court erred in its rulings upon those motions, and if it did, those errors may be corrected on appeal.
[3] For the same reason we may not hold as a matter of law that other litigation which grew out of controversies over this same property constitutes res judicata of the issues which are presented in the pending suit. One of these other cases was filed May 6, 1930, in the Superior Court of Glenn County, entitled C. V. and Carrie Seidell v. Tuxedo Land Company et al. Judgment of nonsuit was granted in that case. That judgment was affirmed by this court on appeal. (1 Cal.App.2d 406 [36 PaCal.2d 1102].) It has been repeatedly held that a judgment of nonsuit is not a bar to another action presenting the same issues and does not render such judgment res judicata in a subsequent case involving the same issues. (15 Cal.Jur. 131, sec. 185; Mohn v. Tingley, 191 Cal. 470 [217 P. 733]; San Francisco v. Brown, *680 153 Cal. 644 [96 P. 281]; Ramsey v. Powers, 74 Cal.App. 621 [241 P. 567].)
[4] The other case relied on by the petitioner in this proceeding as constituting res judicata of the issues herein was a suit which was brought in Glenn County Superior Court by the Seidells as plaintiffs against Tuxedo Land Company, Harris and other defendants, except this petitioner, The Anglo California National Bank of San Francisco, numbered 5094, to cancel the deed of trust dated August 25, 1925, which is involved in this proceeding. From the complaint which was filed in that case it appears that Harris, the beneficiary under that trust deed, had conveyed to the Covingtons this property "subject to a deed of trust dated August 25, 1925, and recorded August 25, 1926", and the Covingtons subsequently conveyed the same property to the Seidells in consideration of their promissory note for $500, subject to the same original trust deed. Judgment was rendered against the Seidells in that suit, which judgment was affirmed on appeal. (Seidell v. Tuxedo Land Co., 216 Cal. 165 [13 PaCal.2d 686].) The Supreme Court merely held that: "While the assignment given by him [Harris] to the Tuxedo Land Company was ineffective for the purpose of passing any title to said land, it was valid as an assignment of the promissory note secured by the deed of trust, and the assignment of the note carried with it the security of the deed of trust. (Sec. 2936, Civ. Code.)" We are unable to say from the record of that case which is before us, that title to the land in question was conclusively determined therein.
For the reasons assigned in the case of Reidy v. Superior Court, supra, the language of which appears to be conclusive of the present proceeding, the petition for a writ of mandamus is denied.
Plummer J., and Pullen, P. J., concurred.

=== CASE 9738026 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:40:58.301364+00 ===

Spencer, J.
Plaintiffs, as guardians and next friends, appeal the judgment of the District Court for Lancaster County affirming rulings of the Department of Public Welfare rejecting their applications for aid for dependent children (AFDC) for their minor wards. The wards are beneficiaries of a trust fund which if presently payable *270to them would make them ineligible for public assistance benefits. We reverse.
On July 30, 1965, the county court of Gage County, Nebraska, distributed the proceeds of a wrongful death settlement in a case involving the mother of the wards. So far as material herein, the decree provided: “That all the remainder of the proceeds, after the payment of costs herein ordered to be paid, should be placed in trust or in a guardianship fund for the benefit of the surviving children of Loretta Dorn, decedent, whose names are: Darrell Gene Dorn, Patricia Anne Dorn, Dennis Elmer Dorn, Bruce Allen Dorn and Pamela Sue Dorn, in equal shares, share and share alike, and said funds are to be used by the trustee or the guardian as may be directed by the Court for the direct benefit of the above named children and shall be used for their health, education, nurture, care and welfare in such amount and at such times as may be deemed necessary and proper upon application being made to this Court.”
On November 12, 1965, the county court ordered that the proceeds from the wrongful death settlement should be placed in trust at interest with the Beatrice National Bank and Trust Company for the benefit of the Dorn children. The terms of the trust were: “That the best interest of the beneficiaries of the proceeds would be to place said funds in an interest-bearing savings account and to hold said funds for the benefit of the named children until there is a demonstrative need for paying any of said proceeds to any of the beneficiaries or until such funds are needed for their education or the necessities of life which cannot be provided for them by the father of said children or until they reach the age of 21 years.” See § 30-810, R. R. S. 1943.
The issue presented in both cases is identical. Both wards had been receiving aid for dependent children. They were terminated when the Department of Public Welfare learned of the proceeds from the wrongful *271death settlement which was being held in trust by the Beatrice National Bank and Trust Company.
It was not until January 13, 1971, that a legal guardian was appointed for Pamela Sue Dorn by the county court of Lancaster County. On July 13, 1971, the county court of Douglas County appointed a legal guardian for Patricia A. Dorn.
After welfare benefits were terminated, the guardians made application to the Gage County court for the use and possession of the trust funds. Each of the wards has a one-fifth interest in the fund, which at that time amounted to approximately $17,700. On June 25, 1973, the county judge held that no part of said funds could be used at the present time for the support and maintenance of said wards. No appeal was taken from this order. The guardians then renewed their respective applications for welfare benefits. The Department of Public Welfare considered the order of the county court to be an arbitrary exercise of jurisdiction, and chose to ignore it. In doing so, it held that the funds were a resource which must be considered in determining eligibility for public assistance for the wards.
The primary purpose of allowing recovery for a wrongful death is to compensate the survivors for their pecuniary loss; and to compensate them for the care, maintenance, and support that they could reasonably have expected to receive had the decedent lived. § 30-810, R. S. Supp., 1972. The present use of the funds, however, is not the issue before us. Regardless of how arbitrary the order of the county judge may be, it is binding on all parties affected until it is judicially reversed or modified. This action is not a proper proceeding to accomplish that purpose. It is not within the power of the Department of Public Welfare to second-guess a judicial officer or to ignore his order. Until the order of the county judge, arbitrary or otherwise, is reversed or modified, the money held in trust is unavailable to the wards. It is the present availability of the funds *272which is determinative herein. Until the guardians take steps to acquire possession by a further application to the county court, and an appeal if the order is adverse to them, the funds are not available to them.
The AFDC program is designed to provide financial assistance to needy dependent children and the parents who live with and care for them. It is financed in large measure by the federal government on a matching funds basis, and participating states must submit AFDC plans in conformity with the act and the regulations promulgated thereunder by the Depártment of Health, Education, and Welfare. The program is, however, administered by the states, which are given broad discretion in determining both the standard of need and the level of benefits. Shea v. Vialpando (1974), 416 U. S. 251, 94 S. Ct. 1746, 40 L. Ed. 2d 120. In that case, Mr. Justice Powell said: “The ‘income and resources’ attributable to an applicant, defined in 45 CFR S. 233.20 (a) (6) (iii-viii), consist generally of ‘only such net income as is actually available for current use on a regular basis . . . and only currently available resources.’ ”
The action of the Department of Public Welfare was arbitrary and capricious in determining that the fund was available when it knew that the requests of the guardians for said funds had been denied. An administrative agency may not act unreasonably or capriciously. Its judgment must be based on a factual foundation, and the agency or officer must give due consideration to all the essential elements involved. If material elements have not been given due consideration, the decision is void. Block v. Lincoln Tel. & Tel. Co. (1960), 170 Neb. 531, 103 N. W. 2d 312.
From a cursory examination of relevant laws and regulations, it does not appear that it was the intention of Congress or the Legislature to exclude procéeds of a wrongful death settlement from “any other income or resources of the child” in determining need for public aid. That, however, is not the issue.
*273We do not question the right of the Department of Public.Welfare, if its practice permits, to enter a conditional order to require the guardians to exhaust their remedies so long as it does not deny assistance to the wards pending such determination. This was the procedure followed in Fitzpatrick v. Illinois Department of Public Aid (1972), 52 Ill. 2d 218, 287 N. E. 2d 666. Until, however, the funds are actually available to the respective guardians, they are not current resources which may be considered in determining eligibility for aid for dependent children.
In view of the result we have reached, there is no need to consider the other questions raised by the guardians. The judgment is reversed and the cause remanded for proceedings consistent with this opinion.
Reversed and remanded.

=== CASE 9738028 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:40:59.996509+00 ===

NEAL, Judge.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
Petitioner-appeliant, Byron Q. Alston (Alston), appeals the denial by the Marion Superior Court, Criminal Division Two, of his petition for relief under Ind. Rules of Procedure, Post-Conviction Rule 1.
We affirm.
STATEMENT OF THE FACTS
Alston, age 18 years, was charged by Information on January 11, 1982, with two Class A felonies. He was charged in Count I with kidnapping while armed with a deadly weapon (a knife), and in Count II, he was charged with robbery with a deadly weapon (a knife), resulting in bodily injury. The presumptive sentence for a Class A felony is 30 years, to which could be added 20 years for aggravating circumstances and from which could be subtracted 10 years for mitigating circumstances.
After extensive discovery, a written plea agreement was entered into and signed by Alston and his attorney, the terms of which provided that he would enter a plea of guilty to simple robbery, a Class B felony, and the State would recommend an executed sentence of 10 years. The presumptive sentence for a Class B felony is 10 years, to which could be added 10 years for aggravating circumstances and from which could be subtracted 4 years for mitigating circumstances. The plea agreement recited that Alston understood that he had a right to: (1) a public trial by jury; (2) confront and cross-examine the witnesses against him; (8) have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses; and (4) require the State to prove his guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. In addition, he acknowledged that he understood; (5) that by entering a plea of guilty he would waive these rights; (6) that by entering a plea of guilty, he would admit to the truth of the facts stated in the Information; (7) that he was satisfied with his attorney; and (8) that he believed that entering a plea of guilty was in his best interest.
At the guilty plea hearing, wherein he was accompanied by his attorney, Alston acknowledged that he had attended school twelve years and lacked only one credit from graduating. He stated that he could read and write, had read the plea agreement, initialed each of its provisions, discussed it with his attorney, and understood it. In answer to the trial court's questions, he stated that he understood his rights, had no complaint against his attorney, and entered into the plea agreement of his own free will. The court read to him the Information and advised him of the presumptive, maximum, and minimum penalty for simple robbery. The trial court further advised him that by his plea of guilty, Alston was giving up his right to a jury trial, right to subpoena and cross-examine witnesses, right to remain silent, right to have the State prove his guilt beyond a reasonable doubt, and if he went to trial, he would not be required to prove anything. Alston acknowledged that he understood these advises.
The trial court made a factual determination which disclosed that Alston approached a 24-year-old woman in the Lafayette Square parking lot at 2:15 p.m., flashed a butcher knife at her, shoved her into her car, got in, and drove off with her. Acquiescing to his threats, she agreed to cash a check at a bank drive-in. The first drive-in refused, but the second drive-in bank cashed her check. Alston then put her out of the car and left with it, her money, her purse, and her other personal belongings. Later he was caught driving the victim's automobile.
The pre-sentence investigation report reflected that Alston had a juvenile record consisting of arson, two instances of theft, disorderly conduct, public intoxication, *1333eriminal trespass, shoplifting, conspiracy to commit robbery, resisting arrest, and robbery. On April 10, 1982, in accordance with the plea agreement, the court imposed the agreed presumptive sentence of 10 years.
On April 22, 1982, Alston filed a pro se petition for shock probation which was denied. On July 8, 1982, he filed a petition to modify his sentence which was also denied. His motion to reconsider that latter petition, filed on August 26, was likewise denied.
On October 7, 1982, Alston, pro se, filed a post-conviction petition, denominated by us as PCR I, which alleged: (1) misconduct of his attorney at trial; (2) incompetency of his attorney at trial; (8) violation of his constitutional rights; and (4) he did not understand the proceedings. After several continuances requested by Alston, then represented by a public defender, the petition was heard on December 2, 1982, and denied. Through the public defender's office, Alston filed his petition for leave to file a belated motion to correct errors on PCR I on June 28, 1983, which was granted. However, the belated motion to correct errors was denied, and the ensuing appeal questioning counsel's performance during plea negotiations was denied on September 6, 1984 in Alston v. State, 467 N.E.2d 809 (Ind.App.), an unpublished opinion.
Meanwhile, on April 22, 1983, Alston had filed yet another pro se petition for sentence modification which was denied.
After the opinion on PCR I was handed down, Alston, on April 8, 1984, through the public defender's office, filed another petition for post-conviction relief denominated by us as PCR II charging: (1) denial of due process; (2) misconduct of the prosecuting attorney; (8) violation of the 5th, 6th, and 14th amendments; and (4) that his confession was coerced. After PCR II was set for hearing on December 13, 1984, and he was transported to the Marion County Jail, Alston, on December 7, 1984, dismissed PCR II without prejudice. On that same day he filed yet another post-conviction petition denominated by us as PCR III, in which he charged: (1) misconduct of his attorney at trial; (2) incompetency of counsel; (3) violation of his constitutional rights; and (4) he did not understand the proceedings. After continuances sought by Alston, he dismissed PCR III without prejudice on March 8, 1985.
Finally, on March 6, 1986, he filed, pro se, the petition for post-conviction relief here under consideration, which we shall denominate as PCR IV. In PCR IV he alleges: (1) he wanted his prison sentence reduced; (2) he was promised 8 years instead of 10 years by his attorney; (8) he had served 5 out of 10 years; and (4) he did not understand the proceedings. After the public defender's office appeared in his behalf, PCR IV was amended to add that the guilty plea was not entered freely and voluntarily because the trial court had not advised him; (5) that the court was not a party to the plea agreement and was not bound by it; (6) that the plea of guilty acted as an admission of the facts alleged in the Information; and (7) that by entering a plea of guilty he waived his right to a public and speedy trial, After a hearing conducted on August 18, 1986, PCR IV was denied. It is to be noted that the plea agreement contained a sentence initialed by Alston, which advised him of his right to a public trial by jury, and that if he pleaded guilty he would be admitting the facts alleged in the Information. At the guilty plea hearing, the trial court advised him of his right to a jury trial.
ISSUES
Alston raises three issues which we will discuss together. They are as follows:
I. Whether Alston's conviction for robbery violated due process of law as guaranteed by the sixth and fourteenth amendments to the U.S. Const., art. I, §§ 12 and 13 of the Indiana Const., and Indiana law.
II. Whether the lower court erred by concluding Alston was afforded the effective assistance of counsel during previous post-conviction proceedings.
III. Whether the lower court erred and abused its discretion by finding Al*1334ston had waived his grounds for post-conviction relief.
DISCUSSION AND DECISION
Alston first claims that at the guilty plea hearing the trial court failed to give him the advisements required by IND. CODE 35-4.1-1-3 by not informing him of the three advisements contained in allegations (5), (6), and (7) of PCR IV set forth above. He correctly argues that under German v. State (1981), Ind., 428 N.E.2d 234, such omissions would be fatal requiring that the guilty plea be set aside. However, German has been superceded by White v. State (1986), Ind., 497 N.E.2d 893 which eased the draconian requirements of German. White places an additional burden on a defendant to show that the omitted advisements prejudiced him. He is now required to allege and prove that his plea would have been different had he known and understood the advisements. This Alston has not done. White is retroactive and governs matters occurring in the time frames involved here. Patton v. State (1987), Ind.App., 507 N.E.2d 624. In fact, White itself had retroactive application.
Alston next claims that PCR I was filed, determined, and appealed during a time that the rule in German prevailed. Therefore, if counsel, also from the public defender's office, had raised these three omitted advisements required by IND.CODE 35-4.1-1-3, PCR I would have been successful. Therefore, counsel in PCR I was incompetent, and PCR IV, addressing the matter of incompetency of counsel in PCR I, should be granted.
We have set out the record in detail which illustrates the extreme abuse existing in post-conviction proceedings which White attempted to ameliorate. A full and open guilty plea hearing was held wherein Alston was represented by counsel. The factual determination conducted by the court fixed his guilt beyond question. In addition to the facts presented by the State, Alston admitted in open court that he had kidnapped, tormented, terrorized, and robbed the 24-year-old woman in midday at a shopping mall. In fact he was later caught driving her car. Counsel negotiated a plea agreement by which two Class A felonies, each carrying potential penalties of up to 50 years, were reduced to 10 years. The pre-sentence investigation report disclosed that Alston possessed violent antisocial tendencies. Under P.C.R. 1 § 10, as it existed prior to January 1, 1986, and Ballard v. State (1974), 262 Ind. 482, 318 N.E.2d 798, Alston could never receive a sentence greater than 10 years, even if the guilty plea to the reduced charge was set aside and he was subsequently convicted upon the two Class A felonies. P.C.R. 1 § 10, as interpreted by Ballard, afforded a criminal defendant a means by which he could agree to a lesser charge and sentence and then with inpunity commence to attack the plea. P.C.R. 1 § 10 was amended on January 1, 1986, to insert provisions which could be utilized to impose the maximum sentence that was previously available.
Immediately, within 12 days of the sentencing, Alston mounted his attack upon the guilty plea which was entered pursuant to his most favorable agreement. That attack has continued unbated to the present time. As seen, his principal theme is accusations against his attorneys. Nowhere in the substantial record generated since March 16, 1982, has Alston claimed that he did not kidnap, torment, terroize, and rob the victim.
Instead, the argument advanced by Alston, as well as the views expressed by the dissenting opinion, posits, essentially, that criminal justice demands a liturgy, a ritual, and if the trial court performs the required incantations flawlessly, then justice is done. Should the court, in the turmoil of a crowded metropolitan court room, omit any part of the rite, then the defendant is considered to have been denied fundamental rights. What a defendant knew, what his attorney told him, his obvious guilt admitted in open court, are not relevant considerations. Such doctrine made all convictions suspect and over burdened the judiciary to the brink of collapse. Those views were wholly discredited in White. Now, underlying merit must be shown. A defendant bears the burden of showing by the whole *1335record that the omissions made a difference in his decision to enter a plea.
PCR IV itself addressed the original guilty plea and did not attack PCR I. The attack on PCR I occurred in argument. An examination of the rule clearly discloses that a post-conviction petition and remedy is addressed solely to the original conviction or plea of guilty. There is nothing within the rule that indicates that a post-conviction petition may be addressed to a prior post conviction proceeding. Alston cites no authority that so holds. If counsel is inadequate at a prior post-conviction proceeding, a remedy would be to allow the defendant to start over. However, his new efforts must still be addressed to events occurring at the trial or guilty plea hearing, and the issues would be determined by prevailing law as though no prior PCR had been filed. In this instance, White retroactively applied, is determinative and governs the original proceedings attacked in PCR IV.
We decline to take a step backward and create a new vehicle by which a defendant could use a PCR to attack a previous PCR on the grounds of incompetency of counsel in that PCR hearing, and then use yet a third PCR to attack the competency of counsel of the second PCR and so on in perpetuity.
We believe our decision is within the spirit of White, which restricts repetitive attacks on criminal convictions on purely formalistic grounds. Because of our decision here, we decline to address the waiver argument, though we believe waiver exists. This cause is affirmed.
Judgment affirmed.
BUCHANAN, J., concurs.
SULLIVAN, J., dissents with opinion.

=== CASE 9738029 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:41:00.000986+00 ===

SULLIVAN, Judge,
dissenting.
The trial court accepted Alston's plea of guilty on April 16, 1982, without having given him all of the advisements required by I.C. 35-4.1-1-8 (repealed 1981). Specifically, the court failed to advise him that by a plea of guilty he admitted the truth of all facts alleged in the information and waived his right to a public and speedy trial. Neither did the court advise him that it was not a party to nor bound by any plea agreement that the parties had reached. On August 16, 1983, the court denied Alston's petition for post-conviction relief which failed to allege these omitted advisements. This denial was affirmed upon appeal. Al ston again sought post-conviction relief contending that he was denied effective assistance of counsel at his first post-conviction relief hearing because his counsel failed to raise the issue of the omitted advisements. Denial of relief is the focus of this appeal.
Pursuant to Ind. Rules of Procedure, Post-Conviction Rule 1, § 8, all grounds for relief must be raised in the original petition unless good cause is demonstrated. In Wells v. State (1985) 1st Dist.Ind.App., 482 N.E.2d 786, the defendant was denied post-conviction relief because he failed to present the grounds in his first petition. The court noted that Wells had no excuse for this default:
"Wells does not even attempt to justify this procedural default. Most notably, he does not allege ineffective assistance of appellate counsel in his present petition." Id. at 788.
The suggestion is apparent that had Wells alleged ineffective assistance, such would have been sufficient reason to entertain the subsequent petition.
Alston has alleged ineffective assistance of counsel and therefore has at least facially set forth sufficient reason to consider the omitted advisements. The alleged ineffective assistance of counsel itself could 'not have been earlier raised because the deficient performance occurred at the first post-conviction relief hearing. An allegation of ineffective counsel at a post-conviction proceeding following a guilty plea, as here, is analogous to an allegation of ineffective counsel in a direct appeal as was the situation in Wells, supra, 482 N.E.2d 786.
In the case before us, the attorney who failed to present the guilty plea advisement defect at the first post-conviction proceed*1336ing was the counsel who represented Al ston at the guilty plea stage. The same attorney filed the belated motion to correct errors and the appellate brief which resulted in an affirmance of the denial of post-conviction relief. It tortures the concept of waiver beyond reason to hold Alston responsible for the failure of counsel to allege his own incompetence. In my estimation the allegation and demonstration of ineffective assistance was timely presented when, in the post-conviction petition and proceeding under review, the matter was alleged and demonstrated.
The majority appears to ignore that the crucial allegation in the appeal before us is ineffective assistance of counsel. If the doctrine of waiver were to be applied to every failure to raise an issue at the first possible opportunity, there could be no relief afforded if such failure were, as here, the result of counsel's ineffective representation and the matter were presented at the first opportunity by new counsel.
Post-Conviction Rule 1, § 8 provides:
"All grounds for relief available to a petitioner under this rule must be raised in his original petition. Any ground finally adjudicated on the merits or not so raised and knowingly, voluntarily and intelligently waived in the proceeding that resulted in the conviction or sentence, or in any other proceeding the petitioner has taken to secure relief, may not be the basis for a subsequent petition, unless the court finds a ground for relief asserted which for sufficient reason was not asserted or was inadequately raised in the original petition." (Emphasis supplied.)
It clearly contemplates the situation before us. See Patton v. State (1987) 2d Dist.Ind.App., 507 N.E.2d 624, trans. denied. See also Lombardo v. State (1986) Ind., 499 N.E.2d 1075, in which our Supreme Court applied waiver to a second petition for post-conviction relief although counsel in the first post-conviction proceeding had been counsel for the guilty plea. However, the Supreme Court reversed denial of a third post-conviction petition with instructions to grant a change of judge. Such remand certainly contemplated that the new judge might appropriately consider the allegations of ineffective assistance of counsel at the first post-conviction proceeding. If such allegations were waived as a matter of law, as the majority here suggests, the remand to grant the change of judge would have been a meaningless expenditure of judicial resources.
White itself contains support for my view that there is no waiver in this situation. In affirming the trial court's denial of post-conviction relief, our Supreme Court clearly contemplated a subsequent petition which would withstand a claim of waiver:
"If appellant has any other basis upon which to establish that his plea was not voluntary and intelligent, he may file a new petition." 497 N.E.2d at 906.
The majority opinion today effectively erases this language from the Supreme Court's opinion in White. I believe that if such modification of the law is to be made it should be made by the Supreme Court.
The White standard places upon Alston the burden to show that the omission of the advisements prejudiced him. Alston has not alleged that his plea agreement would have been different had he known and understood the omitted advisements. Therefore, the majority is correct insofar as it holds this ground for relief insufficient to set aside the plea of guilty. However, such determination should not end our consideration of this appeal.
Alston also contends that his plea of guilty must be set aside and his conviction vacated because he was denied effective assistance of counsel. To evaluate Al ston's claim of ineffective counsel, we must decide whether his counsel's performance was so deficient that he was not functioning as guaranteed by the Constitution, and if so, whether this deficient performance was so prejudicial as to deprive Alston of fundamental fairness. Strickland v. Washington (1984) 466 U.S. 668, 104 S.Ct. 2052, 80 L.Ed.2d 674; Burse v. State (1987) Ind., 515 N.E.2d 1383. To establish deficiency of his counsel's conduct, Alston must show "counsel's specific acts or omis*1337sions which, viewed from the perspective of counsel at the time of the trial, fell below the standard of reasonable professional assistance." U.S. v. Payne (7th Cir.1984) 741 F.2d 887, 891. To satisfy the second requirement, Alston must establish "a reasonable probability that, but for counsel's unprofessional errors, the result of the proceeding would have been different." Strickland, supra, 104 S.Ct. at 2065.
Alston has established deficiency of his counsel's performance. At the first post-conviction relief hearing, Alston's counsel failed to raise the issue of the omitted advisements. At this 1983 hearing, the standard of review was that announced in German wherein omitted advisements were sufficient cause for granting post-conviction relief. Sexton v. State (1983) Ind., 455 N.E.2d 910; Early v. State (1983) Ind., 454 N.E.2d 416; Brown v. State (1982) 4th Dist.Ind.App., 435 N.E.2d 582. From the record, it appears clear that Alston's counsel was aware of the German standard at the time of the hearing, having filed a brief in Early, supra, which argued for relief under the German standard. His failure to argue for such relief for Alston constitutes deficient performance of counsel.
Alston also satisfies the second prong of ineffective assistance. But for his counsel's failure to argue the omitted advise-ments, Alston would have been granted post-conviction relief. The German standard, in effect at the time of Alston's first post-conviction relief hearing, provided that "it is the duty of the trial judge to comply strictly with the terms of Ind.Code § 35-4.1-1-8...." 428 N.E2d at 286. Indiana Code 35-4.1-1-8 prohibited the court from accepting a plea of guilty without first addressing the defendant and
"(b) informing him that by his plea of guilty he is admitting the truth of all facts alleged in the indictment or information or to an offense included thereunder and that upon entry of such plea the court shall proceed with judgment and sentence;
(c) informing him that by his plea of guilty he waives his rights to a public and speedy trial by jury ...;
* La # U La L
(e) informing him that the court is not a party to any agreement which may have been made between the prosecutor and the defense and is not bound thereby")
The record before us clearly shows that the court did not give Alston these advisements before accepting his plea of guilty. Applying the German standard when these same advisements were omitted, Indiana courts have granted post-conviction relief. Seyton, supra, 455 N.E.2d 910 (omission of I.C. 35-4.1-1-3(b); Early, supra, 454 N.E.2d 416 (omission of I.C. 35-4.1-1-3(e)); Brown, supra, 435 N.E.2d 582 (omission of I.C. 35-4.1-1-3(c) and (e). Alston, also, would have been granted post-conviction relief but for his counsel's deficient performance. Alston has shown ineffective assistance of counsel.
It is not unreasonable for the law to place a premium upon finality and to discourage repetitive attempts to obtain judicial relief, However, the law in its current state affords one who has been convicted of crime an opportunity to fully and fairly present reasons why the conviction should be set aside. Even though a defendant may have had prior access to the appellate or post-conviction process, if through no fault of his own the opportunity has been frustrated, the system should not deny meaningful review. Justice may not be reluctantly or grudgingly administered.
I do not have, nor could I have, any quarrel with the observations of the majority concerning the existence of adequate factual basis for acceptance of Alston's guilty plea. Nor do I quarrel with the sentiment expressed by the majority which decries the fact that under Germar, many guilty pleas were set aside because the trial court failed to dot i's or cross t's.
The fact remains however that had counsel in the previous post-conviction proceeding presented the legal issue known by him to exist, the conviction of his client, Alston, would have been set aside. I cannot view this failure as other than an example of ineffective assistance of counsel.
*13381 do not view it as a transgression upon the myriad cases which hold White to have retroactive application. I view it purely and simply as a case in which the defendant had ineffective assistance of counsel and in which that ineffective assistance resulted in demonstrated prejudice. But for the default of the attorney, Alston's guilty plea would have been vacated. That state of facts calls for a reversal.
I would remand with instructions to vacate the conviction, to set aside the guilty plea and for further proceedings upon the charges as originally filed and in contemplation of Ind. Rules of Procedure, Post-Conviction Rule 1, § 10(c)(1).

=== CASE 2213171 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:28.310219+00 ===

226 N.W.2d 829 (1975)
STATE of Iowa, Appellee,
v.
Diane GREENE, Appellant.
No. 57233.
Supreme Court of Iowa.
March 19, 1975.
*830 L. Vern Robinson, Iowa City, for appellant.
Richard C. Turner, Atty. Gen., Nancy J. Shimanek, Asst. Atty. Gen., Carl Goetz, County Atty., for appellee.
Heard before MOORE, C. J., and MASON, REES, UHLENHOPP and REYNOLDSON, JJ.
MASON, Justice.
Diane Greene was charged by county attorney's information with delivery of a schedule I controlled substance in violation of section 204.401(1), The Code, 1973. Following arraignment, confirmation of court appointed counsel and a plea of not guilty defendant filed various motions including a motion to suppress and at least two motions for continuance. Later she withdrew her previous plea of not guilty and tendered a plea of guilty to the crime of delivery of a controlled substance, the delivery being stipulated to be an accommodation sale, which the court accepted.
The guilty plea resulted from a plea bargaining agreement entered into by defendant's court appointed attorney and the Johnson county attorney. The agreement stipulated the offense charged was factually one of accommodation and that there would be no fine imposed but the length of sentence would be left up to the court. The county attorney recommended the court impose a six month sentence.
After examination of defendant, the court sentenced defendant to six months imprisonment in the Johnson county jail, but, pursuant to section 245.4, The Code, provided such commitment be at the Iowa State Reformatory for Women at Rockwell City.
It appears from the minutes of testimony that on August 23, 1973. Officer Earnest Baty, Jr., of the Narcotics Division of the Iowa City Police Department was admitted into a residence at 326 North Dubuque Street in Iowa City by defendant. Baty asked defendant whether he could purchase one "lid" of marijuana. Defendant agreed to make the sale and stated the price was twenty dollars.
Defendant then left the room, returning thereafter with a plastic bag containing the purported marijuana, which she gave to Officer Baty in return for a twenty dollar bill. Baty also inquired concerning the purchase of a pound of marijuana to which defendant replied that the officer should check with her the next day.
Possession of the bag of marijuana passed through several police officers until it reached Wayne B. Eaton, a chemist at the Iowa Criminalistics Laboratory, who determined the substance was in fact marijuana.
During the hearing defendant took the stand and gave the court a short life history. Perhaps important to the court's decision were the facts defendant, separated from her husband, had custody of her four-year-old son, was then gainfully employed full time at the Emma Goldman Clinic for Women in Iowa City, and had been convicted (out of state) only once for the misdemeanor of shopliftingshe had never been charged with any drug related offenses.
I. One of the issues raised by defendant's appeal relates to the trial court's acceptance of defendant's tendered plea of guilty.
Defendant contends the record is insufficient to support the trial court's determination that a factual basis existed for defendant's guilty plea.
The reporter's transcript of the proceedings had at the guilty plea and sentencing stage has been certified to this court. It consists of 19 typewritten pages.
The trial court after determining that defendant's guilty plea was a voluntary and intelligent act done with actual knowledge of the existence and meaning of her constitutional rights involved and with full *831 understanding of the charge made against her and the direct consequences of the plea then proceeded to determine whether there was a factual basis for accepting defendant's tendered plea. State v. Clayton, 217 N.W.2d 685, 686 (Iowa 1974).
Since defendant's challenge does not involve the first three responsibilities of the trial judge when a guilty plea is tendered consideration will therefore be limited to the sufficiency of the record to support a factual basis for defendant's guilty plea.
When a guilty plea is tendered the trial judge must make an inquiry on the record, by appropriate method, to satisfy himself there is a factual basis for the plea. Ryan v. Iowa State Penitentiary, Ft. Madison, 218 N.W.2d 616, 618-620 (Iowa 1974); Brainard v. State, 222 N.W.2d 711 (Iowa 1974); and State v. Williams, 224 N.W.2d 17, 18 (Iowa 1974).
Williams, 224 N.W.2d at 18-19, has this statement:
"In Ryan we recognized three methods for determining that a factual basis exists for a guilty plea: (1) inquiry of the defendant, (2) inquiry of the prosecutor, and (3) examination of the presentence report. In Hansen and Marsan [State v. Marsan, 221 N.W.2d 278 (Iowa 1974)] we recognized that the judge may also refer to the minutes of testimony attached to the indictment or county attorney's information. It is essential, whatever source is used, that the factual basis be identified and disclosed in the record. The preferable method would be for the judge to ask the defendant, `What did you do?'. See State v. Hansen, 221 N.W.2d [274] 276 (Iowa 1974)."
The transcript discloses that after the trial judge addressed defendant personally regarding the offense charged and her tendered plea of guilty and explained to her in detail the Code section under which she was charged he then inquired of defendant about the plea bargaining.
The trial judge next turned to the information under which defendant was charged. Minutes of testimony were attached to the county attorney's information filed in this matter. These minutes indicated Officer Baty would testify defendant admitted him to a residence in Iowa City on August 23, 1973. Following defendant's affirmative reply to his inquiry whether he could purchase a "lid" they had a conversation about the price in which defendant told Baty the price was "20." According to the minutes Baty was prepared to describe how defendant left the room where the two had the conversation and returned with a plastic bag containing material later found to be marijuana which she delivered to him in exchange for a twenty dollar bill. This witness would testify he made inquiry of defendant about the possibility of purchasing a pound of marijuana and she told him to "check with her the following day."
The trial judge asked defendant whether the minutes of Baty's testimony attached to the information correctly reflected what happened at her residence on August 23, 1973. She replied they did and that the facts were essentially true.
The factual basis for the plea was thus adequately identified and disclosed in the record. See State v. Williams, 224 N.W.2d at 18-19.
Defendant's contention the record is insufficient to support the trial court's determination that a factual basis existed for defendant's guilty plea is without merit.
II. Defendant next contends section 245.4, The Code, 1973, (since repealed by the First Regular Session of the Sixty-fifth General Assembly, chapter 1093, section 92) is unconstitutional as violative of the equal protection clause. The statute at time of trial read as follows:
"245.4 Commitments generally. All females over eighteen years of age, and married females under eighteen years of age, who are convicted in the district court of *832 offenses punishable by imprisonment in excess of thirty days, shall, if imprisonment be imposed, be committed to the women's reformatory."
The equal protection contention is that a man convicted of the same crime would be allowed to remain at the county jail, whereas defendant, a twenty-seven year old mother, will be transferred to the women's reformatory several hundred miles away. Defendant's crime is an indictable misdemeanor but she will be required to serve out her term with convicted felons. This, defendant claims, is in violation of Amendment 14 of the federal constitution.
Defendant attacks the sentence imposed following her conviction only insofar as it directs that she be incarcerated in the women's reformatory at Rockwell City. As indicated, the judgment imposed provided, "* * * defendant be sentenced to imprisonment in the Johnson County Jail for a term of six months, and in accordance with the provision of section 245.4 of the Iowa Code, defendant is committed to the Iowa State Reformatory for Women at Rockwell City, Iowa, and the Sheriff of Johnson County, Iowa, is directed to transfer the defendant to that institution."
The first question is whether the assignment stemming from defendant's contentions urged in this division was properly preserved for review in this court.
Ordinarily, issues not raised in the trial court including constitutional questions cannot be effectively asserted for the first time on appeal. Furthermore, the constitutionality of a statute may not be considered on appeal when ruling by the trial court on the constitutionality was not invoked. State v. Ritchison, 223 N.W.2d 207, 213 (Iowa 1974) and authorities cited.
In Ritchison the State maintained a constitutional challenge to a statute is waived if not raised by a demurrer. This court rejected the contention demurrer was the exclusive method of challenging the constitutionality of a statute in all cases and held when a party challenges the constitutionality of a statute he must do so at the earliest available opportunity in the progress of the case in order to preserve for review any alleged error in the trial court's ruling. Ritchison's attack was made for the first time in a motion for directed verdict at the close of all evidence. The court held this was not timely. See State v. Boer, 224 N.W.2d 217, 218 (Iowa 1974).
The record discloses that when the trial judge was addressing defendant personally at the plea and sentencing stage as to the maximum penalty which could be imposed in the event the court accepted her guilty plea, he specifically called her attention to the fact the statute applicable in her case provided any sentence confining her to a county jail for a term of more than 30 days would have to be served in and she would have to be committed to the women's reformatory at Rockwell City. When the judge asked defendant if she understood the penalty, she answered she did.
After defense counsel had made a statement prior to imposition of sentence the court advised defendant it would impose a sentence of six months imprisonment in the Johnson county jail and under the provisions of section 245.4, The Code, she would be committed to the women's reformatory at Rockwell City. As pointed out, the formal sentence so provided.
It must be conceded defendant did not at any stage of the proceedings in the trial court raise the issue of the constitutionality of section 245.4. However, defendant insists a motion in arrest of judgment would not be necessary or appropriate since she does not argue the invalidity of the judgment.
The information in this matter was filed November 12, 1973. Sentence was imposed April 9, 1974. Before the trial court accepted defendant's guilty plea she was advised by the court that under the provisions of *833 section 245.4 any sentence in excess of 30 days which might be imposed would require her incarceration at the women's reformatory. This statute, before being repealed, had been a part of the statutory law of this state for more than 50 years. Nevertheless, the issue of the constitutionality of the statute was not raised until defendant's brief was filed in this court August 21. It cannot logically be maintained this was the earliest available opportunity in the progress of the case to question the constitutionality of the statute.
This assignment presents nothing for review.
The case is thereforeaffirmed.

=== CASE 2213173 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:28.341909+00 ===

15 Cal.App.2d 96 (1936)
W. C. AUSTIN, Appellant,
v.
WILLIAM R. HANNON et al., Respondents.
Civ. No. 10007.
California Court of Appeals. Second Appellate District, Division One.
June 29, 1936.
Eugene D. Hill for Appellant.
David J. Keily for Respondents.
Desmond, J., pro tem.
Plaintiff appeals from a judgment of dismissal entered upon the court's sustaining without leave to amend a general demurrer to his complaint.
[1] The sole question involved in this appeal is whether section 2924 1/2 of the Civil Code, enacted in 1933, which section precludes the entry of a deficiency judgment unless one year, as distinguished from the former period of three months, has elapsed between the recordation of the notice of breach and election to sell and the date of sale under a deed of trust, may be applied to deeds of trust executed prior to the effective date of the section. The trial court, by sustaining a demurrer to the complaint without leave to amend, concluded that the section should be given a retroactive application. This is contrary to the decision in Brown v. Ferdon, 5 Cal.2d 226 [54 PaCal.2d 712], in which it was held that the section could not be retroactively applied without doing violence to the "contract clause" of the Constitution.
Upon the authority of the decision in the cited case, the judgment herein is reversed.
York, Acting P. J., and Doran, J., concurred.

=== CASE 9738030 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:41:02.77187+00 ===

White, C. J.
This is an action growing out of a guest passenger automobile accident arising from an automobile-tractor collision in Butler County, Nebraska. Plaintiff and defendant Reisdorff stipulated that judgment be entered in favor of plaintiff against Reisdorff in the sum of $8,500, and such judgment was entered by the District Court. The theory of the plaintiff’s case is that the acts of negligence alleged in her petition ■ constituted both ordinary and gross negligence. On appeal, the plaintiff challenges the constitutionality of ■ the -guest statute, section 39-6,191, R. R. S. 1943, under the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution of the United States and the comparable and complementary provisions under the Constitution of the State of Nebraska. The issue is also presented -as to the sufficiency of the evidence to submit- the issue of gross negligence to the jury. The trial court refused to submit this issue and directed a verdict for the defendant Marohn. ...
We hold that the guest statute does not violate the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution of the United States, nor any provision of the Constitution of the State of Nebraska, and reverse and remand the cause for trial upon the issue of gross negligence.
Our guest statute, section 39-6,19.1, R. R. S. 1943, provides in parts pertinent to the issues here as follows: “The owner or operator of a motor' vehicle shall not be liable for any damages to any passenger or person riding in such motor vehicle as a guest or by invitation and not for hire, unless such damage is caused by the driver * * * because of the gross negligence of the owner or operator in the operation of such motor vehicle. For the purpose of this section, the term guest is hereby *168defined, as being a person who accepts a ride in any motor vehicle without giving compensation therefor * * *
Motor vehicle guest statutes containing the same essential principles now under constitutional attack, have been adopted in more than one-half of the. states, and the principle that automobile owners or operators be relieved from liability to their guests or passengers for ordinary negligent conduct has been judicially imposed in, still more states. See Prosser, Torts (4th Ed.), § 34,. p. ,18,6. Ever since their inception in the early twentieth century, guest statutes have been under continual attack on both state and federal constitutional grounds similar to those raised in this case. Notwithstanding the attacks, the states and the United States Supreme Court have consistently held statutes such as ours constitutional. See, Silver v. Silver, 280 U. S. 117, 50 S. Ct. 57, 74 L. Ed. 221 (1929); Rogers v. Brown, 129 Neb. 9, 260 N. W. 794 (1935). Almost the total thrust of the plaintiff’s attack upon the guest statute is a contention that this court should adopt the reasoning and authority of' the California Supreme Court in Brown v. Merlo, 8 Cal. 3d 855, 106 Cal. Rptr. 388, 506 P. 2d 212 (1973). Rather than rest our decision on the simple proposition that Silver is still the law of the land and that we adhere to it, we examine the contentions of the plaintiff which in turn are based upon the argument that modern conditions, social and economic, demand a reconsideration of the Silver rationale and of the other cases and require us to hold our guest statute unconstitutional'.
So far as we can determine, since Brown v. Merlo, supra, courts of six states have considered whether their guest statutes violated the Equal Protection Clause of either the federal or their own Constitution. Four states have held that neither state nor federal Constitution was violated by their guest statutes. Justice v. Gatchell, 325 A. 2d 97 (Del., 1974); Keasling v. Thompson, 217 N. W. 2d 687 (Iowa, 1974); Cannon v. Oviatt, 520 P. 2d *169883 (Utah, 1974); Tisko v. Harrison, 500 S. W. 2d 565 (Tex. Civ. App., 1973). Two state courts have held their guest statutes unconstitutional, one on grounds that it violated the federal and state Constitutions, Henry v. Bauder, 213 Kan. 751, 518 P. 2d 362 (1974), and the other a North Dakota case on grounds that only the state Constitution was violated under its particular constitutional context. Johnson v. Hassett, 217 N. W. 2d 771 (N. D., 1974).
The test, under the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution of the United States, when a state statute operates to single out a class of people for special treatment, is whether the suspect classification bears some rational relationship to the legitimate purposes of the legislation. In Dandridge v. Williams, 397 U. S. 471, 90 S. Ct. 1153, 25 L. Ed. 2d 491 (1970), a very recent case, the United States Supreme Court said: “In the area of economics and social welfare, a State does not violate the Equal Protection Clause merely because the classifications made by its laws are imperfect. If the classification has some ‘reasonable basis,’ it does not offend the Constitution simply because the classification ‘is not made with mathematical nicety or because in practice it results in some inequality. * * * The problems of government are practical ones and may justify, if they do not require, rough accommodations - illogical, it may be, and unscientific. * * * A statutory discrimination will not be set aside if any state of facts reasonably may be conceived to justify it. * * * But the Equal Protection Clause does not require that a State must choose between attacking every aspect of a problem or not attacking the problem at all. * * * It is enough that the State’s action be rationally based and free from invidious discrimination.” See, also, Lindsley v. Natural Carbonic Gas Co., 220 U. S. 61, 31 S. Ct. 337, 55 L. Ed. 369 (1911); McGowan v. Maryland, 366 U. S. 420, 81 S. Ct. 1101, 6 L. Ed. 2d 393 (1961); San Antonio Independ*170ent School Dist. v. Rodriguez, 411 U. S. 1, 93 S. Ct. 1278, 36 L. Ed. 2d 16 (1973).
Stated broadly the contention is that a nonpaying guest is singled out for special treatment in that he is denied the cause of action against his host for negligently inflicted injuries. The contention is, following Brown v. Merlo, supra, that there is no legitimate state interest justifying this classification on the basis of the promotion of hospitality, and the prevention of fraud and collusion. The question, therefore, before the court, under the test pronounced above, is whether the denial of a remedy for negligently inflicted injuries to automobile guests is rationally related to the aforementioned state purposes. First, it is contended.that the “protection of hospitality”.justification cannot be sustained by making a distinction between guests in automobiles and other social guests. This reasoning is inappropriate because the law of the State of Nebraska, contrary to California, does make a distinction between the duty owed a trespasser, a business invitee, and a licensee or social guest. See Casey v. Addison, 190 Neb. 634, 211 N. W. 2d 410 (1973). In. other words, the contention of the plaintiff is partially based upon the case of Rowland v. Christian, 69 Cal. 2d 108, 70 Cal. Rptr. 97, 443 P. 2d 561 (1968), and the California statute, which together hold that guests generally can demand from their host liability for ordinary negligence. In other words, the distinctions as to liability that Nebraska law draws in different classes is consistent with the distinctions made as to liability for conduct in other areas and the contention of an invidious or irrational discrimination cannot be applied under current Nebraska law.
The plaintiff next argues, again following Brown v. Merlo, supra, that holding a host to a lower standard of care for a nonpaying guest is irrational and not justified by the fact that the guest did not pay consideration. We reject this contention. In the basic and controlling case of Silver v. Silver, 108 Conn. 371, 143 A. 240 (1928), *171affirmed by the United States Supreme Court, the court pointed out that a distinction between the duty imposed in the case of grautitous performance of services and the performance of them for hire is to be found running •through many fields of law, for example, the higher degree of care required by carriage for hire in the common carrier over other types of carriers, and the com.món and historic distinction between the business invitee and the ordinary social guest. In Silver v. Silver, 108 Conn. 371, 143 A. 240 (1928), it is stated: “There is inherent justice in the requirement that one who undertakes to perform a duty gratuitously should not be under the same obligation as one who enters upon the same undertaking for pay * * *. * * * It seems to us that the legislature was acting well within the limits of the police power in making a distinction between the degree of care to be exercised by the owner or operator of á motor vehicle toward a guest and that to be exercised toward one who pays for his transportation.” The legislative and judicial'minds in the past 50' years have consistently' héld that this distinction between a paying and a gratuitous guest could rationally take precedence in the legislative mind over and above the social engineering notion of shifting liability for negligently inflicted injuries to a guest on to hosts or to the general motoring public’s liability insurance. Wé, therefore, hold that the Legislature could and 'did act reasonably by differentiating between standards of care owed on the basis of compensation paid,'and that no invidious discrimination is present in the enactment of such a standard.
. The plaintiff contends, following Brown v. Merlo, supra, that the prevalence-of automobile liability insurance carried- by drivers nowadays has eliminated the notion of ingratitude in a guest suing his host for ordinary negligence. On the contrary, the legislative justification still may well be founded on the ingratitude element for the simple reason that despite insurance it' still could be rationally determined that the ingrati*172tude element would tend to inhibit hospitality. A thorough review of these considerations can be found in Casenote, 53 Neb. Law Rev. 267 (1974). We will not review all of them. Many tort personal injury cases have in the past and will continue to result in judgments which exceed the host’s liability insurance limits. In Nebraska, statutory required policy limits are relatively low. See § 60-509, R. R. S. 1943. Moreover, the fact that a significant number of drivers do not have any liability insurance is evident by section 60-509.01, R. R. S. 1943, which requires uninsured motorist’s coverage to be offered in automobile liability insurance policies. In short, possibilities for the ingratitude which inhibit hospitality still exist despite liability insurance, and the Legislature acted rationally in allowing legislation to stand which cured this evil. There is no merit to this contention.
The plaintiff contends, again pursuant to Brown v. Merlo, supra, that the limitation of a guest’s redress for negligent injuries cannot be rationally justified by the desire to promote hospitality. We hold that the Nebraska Legislature could reasonably believe that more hospitality results from the guest statute being in force than without it. We realize, of course, in balancing the considerations present in the enactment of the guest statute, that the Legislature may well decide to reevaluate the varying weight of the many considerations and policy determinations present in the enactment thereof. It is not a judicial function to enter that area. We may further observe that the guest statute perhaps is not perfectly designed to accomplish its ends. But such a design need not and could not be met, especially when a law attempts to thread its way and make a balanced decision among the multitude of considerations that are present in the social and economic context of this statute. As we have pointed out the Equal Protection Clause does not require such perfection, nor such a rigorous standard of rationality as is contended for in this case. It is well *173settled that even unwise or improvident laws, if based upon some sort of a rational conception, can pass constitutional muster.
We summarize very briefly other considerations that could conceivably be rationally related to the enactment of a guest statute. The regulation of motor vehicle use is a valid legislative occupation, and as we have seen, automobile guests can validly be distinguished from other social guests in the State of Nebraska. We observe that in Nebraska much state money goes into highway construction and state maintenance. Since, as we have held, the guest statute can rationally be conceived to encourage hospitality, it affects both the number of cars and the total cumulative mileage on highways, which directly bears on the state’s economic burden. In the same way, the guest statute promotes the conservation of petroleum and other natural resources which are consumed in highway travel. We observe that the financial consequences to a host in a lawsuit against him by a guest are very significant in the automobile context because the degree of potential physical injury is very great, especially in comparison with injuries suffered by guests in the other context of liability law. Whatever the argument may be as to the respective weight of the many considerations which go into making these decisions, it is clear that the Legislature is the proper decision-making forum in which to strike the balance in the matter, and this court will not usurp the legislative function.
Although the foregoing reasons alone are sufficient to sustain the provisions of our guest statute against the contention of constitutionally inviduous discrimination, we deem it necessary to consider the strongly urged contention by the plaintiff, again pursuing Brown v. Merlo, supra, that the statute is not rationally related to a legitimate purpose of preventing collusion and •fraud. It is said that this is so because a statute eliminating the cause of action for ordinary negligence for all *174automobile guests when only a■ small segment of the guest class may file collusive suits, was a classic example of impermissible, over-inclusiveness of classification which was contrary to traditional motions of fairness or reasonableness. It is stated paying passengers might often include friends and relatives in various situations and that parties because of their closeness of relation might still be likely to collude in proving ordinary negligence because the guest statute does not reach them. Further, it is stated that the class of nonpaying guests includes hitchhikers with whom the host is unlikely to collude. It is also stated that the statue is ineffective as a remedy for collusion and that the remedy for collusion lies in the integrity of the discovery of truth in our adversary system.
Again, this contention falls because it requires more of the guest statute than the Equal Protection Clause mandates. The notion of impermissible over-inclusiveness has been held to have no place in the equal protection analysis of social and economic regulations not affecting' freedoms guaranteed by the Bill of Rights. In Dandridge v. Williams, supra, it is stated as follows: “For this Court to approve the invalidation of state economic or social regulation as ‘overreaching’ would be far too reminiscent of an era when the Court thought the Fourteenth Amendment gave it power to strike down state laws ‘because they may be unwise, improvident, or out of harmony with a particular school of thought.’ Williamson v. Lee Optical Co., 348 U. S. 483, 488. That era long ago passed into history. Ferguson v. Skrupa, 372 U. S. 726.” See, also, Railway Express Agency, Inc. v. New York, 336 U. S. 106, 69 S. Ct. 463, 93 L. Ed. 533 (1949); Keasling v. Thompson, supra. We point out this argument assumes that the majority of guests and hosts are honest, and that only a small number would act collusively. Casenote, 53 Neb. Law Rev. 267 (1974). But it is obvious that this is mere speculation. There is no responsible data available, so far as *175this court knows, on whether the majority of automobile guests are honest or not. As in other areas, including the various classes of cáses in which separate burdens of proof are judicially required, it is a reasonably conceived ground by the Legislature to determine that the temptation or actual incidence of fraud is very great; or that collusion is especially difficult to detect; or that the judicial system should not be responsible for having to detect fraud. A Legislature or a court is reasonably justified in believing that the alternative of requiring a higher degree of proof in automobile guest cases, for example requiring a standard of clear and conclusive evidence instead of a preponderance of the evidence, is a definite factor in controlling the problem of collusive lawsuits and losses. We fail to see the difference between an acknowledged power by judicial decision or legislation to invoke a higher degree of proof in certain classes of cases and the requirement of the guest statute as to proof of a higher degree of negligence. Whatever the merits may be as a matter of policy under the changing conditions that may be present in society today, we cannot say that the Legislature has acted unreasonably in choosing to deny the ordinary negligence cause of action in a wholesale manner where it felt the greatest potential for collusion existed. We, therefore, hold that the Legislature did' not act irrationally in choosing the prevention of collusion and fraud as one of the reasons for the adoption of the guest statute and a different standard for the proof of negligence.
Consequently, we hold that the Nebraska guest statute as presently enacted, is not in violation of’ the federal or the state Constitution, and that the contentions of the plaintiff as to its unconstitutionality are' without merit.
Our decision in this matter is reinforced by the legislative history of attempts tó repeal the guest statute. In recent years the matter has been before the Legislature and it has elected not to repeal the guest statute.
*176In the 1969 session of the Legislature the repeal of the guest statute was presented to the Judiciary Committee in L.B. 555 and reported out for consideration on the floor. The bill was indefinitely postponed by a vote of 22 to 10. In 1971, L.B. 897, which had as its purpose the repealing of the guest statute, was withdrawn by its sponsor. In the 1972 Legislature, L.B. 1461 was introduced for the purpose of repealing the guest statute, but was also withdrawn. At a minimum, the legislative history of the attempts to repeal the guest statute are consistent with the conclusion that the viability and force of the arguments for the retention of the purposes of the guest statute are still very much alive.
Since the guest statute is applicable we now consider the question of whether the evidence under the facts in this case was sufficient to submit the issue of gross negligence to the jury.
The- general factual background is that on November 16, 1966, the plaintiff, Diane Neeld Botsch, was a guest in a 1964 Chrysler sedan driven by the defendant, Christian Marohn. At dusk, the Marohn car was proceeding down a hill and had started up the grade of the next slope or hill when it was in collision with the tractor driven by Joseph Reisdorff, both car and tractor being operated in the west and southbound lane of the highway. As the result of the collision, the plaintiff was seriously injured.
The applicable rules that we use to evaluate the evidence have recently been stated in the case of Demont v. Mattson, 188 Neb. 277, 196 N. W. 2d 190 (1972). Therein we said: “ ‘Gross negligence’ within the meaning of the automobile guest statute is great and excessive negligence, or negligence in a very high degree. It indicates the absence of even slight care in the performance of a duty.’ NJI No. 7.51. See, also, Olson v. Shellington, 167 Neb. 564, 94 N. W. 2d 20. Where several acts of negligence are supported by the evidence ‘no one act is to be segregated and weighed separately to de*177termine whether or not it constituted gross negligence. Instead the several acts are to be considered as a whole.’ NJI No. 7.51. See, also, Olson v. Shellington, supra; Paxton v. Nichols, 157 Neb. 152, 59 N. W. 2d 184; Carley v. Meinke, 181 Neb. 648, 150 N. W. 2d 256. * * * This court has frequently reiterated in slightly varying language that whether gross negligence exists must be ascertained from the facts and circumstances of each particular case and not from any fixed definition or rule. Boismier v. Maragues, supra.”
Under the issues presented, we examine the evidence as to failure of the defendant to keep a proper lookout; failure to keep his automobile under reasonable control; and that he was operating his vehicle at an excessive rate of speed.
Resolving the conflicts and the inferences from the evidence in favor of the plaintiff, as we are required to do, the evidence shows the following facts: As the defendant proceeded down the slope immediately before the collision, his headlights were on. The highway had a painted dividing line and both the defendant’s car and the tractor with which he was in collision were on the west and southbound lane of traffic. At the time of the collision the tractor was proceeding south at a rate of about 16 miles per hour. Three witnesses testified that a short time prior to the accident they saw the tractor with a white light at the rear of the tractor. The defendant testified that he did not see the tractor in the beam of his headlights until it was 100 feet from his car. At that time, he had his foot on the accelerator. He applied his brakes, but the impact occurred almost at the same time that he saw the tractor in his headlights. The tractor was clean and had yellow wheeled rims. There is also evidence that there was sufficient light to make the tractor visible without the aid of headlights or rear lights. We have consistently held that it is negligence as a matter of law for a motorist to drive an automobile on a highway in such a manner that he cannot *178stop in time to avoid a collision with an object within the range of his vision. Guerin v. Forburger, 161 Neb. 824, 74 N. W. 2d 870 (1956); Murray v. Pearson Appliance Store, 155 Neb. 860, 54 N. W. 2d 250 (1952); Pool v. Romatzke, 177 Neb. 870, 131 N. W. 2d 593 (1964); Kehm v. Dumpert, 183 Neb. 568, 162 N. W. 2d 520 (1968). The tractor ahead of the defendant was directly ahead of him in its proper lane of traffic. It was also traveling forward and at an approximate rate of speed of 16 miles per hour. The evidence is overwhelming that it was visible and discernible within his range of vision ahead in his own lane of traffic and discoverable within the beam of his headlights. No excuse or reason appears for his failure to properly observe the tractor. The evidence in this case does not permit a finding that the defendant’s actions came within one of the exceptions to the range of vision rule which usually relates to whether the object ahead was visible or discernible. Outside the element of speed, which will be later discussed, we come to the conclusion, under the applicable rule as to the testing of the evidence, that the defendant was guilty of negligence as a matter of law.
We consider the evidence as to the issue of reasonable control of the defendant’s vehicle. A driver of a motor vehicle should have his automobile under such reasonable control as will enable him to avoid collision with other vehicles, assuming that the drivers thereof are exercising due care. Paddack v. Patrick, 163 Neb. 355, 79 N. W. 2d 701 (1956); Spomer v. Allied Electric & Fixture Co., 120 Neb. 399, 232 N. W. 767 (1930). There Is evidence that when the defendant saw the tractor 100 feet ahead in his headlight beam, the accident occurred almost simultaneously with his application of the brakes. The investigating sheriff did not find any skid marks north' of the first gouge mark which marked the impact location. The only inference from this testimony is that the defendant did not or was unable to make any attempt to turn aside or to.avoid hitting.the tractor which was *179traveling ahead and at a reasonable rate of speed in the same lane of traffic as the defendant. Independent of the evidence as to lack of a proper lookout, the evidence is indisputable that after the defendant saw the tractor he was unable to control his automobile so as to avoid colliding with the tractor. It is also readily inferable from the plaintiff’s evidence that the tractor was being operated without negligence. It is therefore clear that there was ample evidence on the issue of reasonable control.
We go now to the issue of the defendant’s excessive speed and the degree of it. The defendant himself testified that he did not know at what speed he was traveling. One witness, Richard Vlach, testified that while he was traveling in his car at a constant rate of approximately 60 miles per hour and southbound on State Highway No. 15 he was passed by the defendant’s car a short distance before the scene of the accident. Distance measurements were made by defendant Reisdorff and introduced in evidence. Plaintiff in her brief calculated the speed at .which defendant’s automobile was traveling between the time Reisdorff first saw the defendant’s car cresting the hill and when the impact finally occurred. Plaintiff argues this evidence indicated that the defendant’s car was traveling around 90 miles per hour just before impact. Defendant disputes this argument. Further evidence showed that the impact of the collision broke part of the body of the tractor open, and there was transmission grease and oil on the highway. The investigating sheriff testified that the distance between the northernmost gouge marks on the highway and the tractor indicated the tractor had been pushed a distance of 129 feet. Other evidence as to the size and the weight of the tractor, 5,000 pounds, lead to no other conclusion than that the defendant was traveling at a reckless and dangerous rate of speed under the circumstances. There was additional testimony to the effect that the defendant’s mother, riding in the back seat of *180the car, had warned the defendant to watch his speed and to drive carefully.
In the determination of whether all the evidence in a specific case is sufficient to submit the issue of gross negligence to the jury we have consistently held that the presence of imminence of danger visible to, known by, or made known to a driver, together with a persistence in negligence heedless of the consequences, are factors to be given material, if not controlling, consideration. Zoimen v. Landsman, 192 Neb. 561, 223 N. W. 2d 49 (1974); Thorpe v. Zwonechek, 177 Neb. 504, 129 N. W. 2d 483 (1964); Gummere v. Mudd, 139 Neb. 370, 297 N. W. 622 (1941).
We consider the acts of negligence together. Not only does the evidence, construed most favorably to the plaintiff, indicate a gross failure by defendant to keep a proper lookout, especially in light of the fact that the vehicle ahead of him was traveling forward in his proper lane of traffic, but it also indicates that this failure to keep a proper lookout was combined with a continuous and persistent operation at a reckless and excessive rate of speed up to the point of collision. In addition, the evidence shows that there was ample opportunity to turn aside or otherwise avoid the collision with the moving tractor in front of him. There' was a violation of the range of vision rule which we have held to be negligence as a matter of law. We hold that the evidence as to the various issues of negligence, taken together, were amply sufficient for the submission of the issue of the defendant’s gross negligence to the jury and that the court was in error in directing a verdict for the defendant.
Other contentions of the parties have been considered and have been found to be without merit.
The judgment of the District Court is reversed and the cause is remanded for a new trial.
Reversed and remanded with directions.

=== CASE 9738031 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:41:02.776854+00 ===

*181McCown, J.,
dissenting in part.
I dissent from that portion of the majority opinion which holds the Nebraska guest statute constitutional. The basic reasons are set forth in my dissent in Hale v. Taylor, 192 Neb. 298, 220 N. W. 2d 378.
Rational and logical arguments may be made in support of each of the two divergent judicial views regarding the constitutionality of automobile guest statutes. In weighing the conflicting viewpoints, the unequal justice visited upon thousands of guest passengers in the name of legislative public policy becomes the critical weight which tips the scales of justice in favor of the determination that equal protection of the law is denied by the guest statute.
No one really denies that many of the factual assumptions which gave rise to the basic philosophy of the guest statute have disappeared or changed drastically since the statute was adopted in Nebraska in 1931. in the 1975 Legislature, repeal of the guest statute is pending again. Obviously, the Legislature must now determine, in the light of modern concepts of automobile travel and social policy, whether the factual assumptions which supported the initial adoption of the automobile guest statute in 1931 are still present, and, if so, whether they justify the continuation of the public policy reflected by the Nebraska guest statute.
I concur in the determination that there was sufficient evidence of gross negligence in this case to require submission of the case to the jury.

=== CASE 9738032 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:41:06.063843+00 ===

Van Valkenburg, J.
On August 15, 1973 the 1971-1973 contract for the teachers in the Warren Consolidated School District expired by its own terms and was not renewed. In spite of the absence of a contract, the teachers returned to work at the beginning of the fall semester, the school board having refused to extend the old contract past its expiration date. There being no written contract, the school board imposed "interim operating regulations” pursuant to and under the authority of MCLA 340.614; MSA 15.3614. These regulations eliminated a great many of the provisions and protections of the expired contract.
On September 4, 1973, the Warren Education Association authorized a strike to commence October 8, 1973. On October 7, 1973 a strike vote was taken. The ballot was prepared and structured to indicate that the sole purpose of the strike was to seek reinstatement of the provisions of the previous expired contract which had been deleted or modified by the "interim operating regulations”. By a vote of 1201 to 37 the members of the association resolved to withhold their services and on the following day the teachers did not appear for work.
When the school board did not take any action with respect to this work stoppage, the association filed an action for declaratory judgment on October 12, 1973. The school board counterclaimed against plaintiff association and, with permission of the trial court, filed a third-party complaint against the teachers individually for injunctive *499relief and damages. After two days of hearings, the trial court entered an opinion and injunctive order on October 24, 1973 which held that the teachers were engaged in an illegal strike in violation of the public employment relations act as amended, commonly known as the "Hutchinson Act”, the same being MCLA 423.201 et seq.; MSA 17.455(1) et seq. The trial court ordered that the teachers were "therefore ordered back to school forthwith, and shall report for duty at the regular hour on Thursday, October 25, 1973, and will serve pursuant to the terms of the 1971-73 Collective Bargaining Agreement” subject to the court’s continuing supervision of the negotiations between the parties. This injunctive order was made final on November 19, 1973 and plaintiff association appealed.
The focal question on appeal, as below, is whether the withholding of services by the teachers in an effort to cause the school board to reinstate the provisions of the expired contract is a "strike” within the meaning of the aforementioned act.
MCLA 423.201; MSA 17.455(1) provides, in part, that:
"As used in this act a 'strike’ means the concerted failure to report for duty, the wilful absence from one’s position, the stoppage of work, or the abstinence in whole or in part from the full, faithful and proper performance of the duties of employment, for the purpose of inducing, inñúencing or coercing a change in the conditions, or compensation, or the rights, privileges or obligations of employment. ” (Emphasis supplied.)
See also MCLA 423.206; MSA 17.455(6).
Plaintiff association argues here, as they did below, that the work stoppage by the teachers was not a "strike” within the meaning of the act, since it was not for the purpose of coercing "a change in *500the conditions” but rather to seek a return to the conditions as they existed under the expired contract. As appealing as the argument may be, the error in the logic of the argument is patent. Since the prior contract expired by its own terms on August 15,1973, the status quo is not the situation as it existed under the expired contract, but rather the situation in which no contract exists and the interim operating regulations do exist. Since the teachers were seeking a change from the situation as it existed under the interim operating regulations, they were seeking a "change in the conditions” within the meaning of the above quoted statute.
We would hasten to add that the school board may not promulgate unconscionable regulations and seek the solace of an injunction to terminate a teacher strike. Not only does MCLA 340.614, supra, mandate that the regulations be reasonable, but also, since injunctive relief is equitable in nature, a court may not decree relief which would create an inequitable result.
The withholding of services by the teachers being a strike within the meaning of MCLA 423.201, supra, and strikes by said public employees being contrary to statutory mandate, MCLA 423.202; MSA 17.455(2), the circuit court could issue, upon a showing of violence, irreparable injury or breach of the peace, an injunction restraining the teachers from continuing their strike. Holland School District v Holland Education Association, 380 Mich 314; 157 NW2d 206 (1968). Plaintiff association stipulated, and the trial court found, that there would be irreparable injury. While this Court hears appeals from actions in equity de novo, we give great weight to the findings of the trial court. Upon review of the *501record herein, we hold that the relief granted by the trial court was proper.
Affirmed as to the injunctive relief granted, but remanded for consideration of the remaining issues raised in the counter and cross complaints. No costs, a public question being involved.
V. J. Brennan, J., concurred.

=== CASE 9738033 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:41:06.068852+00 ===

Bronson, P. J.
(concurring). I concur in the result reached by my colleagues, but for different reasons.
It is undisputed that the Warren teachers were on strike. The plaintiff education association admitted that at trial. The issue for decision, as I see it, is whether that strike was prohibited by the public employment relations act.
The act, relevant portions of which are set forth in the majority opinion, by its own terms does not prohibit all strikes, but only those "for the purpose of inducing * * * a change in the conditions * * * of employment”.
My colleagues have concluded that this strike was illegal because it was for the purpose of changing the conditions of employment. With that conclusion I have no quarrel. However, they maintain that the "change” involved returning to the provisions of the then expired contract, in lieu of "interim operating regulations” which are said to have been validly imposed by the school board to fill the void created by the expiration of the old contract. My view is that the "change” urged by the striking teachers — in a way which is condemned by the statute — was to extend the term of the old contract, during which time negotiations for a new contract would take place.
I believe that support for this view is found in *502the facts. The teachers had originally agreed to continue working while negotiations were in progress, in compliance with the mandate of Holland School District v Holland Education Association, 380 Mich 314; 157 NW2d 206 (1968). It was only when the school board, unilaterally and without notice to the association, enacted the "interim operating regulations”, that the teachers voted to withhold their services. The teachers sought to reinstate the provisions of the expired contract in order to avoid the oppressive provisions of the board’s regulations. That purpose — to extend the expiration date of the old contract — was to "induce * * * a change in the conditions” because one of the terms of a contract is its duration. The board was under no obligation to agree to extend the expiration date of the old contract and the withholding of services by the teachers to force that result was the type of strike proscribed by the public employment relations act.
However, I find no warrant in legislation or case law for the "interim operating regulations” created by the board. My colleagues’ position is that MCLA 340.614; MSA 15.3614 empowers the board to institute such regulations. That statute provides, in pertinent part:
"Every board shall have authority to make reasonable rules and regulations relative to anything whatever necessary for the proper establishment, maintenance, management and carrying on of the public schools of such district * * * .”
This law gives school boards the power to enact regulations concerning, for example, (1) the disciplining and suspending of students, Davis v Ann Arbor Public Schools, 313 F Supp 1217 (ED Mich, *5031970), (2) the activities of its pupils and teachers within the classroom and on the school premises during the school day, Nigosian v Weiss, 343 F Supp 757 (ED Mich, 1971), (3) the usage of identification cards by students, faculty and staff, LaPorte v Escanaba Area Public Schools, 51 Mich App 305; 214 NW2d 840 (1974), and (4) the denial to married high school students of the right to engage in extra curricular activities, Cochrane v Mesick School District, 360 Mich 390; 103 NW2d 569 (1960).
The statute does not grant the board a license to dictate unilaterally the terms of the contract under which the teachers are required to work, pursuant to the command of Holland, supra, while negotiations are in progress. It is designed to give school boards the authority to regulate the day-today operation of the schools, not to provide state-supported bargaining leverage by which teachers are forced by Holland to continue working, but on the board’s terms.
I read Holland to require that the old contract remain in force pending the negotiation of a new one to replace it. Otherwise, the teachers, then working under an expired contract, could not properly be said to be "employees” at all. Had Holland’s message been heeded by the board in this case, this strike could have been avoided, since Holland assures precisely what the teachers sought here: maintenance of the status quo while negotiations continue. Teachers cannot fairly be required to refrain from striking and be subjected to the whim of the school board as a reward for practicing restraint.
It is not enough to say that the interim regulations must be reasonable. A brief look at the regulations imposed by the board in this case and *504apparently approved sub silentio by my colleagues well illustrates the point.1
In view of the trial judge’s order, in which he sent the teachers back to work pursuant to the terms of the old contract, I am willing to affirm. But I emphasize my belief that no legislation or case law of which I am aware authorizes a school board to substitute "interim operating regulations” however reasonable,2 for the terms of the expired contract during the period in which teachers continue to teach and their bargaining representatives negotiate a new collective bargaining agreement. I cannot countenance a situation in which teachers are forced to choose between violating the command of Holland and subjecting themselves to the unbridled discretion of the school board with which they are negotiating.
The interim operating regulations eliminated the following provisions and protections of the previous expired contract: seniority step increase in salary, additional education or higher degree status level increases in salary, recognition of the association as the exclusive bargaining agent, the association’s use of mails and bulletin board, the teachers’ right to review their own personnel files, presence of the association’s representative at disciplinary hearings, certain teacher protection in the enforcement of discipline, and certain procedural protections for discharge and demotion. The length and definition of the teachers’ work day was changed, along with other numerous changes.
I hasten to point out that there is potentially a great deal of difference between the terms included in a set of "reasonable” regulations and those resulting from the give and take of hard-nosed bargaining.

=== CASE 2213198 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:28.628916+00 ===

25 Mass. App. Ct. 693 (1988)
521 N.E.2d 1058
COMMONWEALTH
vs.
BRIAN J. FOGARTY.
No. 87-1093.
Appeals Court of Massachusetts, Berkshire.
February 16, 1988.
April 25, 1988.
Present: GREANEY, C.J., SMITH, & FINE, JJ.
*694 Barry P. Wilson for the defendant.
Joel S. Fishman, Assistant District Attorney, for the Commonwealth.
FINE, J.
The seven indictments on which the defendant was tried arose out of (1) vicious assaults on two women, Irene Pizzi and Diane Makarski, one taking place within a few hours and a few miles of the other, and (2) the retrieval four and one-half days later of a blood-stained bag containing a large amount of cocaine in the woods near the residence of Diane Makarski. The two victims were longtime acquaintances of each other. The defendant was convicted of assault in a dwelling house with a dangerous weapon[1] (a pistol) on each of the victims, assault with intent to murder[2] each of the victims, assault and battery by means of a dangerous weapon[3] (a pistol) on each of the victims, and trafficking in cocaine.[4] After considering the numerous issues raised by the defendant on appeal, we conclude that the convictions should stand.
We recite the highlights of the evidence produced by the Commonwealth, with the events described in the order in which they occurred. The defendant, an attorney, resided in Florida but made frequent lengthy visits to western Massachusetts, often by car. He became romantically involved for a time with Diane Makarski. On September 28, 1986, Makarski, perhaps annoyed with the defendant about his inconstancy in their relationship, took, without permission, a sealed shoebox from the bed in a room which he frequently occupied in the home of his brother and sister-in-law, Matthew and Anne Fogarty. Makarski believed the box contained cocaine. She hid it in a shed in her back yard. The defendant and his brother, Matthew, made separate visits to a bar that evening, the Macano Inn in Great Barrington. The defendant left the bar around 11:45 P.M.
*695 Some time after retiring for the night at her home in Stockbridge around 11:00 P.M., Irene Pizzi was awakened by someone beating her on the head with a small handgun. The assailant wanted to know the whereabouts of Diane Makarski. Makarski, he said, had something which belonged to him that he wanted returned. He said he knew that Pizzi knew where Makarski was because he had read "the note." (A note had been left on Makarski's door in nearby Housatonic signed by a different "Irene.") While being subjected to threats and beatings, Pizzi denied any knowledge of the note or of Makarski's whereabouts. The beating caused her to bleed profusely (type A blood). The man strangled Pizzi and put a pillow over her head. A second assailant present in Pizzi's bedroom also beat her. As she lost consciousness, she heard one of the two men say, "It's done" or "She's done." She was unable to identify the man who strangled her, but she recognized the voice of the second man in the room as that of Matthew Fogarty.
Some time after Makarski went to sleep in her apartment in Housatonic at around 11:30 P.M., she was awakened by the defendant knocking loudly on her porch door. She let him inside. He grabbed her, started to strangle her, and said, "Tell me where it is. I just did your girlfriend in. Tell me where it is, I just killed her." The defendant struck Makarski over the head with a small metal gun. She told him that what he wanted was in the shed. He kept beating her on the head, and she may have lost consciousness. She bled profusely (type O blood). As she was coming to, she saw the defendant holding a plastic bag in his hand which appeared to contain cocaine. As she was screaming, the defendant told her that someone who was waiting outside would come and silence her if she did not keep quiet. He told her he was going to kill her. As he looked down to prepare his gun, however, she managed to flee to a neighbor's house.
The two victims were hospitalized. After some initial reluctance, Makarski named the defendant as her assailant to the police. At around 6:00 A.M. on the morning following the attacks, the police went to the apartment occupied by Matthew and Anne Fogarty with a warrant for the defendant's arrest. *696 Only the defendant, Matthew Fogarty, and an unidentified third person were present. The defendant was asleep, fully clothed, with a twelve-gauge shotgun cradled across his stomach. After being given his Miranda warnings, the defendant was taken to a police station. The police again apprised the defendant of his Miranda rights, and the defendant agreed to answer questions. He said he had been in the Macano Inn until it closed at 2:00 that morning and that he then went home to bed. The Macano Inn owner testified that he recalled closing the bar that night at around 11:45 P.M. because business was slow. The defendant, he testified, was the only customer in the bar when he closed it.
Four and one-half days later, a hitchhiker noticed a yellow plastic bag hanging from a tree limb, about five feet from the ground, off the road near the baseball field bordering Makarski's apartment house. The yellow bag contained two plastic ziplock bags, which in turn contained 514 grams of cocaine. The wholesale value of the cocaine was about $86,000. On the bags was blood of type A and possibly also type O.
1. Request for continuance and change of counsel. The defendant's principal contention on appeal is that the trial judge erred in denying both the eleventh-hour request by the defendant for a continuance of his trial in order to obtain new counsel and the request by his privately-retained attorney, Ms. Elizabeth Quinlan, to withdraw. As we have indicated, the defendant is an attorney. The trial had been set for June 22, 1987, at Ms. Quinlan's request. The judge had reserved the time for the trial during the last week of the June session; there would be no other jury session in Berkshire County until September. The defendant had indicated his intention to offer a plea, but whatever plea arrangement had been made fell through. On the date set for the trial the judge was finishing up another matter. That day, for the first time, the defendant indicated that he no longer wanted Ms. Quinlan to represent him, and Ms. Quinlan also sought to withdraw. She referred to "certain disputes relative to witnesses, defense tactics," a "profound personality conflict," and a breakdown in the attorney-client *697 relationship which made it impossible for her adequately to represent the defendant. The judge invited the defendant to speak. The defendant said, "We have had irreconcilable differences of opinion, trial strategies and what have you." In a recorded conference between the defendant and Ms. Quinlan, a transcript of which was read by the judge before he ruled on the matter, they referred to a clash in personalities and differences as to tactics. Ms. Quinlan indicated, however, that she was prepared for trial. The following day, Ms. Quinlan also expressed her concern that her ability to conduct an effective defense might be affected by her fear of a posttrial claim of ineffective assistance of counsel.
The prosecutor objected to the requests, pointing out the reservation of the late June date, the impossibility of calling another case in for trial, the distress the delay would cause the victims, and the inconvenience to the numerous witnesses who had been summoned or placed on call and were ready to testify. A Florida attorney interested in representing the defendant made known to the judge through a telephone call that he could appear in a week and be ready for trial in a month.
The judge indicated that a similar motion for a continuance made at an earlier stage in the proceedings would almost certainly have been allowed. He denied the requests, however, because of their timing, because of the substantial inconvenience to the witnesses and the court, and because it appeared to him that the differences were tactical and that they would not cause such detriment that the defendant's rights would be jeopardized. As a result, the judge was "not convinced this delay is for a legitimate reason, quite honestly, at this stage." Presented with a choice whether to proceed with Ms. Quinlan as his attorney, pro se, or with standby counsel, the defendant chose the first alternative. At trial, Ms. Quinlan, described by the judge as a competent attorney, conducted a vigorous defense.
A defendant has a right under the Sixth and Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution to have considerable deference given to his choice of counsel to represent him at a trial in which his liberty is at stake. The right is not *698 absolute, however, and on occasion it may be subordinate to the public's interest in the fair, efficient, and orderly administration of justice. See Commonwealth v. Dunne, 394 Mass. 10, 14 (1985); United States v. Panzardi Alvarez, 816 F.2d 813, 816 (1st Cir.1987). The question whether to allow a continuance for change of counsel rests ordinarily in the sound discretion of the trial judge once he has made appropriate inquiry of the defendant as to the reasons for the request. See Commonwealth v. Moran, 388 Mass. 655, 659 (1983); United States v. Torres, 793 F.2d 436, 440 (1st Cir.), cert. denied, 479 U.S. 889 (1986). "There are no mechanical tests for deciding when a denial of a continuance is so arbitrary as to violate due process. The answer must be found in the circumstances present in every case, particularly in the reasons presented to the trial judge at the time the request is denied." Ungar v. Sarafite, 376 U.S. 575, 589 (1964). See Commonwealth v. Dunne, 394 Mass. at 14.
Among the significant factors to be considered in determining whether the denial of the continuance was justified is the timing of the request. See Commonwealth v. Dunne, 394 Mass. at 14. Here it was made on the eve of trial. Even at such a late hour, however, it may be error to deny such a request if good cause supports it. Conflict of interest, lack of preparation, or irreconcilable conflict between counsel and defendant may constitute good cause. Smith, Criminal Practice and Procedure § 1120 (1983). See Commonwealth v. Miskel, 364 Mass. 783, 789-790 (1974) (allegation of personality conflict not raised until commencement of trial not sufficient to require postponement of trial); Commonwealth v. Cavanaugh, 371 Mass. 46, 52, 57 (1976) (lack of preparation constituted good cause); Commonwealth v. Tuitt, 393 Mass. 801, 805-807 (1985) (allegations of lack of preparation and breakdown of communication); Commonwealth v. Flowers, 5 Mass. App. Ct. 557, 565-566 (1977), cert. denied, 434 U.S. 1077 (1978) (not a case of conflict of interest or lack of preparation, which would warrant further scrutiny); Commonwealth v. Moran, 17 Mass. App. Ct. 200, 206-207 (1983) (alleged conflict of interest). See also Wilson v. Mintzes, 761 F.2d 275, 280 (6th Cir.1985). *699 No claim of a conflict of interest or a lack of preparation was made to the trial judge in this case. The somewhat vague claims made here, relating to tactics and personality conflicts, were of a type best left for consideration by the trial judge. With the opportunity to make firsthand observations of the parties, familiarity with the procedural history of the case, and a full understanding of the consequences of a continuance, a trial judge is in the best situation to assess the seriousness of such claims. In this case, an experienced trial judge heard the parties, considered the relevant factors, and apparently determined that the real reason for the request was merely to delay the trial. On the information before him, there was no abuse of discretion. The denial of a motion for a change of counsel made on the eve of trial and alleging a breakdown of the attorney-client relationship does not provide a ground for a new trial unless the breakdown in communication is such that it leads to an apparently unjust verdict, prevents an adequate defense, or threatens the defendant's right to a fair trial. Commonwealth v. Tuitt, 393 Mass. at 806-807. None of these has been shown to be the case here. It is of some relevance in assessing the defendant's argument on appeal that, as we discuss in relation to the next point, Ms. Quinlan provided effective assistance at trial. See Commonwealth v. Moran, 17 Mass. App. Ct. at 206-207 & n. 3. See also Morris v. Slappy, 461 U.S. 1, 10-12 (1983).
2. The claim of ineffective assistance of counsel. Ms. Quinlan conducted a thorough and vigorous defense at trial. The verdicts were attributable not to any ineffectiveness on her part but to the compelling facts presented to the jury. Alleged trial errors pointed to in the defendant's appellate brief reflect either tactical differences suggested with the benefit of hindsight, or nitpicking. The defendant was not deprived of an otherwise available, material or substantial defense. See Commonwealth v. Saferian, 366 Mass. 89, 96 (1974); Commonwealth v. Satterfield, 373 Mass. 109, 115 & n. 10 (1977).
Apart from alleged trial errors, the defendant points out that Ms. Quinlan failed to file pretrial motions to dismiss the indictments for trafficking in cocaine and for the offenses against *700 Pizzi. "It is the general rule that a court should not inquire into the adequacy or competency of the evidence upon which an indictment is based." Commonwealth v. Salman, 387 Mass. 160, 166 (1982). If the integrity of the grand jury process is not challenged, then the defendant may have the indictments dismissed only if the evidence presented by the Commonwealth to the grand jury failed to meet the test of probable cause to arrest. See Commonwealth v. O'Dell, 392 Mass. 445, 450-452 (1984). This standard was met, and Ms. Quinlan may not be faulted for not filing what would have been futile motions.
As to each indictment, the grand jury could properly consider all of the evidence presented on the related incidents. On the cocaine trafficking charge, evidence was presented to the grand jury that Makarski took the shoe box and hid it and that the defendant was so desperate to retrieve it that he was willing to kill for it. Although Makarski refused to testify directly that she saw the cocaine, her hearsay statements to the police, properly considered by the grand jury, see Commonwealth v. Gibson, 368 Mass. 518, 525 (1975), revealed that she knew the box contained cocaine and that she had seen the defendant holding some of the contents of the box. The grand jury were told about the discovery, four and one-half days after the beatings, of the large amount of cocaine in a blood-stained bag near Makarski's home. It was a reasonable inference, Makarski having escaped, that the defendant feared being apprehended with the cocaine and therefore chose to hide it in the woods instead of bringing it home with him. The defendant was arrested within hours of the time he would have left the bag in the woods. Thus, even if he may have intended to do so, he was unable to retrieve it. The four and one-half day period which intervened between the beatings and the discovery of the cocaine, relied upon by the defendant in his argument to show a lack of connection between the defendant and the bag, therefore is not necessarily suggestive of his innocence. Finally, the grand jury were told that the defendant occasionally made calls to Atlanta in Makarski's presence and that he spoke to Makarski about getting an apartment in the Atlanta area. The yellow bag had a Georgia logo, which, therefore, was a link *701 to the defendant, even if not a strong one. The evidence, taken as a whole, was sufficiently probative of the defendant's guilt of the trafficking charge to authorize the indictment. See Commonwealth v. Brien, 19 Mass. App. Ct. 914 (1984). Compare Commonwealth v. McShan, 15 Mass. App. Ct. 921 (1983). It is true that a police officer may have strayed into theorizing in the course of his testimony before the grand jury. As mentioned earlier, however, the competence of that evidence is not a matter for us properly to consider. See Commonwealth v. Salman, 387 Mass. at 166.
The weakness pointed to in the evidence supporting the indictments for the crimes against Pizzi is her inability to identify the defendant as her attacker. On all the evidence of the related incidents presented to the grand jury, however, there was ample circumstantial evidence of the defendant's identity.
3. The denial of the motions for required findings of not guilty. There was sufficient evidence of the defendant's guilt of trafficking in cocaine to support the jury's verdict. The evidence at trial differed slightly from the evidence before the grand jury. The box was taken from a bed used by the defendant. Makarski, familiar with the defendant's habits, believed the box was the defendant's and that it contained cocaine. The defendant acted in a desperate manner to retrieve the box, beating Pizzi and leaving her for dead and beating Makarski. Makarski told the defendant where the box was. She saw him soon afterwards with the plastic bag containing cocaine. The blood-stained bag was later found near Makarski's apartment. The bag contained cocaine in a quantity far in excess of an amount reasonable for personal use. The defendant exhibited consciousness of guilt upon his arrest. The evidence warranted findings that the defendant knowingly possessed the drug with the intent to distribute it. See Commonwealth v. Bongarzone, 390 Mass. 326, 349 (1983). Contrast Commonwealth v. Williams, 3 Mass. App. Ct. 370, 371 (1975); Commonwealth v. Duffy, 4 Mass. App. Ct. 655, 660 (1976); Commonwealth v. Deagle, 10 Mass. App. Ct. 563, 566-568 (1980). There was considerably more here than conjecture and piling inference upon inference. See Commonwealth v. Mazza, 399 Mass. 395, 399 (1987).
*702 The required finding argument with regard to the Pizzi offenses is altogether lacking in merit. To dispose of the defendant's contention, we need mention only a portion of the Commonwealth's evidence. Pizzi identified Matthew Fogarty as having been present; the defendant was in Matthew Fogarty's company, with a shotgun cradled across his stomach, when he was arrested just hours after the beating. Pizzi's assailant questioned her about Makarski and referred to the stolen box he wanted returned. The defendant, shortly afterwards, told Makarski he had just killed her friend. The note on Makarski's door used the name "Irene," Pizzi's first name. The motion for required findings of not guilty was properly denied.
4. The denial of the motion to sever the indictments. The seven indictments on which the defendant was convicted related to the two beating incidents and the discovery of the cocaine. The defendant sought to have the indictments severed so that he could be tried separately on the cocaine charge and also to receive separate trials relating to the offenses against each of the two victims. After a pretrial hearing, the trial judge denied the motion. The defendant claims on appeal that the denial of the motion was prejudicial error, as the jury were influenced by the cumulative effect of the evidence as to the separate offenses which related to other bad acts of the defendant.
"The decision whether to sever indictments lies within the sound discretion of the trial judge. Commonwealth v. Sylvester, 388 Mass. 749, 754 (1983). Commonwealth v. Gallison, 383 Mass. 659, 671 (1981). Commonwealth v. Jervis, 368 Mass. 638, 645 (1975), and cases cited. Joinder is permitted if the offenses constitute a single line of conduct, grow out of essentially one transaction, and would be proved by substantially the same evidence. See Commonwealth v. Blow, 362 Mass. 196, 200 (1972)." Commonwealth v. Helfant, 398 Mass. 214, 230 (1986). It is a defendant's burden to show that joinder of charges in one trial prejudiced his right to receive a fair trial. Ibid. Showing the greater likelihood of an acquittal if tried separately, however, is not enough to meet that burden. See Commonwealth v. Gallison, 383 Mass. at 672; Commonwealth v. Gordon, 389 Mass. 351, 357-358 (1983).
*703 We think the defendant has failed to sustain his burden of showing that the denial of the motion to sever in the circumstances of this case deprived him of a fair trial. The offenses were closely related in time and location and consisted of a single line of conduct. As in Commonwealth v. Helfant, 398 Mass. at 230, evidence at any one of the separate trials sought by the defendant would have been incomprehensible without evidence of the other related events giving rise to the other indictments. Thus, separate trials would have been largely duplicative of each other, causing harm to "the interests of the court, the Commonwealth, and the public." Id. at 231.
5. Evidentiary rulings. The defendant objected unsuccessfully to Makarski's testimony that she used cocaine with the defendant a few days before the beating. We need not decide whether the ruling was erroneous, however, because other evidence of the defendant's cocaine use came in without objection through a defense witness, Anne Fogarty. Any error, therefore, was harmless.
It was altogether proper for the judge to allow in testimony that at 6:00 A.M., a few hours after the beatings, the defendant was asleep cradling a rifle. The evidence was relevant to consciousness of guilt. See Commonwealth v. Montecalvo, 367 Mass. 46, 52 (1975).
Judgments affirmed.
NOTES
[1]  G.L.c. 265, § 18A.
[2]  G.L.c. 265, § 15.
[3]  G.L.c. 265, § 15A.
[4]  G.L.c. 94C, § 32E.

=== CASE 2213204 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:28.709119+00 ===

25 Mass. App. Ct. 618 (1988)
521 N.E.2d 759
WARREN MANSUR
vs.
ANN CLARK (and a companion case).
No. 87-227.
Appeals Court of Massachusetts, Essex.
November 18, 1987.
April 15, 1988.
Present: ARMSTRONG, BROWN, & KASS, JJ.
David E. Cherny for Warren Mansur.
Mary P. Harrington for Ann Clark.
ARMSTRONG, J.
These are appeals from two judgments of dismissal entered in a Probate Court, one dismissing the former wife's complaint for contempt (which alleged that the former husband was in arrears on his alimony payments), the other dismissing the former husband's complaint for modification (which alleged that the former wife was living with another man in a de facto marital relationship and that she no longer *619 needed support from the former husband). While the agreed statement of the record is not crystal clear in this respect, we interpret it to mean that no evidence was received, whether by testimony, affidavits, or representations of counsel, and that the orders of dismissal were entered purely as matter of law.
The circumstances were these. On December 1, 1975, the parties, both represented by counsel, executed a separation agreement which made comprehensive provision for alimony, child support, custody, and property division. The agreement was to survive and be "forever binding and conclusive upon the parties," whether incorporated or not in the divorce judgment. The following day the judgment nisi was entered. It referred to the agreement, stating that it had been exhibited to the court but not filed and that it was not merged in the judgment or incorporated therein. No separate provision was made for alimony: rather, it was "ordered that alimony and the economic rights and responsibilities of the parties ... are as provided for in [the a]greement."
The use of the word "ordered" cannot be read as having incorporated the provisions of the separation agreement in the judgment, when incorporation is expressly negated in the same sentence. Compare Stansel v. Stansel, 385 Mass. 510, 513 (1982). The word "ordered" here obviously means nothing more than "provided," and the passage as a whole is simply an explanation by the judge why he was not making provision in the judgment for alimony, child support, and the like.
The present actions were commenced eleven years later. First filed was the husband's complaint for modification, which alleged that the children were emancipated, that the wife was living in a de facto marital state with another man, and that she enjoyed abundant income and had no need whatever of support from him (i.e., the former husband). The wife pleaded the separation agreement as a bar to modification. See Knox v. Remick, 371 Mass. 433, 438 (1976). She also filed her complaint for contempt, alleging that the husband was $900 in arrears, at least, on his alimony payments and had failed to meet his obligation to either insure or pay for the wife's medical and dental expenses. In his answer the husband raised what was *620 in effect a counterclaim seeking modification of the divorce judgment to be "consistent with the terms of the ... separation agreement."
The probate judge was correct, for the reasons she gave, in dismissing the complaint for contempt. Contempt does not lie for violating an agreement as such but only for violating a court order. Here, the husband's obligation to pay alimony arose exclusively from the separation agreement; it was not the subject of a court order.
The husband's complaint for modification presents a more complicated picture. Originally it sought modification of the alimony provisions of the judgment of divorce and was predicated on an assertion that the judgment had incorporated the terms of the separation agreement. That assertion was amended out of the complaint, however, and the husband thereafter took the position, correctly, that no order relative to alimony was in effect. His effort to achieve modification was thus directed to the alimony obligation imposed by the separation agreement itself.
It seems undisputed that a court has no authority to modify the obligations voluntarily undertaken by the parties to a separation agreement. Schillander v. Schillander, 307 Mass. 96, 98 (1940). Glazer v. Silverman, 354 Mass. 177, 178 (1968). Knox v. Remick, 371 Mass. 433, 435 (1976). Moore v. Moore, 389 Mass. 21, 23-24 (1983). The "countervailing equities" (Knox v. Remick, at 437) that the husband alleges he can establish are usually understood to have a different legal significance from that contended for by the husband: i.e., if shown, they would justify a Probate Court in establishing (or varying) court-ordered alimony notwithstanding a finality provision in the parties' separation agreement. See Knox v. Remick, 371 Mass. at 436-438; Stansel v. Stansel, 385 Mass. at 515-516; DeCristofaro v. DeCristofaro, 24 Mass. App. Ct. 231, 235-237 (1987). Such a variation is said not to alter the rights of the parties under the agreement, which may still be sued upon in an action at law[1] to recover any difference between alimony *621 paid under the court order and that agreed to as final between the contracting parties. Knox v. Remick, at 438. DeCristofaro v. DeCristofaro, at 236-237. Ratchford v. Ratchford, 397 Mass. 114, 116 (1986).
There is a suggestion in Schillander v. Schillander, 307 Mass. at 99, that a paying spouse having as a result of changed circumstances difficulty meeting his contractual obligation of support under a separation agreement may seek an allowance of alimony from the recipient spouse. There is, however, nothing in the husband's complaint, even as amended, or in his brief here, that suggests that the husband was seeking relief of that type.[2]
As the Probate Court was powerless to give the relief sought in the modification complaint, it also was properly dismissed.
Judgments affirmed.
NOTES
[1]  Under present law that action is not cognizable in the Probate Court, see Binder v. Binder, 7 Mass. App. Ct. 751, 760 (1979), although a unified trial may be achieved through the mechanism described in Glick v. Greenleaf, 383 Mass. 290, 295 n. 7 (1981), and Konstantopoulos v. Whately, 384 Mass. 123, 129-130 (1981).
[2]  The successive claims implicit in the Knox v. Remick and Schillander cases could most efficiently be telescoped into a single proceeding if the Legislature were to enlarge the types of postdivorce controversies cognizable in the Probate Courts, see the second paragraph of G.L.c. 215, § 6, as appearing in St. 1975, c. 400, § 55 (which speaks of "controversies over property"), to include exclusive jurisdiction over all controversies, both legal and equitable, concerning spousal or child support.

=== CASE 2213208 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:28.746579+00 ===

406 N.W.2d 123 (1987)
225 Neb. 466
STATE of Nebraska, Appellee,
v.
Thomas A. WILSON, Appellant.
No. 86-777.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
May 22, 1987.
*124 Thomas M. Kenney, Douglas County Public Defender, and Timothy P. Burns, Omaha, for appellant.
Robert M. Spire, Atty. Gen., Lincoln, and Marie C. Pawol, Omaha, for appellee.
KRIVOSHA, C.J., and BOSLAUGH, WHITE, HASTINGS, CAPORALE, SHANAHAN, and GRANT, JJ.
BOSLAUGH, Justice.
The defendant, Thomas A. Wilson, was charged with first degree murder in the shooting death of his son, Robert Paul Wilson, and with use of a firearm in the commission of a felony. He was found guilty of second degree murder and sentenced to imprisonment for 35 years on count I and 6 to 20 years on count II, the sentences to run consecutively. He has appealed and contends the trial court erred (1) in allowing the testimony of Christine Wilson and Joseph Lang, Sr., regarding their knowledge of a Florida robbery; (2) in receiving exhibits 1 through 4; and (3) in receiving exhibit 37 into evidence.
The victim, who was known as Bobby Wilson, died from a single gunshot wound to his chest inflicted while visiting the defendant's Omaha, Nebraska, home on August 31, 1983. The only surviving witnesses to the incident, the defendant and Christine *125 Wilson, the defendant's wife at the time of the shooting, originally reported that Bobby had shot himself following an argument with the defendant. Similar stories were reported in taped statements by the Wilsons the day after the shooting. Following these statements, the police closed the case as a suicide.
In September of 1985, Christine Wilson came forward with a different version of the shooting. According to Christine's testimony at trial, she and the defendant were in bed on August 31, 1983, when Bobby Wilson knocked on the front door. The defendant answered the door and after 5 to 10 minutes, the two men began to argue. The defendant yelled at Bobby, "[H]ow could you do that" and "there were other people that had to be paid and it wasn't right." Bobby responded that "Tommy was too old, he couldn't handle it any more, he couldn't do the job any more."
When Christine walked through the dining room on the way to the bathroom, she saw the two men near the front door in the living room. They stopped arguing as she passed by. After she had returned to the bedroom, Christine heard the two men begin to argue again. Bobby became very angry and stated that he was leaving. Christine heard the front door open and then the defendant, in a conciliatory tone of voice, asked Bobby to stay. Bobby said okay and the door was closed. Then Bobby screamed, "[D]ad, no," and there was a shot fired. Christine ran to the dining room and saw Bobby on his knees leaning against the wall by the front door. Bobby was pleading with his father, who was holding a gun 5 inches from Bobby's head, not to kill him.
Christine began screaming at the defendant not to shoot. The defendant backed away from Bobby, who then began to plead for an ambulance. Christine started toward the telephone, but was ordered to stop by the defendant. The defendant then offered to call an ambulance if Bobby promised to say he had shot himself. Bobby agreed, and an ambulance was summoned. Christine was instructed to say that Bobby had shot himself. By the time the rescue team arrived, Bobby's state of consciousness was confused. Upon his arrival at the hospital emergency room, Bobby stated that he did not wish to die. Rescue efforts were unsuccessful, and Bobby died at 8:54 that evening. Christine testified that on the following day the defendant demonstrated how he had shot Bobby.
Apparently, the argument leading to Bobby's death stemmed from the robbery of a drug dealer in Florida during the summer of 1983, in which the defendant, the victim, and Joseph Lang, Sr., were involved. Lang and the defendant flew to Miami, Florida, that summer, where they met Bobby. According to Christine, the defendant had been hired to rob a drug dealer there. About a week after arriving in Florida, the defendant returned to Omaha alone, stating to Christine that he had come home to rest, but was planning to return to commit the robbery.
Lang and Bobby remained in Florida another 2 or 3 weeks before Bobby individually obtained the sought-after money. After the two men returned to Omaha, Bobby gave Lang $6,000 for himself and an envelope for the defendant. Bobby then left town. Lang delivered the envelope to the defendant the next day. The defendant became angry when he received the envelope because it contained only $6,000. According to Christine, the defendant could not understand how Bobby could "do that to him" when it was his (the defendant's) "deal." Less than a month prior to the shooting, the defendant went to New Hampshire to see Bobby and to "get something resolved or taken care of." While there, the two men physically fought over the share of money the defendant received.
Christine's testimony indicates that her marriage to the defendant began to deteriorate after Bobby's death. By June of 1985, she determined that she must leave the defendant because of the shooting.
After her separation from the defendant, he began to harass and threaten Christine and her family. On one occasion, the defendant came at Christine with a gun, but she was able to defend herself. Following an incident on July 4, 1985, Christine filed *126 for divorce. Three to four weeks after the filing, Christine began seeing the defendant twice weekly for "sexual relations." Christine testified that she was forced to make those visits because of the defendant's death threats against her family and herself. Christine also testified that on several occasions after Bobby's death, the defendant threatened her with statements to the effect that she had better not push him (the defendant) because Bobby had done so and she saw what happened to him. Christine also said the defendant told her that "rats" or "snitches" always die and that she could not testify against him because she was his wife.
Finally, after a threat by the defendant against her father's life, Christine Wilson sought out FBI agent Tom Murphy, to whom she told her story. Eventually she talked with the Omaha police. After making her own taped statement, Christine was asked to have a recording device placed in her purse to record conversations between herself and the defendant.
Christine agreed to carry such a device on December 17, 1985, but the defendant was unusually quiet that day and, according to Christine, hardly talked at all. She agreed to return to the defendant's home on January 2, 1986, with another listening device in her purse. On this occasion the conversation was monitored and recorded by an Omaha police officer in a nearby unmarked car. Four cassette tapes were used to record the conversation. In this conversation the defendant alluded to Bobby's death as Christine said that he frequently had. The defendant was arrested 1 week later on January 9, 1986, and subsequently charged with first degree murder and the use of a firearm to commit a felony.
Trial to a jury began July 8, 1986. At trial, defense counsel objected unsuccessfully to the testimony of Christine Wilson and Joseph Lang, Sr., regarding their knowledge of the Florida robbery, on grounds of relevance and that it related to other crimes, wrongs, or acts.
Defense counsel also objected unsuccessfully to the admission of two portions of exhibits 1 through 4, the tape-recorded conversations between Christine Wilson and the defendant on January 2, 1986. This objection was that the two portions in question related to other crimes, wrongs, or acts and were therefore inadmissible.
Additionally, exhibit 37, photocopies of nine records of complaints received by the Bellevue, Nebraska, police department are said to have been received over the objection of defense counsel. These records indicate complaints were received from Christine Wilson's parents' home between July 4 and 8, 1985. The record of each complaint includes a remarks section which reflects the statements which were made by the complaining party when the call was made.
As to the first assignment of error, the defendant concedes that the testimony regarding the Florida robbery was relevant under Neb.Rev.Stat. § 27-404(2) (Reissue 1985), to show the motive to commit the crimes alleged. Clearly, that was the State's purpose in offering the testimony.
Section 27-404(2) provides:
Evidence of other crimes, wrongs, or acts is not admissible to prove the character of a person in order to show that he or she acted in conformity therewith. It may, however, be admissible for other purposes, such as proof of motive, opportunity, intent, preparation, plan, knowledge, identity, or absence of mistake or accident.
Nevertheless, the defendant contends that Neb.Rev.Stat. § 27-403 (Reissue 1985) required exclusion of the testimony because its probative value was outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice. Specifically, the defendant claims that the evidence was unfairly prejudicial because it showed the defendant was involved in drugs and a robbery.
Section 27-404(2) is subject to the overriding protections of § 27-403. State v. Clancy, 224 Neb. 492, 398 N.W.2d 710 (1987). The latter section provides: "Although relevant, evidence may be excluded if its probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading *127 the jury, or by considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or needless presentation of cumulative evidence." (Emphasis supplied.) § 27-403.
It is within the trial court's discretion to admit or exclude evidence, and such rulings will be upheld on appeal absent an abuse of discretion. State v. Clancy, supra.
As noted in Lincoln Grain v. Coopers & Lybrand, 216 Neb. 433, 345 N.W.2d 300 (1984), most evidence offered by one party to an action is intended to be prejudicial to the opposing party; it is only unfair prejudice with which § 27-403 is concerned. According to Lincoln Grain, supra at 439, 345 N.W.2d at 306, "In the context of § 27-403 such prejudice means a tendency to suggest a decision on an improper basis."
Probative value, on the other hand, "is a relative concept and involves a measurement of the degree to which the evidence persuades the trier of fact that a particular fact exists and the distance of that particular fact from the ultimate issue in the case." State v. Clancy, supra at 498, 398 N.W.2d at 715.
The ultimate issue in this case was the defendant's guilt or innocence of the crimes charged. Proof of motive was critical to the State's case under the circumstances of the shooting. Christine Wilson and the defendant had both originally reported that Bobby's gunshot wound was self-inflicted. There was evidence presented by the defendant to the effect that Bobby and the defendant were close to each other and were thought to have a good relationship prior to the shooting. A neighbor testified that Bobby was the black sheep of the family, who the defendant was always trying to help. There was also testimony, by Bobby's widow on cross-examination, that the defendant was a "soft touch" with money for his grandchildren as well as for Bobby.
Motive is defined as that "which leads or tempts the mind to indulge in a criminal act." State v. Coca, 216 Neb. 76, 82, 341 N.W.2d 606, 610 (1983). Absent evidence of the circumstances leading to the dispute between the victim and the defendant regarding the money obtained in the Florida robbery, there would have been no apparent motive for the defendant to have shot his son.
Further, the testimony relating to the Florida robbery tended to suggest that it was the victim who actually committed the robbery, and not the defendant. In fact, the defendant had departed from Florida at the time of the alleged robbery and mentioned no plans to Lang about returning. Thus, the evidence suggested limited involvement by the defendant and did not warrant a conclusion by the trial court that the jury would improperly base its decision on that involvement in reaching its verdict. The trial court did not abuse its discretion in receiving the testimony. The probative value of the testimony outweighed the danger of unfair prejudice.
Next, the defendant complains that two portions of exhibits 1 through 4, the tape recordings of the January 2, 1986, conversation between the defendant and Christine Wilson, should have been excluded under § 27-404(2).
The prosecution originally offered exhibit 5, a copy of portions of the original tape recording of the January 2 conversation, during the direct examination of Christine Wilson. The exhibit was received into evidence without objection.
On cross-examination, defense counsel questioned Christine Wilson about why she had failed to immediately report that the defendant was responsible for the shooting. The questions suggested that Christine had the opportunity to immediately report the crime without fear of harm from the defendant. Throughout this line of questioning, Christine maintained that she did not immediately come forward because she feared the defendant would kill her. She also indicated that she had thought incarceration of the defendant would provide no protection because she believed he had "big connections" all over the country.
During further cross-examination, defense counsel offered exhibits 34 and 35, which are copies of the entire January 2 *128 conversation with the exception of two deleted portions, which portions were among those deleted in exhibit 5.
The first deleted portion involved the defendant mentioning that he had been contacted to come to Casper, Wyoming, to talk to "Kirkland." During the discussion, Christine asked the defendant, "What's he want you to do, bump those guys off or somethin'?" The defendant responded that he did not know.
In the second deleted portion, the defendant indicated that he had been contacted by someone named Charlie to "torch" the Capitol Bar. The defendant also indicated that he refused to do it because he had not been offered any money.
The State objected to the offer of exhibits 34 and 35 on grounds that the two portions should not be deleted because they were part of the entire conversation and were relevant to show Christine Wilson's basis for fearing the defendant.
The court ultimately determined that the tapes (exhibits 1 through 4) were admissible in their entirety. The State was granted leave to reopen direct examination of Christine Wilson, and upon doing so, offered exhibits 1 through 4 over defense counsel's objections that the two portions in question were inadmissible pursuant to § 27-404(2).
Section 27-404(2) is an inclusionary rule which permits "the use of relevant other crimes, wrongs, or acts ... if such is relevant for any purpose other than to show defendant's propensity or disposition to commit the crime charged" (Emphasis supplied.) State v. Kern, 224 Neb. 177, 185, 397 N.W.2d 23, 29 (1986).
In State v. Hitt, 207 Neb. 746, 301 N.W.2d 96 (1981), this court concluded that evidence of other assaults on the victim and his brother were admissible under § 27-404(2) in a prosecution for first degree sexual assault. Specifically, the court concluded the evidence was admissible because it was offered to corroborate testimony that the boys feared the defendant and because it also explained their failure to make a prompt complaint.
The evidence in the present case was relevant for purposes similar to those in Hitt, supra. Clearly, a material issue in this case related to why Christine Wilson failed to promptly report that the defendant was responsible for the shooting. According to her testimony, she did not come forward at an earlier time because she feared retaliation by the defendant or others with whom he had connections. Thus, exhibits 1 through 4 were relevant to corroborate Christine Wilson's testimony concerning her fear of coming forward with the truth about the shooting.
Further, the trial court did not abuse its discretion in admitting this evidence because of the danger of unfair prejudice. The evidence in question involved talk by the defendant of being asked to commit or become involved in certain unlawful activities. While the conversations suggested that he had connections with persons who might ask him to commit criminal acts, it did not show that the defendant agreed to participate in them. On the other hand, the evidence did suggest that the defendant had connections with persons involved in criminal activity, as claimed by Christine Wilson. As previously stated, this evidence supported the testimony of Christine Wilson regarding her hesitation to come forward.
Finally, the defendant maintains the trial court committed reversible error in receiving exhibit 37 into evidence. Exhibit 37 consists of three photocopied pages reflecting nine complaint reports recorded by the Bellevue Police Department between July 4 and 8, 1985. Information in these reports includes the address, date, and time of the complaint; the police unit dispatched; a code reflecting how the complaint was made; a code indicating the type of call; a number representing the person receiving the call; the district of the call; a disposition code; a case number; the name, address, and telephone number of the complaining party; and a remarks section reflecting statements made by the complaining party.
The record does not show that exhibit 37 was actually received in evidence, although *129 it is included in a volume of exhibits in the bill of exceptions. Instead, some of the information appearing in the reports was elicited through the testimony of Gary Fliehmann, the chief of communications of the Bellevue Police Department and the person ultimately in control of the filing of the complaint reports. Fliehmann specifically testified to the dates and times of the complaints and that they all involved 1114 Grandview. Defense counsel indicated that he had no objection to the receipt of this information. He did object on hearsay grounds to questions regarding who lived at 1114 Grandview and who made the complaints. These objections were overruled. On previous cross-examination, Christine Wilson testified that her parents lived at the address in question.
The defendant maintains that exhibit 37 amounts to hearsay within hearsay and should have been excluded because there was no showing that each level of hearsay was admissible under an exception to the rule. There is no merit to this argument, even assuming that exhibit 37 was received into evidence.
Neb.Rev.Stat. § 27-802 (Reissue 1985) provides that "[h]earsay is not admissible except as provided by these rules or by other rules adopted by the statutes of the State of Nebraska." Hearsay is defined as "a statement, other than one made by the declarant while testifying at trial or hearing, offered in evidence to prove the truth of the matter asserted." Neb.Rev.Stat. § 27-801(3) (Reissue 1985). Included within the definition of a statement for hearsay purposes are oral or written assertions. § 27-801(1)(a).
Neb.Rev.Stat. § 27-805 (Reissue 1985) provides: "Hearsay included within hearsay is not excluded under the hearsay rule if each part of the combined statements conforms with an exception to the hearsay rule proved in these rules."
The defendant contends that exhibit 37 includes both oral and written assertions which amount to hearsay. Specifically, he argues that the written assertions are the written records themselves and the oral statements are the statements contained on the records, i.e., information provided by the complaining parties.
Although the record fails to show that exhibit 37 was received, the State did offer it into evidence at one point. The defendant objected on hearsay grounds, to which the State responded that the exhibit was not being offered to prove the truth of any message received. Instead, the State maintained it was offered merely to show complaints were received. The State's position was supported by testimony from Gary Fliehmann on direct examination:
Q. The truthfulness or the untruthfulness of the complaint of the party that is recorded on those cards, you have no way of knowing?
A. No. We just take the information that they give us.
Q. And their complaint?
A. That's right.
Christine Wilson's credibility was critical to the State's case. In her testimony previous to the offer of exhibit 37, she testified that she and her family were harassed by the defendant on the 4th of July, 1985, and that the harassment escalated after that date. These events ultimately led her to contact law enforcement officials about the defendant's involvement in the shooting because she feared he might kill someone else. She also testified that because of the harassment "we had the police, Bellevue Police Department, over 20 times a day." At the time of the complaints, Christine Wilson was living with her parents.
The oral assertions complained of in exhibit 37, i.e., the remarks noted in the remarks section and the parties' names, were not offered to prove the truth of any matter therein asserted. As such, they were not hearsay statements. Instead, they were offered to show that complaints were received from persons claiming disturbances at 1114 Grandview during time periods relevant to this case. The evidence tended to corroborate Christine Wilson's testimony that complaints were made regarding the defendant during the relevant time period.
*130 Any argument as to the admissibility of Gary Fliehmann's testimony regarding the times, dates, or addresses of the complaints, or as to the names given by the complaining parties, is similarly resolved. That evidence was also offered to show that complaints were received and not to prove the truth of the information received.
The "written assertions" or written records themselves were admissible under the business records exception to the hearsay rule. Neb.Rev.Stat. § 27-803(5) (Reissue 1985). The foundational requirements for admitting a document under this section are: "First, the activity recorded must be a type which regularly occurs in the course of the business' day-to-day activity. Second, the record must have been made... at or near the time of the event recorded. Third, the record must be authenticated by a custodian or other qualified witness." Crowder v. Aurora Co-op Elev. Co., 223 Neb. 704, 715, 393 N.W.2d 250, 258 (1986) (quoting Chalupa v. Hartford Fire Ins. Co., 217 Neb. 662, 350 N.W.2d 541 (1984)).
Since these foundational requirements were satisfied by Gary Fliehmann's testimony, the trial court would not have committed an abuse of discretion in admitting exhibit 37.
There being no error, the judgment is affirmed.
AFFIRMED.

=== CASE 2213210 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:28.78147+00 ===

15 Cal.App.2d 129 (1936)
HUGO FROEHNERT, Appellant,
v.
J. W. HEIDT, Respondent.
Civ. No. 10135.
California Court of Appeals. First Appellate District, Division Two.
July 1, 1936.
Hubbard & Hubbard for Appellant.
Charles V. Barfield for Respondent. *130
Nourse, P. J.
Plaintiff appeals from a judgment of nonsuit entered upon the ground that his evidence made out a case of contributory negligence as a matter of law. The cause was tried before a jury, and the motion was granted at the close of plaintiff's case. The facts are fairly stated in appellant's opening brief as follows:
"Fruitvale Avenue, a two way street about forty-five feet wide, in Oakland, runs north and south. Elmwood Avenue intersects Fruitvale Avenue at approximately right angles, but not in a continuous line. In other words, Elmwood 'jogs' at its intersection with Fruitvale. As Elmwood proceeds east from Fruitvale, its northerly curb line is about even with the southerly edge of Elmwood to the west of Fruitvale, there being no curb lines or sidewalks on Elmwood west of Fruitvale."
"About 11:00 P. M. on May 26, 1935, plaintiff started westerly across Fruitvale Avenue, leaving the easterly curb of Fruitvale at a point even with the northerly side of Elmwood as that avenue runs west from Fruitvale. There were no marked crosswalks across Fruitvale at that time. When plaintiff reached a point near the center of Fruitvale, he stopped to permit a line of five or six southbound automobiles to pass in front of him. He stood in that place while three or four of those cars passed, when he saw defendant's car, about 60 to 80 feet north of him, pull to its left out of this line of traffic and start to pass the cars in front of it. Defendant's car was traveling directly towards plaintiff, who could not proceed westerly because of passing cars. In order to avoid injury to himself, plaintiff tried to return to the easterly curb of Fruitvale, but was struck and injured by the right end of defendant's front bumper when plaintiff was about eight feet from said easterly curb."
Defendant's negligence must be conceded because his breach of duty in attempting to pass the other cars at the intersection was in direct violation of the Vehicle Act, and was, therefore, negligence as a matter of law. [1] Plaintiff was attempting to cross the street in a legal manner and at a proper place; nothing that he did could be said as a matter of law to have been negligence. If he did any act which he should not have done or failed to do anything which he should have done, it was a question for the jury to determine whether he acted as a reasonable person under all *131 the circumstances. If he took what, at the moment, seemed to him to be the most reasonable method of saving himself from injury, but, if some other method not here suggested might have been more feasible, it is still a question of what a reasonable person should have done.
The case presents the same situation as was before the Supreme Court in McQuigg v. Childs, 213 Cal. 661 [3 PaCal.2d 309],--a case "when an honest difference of opinion between men of average intelligence arises as to the effect of the evidence"--it is not a case in which "reasonable men can draw but the one inference of contributory negligence". (Gibb v. Cleave, 12 Cal.App.2d 468 [55 PaCal.2d 938].) For this reason the issue was one to have been left with the jury.
The judgment is reversed.
Sturtevant, J., and Spence, J., concurred.

=== CASE 3784371 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2016-07-06 07:34:05.551284+00 ===

The single question presented is whether the relator's proposal was accompanied by a bond in compliance with the law. If it was, concededly the commission was required to consider the proposal. If not, the commission was right in refusing to consider it, and of course action in mandamus would not lie. The action and attitude of the commission in the premises is based upon the provisions of Section 2319, General Code, the pertinent portions of which are as follows: "On the day and at the place named in the notice, such owner shall open the proposals, and shall publicly, with the assistance of the architect, or engineer, immediately proceed to tabulate the bids upon triplicate sheets, one of which shall be filed with the auditor of state. A proposal shall be invalid and not considered unless a bond, in the form approved by the state building commission, with sufficient sureties, in a sum equal to the total sum of the proposal, is filed with such *Page 73
proposal, nor unless such proposal and bond are filed in one sealed envelope. After investigation which shall be completed within thirty days, the contract shall be awarded by such owner to the lowest bidder, or bidders."
The contention of the relator with reference to this statutory provision is twofold: First, that it is no longer in effect, it having been repealed by implication; and, second, if it has not been repealed and still is in effect, the commission was authorized to, and in the exercise of its discretion should, waive the provision of said section that the bond accompanying the proposal be "in a sum equal to the total sum of the proposal."
The creation of the state office building commission was provided for and its powers and duties prescribed by an act passed March 14, 1929 (113 Ohio Laws, 57). This act amended "An act providing for the creation of a state building commission," passed April 17, 1925 (111 Ohio Laws, 475), but in no wise altered, amended, or repealed Section 7 of that act, which, among other things, provided that "The construction of such building shall be governed by the provisions of Sections 2314 to 2332 of the General Code, relative to the erection of state buildings," etc. Sections 2314 to 2332, General Code, relate to the procedure for the construction or alteration or improvement of a state building, the aggregate cost of which exceeds $3,000.
The relator contends that Sections 2314 to 2330, General Code, were repealed by implication by the enactment of Sections 2365-1 and 2365-2, General Code. Sections 2314 to 2320, General Code, were a part of an act passed March 20, 1917, "relating to *Page 74
the construction, alteration and improvement of state buildings and public works, and the installation of equipment therefor." 107 Ohio Laws, 453. Sections 2365-1 and 2365-2, General Code, were enacted on the very next day, March 21, 1917. They were Sections 1 and 2 of "An act to protect persons performing labor and furnishing materials for the construction and repair of public works." 107 Ohio Laws, 642.
It is to be observed that the provisions of Sections 2314 to 2330, General Code, are special and limited in character; whereas, Sections 2365-1 and 2365-2, General Code, have general application to public buildings, regardless of the amount involved, and relate not only to state, but also to county, city, village, township, and school buildings. The purpose of the enactment of the latter sections is clearly indicated in the title of the act. The rule is familiar and elementary that repeals by implication are not favored, and the presumption obtains that the Legislature in passing a statute did not intend to interfere with or abrogate any former law relating to the same matter unless the repugnancy between the two is irreconcilable. "The presumption is stronger against implied repeals where provisions supposed to conflict are in the same act or were passed at nearly the same time." 1 Lewis' Sutherland Statutory Construction (2d Ed.), Section 268.
We cannot support the further contention of counsel for the relator that the statutes in question were repealed by implication by virtue of the enactment of the Administrative Code in 1921 (109 Ohio Laws, 105), for the effect thereof was not to change the method of procedure in relation to the matters *Page 75
involved, but only to transfer the rights, powers, and duties to another department therein designated, and the provisions of Sections 2314 to 2330, General Code, continued in force and were controlling in the particular matters and proceedings to which they specifically related. The legislative intent with reference to a continuation of said statutes in force is manifested by reference thereto in subsequent legislation. The appropriation act passed subsequent to, but during the same session as, the passage of the Administrative Code, above referred to, makes specific reference to said sections as being in force, and similar reference is made in acts passed by the Legislature in the two subsequent sessions thereof, which appear in 110 Ohio Laws, 150, and 111 Ohio Laws, 477. The sections in question not being incompatible or irreconcilable, it cannot be held that the former had been impliedly repealed by the enactment of the latter.
The relator further urges that if Section 2319 has not been repealed, and is in full force, the commission was authorized to and should have waived the provision in question, and having refused should be compelled to do so by mandamus. If it be assumed that a discretion was lodged in the commission, it is elementary that the court will not attempt to control that discretion by mandamus. However, it cannot be concluded that the provision in question is directory. The language employed is clearly mandatory. The provision reads: "A proposal shall be invalid and not considered unless a bond, in the form approved by the state building commission, with sufficient sureties, in a sum equal to the total sum of the proposal, is filed with such proposal, nor *Page 76
unless such proposal and bond are filed in one sealed envelope."
No language could be more mandatory in character. Upon the facts set forth in the petition, the commission was precluded by the clear and positive terms of the statute from considering the proposal of the relator. The demurrer to the answer searches the record, and as the petition does not state a cause of action it is dismissed and a writ denied.
Writ denied.
MARSHALL, C.J., KINKADE, ROBINSON, JONES, DAY and ALLEN, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9738040 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:41:17.21518+00 ===

MILLER, Presiding Judge.
Thomas R. Stewart, who has tested positive for the AIDS virus, appeals the termination of his parental visitation rights with his two year old daughter, Kara Stewart. The issues raised on appeal include:
1. Whether the trial court abused its discretion in terminating Thomas' parental visitation rights on the basis that he presented a physical danger to Kara;
2. Whether the trial court abused its discretion in denying Thomas' due process rights by refusing to permit Thomas to present certain witnesses on his behalf; and
8. Whether Thomas was denied the opportunity to present his case in a fair and impartial forum.
Based on a thorough review of the record and pertinent case law, we conclude: (1) that the trial court's decision to deny Thomas' emergency petition for change of custody should be affirmed, and (2) that Thomas' visitation rights were improperly terminated.
On September 6, 1985, Thomas petitioned for the dissolution of his marriage to Debra Stewart. On December 6, 1985, a "Decree for Dissolution of Marriage" was entered. Debra was awarded custody of Kara, who had been born on October 831, 1984. At the time of the dissolution, Debra resided in California and Thomas in Indiana. As a result, the dissolution decree provided that Thomas was to have reasonable visitation with Kara which was defined as being not less than two months of visitation during the summer while Debra lived outside the State of Indiana,. If Debra moved back to Indiana, visitation was to be on alternate weekends and alternate holidays.
On October 9, 1986, while Debra was in Indiana, Thomas filed a "Verified Petition for Emergency Temporary Custody and Contempt," alleging that Debra had refused to let Thomas exercise his visitation rights. It also asserted that Kara was not receiving adequate nourishment and was being given alcohol and narcotics, and an extreme emergency existed with regard to Kara's physical, mental and emotional condition. As a result of the petition, the trial court issued an order forbidding Debra to leave the jurisdiction. Debra denied all the allegations and filed a "Verified Petition for Modification of Custody and Contempt," alleging that Thomas had failed to make timely child support payments. She further claimed that Thomas led a homosexual lifestyle, was infected with the AIDS virus, lived in substandard housing with ten other occupants and lived in a household in which there was violence. Debra also asserted that the two month summer visitation out of her presence would upset two year old Kara, who had never been out of her mother's care.
On October 24, 1986, a hearing was held to consider the pending petitions. The parties agreed that, although Thomas would proceed first, the testimony of the witnesses could be considered in determining both petitions. Thomas' witnesses were himself, two doctors (whose testimony will be discussed later), his former wife Debra and his niece, Sandra Cole (also Debra's cousin). Thomas testified that he had a good home environment. He lived with his parents and sister and her three children in a 1,250 square foot, three bedroom, two-story home in a residential area. The home had all modern appliances. Thomas was self-employed in the excavating business. Since the divoree-granted less than a year before the hearing-Thomas fell behind 36 weeks in his support payments. He made a lump sum payment and was current at the time of the hearing. He based his contention that emergency custody was necessary solely on telephone conversations with Debra. He claimed that in the conversations Debra admitted that she was using drugs and alcohol and stated that she gave Kara beer, which she didn't consider harmful, and that on one occasion the child accidentally ate half a marijuana cigarette. Debra, on the other hand, denied making these statements to Thomas. She stated that, although she had suffered drug and alcohol problems in the past, she was not a *959current user. Thomas' niece, Sandra Cole, testified that she visited Debra in California for one day and in the evening, at a dinner party with six guests present, she observed the consumption of alcoholic beverages. She stated that she thought there was an unspecified drug present. She did not testify that Debra mistreated the child in her presence. At this point, Thomas represented to the court that his next witness, his father Fred Stewart, would corroborate the telephone conversation in which Debra allegedly stated that: (1) she gave Kara beer, and (2) Kara had accidentally eaten half a marijuana cigarette. However, the court did not permit Fred Stewart to testify, stating that, even assuming he would corroborate Thomas' testimony, the evidence was clearly insufficient to support the granting of an emergency petition for change of custody. The court then proceeded, apparently based upon the testimony of Thomas' witnesses, to find in favor of Debra's motion for modification, although Debra did not request total termination of Thomas' visitation. The court commented that Thomas had proven that he had AIDS and, under those circumstances, "even if there was a one percent chance that this child is going to contract it from him, I'm not going to expose her to it," and proceeded to terminate his visitation rights because of physical danger to the child1 He further authorized the mother to return with the child to California. This appeal followed.
Thomas first argues that the trial court erred in not permitting his father to testify and corroborate his testimony. We agree. Of course, the parties should be permitted to present their witnesses in order to establish their case. This right can be abused, for instance, by presenting a number of witnesses with cumulative evidence. This was not the case here. But, while on the one hand we agree with Thomas' assertion of error, on the other hand we believe the error here to be harmless for several reasons. First, the evidence of emergency based on Debra's inadequacy as a parent was skimpy and supported for the most part by self-serving testimony by Thomas. There was no substantial testimony by anyone that they had direct contact with Debra in California and were familiar with her life style and the manner in which Kara was being raised. Further, the court was aware of Fred Stewart's potential testimony and indicated that Stewart's testimony would not affect the court's decision. Therefore, we conclude that the error committed by the trial court was harmless and, since the evidence was conflicting, we must affirm the trial court's decision to deny Thomas' emergency petition for custody.
The key issue in this case is whether the trial court abused its discretion in terminating Thomas' visitation rights with Kara.2 Visitation by non-custo- , *960dial parents is provided for by IND.CODE 81-1-11.5-24 (Supp.1987), which states in part:
(a) A parent not granted custody of the child is entitled to reasonable visitation rights unless the court finds, after a hearing, that visitation by the parent might endanger the child's physical health or significantly impair his emotional development.
(b) The court may modify an order granting or denying visitation rights whenever modification would serve the best interests of the child, but the court shall not restrict a parent's visitation rights unless it finds that the visitation might endanger the child's physical health or significantly impair his emotional development.3
Indiana has long recognized that the right of parents to visit their children is "a sacred and precious privilege" which should be enjoyed by non-custodial parents. Partridge v. Partridge, (1971) 257 Ind. 81, 272 N.E.2d 448, 450. However, the right of visitation is subordinated to the best interests of the child. Thus, under IND.CODE 31-1-11.5-24(a) and (b), visitation may be denied or restricted only if the trial court finds that visitation might endanger the child's physical health or significantly impair his emotional development.
*961The degree of proof required in actions involving the termination of a parental right was discussed in Santosky v. Kramer (1982), 455 U.S. 745, 102 S.Ct. 1388, 71 L.Ed.2d 599. In Somtosky, the natural parent's rights to visit, communicate with, or regain custody of the child were being permanently terminated pursuant to New York's permanent neglect statute. The state court determined that these parental rights could be permanently terminated if the state proved its allegations of neglect by a "fair preponderance of the evidence." The Supreme Court held that the state could not completely and irrevocably terminate the rights of parents unless the state supported its allegations with evidence that was at least clear and convine-ing.4 In reaching this conclusion, the court examined and balanced three factors-the private interests affected by the proceeding; the risk of error created by the State's chosen procedure; and the countervailing governmental procedure-and stated, "Whether the loss threatened by a particular type of proceeding is sufficiently grave to warrant more than average certainty on the part of the factfinder turns on both the nature of the private interest threatened and the permanency of the threatened loss." Santosky, supra, 455 U.S. at 754, 102 S.Ct. at 1395-97. An examination of these factors leads us to conclude that, unlike Santosky, the present case does not involve a total irrevocable termination of parental rights. Rather, only the right of visitation has been terminated. While there is authority using the clear and convincing test where less than all parental rights are terminated,5 we observe our supreme court has very recently held that where parental rights are being terminated, and the termination is revocable, the preponderance of the evidence standard is appropriate. In re Guardianship of Thompson (1987), Ind., 514 N.E.2d 618.
In Thompson, the court determined that a guardianship could be established for a child whose adoptive parents lived in Texas. The Texas couple, immediately after adopting the child, consented to the adoption of the child by an Indiana couple and permitted the child to be taken to Indiana pending the adoption. When the Indiana couple immediately thereafter filed its adoption petition, the Texas couple withdrew their consent and requested the child be returned to them in Texas. The trial judge denied the adoption petition because *962consent had been withdrawn but permitted the case to remain open pending further possible action. Then the Indiana couple filed a petition to be appointed guardians of the child which, after an evidentiary hearing, was granted. The creation of the guardianship, affirmed by our supreme court, essentially acted as a termination of the Texas couple's parental rights until the issue of adoption by the Indiana couple was ultimately resolved. In affirming, our supreme court did not specifically state the standard of proof applied, but a review of its decision leads to the conclusion that the court utilized a preponderance of the evidence test. The evidence in Thompson was conflicting in several areas, including the fitness of the Texas couple as parents. However, the evidence favorable to the Texas couple showed that the Texas Welfare Department, only months before the Indiana proceeding, had conducted a thorough investigation of the couple and found them to be fit parents. It is notable that the Texas couple had two children of their own who continued to live with them throughout this proceeding. There was evidence that the Texas couple was acting under a great deal of stress at the time they consented to the adoption by the Indiana couple-evidence which was corroborated by their Texas attorney who was also an in-law of the Indiana couple. On the other hand, the supreme court cited evidence before the trial court from which the court could have found the Texas couple was not acting in the best interests of the child 6 and concluded "[t}here were conflicts in all of these facts but the conflicts were before the trial court for resolution." Id. at 621. We must conclude from the result in Thompson that clear and convine-ing evidence was not required in order for the trial court to establish the guardianship which, in effect, deprived the Texas couple of all their parental rights for a temporary, but indefinite, period of time. The case before us presents an analogous situation. Here, while the loss of visitation is the loss of a significant parental right, it is not necessarily a permanent loss. A future change in condition could remove the basis for termination of visitation. Thus, we conclude the TRhompson opinion would indicate that the burden of proof required in this case is a "preponderance of the evidence."
The case before us is also distinguishable from Santosky in that it involves a dispute between two parents as to visitation. It does not present a situation in which the state, of its own volition, is seeking to terminate a parental right on the basis of neglect. The private interests involved in the termination of parental visitation include the non-custodial parent's right to maintain contact with the child, the custodial parent's right to protect the child and the child's interest in maintaining contact with both parents. The state's interest is to ensure that the health and welfare of the child are protected. Unlike its role in a neglect termination proceeding, the state's role in the present proceeding does not require it to prove that the parents are unfit. Rather, the Indiana visitation statute requires the party filing the petition for modification to prove that the non-custodial parent presents a physical or mental danger to the child before the non-custodial parent's visitation rights can be curtailed or terminated. IND.CODE 31-1-11.5-24 *963states that the non-custodial parent "is entitled to reasonable visitation." This language gives rise to the presumption that visitation will be in the child's best interest unless it is shown that the parent "might endanger the child's physical health or impair his emotional development." Thus, the presumption favoring visitation is re-buttable and unless it is rebutted, the noncustodial parent is entitled to visitation. In this context, the burden of proof establishes the level of proof required to rebut the presumption. It is the custodial parent or petitioner's responsibility to rebut that presumption. Thus, the role of the state is completely different than in a proceeding in which the state seeks to permanently terminate parental rights on the basis of neglect.
Further, under Indiana law, a party may obtain a modification of visitation so long as evidence is presented which shows a change in cireumstances since the last visitation order was entered. See State ex rel. Jemiolo v. LaPorte Circuit Court (1982), Ind., 442 N.E.2d 1060, 1062. Thus, a termination of visitation is not permanent nor does it necessarily prohibit the parent from maintaining contact with the child through correspondence, telephone calls or other methods. We are aware that physical visitation is more satisfying and more meaningful but it must be acknowledged that contact with the child is not completely and irrevocably terminated when visitation is denied.7 Because the private interest at stake, although great, is not permanently terminated and the state is not the initiator of the termination, we conclude the decision in Thompson is controlling here and, therefore, the party seeking termination is obligated to prove its case only by a preponderance of the evidence. In the present case, this burden was not met.
On appeal, we will reverse a judgment concerning non-custodial parent visitation upon a showing of a manifest abuse of the trial judge's discretion. An abuse of discretion occurs when the trial court's decision is "clearly against the logic and effect of the facts and circumstances before the court, or the reasonable, probable, and actual deductions to be drawn therefrom." Carter v. Dec (1985), Ind.App., 480 N.E.2d 564, 566 (quoting K.B. v. S.B. (1981), Ind.App., 415 N.E.2d 749, 755). In conducting our review, we will neither reweigh the evidence nor judge the credibility of the witnesses. Corter, supra at 566.
In the present case, the medical evidence presented at the hearing on the parties' motions consisted of testimony by Dr. Robert Baker, Thomas' personal physician, and Dr. Charles Barrett, an epidemiologist employed by the Indiana State Board of Health in the area of Chronic and Communicable Disease Control. Dr. Baker stated that Thomas came to him after testing positive for the Human Immunodeficiency Virus. Dr. Baker is board certified in infectious diseases and has treated multiple patients for the virus over the past four to five years. Dr. Baker ran a complete blood count and a test on Thomas' immune system. These tests were essentially normal. Although Thomas does not have AIDS, Dr. Baker indicated that Thomas was "potentially contagious to people who would be transfused with his blood or people he would have sexual intercourse with." (R. 139) When asked if Thomas could infect anyone in his family by everyday household contact, Dr. Baker replied, "there have been no reported cases of that occurring in all the people who've had infection with this virus in households. That has not been, that has not occurred." (R. 140) On cross-examination, Dr. Baker was asked if it were possible for Thomas to pass the virus if he cut his finger while extracting one of Kara's baby teeth. Dr. Baker replied that it would be possible. Dr. Baker was not asked about the probability of AIDS being transmitted under those circumstances.
Dr. Barrett's testimony was similar to Dr. Baker's. Dr. Barrett is an epidemiolo*964gist and had previously testified in the Ryan White school admission case. Dr. Barrett had also worked with the AIDS program at the State Board of Health. In fact, Dr. Barrett was the director of the division which carried out most of the State Board of Health's work in the area of AIDS. During the direct examination of Dr. Barrett, the following exchange occurred:
Q. If a man had AIDS, he actually had the disease AIDS, would a two year old child, living with him in the same household, be susceptible to that virus also, just by living in that household?
A. Would the child be susceptible to it, or ...?
Q. Yes. What are the chances of that two year old ...
A. _._ That _..
Q. ... getting the ..
A. __ that transmission of the virus might occur, which is a little different than being susceptible, but the evidence I would say is quite to the contrary now. There have been a number of studies done even a year or so ago, there were nine studies already being reported, which involved more than three hundred household contacts of approximately a hundred AIDS cases and these studies subsequently have been enlarged upon, the studies, themselves, have enrolled more individuals, there've been additional studies done and none of these household contacts involved in any of these studies have become infected. And of course, you don't have to wait to see if they're gonna develop AIDS because of the antibody test that we were talking about earlier. A person who becomes infected with HIV will generally become positive for the antibody within a period of about three weeks to three months, and so these individuals have been followed very closely with antibody testing to see if they might sero-convert, that is develop, the antibody themselves, and they have not.
Q. Okay. Doctor, you're speaking of someone that actually had AIDS, is that true?
A. That is correct.
Q. Okay, if a person were to not have AIDS, but have the antibody present, does that lessen the chances of being contagious to someone else in the household?
A. Well, we have to assume that a person who is positive for the antibody is infected with the virus and would have the virus present in their blood, at least at that time and would be capable, under the right circumstances, of transmitting the virus to someone else.
Q. Okay, Doctor, have there been any reported cases of transmission of the disease through blood, which was not, through blood, in any cases which weren't involving hypodermic needles or blood transfusions, for instance, cuts or scrapes?
A. There've been no cases documented as occurring through that manner, the transmission modes are via the sharing of hypodermic needles, via blood transfusions and blood products, which are given hemophiliacs, for example, and result in the infection.
(R. 158-55) When asked on cross-examination whether it would be possible for a parent to infect a child while extracting the child's tooth, Dr. Barrett replied: "I think we would have to say that there would be a theoretical possibility ... of such a direct mode, yes." (R. 158) Dr. Barrett was not questioned regarding the probability of such a transmission.
No other medical evidence or testimony was presented by either party. The only other evidence presented related to the living conditions and lifestyles of both parents. An examination of the evidence leads to but one conclusion: the medical evidence and studies available at the time of trial showed that AIDS is not transmitted through everyday household contact. The only evidence to the contrary was the doc*965tors' agreement that there was a theoretical possibility that transmission could occur during the extraction of a tooth. However, as previously noted, the doctors were not asked the probability of such an occurrence, especially in light of the fact that under the existing visitation order Thomas would have Kara only two months out of the year.
Even if the evidence of Thomas' living conditions, lifestyle and infection with the virus supported a modification of some type, it did not support a complete termination of his visitation rights. See eg., Annot., 86 A.L.R.4th 986 (discussing the imposition of visitation restrictions based on a parent's homosexual or lesbian lifestyle). Notably, Debra did not request complete termination of visitation. Rather, the trial court, after hearing Thomas' case, inaccurately stated, "[wlhat you have proved is that Mr. Stewart has AIDS, and even if, even if there's a one percent chance that this child is going to contract it from him, I'm not going to expose her to it." (R. 198) In light of the medical evidence presented, the complete termination of visitation was an extreme and unwarranted action. When courts are confronted with new situations and problems regarding visitation, they must be sure that the action taken corresponds to the danger presented. Many parents suffer from varying degrees of handicaps and illnesses. Yet those parents cannot be deprived of all visitation with their children merely because some danger exists. The level of danger must be examined and appropriate precautions taken.8 Only in this way can both the parent's visitation rights and the child's health and welfare be fairly and fully protected. This was not done in the present case.
Finally, we can find only one reported case dealing with the termination of visitation of a parent infected with AIDS.9 In "Jane" W. v. "John" W. (1987), N.Y.Sup.Ct., 137 Misc.2d 24, 519 N.Y.S.2d 603, the trial court held that the father was not precluded from visiting pendente lite with his one and one-half year old daughter because he was diagnosed as having AIDS. The father was then employed as a health care worker at a hospital and was aware of the precautions which must be taken to avoid the spread of AIDS. The court heard the medical testimony of Dr. Jeffrey Vieira, the Chief of Infectious Diseases at Brooklyn-Caledonia Hospital and a teacher at Downstate Medical School. The court described his testimony as follows:
Dr. Vieira testified about the nature of AIDS. It is transmitted through direct mixing of bodily fluids. He explained that the known methods of transmittal are sexual contact, the sharing of needles among intravenous drug abusers and the transfusion of blood (though this last method has been drastically reduced with the discovery of a blood test for the disease). Another possible transmission method is through breast milk. The doe-tor explained that theoretical transmission routes are through saliva, bite wounds, sharing a handkerchief or tissues and the sharing of dining utensils (Le. a glass or a fork) though he noted that there are not any known transmissions through these methods. He also referred to an ongoing study being conducted by Montifiore Medical Center which has followed 50 families in which one member had AIDS. The study has found that there has been no transmission of the AIDS virus within the close contact of familial groupings.
*966Defendant is Dr. Vieira's patient. Dr. Vieira has seen defendant at least every three weeks since the summer of 1986. Since January of this year he has seen defendant more often than that.
Dr. Vieira testified that upon his release in December of 1986, defendant was in a good emotional state. He was anxious but this was reasonable given the AIDS diagnosis. Defendant is presently taking the drug AZT, which appears to inhibit the progress of the disease. The drug may also suppress the likelihood of transmitting the virus. Defendant is tolerating the drug well. Defendant was given medical approval to return to his health care work. Dr. Vieira, as a final analysis determined that defendant is a responsible, reasonable person who knows the nature of the disease which afflicts him. Defendant is also aware of the precautions which must be taken to avoid its spread (i.e. avoid sexual contact or have 'safe sex,' avoid kissing in which a large amount of saliva would pass, do not share utensils which have been immediately used, do not share tooth brushes or razors, and clean spills of urine or other bodily secretions with bleach).
519 N.Y.S.2d at 604. Relying primarily on the testimony of Dr. Vieira, the trial court held:
... [tlhat the issues of the defendant having AIDS and the possible transmittal of the AIDS virus should play little if any role in determining this pendente lite application for visitation.
519 N.Y.S.2d at 605. Further, the court noted that the father had training in pediatric care and therefore ordered unsupervised visitation one day a week from 10:00 am. until 6:00 p.m.
The medical testimony in 'YJone" W. is similar to the testimony in the case before us. "Jane" W. supports our conclusion that the court was in error when it cut off Thomas' visitation rights.
Finally, Thomas asserts that he was denied a fair and impartial forum because the judge was prejudiced against anyone infected with AIDS. In the argument seetion of his brief, he calls to our attention only one specific comment by the judge, which we have quoted earlier and which occurred when the judge cut off his visitation rights. We have found that the judge's decision in this regard was erroneous. We have no reason to believe that on remand the trial court will not follow our direction and, absent any further evidence establishing that Thomas is unfit, will grant appropriate visitation to Thomas.
The decision of the trial court to deny Thomas' emergency petition for change of custody is affirmed. The case is reversed and remanded for the following purposes: (1) to hear further evidence on Debra's petition for modification of visitation; (2) to hear any further medical evidence by either party with respect to current information on AIDS; and (8) to fashion a visitation order based upon the evidence presented to the court, which visitation order shall not preclude visitation to Thomas solely on the basis that he is infected with the AIDS virus.
SULLIVAN, J., concurs.
CONOVER, J., dissents with separate opinion.
. At the hearing, the trial court actually stated that it was terminating Thomas' parental rights. This statement, however, was clarified by the trial court's docket entry which limited the termination to visitation rights.
, Thomas, Debra and the amicus curiae (Indiana Civil Liberties Union) all have submitted appendices with their briefs. The materials contained in the appendices vary but basically fall into three categories: cases, medical articles mentioned by the expert witnesses at trial and medical articles not mentioned by the experts at trial,. None of the materials was introduced as evidence at trial. While there is no dispute that the cases are subject to consideration, there is a question concerning the medical literature. Debra takes the position that we may not consider any of the medical literature presented in the appendices while Thomas suggests we may take judicial notice of the materials and consider them in reaching our decision or may consider the materials because of the important public issue involved. Judicial notice may be taken of medical facts that are not subject to reasonable dispute. Hardy v. Johns-Manville Sales Corp. (1982), 5th Cir., 681 F.2d 334, 347. Facts that are judicially noted must be generally known or capable of accurate determination by resort to sources whose accuracy cannot reasonably be questioned. Prestige Homes, Inc. v. Legouffe (1983), Colo., 658 P.2d 850, 853. Judicial notice has traditionally been used cautiously and only when the facts judicially noted cannot reasonably be disputed. Judicial notice may not be used on appeal to fill gaps in the evidence. City of New Brunswick v. Borough of Milltown (1982), 3d Cir., 686 F.2d 120, 131, n. 15.
In the present case, we are asked to take judicial notice of several articles containing in-depth information regarding the AIDS virus. Unlike the court in Evans v. Indiana University *960Medical Center (1951), 121 Ind.App. 679, 100 N.E.2d 828, 830, where the court judicially noted that pulmonary tuberculosis was a disease to which the general public was exposed, we, in essence, are being asked to judicially note the specific methods by which AIDS is communicated. While we have no problem with noting that AIDS is a severe and communicable disease, we cannot judicially note the ways in which it is communicated. Research continues in an attempt to specify the methods of communication but the data is not all collected and the methods of communication are not so firmly established as to be beyond reasonable dispute. Taking judicial notice of the scientific and medical data contained in the articles would put us in the role of expert witnesses and thereby result in the expansion of judicial notice far beyond its intended scope. Prestige Homes, Inc., supra, 100 N.E.2d at 854. See also Roe v. Wade (1973), 410 U.S. 113, 207, 93 S.Ct. 705, 755, 35 L.Ed.2d 147 (Burger, C.J., concurring).
We recognize that judicial notice may be taken of government publications that have not been introduced into evidence. See Kavanagh v. Butorac (1966), 140 Ind.App. 139, 221 N.E.2d 824, 833. However, because of the continuing nature of AIDS research, the proper method of presenting medical information in the present case is through experts familiar with the disease and the current developments in research. Therefore, the review on appeal will be limited to the evidence presented at trial, However, even if the medical literature contained in the appendices were considered, the result of this decision would remain the same.
. Neither party suggests that the word "might" in the statute ("visitation by the parent might endanger the child's physical health or significantly impair his emotional development") requires only a mere possibility that the physical or mental health of the child would be endangered or impaired. In view of the nature of the parental right being cut off, such a construction would be an absurd one. Why would the legislature acknowledge the basic right of visitation of a non-custodial parent and then effectively abolish that right by permitting terminations supported only by speculative, possibility-type evidence. Thus, we have no hesitation in concluding that statute requires evidence establishing that visitation "would" (not "might") endanger or impair the physical or mental health of the child. Case law supports our treatment of the word "might" in this context as being more than a mere possibility. In Louisville and Southern Indiana Traction Co. v. Montgomery (1917), 186 Ind. 384, 115 N.E. 673, our supreme court held that an allegation in a complaint that a motorman started his car while a surrey was so near the track that the car could not clear it, as the motorman "might" have discovered by ordinary care, was not insufficient. The court stated:
[Wle may concede that the grammarian recognizes a technical distinction of the correct use of the words 'might' and 'should," and that the failure to observe this distinction has on occasion been criticized in judicial decisions. Monroeville v. Weihl, 6 Ohio Cir.Ct.R. 188, 196. On the other hand, it must be noted that the error is one of frequent occurrence with courts and textwriters alike, and that, at most, the difference between the two words is hardly potential enough to constitute legal irregularity sufficient to require the reversal of a judgment, particularly as applied to the situation presented in this case.
Similarly, in U.S. v. Harrington, 388 F.2d 520, 524 (2d Cir.1968), the court noted the standard for relevance and materiality of information sought by an internal revenue summons was whether the information sought "might" throw light upon tax liabilities under the investigation. The court held the word "might" as used in that standard meant simply that there must be "a realistic expectation rather than an idle hope that something may be discovered." See also, United States v. Campbell (1975), 390 F.Supp. 711.
. The burden of proof essentially allocates the risk of error between the various parties to an action. The degree of proof required must be set for a given class of proceedings. It cannot be determined on a case by case basis because litigants must know at the outset of their case how the risk of error will be allocated. Santosky v. Kramer (1982), 455 U.S. 745, 102 S.Ct. 1388, 1397, 71 L.Ed.2d 599.
. In Petition of Meyer (1984), Ind.App., 471 N.E.2d 718 (Miller, J., concurring in result), a custodial mother petitioned to change her four and a half year old daughter's last name to match the name the mother took upon her remarriage. The child's natural father objected to the name change. The majority stated:
While a change of name action seeks to sever but one of these parental rights rather than all of them, as an adoption proceeding does, one seeking to sever the right here in question must meet this same burden of proof, that is, the evidence favoring a change of name in such circumstances must be clear and convincing.
Id. at 720-21. The evidence in favor of the name change consisted of the mother's testimony that both she and her daughter, Sarah, desired it. The child did not testify. Other reasons for the name change were that it would be easier for the child in school if she had the same name as her mother and stepfather, and having the same name as her mother and stepfather would give the child a more secure feeling of family unity. The majority concluded:
No substantive evidence to support these reasons was introduced, however. The record shows only generalized allegations by Penny [the mother] these results would inure from the name change. Mere unsupported assertions by a party are not substantive evidence. See, Coghill v. Badger (1982), Ind.App., 430 N.E.2d 405, 406-407. There was no showing Sarah presently lacked a feeling of family unity by having a last name different from her mother's or she was in any way troubled by her last name. Absent any facts to rebut the statutory presumption in favor of retaining Sarah's present name, the order of the trial judge must be reversed.
Id. at 721 (emphasis added).
Since the court held there were no facts to rebut the statutory presumption in favor of retaining the child's name, it could be logically argued that the petitioner in that case failed to meet even the preponderance of the evidence test.
. "The facts in the instant case clearly showed the Thompsons did not live in Indiana. Other facts in evidence raised the question of whether the Thompsons were properly performing their duties as natural guardians, The Thompsons had deliberately placed Billy Joe in the Gorman's custody with the understanding that she would be brought to Indiana and adopted by the Gormans. The evidence indicated this was the Thompsons' intent at the time they adopted Billy Joe in Texas. They deliberately kept this information from the judge during the Texas adoption proceedings while the Gormans were with Billy Joe in a separate room. There was evidence from which the court could find that the Thomp-sons were more concerned with money than they were with Billy Joe's interests. There are facts which demonstrate the Thompsons at one time had an interest in taking Billy Joe into their home but lost that interest. There also are facts which demonstrate the Thomp-sons were willing to give Billy Joe to the Gormans for adoption and later changed their minds. It also was demonstrated to the guardianship court that the child was being well cared for in the Gormans' home."
Id. at 621.
. We recognize that maintaining contact with a two year old child would be difficult absent actual visitation. The point, however, is that the loss of visitation, although great, is not necessarily permanent.
. For example, the facts in a particular case might justify the denial of visitation to a parent who is often intoxicated and thereby constitutes a danger to the child. However, "the tendency of the courts seems to be to allow visitation but to require that the visits be made in the presence of some other person or under such circumstances as will guarantee that the child will not be exposed to a parent who is under the influence of liquor." 24 Am.Jur.2d, Divorce and Separation #1000.
. Three recent federal cases have affirmed the right of a teacher with AIDS to teach in public school and the right of children with AIDS and children who tested seropositive for Human Immunodeficiency Virus to attend public schools. Chalk v. U.S., Dist. Court, Central Dist. of California (1988), 840 F.2d 701 (9th Cir.Cal.); Ray v. School Dist. of DeSoto County (1987), 666 F.Supp. 1524; Thomas v. Atascadero Unified School Dist. (1987), 662 F.Supp. 376. There was no medical evidence in any of these cases of any substantial risk of harm to school personnel or students.

=== CASE 9738041 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:41:17.220873+00 ===

CONOVER, Judge,
dissenting.
I respectfully dissent because I do not believe the trial court has manifestly abused its discretion in this matter.
As Chief Judge Ratliff recently said
When reviewing a trial court's determination concerning visitation by a non-custodial parent we may reverse only upon a showing of a manifest abuse of the trial judge's discretion. In re Julien (1979), Ind.App., 397 N.E.2d 651.
Such an abuse of discretion will not be found unless the trial court's decision is clearly against the logic and effect of the facts and circumstances before the court, or the reasonable, probable, and actual deductions to be drawn therefrom. Our function on appeal is 'to examine the decision of the trial court and determine whether the record discloses evidence or reasonable inferences to be drawn therefrom which serve as a rational basis to support the finding of the trial court.! We will not reweigh the evidence or judge the credibility of the witnesses. *967[Citations omitted]. K.B. v. S.B. (1981), Ind.App., 415 N.E.2d 749, 755.
Carter v. Dec (1985), Ind.App., 480 N.E.2d 564, 566. Thus, the question becomes what is the breadth of a trial court's discretion concerning the grant or withholding of visitation rights of the non-custodial parent in this case? Our legislature has clearly defined those parameters. IND.CODE 31-1-11.5-24 provides in part
SEC. 24. (a) a parent not granted custody of the child is entitled to reasonable visitation rights unless the court finds, after a hearing, that visitation by the parent might endanger the child's physical health....
(b) the court may modify an order granting or denying visitation rights whenever modification would serve the best interests of the child, but the court shall not restrict a parent's visitation rights unless it finds that the visitation might endanger the child's physical health.... (Emphasis supplied).
Our legislature has determined as a matter of public policy the best interests of the child are paramount, and trial courts are to deny non-custodial parents visitation if such visitation might endanger the child's physical health.
I do not agree with the majority we are to restrict the meaning of "might" as used in the statute to mean visitation may be restricted only when it "would" endanger the child's physical well being. Such was not the intent of the legislature in my opinion. Had it so intended, that body would have used appropriate language such as "probably will", "reasonably may" or words of similar import. It is apparent to me the legislature intended "might" as used in the statute to carry its ordinary meaning which includes the "possibility" of an event occurring.
Our sole function on appeal is to determine whether the trial court's decision constituted a manifest abuse of discretion. The experts in this case testified to essentially two degrees of certainty as to methods by which the AIDS virus may be transmitted. First, it is reasonably certain the AIDS virus with which appellant Thomas is infected may be transmitted to third parties through sexual intercourse, the sharing of hypodermic needles, and blood transfusions.
Secondly, it is theoretically possible for a parent to infect a child with the AIDS virus while extracting a child's tooth1 Under these circumstances, a parent "might" infect his child with AIDS. Because the statute clearly invests the trial court with a broad discretion in this area, I believe the trial court did not manifestly abuse its discretion by denying appellant his visitation rights under these circumstances.
We may not weigh the evidence nor determine the credibility of witnesses on appeal. While we might have decided the matter differently had we been sitting as the trial court, that reason standing alone does not authorize reversal.
In sum, I would affirm because the trial court did not manifestly abuse its discretion.
. Admittedly, a poor example upon which to 'base a hypothesis, but that was the evidence before the trial court.

=== CASE 9738042 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:41:17.478793+00 ===

Per Curiam.
The appellant, Taylor & Martin, Inc., Real Estate, a Nebraska corporation, appeals from a jury verdict in the amount of $32,053.50. For reasons more particularly set out hereinafter, we believe that the verdict cannot be sustained, and the judgment entered on the verdict must be set aside and the action dismissed.
The appellees, Tim C. Mallette and Donna Jean Mallette (Mallettes), filed a petition in the district court for Douglas County, Nebraska, consisting of four causes of action. The first cause of action alleged that Taylor & Martin “was party to a real estate listing agreement with Clifford Dean Vanderlinde and Cathy Vanderlinde by the terms of which [Taylor & Martin] agreed to use its efforts to sell the Vanderlinde property located in Cherry County, Nebraska.” The petition then alleged that Taylor & Martin solicited an offer from Mallettes to purchase the property. Mallettes alleged that in an effort to induce them to make the offer, Taylor & Martin made certain representations which were untrue and which were made with the intent to deceive Mallettes and induce them to make ah offer to purchase the real estate. Among other matters, Mallettes further alleged that a downpayment in the sum of $80,000 was paid to Taylor & Martin as agents. Mallettes then alleged that they later learned of the fraudulent misrepresentations and proceeded to have a prior decree of specific performance obtained by Mallettes against Vanderlindes set aside.
The petition then alleged: “By agreement of Vanderlindes and Mallettes the contract was rescinded. A copy of said assignment and release is attached hereto and made a part hereof.” Mallettes further alleged: “The defendant has failed to make payment to plaintiffs in the amount of $27,737.50 which constitutes a portion of the initial $80,000 payment made by the plaintiffs to Vanderlindes.” As a result thereof, Mallettes prayed for judgment against Taylor & Martin in the amount of *387$27,737.50.
The remaining three causes of action seek to recover further sums allegedly expended by Mallettes for legal fees, travel expenses, and overpayment of rental for pastureland rented by Mallettes from Vanderlindes. The expenditure of these sums was allegedly caused by the statements made by Taylor & Martin to Mallettes.
The agreement, which was attached to the petition and made a part of the petition, alleged that Taylor & Martin “was acting as an agent of Vanderlinde at the time [when the material misrepresentations of fact were made].” The agreement then further provides that:
4. In order to accomplish such restoration the parties agree as follows:
a. The entire amount of $52,262.50 which has been held by the Clerk of the District Court together with accrued interest shall be paid to Mallette;
b. Vanderlinde shall lease a portion of their real estate to Mallette on the terms set forth on a lease to be signed simultaneously with this agreement.
c. Vanderlinde releases any claim to any portion of the payment made by Mallette through Taylor & Martin by reason of the land contract.
6. Vanderlinde releases Mallette and Mallette releases Vanderlinde severally and jointly of any and all claims known or unknown, liquidated or unliquidated, and whether arising in tort or contract other than obligations as set forth herein.
7. Each party shall pay their own costs and legal fees.
The $52,262.50 appears to be the difference between the $80,000 initially paid by Mallettes to Taylor & Martin as agent of Vanderlindes and the amount paid by Vanderlindes to Taylor & Martin.
Taylor & Martin has assigned a number of errors as to why the judgment should be set aside. Among those assignments of error is one which we believe to be the threshold question which, if answered in favor of Taylor & Martin, makes all of the other assignments of error moot. That question is whether the *388trial court erred in failing to find that the release executed by Mallettes to Vanderlindes likewise released Taylor & Martin from any liability to Mallettes by reason of the sale of the real estate. The district court apparently found that it did not operate to release Taylor & Martin. We believe that the district court was in error and, for that reason, the judgment must be reversed.
There can be no question, nor do the parties contend otherwise, but that the agreement and release executed by and between Mallettes and Vanderlindes was intended to be a complete settlement and release of any dispute between the buyers and the sellers with regard to this property. Moreover, by reason of the agreement and release, the parties acknowledge that Taylor & Martin was acting as agent of the sellers, Vanderlindes, and that therefore there existed a principal-agent relationship between Vanderlindes and Taylor & Martin.
In Ericksen v. Pearson, 211 Neb. 466, 319 N.W.2d 76 (1982), we made a careful analysis concerning the question as to whether the release of either the principal or the agent thereby released the other, and concluded that it did. Specifically, we observed at 475, 319 N.W.2d at 81:
The general rule is stated in 76 C.J.S. Release § 50 at 689 (1952) as follows: “In a situation where several persons are not actively joint tort-feasors, but one person commits the tort and is primarily liable while the liability of the other person is derivative or secondary, as where it arises under the doctrine of respondeat superior, the releasor’s acceptance of satisfaction from one, discharges the other as well, as in the case of master and servant or principal and agent; and it has been held that this is true despite an attempted reservation of rights against the person secondarily hable, since if the rule were otherwise, such person would be liable without having recourse against the person primarily liable, the latter having been released____”
After then referring to an extensive annotation titled “ ‘Release of (or covenant not to sue) master or principal as affecting liability of servant or agent for tort, or vice versa,’ appearing in 92 A.L.R.2d 533 et seq. (1963),” 211 Neb. at 475, *389319 N.W.2d at 81, we said:
“What is the rule in Nebraska? ” It appears that Nebraska has already passed upon the question of whether the release of an agent by a third party also releases the principal, and has decided that in the affirmative; but so far as we have been able to ascertain, this court has not directly passed upon the question of the reverse situation, that is to say, whether the release of the principal also releases the agent where the action is predicated upon negligence and the liability of the principal arises under the respondeat superior doctrine.
Ericksen v. Pearson, supra at 476, 319 N.W.2d at 81.
We then cited the case of Dickey v. Meier, 188 Neb. 420, 197 N.W.2d 385 (1972), in which the court referred to the cases of Max v. Spaeth, 349 S.W.2d 1 (Mo. 1961), and Bacon v. United States, 321 F.2d 880 (8th Cir. 1963), saying in 211 Neb. at 478, 319 N.W.2d at 82:
“See, Max v. Spaeth, 349 S.W.2d 1 (Mo.); Bacon v. United States, 321 F.2d 880 (8th Cir.). Both courts held in those cases: ‘The master’s liability under the doctrine of respondeat superior is based not on his own misdeeds but those of his servant, and therefore, when the servant is not liable, the master for whom he was acting at the time should not be liable. It matters little how the servant was released from liability; as long as he is free from harm, it appears to us that his master should also be held blameless.’ ”
We then concluded by saying at 478, 319 N. W.2d at 82:
We are of the opinion that the same rules should be applicable to a release given by a third party to the principal, that is to say, such release should release the agent from any liability, notwithstanding the fact that they are not technically joint tort-feasors. . . . Under the authorities above cited, the general rule is that in the absence of a specific statute, and Nebraska has no such statute, a valid release of either of the parties to the principal-agent relationship releases the other.
Mallettes acknowledge the rule announced in Ericksen v. Pearson, supra, but contend that there are significant *390differences between the instant case and the facts in Ericksen v. Pearson. With that we do not agree. Mallettes argue that the Ericksen decision did not involve allegations of affirmative fraud by the defendant. While that may be true, the specific language is to the effect that “such release should release the agent from any liability, notwithstanding the fact that they are not technically joint tort-feasors.” (Emphasis supplied.) Ericksen v. Pearson, 211 Neb. 466, 478, 319 N.W.2d 76, 82 (1982). We further pointed out in Ericksen that “the majority view [is] that a valid release of either master or servant from liability for tort operates to release the other where liability is based upon the doctrine of respondeat superior . . . .” (Emphasis supplied.) Id. at 479, 319 N.W.2d at 82. We did not there limit our holding to negligence actions, but included all tort actions.
Furthermore, the release executed by Vanderlindes and Mallettes was not limited to negligence but, rather, released each the other from “all claims known or unknown, liquidated or unliquidated, and whether arising in tort or contract.”
As a second distinguishing factor, Mallettes argue: “In Erickson [sic], damages are requested from the defendant and there is no demand for return of money received and retained by the defendant as a result of the defendant’s affirmative acts of fraud.” Brief for Appellees at 8. There is no allegation that Taylor & Martin retained the $27,737.50 by reason of any alleged acts of fraud. It appears that Mallettes paid Taylor & Martin, as agents for Vanderlindes, $80,000, and settled with Vanderlindes for $52,262.50. While it is true that the difference happens to be $27,737.50, which Vanderlindes paid to Taylor & Martin as a commission, there is no indication that Vanderlindes agreed to pay to Mallettes anything more than $52,262.50. In light of the pleadings, we find no basis to conclude that Mallettes have the right to recover back more than the amount agreed to be paid by the settlement.
Mallettes then contend that the release in Ericksen was with the principal for settlement of damages, while in the case at bar the release is to effect a rescission of a contract and an effort “ ‘as nearly as possible, to place each in the position they would now be in if there had been no purported contract.’ ” Brief for *391Appellees at 8. This appears to us to have made no significant difference. Obviously, the parties to the release agreed that the payment of $52,262.50 was “as nearly as possible” as the parties could get to placing each other in the position each would be in if there had been no purported contract.
Mallettes then argue that in Ericksen there was no evidence of duress involved in the release. The claim for duress apparently is based upon the fact that Mr. Mallette was suffering from ill health and was ordered by his physician to settle his claim against Vanderlindes. While, indeed, that may have been a motivating factor, it certainly was not duress as that term is commonly understood in the law. All of us are often compelled to make decisions because of factors we are required to take into account, over which we have no control. That does not constitute duress. See, Brown v. Pierce, 74 U.S. (7 Wall.) 205, 19 L. Ed. 134 (1868); Williams v. Rutherfurd Realty Co., 159 A.D. 171, 144 N.Y.S. 357 (1913).
Next, Mallettes argue that in Ericksen the plaintiff received payment of damages for the release, while in the instant case no damages were received. We are again unable to see how that could affect the validity or application of the release. There was certainly adequate consideration for the release.
And, finally, Mallettes argue that in Ericksen the court found that the liability of the principal who was released arose only from the application of the doctrine of respondeat superior, while in the instant case the purpose of the release was to relieve the plaintiffs from the obligation to Vanderlindes arising by reason of the decree of specific performance. Whatever may have motivated Vanderlindes and Mallettes to ultimately enter into a release is immaterial in the instant case. What is significant is that the parties to the release are releasing each the other from any and all claims arising out of “a contract for the purchase of real estate from Vanderlinde,” in which “Taylor & Martin, Inc. . . . was acting as an agent of Vanderlinde at the time.” To somehow try to separate these matters into independent transactions is simply without any basis.
We believe that the record clearly establishes that as a matter of law Mallettes released Vanderlindes as principals and, therefore, as a matter of law, at the same time released Taylor & *392Martin as agent. The release having been executed, there was nothing to submit to the jury, and, therefore, the motion for summary judgment made by Taylor & Martin should have been granted. For these reasons the verdict of the jury is set aside, and the action is reversed and the cause remanded with directions to dismiss.
Reversed and remanded with DIRECTIONS TO DISMISS.

=== CASE 9738043 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:41:17.483304+00 ===

Boslaugh, J.,
dissenting.
The majority relies on the rule announced in Ericksen v. Pearson, 211 Neb. 466, 319 N.W.2d 76 (1982). The rule in that case provides that where liability is based upon the doctrine of respondeat superior, “a valid release of either of the parties to the principal-agent relationship releases the other.” Id. at 478, 319 N.W.2d at 82.
The rule is illogical in the context of a third party’s release of the principal, and should not be applied in this case. As stated in Hill v. McDonald, 442 A.2d 133, 138 n.5 (D.C. 1982):
Certainly, as a matter of logic, it is hard to see how a principal could still be held vicariously liable after the release of its agent, the only real wrongdoer. But the converse is not at all obvious. It is thus that a growing minority of courts hold that the release of a principal does not bar suit against the agent for the underlying tort unless the release is so intended. [Citations omitted.]
The original and primary justification behind the rule adopted in Ericksen, supra, was the desire to prevent unjust enrichment of the injured party, rather than consideration of the relationship between those with potential liability to the injured party. Clark v. Brooks, 377 A.2d 365 (Del. Super. 1977), aff’d sub nom. Blackshear v. Clark, 391 A.2d 747 (Del. 1978). The Brooks court indicated that the rule should not apply in situations such as that in the present case:
Since the liability of the employer in such cases [where the sole basis of liability of an employer is the negligence of an employee] is dependent upon at least a showing of tort on the part of the employee, it is understandable that some courts have held that where no liability exists on the part of the employee there cannot be liability on the part of *393the employer and hence they have extended this reasoning to apply to a release of the employee’s liability by the injured person. [As in Dickey v. Meier, 188 Neb. 420, 197 N.W.2d 385 (1972).] However, rationally the converse does not apply. The employee’s liability for his own negligence is not dependent on negligence of the employer nor is the employee entitled to reimbursement by the employer. The ability to sue the employee who committed the tort is not contingent on the ability to sue the employer. Based upon the relationship of the parties no justification exists for extending nonliability of the employer to benefit the employee unless that benefit was created by contract intended to benefit the employee. Hence, the liability of the negligent employee should not be affected by a transaction between the injured party and the employer unless the parties intended the benefit to extend to the employee. The result should not, of course, permit dual recovery by the injured person.
Clark v. Brooks, supra at 371-72.
The Ericksen court cited the case of Dickey v. Meier, 188 Neb. 420, 197 N.W.2d 385 (1972), as support for the rule that release of either of the parties to the principal-agent relationship releases the other. In that case, the court held that a valid release of the employee-agent releases the employer-principal from liability, where the tort action is based exclusively on the alleged negligence of an employee or agent. In so holding, the court indicated that where a master’s liability is based upon the doctrine of respondeat superior, the master should be held blameless, where the servant whose misdeeds gave rise to the suit has been released from liability. As previously noted, this view is consistent with those expressed in Clark v. Brooks, supra, and does not suggest that the release of the principal alleged to be liable exclusively on the theory of respondeat superior should serve to release the agent, regardless of the parties’ intentions. See Busick, Pleading and Procedural Considerations in Nebraska in Subrogation, Contribution, and Indemnity Actions, 19 Creighton L. Rev. 278 (1986). Instead, the decision in Dickey v. Meier, supra, suggests that the release of the primarily liable agent should serve to release the *394secondarily liable principal, because the latter’s liability is merely vicarious. Such considerations are not involved where the person who is secondarily liable is released.
Further, the cases cited in support of the rule announced in Ericksen v. Pearson, 211 Neb. 466, 319 N.W.2d 76 (1982), do not provide strong support for the rule, because they either did not consider the effect of releasing the principal or did not support the proposition for which they were cited. See, e.g., Spradley v. McCrackin, 505 S.W.2d 955 (Tex. Civ. App. 1974), disapproved, Knutson v. Morton Foods, Inc., 603 S.W.2d 805 (Tex. 1980); Smith v. Lincoln, 52 Misc. 2d 66, 275 N.Y.S.2d 74 (1966). Thus, the rule expressed in Ericksen v. Pearson is illogical and should not provide the basis for the decision in this case.
Additionally, if the justification for the rule is to prevent a double recovery or unjust enrichment of the plaintiff, it can hardly be said that those considerations are present in the case at bar. The money sought from Taylor & Martin would do nothing more than place the Mallettes in the position they were in prior to the alleged misrepresentations and the subsequent signing of the contract.
In fact, the pleadings seem to be more in the nature of an action for money had and received than for an action in tort. The former cause is based upon the notion that where one person has money to which in equity and good conscience another is entitled, the law creates a promise by the former to pay it to the latter. Village of Morrill v. Roosevelt P.P. Dist., 215 Neb. 41, 337 N.W.2d 125 (1983).
The fact that the money held by Taylor & Martin was retained as a commission on the sale should not negate such a claim by the Mallettes because, as is noted in the Restatement (Second) of Agency § 339 at 97-98 (1958):
An agent who has received things from another for a disclosed . . . principal in a transaction conducted by him has a duty to return them or their proceeds if the other rescinds the transaction for a cause existing at the time of their receipt, to the extent that the agent has not, before notice of rescission and in good faith, changed his position.
*395Comment /. to this section indicates that a change in position, such as paying the money over to the principal, is no defense to an action for the return of the money where there has been a fraudulent inducement by either the principal or the agent for the third party to enter into the transaction.
Thus, even if the rule of Ericksen v. Pearson, supra, were considered to be sound, it should not apply in this case.
Hastings and Grant, J J., j oin in this dissent.

=== CASE 2213245 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:29.26673+00 ===

406 N.W.2d 640 (1987)
225 Neb. 503
Raymond D. BOREN, Appellee,
v.
STATE FARM MUTUAL AUTOMOBILE INSURANCE COMPANY, a Corporation, et al., Appellees,
Universal Underwriters Insurance Company, a Corporation, Appellant.
No. 85-720.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
May 29, 1987.
*642 Thom K. Cope of Bailey, Polsky, Cada, Todd & Cope, and, on brief, Stanley F. Wilson, Lincoln, for appellant.
Patrick W. Healey of Healey, Wieland, Kluender, Atwood & Jacobs, Lincoln, for appellee State Farm.
KRIVOSHA, C.J., and BOSLAUGH, WHITE, HASTINGS, CAPORALE, SHANAHAN, and GRANT, JJ.
CAPORALE, Justice.
Plaintiff-appellee, Raymond D. Boren, brought this action pursuant to the provisions of Neb.Rev.Stat. §§ 25-21, 149 through 25-21, 164 (Reissue 1985) for a declaration as to whether defendant-appellant, Universal Underwriters Insurance Company, a corporation, or defendant-appellee State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Company, a corporation, was obligated to pay a $2,092.23 judgment he obtained against defendant-appellee Julianne H. Byram and her father, defendant-appellee Harold E. Byram. In seeking a reversal of the judgment declaring Universal to be the primary insurer and State Farm to provide only excess insurance, Universal assigns two errors: (1) the ruling that Universal was barred by reason of the position it had taken prior to litigation from denying coverage; and (2) the finding that the Universal policy provided coverage for the accident giving rise to Boren's judgment. We affirm.
On April 13, 1983, Thomas, Patrick, and Cynthia Herrick assigned their certificate of title to a 1980 Ford Pinto automobile to Misle Chevrolet Company, a corporation engaged in the business of, among other things, the selling of new and used automobiles. Misle sold the Pinto to Harold E. Byram and his wife, Janet, on July 9, 1983. The Byrams gave Misle a check for the purchase price and took possession of the Pinto on the same day. While Misle gave the Byrams a copy of the purchase agreement, it did not execute the "reassignment by licensed dealer" on the certificate of title to the Pinto, not did it deliver the duly assigned certificate of title to the Byrams until July 15, 1983. Although not clear from the record, it appears that Misle wanted to hold on to the certificate of title until the Byrams' check had been paid by the bank.
While driving the Pinto on July 14, 1983, the Byrams' daughter was involved in an accident with Boren. On that day, Universal had in force a policy providing garage operations and automobile hazard coverages to Misle, and State Farm had in force three separate policies providing automobile liability coverages to the Byrams and their daughter. None of the State Farm policies, however, described the Pinto as the owned automobile to which the policy applies. The limit of liability under the Universal policy is more than sufficient to cover Boren's judgment, as is true of the limit of State Farm's liability under any one of its policies.
The first assignment of error questions the correctness of the trial court's factual finding that, prior to litigation, Universal rested its denial of liability on grounds other than a claim that its policy provided no coverage for the subject occurrence, and the trial court's legal conclusion that, as a consequence, Universal could not now deny that its policy provided coverage.
Our analysis must necessarily begin by determining the scope of our review. *643 Whether a declaratory judgment action is treated as an action at law or one in equity is to be determined by the nature of the dispute. See, State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co. v. Royal Ins. Co., 222 Neb. 13, 382 N.W.2d 2 (1986); Occidental S. & L. v. Bell Fed. Credit Union, 218 Neb. 519, 357 N.W.2d 198 (1984). Since no equitable relief is sought, the action is to be treated as one at law. As a consequence, a jury having been waived, the factual finding of the trial court has the effect of a finding made by a jury and will not be set aside unless clearly wrong. See, InterSystems, Inc. v. Farmers Co-op Exch., 225 Neb. 497, 406 N.W.2d 344 (1987); State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co. v. Royal Ins. Co., supra; Occidental S. & L. v. Bell Fed. Credit Union, supra.
State Farm adduced evidence that prior to this suit's being filed, attorney John E. Beltzer, who is associated with the law firm appearing for Universal in this case and which represented the interests of Julianne and Harold Byram in the underlying tort action resulting in the money judgment in favor of Boren, wrote a letter to attorney Richard D. Sievers, who is associated with the firm representing Boren in the underlying tort action and in this suit. That letter, a copy of which was sent to Universal and to attorney Patrick W. Healey, who is associated with the firm representing State Farm's interests in this case, recognized that if Universal were to question whether its policy provided coverage, Beltzer would have a conflict of interest, in which case he would withdraw; if, however, Universal would consent "to not argue that issue," Beltzer would then continue acting in "Universal's defense." The letter then offers an analysis of various provisions of the Universal and State Farm policies and concludes that the best construction from Universal's point of view would render Universal's coverage excess, and the worst construction from its point of view would render both the Universal and State Farm coverages primary, obligating the two companies to share the loss. There is no claim that Beltzer and his firm withdrew from the representation of Julianne and Harold Byram in the underlying tort action. Neither is there any showing that the defense Universal provided Julianne and Harold Byram through Beltzer and his firm was under an agreement whereby Universal reserved whatever policy defenses might operate to relieve it of liability for any judgment Boren might recover. Indeed, so far as the record shows, the first time Universal denied liability for Boren's judgment was when it answered interrogatories in garnishment in the underlying tort action. (Unbelievably enough, this was done through the very same firm of attorneys which had defended Julianne and Harold Byram in the underlying tort action.)
Under the circumstances, it cannot be said the trial court was clearly wrong in finding that Universal did not assert a lack of coverage as a ground for refusing to pay the judgment Boren obtained in the underlying tort action. The denial of coverage which came after Boren obtained his judgment against Julianne and Harold Byram came too late. See National Union Fire Ins. Co. v. Bruecks, 179 Neb. 642, 139 N.W.2d 821 (1966), concerning the effect of counsel's role in the matter.
Once the trial court's factual finding is determined to not be clearly wrong, the controlling rule of law is that an insurer which gives one reason for its conduct and decision as to a matter in controversy cannot, after litigation has begun, defend upon another and different ground. Mutual Benefit Life Ins. Co. v. Chisholm, 213 Neb. 301, 329 N.W.2d 103 (1983). Julianne and Harold Byram were entitled to the full protection of the Universal policy. Thus, the trial court's legal conclusion that Universal is barred from asserting that Julianne and Harold Byram were not "insureds," as defined in its policy, and thus not covered is correct.
That being so, we do not reach the second assignment of error and need only determine to what extent, if any, Universal and State Farm become liable under the terms of their respective policies to pay the money judgment Boren obtained against Julianne and Harold Byram.
*644 Since the Byrams had not yet received a duly executed reassignment of the certificate of title to the Pinto, Misle was the owner of the automobile at the time of the accident giving rise to Boren's money judgment. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co. v. Royal Ins. Co., 222 Neb. 13, 382 N.W.2d 2 (1986); State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co. v. Fitzgerald, 214 Neb. 226, 334 N.W.2d 168 (1983); Neb.Rev.Stat. § 60-105(1) (Reissue 1984). The State Farm policies read that under such a circumstance the coverages provided are "excess" but do not apply at all if the nonowned automobile is "OWNED BY ANY PERSON OR ORGANIZATION IN A CAR BUSINESS" and there exists "OTHER LIABILITY COVERAGE WHICH APPLIES IN WHOLE OR IN PART AS PRIMARY, EXCESS OR CONTINGENT COVERAGE." The definition of "car business" includes a business whose purpose is to sell land motor vehicles. Thus, the language of the State Farm policies specifically excludes coverage if there is other insurance. However, in its answer State Farm prays that it be declared to provide only excess coverage. Consequently, we ignore the exclusionary language and read the State Farm policies as containing excess coverage clauses. The Universal policy reads that the "insurance afforded by" its garage operation and automobile hazard coverage "is primary," except in circumstances not involved in this controversy.
We have been required on a number of past occasions to resolve controversies arising because each of the applicable policies contained mutually repugnant language intended to restrict or escape liability for a particular risk in the event there exists other insurance. Where such conflict has existed, we have held the owner's policy to provide primary coverage and the driver's policy to provide excess coverage. E.g., Jensen v. Universal Underwriters Ins. Co., 208 Neb. 487, 304 N.W.2d 51 (1981); Bituminous Cas. Corp. v. Andersen, 184 Neb. 670, 171 N.W.2d 175 (1969); Farm Bureau Ins. Co. v. Allied Mut. Ins. Co., 180 Neb. 555, 143 N.W.2d 923 (1966); Protective Fire & Cas. Co. v. Cornelius, 176 Neb. 75, 125 N.W.2d 179 (1963); Turpin v. Standard Reliance Ins. Co., 169 Neb. 233, 99 N.W.2d 26 (1959).
In this case there is no conflict in the language of the applicable policies. The owner's policy says it is primary, and the driver's policy says it is excess. Absent ambiguities, language in a policy of insurance is to be given its plain and ordinary meaning. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co. v. Royal Ins. Co., supra; Roth v. Farmers Mut. Ins. Co., 220 Neb. 612, 371 N.W.2d 289 (1985); Kracl v. Aetna Cas. & Surety Co., 220 Neb. 869, 374 N.W.2d 40 (1985); Charley v. Farmers Mut. Ins. Co., 219 Neb. 765, 366 N.W.2d 417 (1985); Wojcik, Tracing the Fibers of Asbestos Litigation: When Do An Insurer's Duties of Defense and Indemnity Arise?, 36 Fed'n Ins. & Corp. Couns. Q. 283 (1986). It necessarily follows, therefore, that the trial court's judgment declaring the obligations of the parties is correct and must be affirmed.
AFFIRMED.

=== CASE 9738044 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:41:23.872812+00 ===

Hennessey, C.J.
The defendant, Thomas J. Shields, was stopped at a State police “sobriety checkpoint” (roadblock) at *163approximately 1:15 a.m. on September 13, 1986. After performing several field sobriety tests, Shields was arrested and charged with operating his vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor in violation of G. L. c. 90, § 24 (1986 ed.).
Shields moved to suppress the evidence obtained following his stop at the roadblock, contending that it was the fruit of an unlawful seizure. In support of this motion, Shields argued that the Commonwealth must prove that no less intrusive alternative would be as effective as roadblocks in enforcing c. 90, § 24, before the roadblock seizure could be found to be constitutionally permissible and the evidence obtained at the roadblock admitted. The Commonwealth acknowledged that it must prove that the roadblock was conducted in accordance with the procedures outlined in Commonwealth v. Trumble, 396 Mass. 81 (1985), and Commonwealth v. McGeoghegan, 389 Mass. 137 (1983), but denied that it must disprove the existence of equally effective yet less intrusive alternatives to enforcing c. 90, § 24, before the evidence obtained at the roadblock could be admit-
The judge noted that resolution of the dispute was likely to be dispositive of Shields’s case, that the issue was likely to arise in similar proceedings, and that an improper determination in the trial court that the Commonwealth must disprove the existence of equally effective, less intrusive alternatives to roadblocks would result in unnecessary expenditure of judicial resources at trial. Accordingly, the judge properly reported the following two questions to the Appeals Court under Mass. R. Crim. P. 34, 378 Mass. 905 (1979): “1. Whether, as a precondition to the admission of evidence obtained as a result of a sobriety checkpoint or roadblock operated by law enforcement personnel, the Commonwealth is required to prove that there was no less intrusive alternative to the checkpoint or roadblock which would have been effective to accomplish the legitimate public safety goals of the Commonwealth. 2. Whether, assuming that the preceding question is answered in the affirmative, the standard of proof by which the Commonwealth must bear its burden is beyond reasonable doubt, by clear and convincing *164evidence or by a preponderance of the evidence.” We granted the parties’ application for direct appellate review of these questions.
The defendant grounds his argument in both the Fourth Amendment to the Constitution of the United States and art. 14 of the Declaration of Rights of the Massachusetts Constitution.1 We conclude that neither of these provisions requires the Commonwealth to prove that there are no equally effective yet less intrusive alternatives for enforcing G. L. c. 90, § 24, than roadblocks. We therefore answer question one in the negative, and need not address question two.
The stop of Shields’s motor vehicle was a seizure. Commonwealth v. Trumble, supra at 86. This seizure violates the Fourth Amendment and art. 14 only if it was unreasonable. See, e.g., INS v. Delgado, 466 U.S. 210, 215 (1984); Commonwealth v. Sheppard, 394 Mass. 381, 391 (1985). Decisions of this court and of the Supreme Court establish that there is “no ready test for determining reasonableness other than by balancing the need to search [or seize] against the invasion which the search [or seizure] entails.” Commonwealth v. Silva, 366 Mass. 402, 405 (1974), quoting Camara v. Municipal Court of the City of San Francisco., 387 U.S. 523, 536-537 (1967) (administrative search). See Trumble, supra at 86 (to determine reasonableness of seizure court balances “the public interest against ‘the individual’s right to personal security free from arbitrary interference by law officers’ ”), quoting United States v. Brignoni-Ponce, 422 U.S. 873, 878 (1975).
Because Shields was seized without a warrant, the Commonwealth bears the burden of proving that the seizure was reasonable. Commonwealth v. Antobenedetto, 366 Mass. 51, 57 (1974). To carry its burden of proving that the roadblock seizure was reasonable the Commonwealth must show, at least, that the roadblock was conducted in accordance with the guidelines established in Trumble, supra, and Commonwealth v. Mc-*165Geoghegan, 389 Mass. 137 (1983). See Commonwealth v. Amaral, 398 Mass. 98, 101 (1986). Adherence to these guidelines, the content of which need not be recited here, assures that a roadblock seizure is the result of a “plan embodying explicit, neutral limitations on the conduct of individual officers. ”Brown v. Texas, 443 U.S. 47, 51 (1979). Conducting roadblocks in accordance with such neutral criteria minimizes the risk “that the individual’s reasonable expectation of privacy [will be] ‘subject to the discretion of the official in the field. ’ ” Delaware v. Prouse, 440 U.S. 648, 655 (1979), quoting Camara, supra at 532. Adherence to the guidelines’ requirements also assures that the surprise, fear, and inconvenience to — and therefore the intrusion on — the motoring public is minimized. See McGeoghegan, supra at 143-144. In sum, leaving aside the question of less intrusive alternatives, where the Commonwealth shows that a roadblock employed to enforce c. 90, § 24, was operated in accordance with the established guidelines, the accompanying seizures, although not conducted on the basis of individualized suspicion, are reasonable under the Fourth Amendment and art. 14. Trumble, supra at 89-90.2
Shields, of course, does not leave aside the question of less intrusive alternatives. He argues that, in order for the Commonwealth to meet its burden of showing that the roadblock seizure at issue here was reasonable, it must prove that there was no *166equally effective yet less intrusive alternative to enforcing c. 90, § 24. We disagree.
Less intrusive alternative analysis traditionally has not been employed in determining the constitutional reasonableness of searches and seizures. Indeed, in one case involving a vehicle search we declined to employ less intrusive alternative analysis and observed that “[t]he fact that, in the abstract, less intrusive means might have been used does not, by itself, render the search unreasonable.” Commonwealth v. Ortiz, 376 Mass. 349, 357 (1978), citing Cady v. Dombrowski, 413 U.S. 433, 447 (1973). Accord United States v. Sharpe, 470 U.S. 675, 687 (1985) (“The question is not simply whether some other alternative was available, but whether the police acted unreasonably in failing to recognize or to pursue it”); United States v. Villamonte-Marquez, 462 U.S. 579, 591 n.5 (1983); United States v. Martinez-Fuerte, 428 U.S. 543, 556 n.12 (1976). The defendant does not address the language quoted from Ortiz, supra, nor does he indicate why the principle of that language is inapplicable in this case.
Article 14 and the Fourth Amendment proscribe only unreasonable law enforcement conduct. As such, these provisions evince a policy of accommodating the legitimate State interest in law enforcement while preventing arbitrary searches and seizures. It would be inconsistent with that policy to rule that, in order to prove that a search or seizure is lawful, the Commonwealth must prove that each of a multiplicity of proffered hypothetical courses of conduct if used would be either less effective or more intrusive. Where the defendant merely conjectures that equally effective yet less intrusive means of enforcing c. 90, § 24, exist, “[t]he [Commonwealth] is entitled in the interest of public safety to bring all available resources to bear, without having to spell out the exact efficiency coefficient of each component and of the separate effects of any particular component.” People v. Scott, 63 N.Y.2d 518, 528-529 (1984). The focus of the inquiry is on the conduct which in fact occurred. The Commonwealth’s burden is to prove that the intrusion generated by that conduct is outweighed by the need to search or seize. Commonwealth v. Silva, supra at 405.
*167We reject the defendant’s argument that the result we reach opens the door for suspicionless searches and seizures in other contexts. Police will not be allowed, for example, to cordon off “high crime areas” and search all the people on the street. Intrusions of this level, even for a limited search, require some degree of articulable individualized suspicion. Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1 (1968). Roadblock seizures for enforcing c. 90, § 24, are virtually sui generis in this regard.3 Their constitutionality is based in large measure on the lower expectation of privacy traditionally accorded to the motoring public. See, e.g., Commonwealth v. Ortiz, supra at 357-358 & n.7, and cases cited; People v. Scott, supra at 525. We do not view our decision today as eroding the protection against unreasonable searches and seizures afforded by art. 14 and the Fourth Amendment.
Rather than eroding the constitutional protection against unreasonable search and seizure, our decision is consistent with precedent. Roadblock seizures have been upheld in the absence of individualized suspicion and without a showing of no equally effective yet less intrusive alternative. United States v. Martinez-Fuerte, supra at 545, 556-557 & n.12 (1976) (permanent roadblock conducted sixty-six miles from border to detect illegal aliens; less intrusive alternative analysis rejected). See Delaware v. Prouse, supra at 663 (indicating that roadblock stops of all oncoming traffic are permissible). In the analogous context of courthouse entry searches we have approved an initial search not based on articulable individualized suspicion so long as it “was no more intrusive than necessary.” Commonwealth v. Harris, 383 Mass. 655, 657 (1981). In the case of roadblocks to enforce c. 90, § 24, compliance with the Trumble and McGeoghegan guidelines assures that the initial seizure is *168no more intrusive than necessary. We perceive nothing in the prior decisions, nor anything in the nature of art. 14 or the Fourth Amendment, which requires the Commonwealth to disprove the existence of equally effective yet less intrusive alternatives to enforcing c. 90, § 24.
Although there is some support elsewhere for the defendant’s position, the result we reach appears to be consistent with the weight of authority from other jurisdictions. Some courts which have addressed the constitutionality of roadblocks to prevent intoxicated driving have required a showing of no less intrusive yet equally effective alternatives. State v. Superior Court, 143 Ariz. 45, 48-49 (1984) (State sustaining its burden). State v. Koppel, 127 N.H. 286, 292 (1985) (State constitutional grounds). Higbie v. State, 723 S.W.2d 802, 805 (Tex. Crim. App. 1987). See State v. Muzik, 379 N.W.2d 599, 604 (Minn. Ct. App. 1985) (State must demonstrate either need for roadblock or its superiority to less intrusive alternatives). The majority of jurisdictions discussing the existence of other alternatives, however, either have rejected this requirement, People v. Bartley, 109 Ill. 2d 273, 287 (1985), cert. denied, 475 U.S. 1068 (1986), rev’g 125 Ill. App. 3d 575, 578 (1984), which had required a showing of no less intrusive yet equally effective alternative; State v. Garcia, 500 N.E.2d 158, 162-163 (Ind. 1986), cert. denied, 481 U.S. 1014 (1987), overruling State v. McLaughlin, 471 N.E.2d 1125 (Ind. Ct. App. 1984), which had required a showing of no less intrusive yet equally effective alternative; Little v. State, 300 Md. 485, 504-506 (1984); People v. Scott, supra at 528-529, or have indicated that the presence of such alternatives is merely one factor to be considered in determining the constitutional reasonableness of the roadblock seizures. State v. Jones, 483 So. 2d 433, 437-438 (Fla. 1986). State v. Deskins, 234 Kan. 529, 541 (1983).
Question one is answered in the negative. Question two therefore need not be reached. This case is remanded for proceedings consistent with this opinion.
Article 14 provides in some circumstances greater protection from searches and seizures than does the Fourth Amendment. See, e.g., Commonwealth v. Upton, 394 Mass. 363, 372-377 (1985) (stricter standard for determining probable cause under art. 14).
The question of probable cause has not been raised in this case (or in the companion case we decide today). Nor was the subject of probable cause presented or discussed in our earlier opinions concerning roadblocks. The dissent nevertheless volunteers a discussion on the question.
The basic issue is the reasonableness of the search, not the presence or absence of probable cause to believe evidence of a crime is likely to be found. In administrative searches a showing of individualized suspicion is not required because of the public interest in the inspection. See Camara, supra at 534-535. The same considerations fairly apply with respect to roadblocks conducted pursuant to established procedures in order to detect drivers operating under the influence of alcohol or other drugs. See 4 W.R. LaFave, Search and Seizure § 10.8(d), at 70-71 (1987). That probable cause need not be shown as to the driver who is stopped is implicit in what we said in Commonwealth v. Trumble, supra at 89-90, when we concluded that a search pursuant to established guidelines would be reasonable under both the Federal and State Constitutions. See also id. at 96 (Abrams, J., concurring).
The strong State interest in eliminating “[t]he carnage caused by drunk drivers,” South Dakota v. Neville, 459 U.S. 553, 558 (1983), sets roadblocks to enforce c. 90, § 24, apart from roadblocks for other purposes. Although the Supreme Court has indicated that roadblock seizures to enforce license and registration regulations do not violate the Fourth Amendment, Texas v. Brown, 460 U.S. 730, 739 (1983), it may well be, given the much lower State interest in assuring compliance with license and registration regulations, that roadblocks for that purpose are not permissible under art. 14.

=== CASE 9738045 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:41:23.880124+00 ===

*169Liacos, J.
(dissenting, with whom Lynch, J., joins). A review of the various decisions of the United States Supreme Court and of this court, dealing with the constitutionality of automobile roadblocks, reveals how the United States Supreme Court and, sadly, this court have slipped away from basic constitutional principles. Additionally, both the Federal decisions and our decisions offer an almost classic illustration of dictum building on dictum to become a rule of law. I write separately, in dissent, because I hope to refocus this debate on the fundamental principles of the jurisprudence of search and seizure law under both Federal and State Constitutions.
The fundamental principle under both the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution and art. 14 of the Massachusetts Declaration of Rights has been that no search or seizure is to be deemed “reasonable” unless based on a warrant issued on probable cause.1 This rule, like any other rule of law, has its exceptions, but it is basic. Yet, the court cavalierly brushes this rule aside by stating erroneously that: “The basic issue is the reasonableness of the search, not the presence or absence of probable cause to believe evidence of a crime is likely to be found.” Ante at 165 n.2. We are told that the test of a reasonable search or seizure is that of balancing the need to search or seize against the invasion of privacy which the search or seizure entails. It is true in this case, as well as in the companion case, Commonwealth v. Lovelace, post 1002 (1988), *170decided this day,2 that the parties also do not address this fundamental issue. It is true that this court did not come squarely to grips with this question in Commonwealth v. McGeoghegan, 389 Mass. 137 (1983), or in Commonwealth v. Trumble, 396 Mass. 81 (1985), or in Commonwealth v. Amaral, 398 Mass. 98 (1986).
Additionally, I do not believe that the court has faced up to the potential differences of result as matter of State constitutional law, but rather has followed the vacillating lead of the United States Supreme Court.3 See, e.g., McGeoghegan, supra at 141 n.2 (same factors are material under Federal and State Constitutions; no discussion); Trumble, supra at 89-90 (seizure pursuant to McGeoghegan guidelines would be reasonable under State and Federal Constitutions; no discussion); id. at 96 n.3 (Abrams, J., concurring) (no separate argument made by defendants); Amaral, supra at 101 (roadblock invalid under art. 14 and probably so under Fourth Amendment for failure to meet McGeoghegan guidelines; no discussion of differences between State and Federal law — or of probable cause or the warrant requirements).
Let us start with a look at McGeoghegan in an effort to illustrate where we have gone astray. In that case we ruled that stopping a vehicle in a police roadblock “was a seizure within the meaning of the Fourth and Fourteenth Amendments.” McGeoghegan, supra at 139. We also recognized that “[t]he reasonableness standard usually requires that the facts on which an intrusion is based be measured against probable cause, Carroll v. United States, 267 U.S. 132, 149 (1925), or, in limited instances, on articulable, reasonable suspicion focusing on the affected individual. United States v. Brignoni-Ponce, [422 U.S. 873, 881 (1975)].” Id. We acknowledged also the holding of Delaware v. Prouse, 440 U.S. 648 (1979), *171that random stops for license and registration checks could not be justified absent “at least articulable and reasonable suspicion.” Id. at 663.4 We then went forward, in dictum, to build on the dictum in Delaware v. Prouse,5 and set forth guidelines of reasonableness as to roadblocks.6
The dictum of McGeoghegan, built on the dictum of Delaware v. Prouse, seems to have become the rule shortly thereafter in Commonwealth v. Trumble, supra.7 The court stated *172in Trumble, supra at 86: “It is well established that the stopping of each defendant’s motor vehicle was a seizure within the Fourth and Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution. Delaware v. Prouse, 440 U.S. 648, 653-654 (1979). Our inquiry becomes, therefore, whether the seizures were reasonable. McGeoghegan, supra at 139. Accordingly, we must balance the public interest against ‘the individual’s right to personal security free from arbitrary interference by law officers.’ United States v. Brignoni-Ponce, 422 U.S. 873, 878 (1975).” (Emphasis supplied.) Thus, “balancing,” not probable cause, reasonable and articulable suspicion, or the presence or absence of a warrant, became the test.8 The court today falls into the same error when it states, ante at 164: “Decisions of this court and of the Supreme Court establish that there is ‘no ready test for determining reasonableness other than by balancing the need to search [or seize] against the invasion which the search [or seizure] entails.’ Commonwealth v. Silva, 366 *173Mass. 402, 405 (1974), quoting Camara v. Municipal Court of the City of San Francisco, 387 U.S. 523, 536-537 (1967) (administrative search). See Trumble, supra [at 86] (to determine reasonableness of seizure court balances ‘the public interest against “the individual’s right to personal security free from arbitrary interference by law officers,”)’ quoting United States v. Brignoni-Ponce, 422 U.S. 873, 878 (1975).”9
I have pointed out already the flaw in the Trumble reasoning. I add just a brief comment as to Commonwealth v. Silva, supra, which the court cites for support today. Silva was not a roadblock case but a stop and frisk case involving a disabled passenger vehicle. The ensuing search of the vehicle was held unlawful as being excessive, even though the initial stop was lawful. The “balancing” done in Silva was not as to the initiation of the stop (seizure), but as to the extent of the intrusion. Silva clearly adheres to the requirement of individualized suspicion and does not support the court’s sweeping assertions in Trumble, or in the present case.
The court refers also to Commonwealth v. Ortiz, 376 Mass. 349 (1978), as further support for its position. In Commonwealth v. Ortiz, supra at 353, however, we stated: “The Commonwealth bears the burden of showing the existence of both probable cause to believe the car contained contraband and exigent circumstances to justify the seizure without a search warrant. See Commonwealth v. Antobenedetto, 366 Mass. 51, 57 (1974).”10
*174To justify further its position, the court has referred in Trumble, and in this opinion, to the “strong public interest” (Trumble, supra at 86), in reducing the harm done by drunken drivers. The results the court reaches today are described as “sui generis,” limited to this large social need, based also, in part, on the “lower expectations of privacy” accorded the motoring public. The approach taken here, we are assured, cannot be extended to “high crime areas.” One must assume then that (under the Federal case law) only detection of aliens at fixed border roadblocks, see United States v. Martinez-Fuerte, 428 U.S. 543 (1976), and (under State law) apprehension of drunken drivers raise the level of public interest to the point where we shall put aside traditional rules and balance, instead, public interest against privacy interests. Does this mean that drug dealing and illegal possession of deadly weapons are lesser concerns? Or does it means that pedestrians are safe, but drivers and passengers are fair game? More likely, it means that “sui generis,” however well meant, is an illusory promise.
Automobiles are not beyond the Fourth Amendment’s protection. Consider these words in Almeida-Sanchez v. United States, 413 U.S. 266, 269 (1973), referring to the exception to the warrant requirement as to automobiles created by Carroll v. United States, 267 U.S. 132 (1925): “The Carroll doctrine does not declare a field day for the police in searching automobiles. Automobile or no automobile, there must be probable cause for the search.”
The public’s interest in barring the entry of illegal aliens and those interests involving enforcement of liquor laws, including the apprehension of drunken drivers, are not necessarily the same. The Court, in Almeida-Sanchez, supra at 274-275, recognized this when it quoted Chief Justice Taft in Carroll as follows: “ ‘It would be intolerable and unreasonable if a prohibition agent were authorized to stop every automobile on *175the chance of finding liquor and thus subject all persons lawfully using the highways to the inconvenience and indignity of such a search. Travellers may be so stopped in crossing an international boundary because of national self protection reasonably requiring one entering the country to identify himself as entitled to come in, and his belongings as effects which may be lawfully brought in. But those lawfully within the country, entitled to use the public highways, have a right to free passage without interruption or search unless there is known to a competent official authorized to search, probable cause for believing that their vehicles are carrying contraband or illegal merchandise. ’ 267 U.S., at 153-154.”
In United States v. Ortiz, 422 U.S. 891, 896-897 (1975), the Court invalidated a border checkpoint seizure and said: “A search, even of an automobile, is a substantial invasion of privacy. To protect that privacy from official arbitrariness, the Court always has regarded probable cause as the minumum requirement for a lawful search. Almeida-Sanchez, 413 U.S. at 269-270; Chambers v. Maroney, 399 U.S. 42, 51 (1970). We are not persuaded that the differences between roving patrois and traffic checkpoints justify dispensing in this case with the safeguards we required in Almeida-Sanchez. We therefore follow that decision and hold that at traffic checkpoints removed from the border and its functional equivalents, officers may not search private vehicles without consent or probable cause.”
Unfortunately, all of its own strictures were abandoned by the Court in United States v. Martinez-Fuerte, 428 U.S. 543 (1976). There the Court, for the first time, upheld border checkpoint stops on the basis of the “substantiality of the public interest” and the impracticality of requiring reasonable suspicion as the basis of the stop. Id. at 556. Justice Brennan’s statement in dissent should be our guide: “Consistent with this purpose to debilitate Fourth Amendment protections, the Court’s decision today virtually empties the Amendment of its reasonableness requirement by holding that law enforcement officials manning fixed checkpoint stations who make standard-less seizures of persons do not violate the Amendment. This holding cannot be squared with this Court’s recent decisions *176in United States v. Ortiz, [supra]; United States v. Brignoni-Ponce, 422 U.S. 873 (1975); and Almeida-Sanchez v. United States, [supra]. I dissent.” United States v. Martinez-Fuerte, supra at 568-569 (Brennan, J., dissenting).
More recently, when this “sui generis” concept was extended to drug searches of boats on interior waterways, Justice Brennan commented in United States v. Villamonte-Marquez, 462 U.S. 579, 610 (1983) (Brennan, J., dissenting):11 “In dissent in Martinez-Fuerte, I expressed my fear that the Court’s decision was part of a ‘continuing evisceration of Fourth Amendment protections against unreasonable searches and seizures.’ 428 U.S. at 567. The majority chided me for my rhetoric and my ‘unwarranted concern,’ pointing out that its holding was expressly and narrowly limited: ‘Our holding today, approving routine stops for brief questioning . . . is confined to permanent checkpoints. ’ Id. at 566 n.19. Today the Court breaks that promise. I dissent.”12
In my view, the same lapses are infecting this court with a foreseeable expansion of the doctrine reiterated today. We have not hesitated to grant to our citizens greater protection under art. 14,13 and we should do so here. In Trumble, Justice *177Lynch concluded his dissent (in which I joined), by asking the court to justify its departure from its “traditional concern” for privacy rights. He stated:
“The court’s holding that the seizures at the Sunderland roadblocks were reasonable contrasts shaiply with other decisions of this court concerning the scope of protection afforded by the Fourth Amendment. See, e.g., Commonwealth v. Pietrass, 392 Mass. 892, 898-900 (1984) (even though there was probable cause to arrest the defendant on charges of aggravated rape and other violent crimes, the Commonwealth failed to meet its burden of showing exigency, so the police were not justified in making a warrantless entry of a dwelling to arrest him); Commonwealth v. Thibeau, 384 Mass. 762, 763-764 (1981) (even though defendant was riding a bicycle, a known means of transporting illegal drugs, and made a sudden left turn as police cruiser approached, police lacked probable cause to arrest him and seize envelopes containing narcotics that were sticking out of his pocket); Commonwealth v. Bacon, 381 Mass. 642, 645-646 (1980) (police were not justified in making investigatory stop of relatively expensive motor vehicle operated by two youthful appearing men, even though one attempted to conceal his face, presumably from police view). I am unable to reconcile the court’s ruling that the Commonwealth has sustained its burden in this case with the traditional concern this court has expressed for protecting Fourth Amendment rights. Here, the court concludes that the warrantless stop of 503 vehicles was justified even though the police lacked a basis for suspecting that any particular operator was or *178had been engaged in criminal activity. The court gives no satisfactory explanation for why it has suddenly lowered the threshold showing which the Commonwealth has traditionally been required to make to justify a warrantless stop or arrest.” Commonwealth v. Trumble, 396 Mass. 81, 101-102 (1985).
Today’s decision again fails to give a “satisfactory explanation” for “lowering] the threshold. ” Accordingly, I dissent.14
The Fourth Amendment states: “The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated, and no warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause, supported by oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the place to be searched, and the persons or things to be seized.”
Article 14 of the Massachusetts Declaration of Rights states: “Every subject has a right to be secure from all unreasonable searches, and seizures, of his person, his houses, his papers, and all his possessions. All warrants, therefore, are contrary to this right, if the cause or foundation of them be not previously supported by oath or affirmation; and if the order in the warrant to a civil officer, to make search in suspected places, or to arrest one or more suspected persons, or to seize their property, be not accompanied with a special designation of the persons or objects of search, arrest, or seizure: and no warrant ought to be issued but in cases, and with the formalities prescribed by the laws.”
Justice Lynch and I disagree with the opinion in Lovelace for the reasons stated here.
For a comprehensive analysis of the retreat of the United States Supreme Court from fundamental Fourth Amendment principles, see Wasserstrom, The Incredible Shrinking Fourth Amendment, 21 Am. Crim. L. Rev. 257
The Supreme Court held, in Delaware v. Prouse, supra at 663, as follows: “Accordingly, we hold that except in those situations in which there is at least articulable and reasonable suspicion that a motorist is unlicensed or that an automobile is not registered, or that either the vehicle or an occupant is otherwise subject to seizure for violation of law, stopping an automobile and detaining the driver in order to check his driver’s license and the registration of the automobile are unreasonable under the Fourth Amendment.”
The dictum in McGeoghegan relied on is: “This holding does not preclude the State of Delaware or other States from developing methods for spot checks that involve less intrusion or that do not involve the unconstrained exercise of discretion. Questioning of all oncoming traffic at roadblock-type stops is one possible alternative. We hold only that persons in automobiles on public roadways may not for that reason alone have their travel and privacy interfered with at the unbridled discretion of police officers.” Delaware v. Prouse, supra.
In McGeoghegan, supra at 143-144, we said, by way of “observations”: “For a roadblock to be permissible, it appears that the selection of motor vehicles to be stopped must not be arbitrary, safety must be assured, motorists’ inconvenience must be minimized and assurance must be given that the procedure is being conducted pursuant to a plan devised by law enforcement supervisory personnel. While we do not suggest that advance notice is a constitutional necessity, advance publication of the date of an intended roadblock even without announcing its precise location, would have the virtue of reducing surprise, fear, and inconvenience. Such a procedure may achieve a degree of law enforcement and highway safety that is not reasonably attainable by less intrusive means. Also, while we do not suggest that roadblocks can only be constitutional if prescribed by statute or appropriate governmental regulation, we think that procedures conducted pursuant to such authorizations and standards would be more defensible them would other procedures.”
It is worthy to note that the roadblock in McGeoghegan was ruled unconstitutional; Justice Nolan, the author of Commonwealth v. Trumble, 396 Mass. 81 (1985), dissented in McGeoghegan.
Trumble came to the court on reservation and report of questions which focused on the validity of roadblock guidelines, not on the question of probable cause or the need of a warrant. The primary question reported
*172was: “Were guidelines promulgated by the Secretary of Public Safety to govern drunk driving roadblocks properly promulgated and did they make adequate provisions so as not to offend the guarantees of the Fourth and Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution, Articles 12 and 14 of the Massachusetts Declaration of Rights and Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 41, Section 98?” Id. at 82.
Being the single justice who reported the questions in the form requested by the parties, I bear some responsibility for the limited nature of the court’s response. The present case is also before the court on reported questions which limit arguably the range of our inquiry. See ante at 163-164. Commonwealth v. Lovelace, post 1002 (1988), is here on appeal, however, and the court’s grouping of the two cases justifies the conclusion that all issues are open to us.
Contrast this with the actual holding in Delaware v. Prouse, quoted in note 4, supra. Contrast this also with the actual holding in Brignoni-Ponce, that a roving patrol stop was unconstitutional, and holding also that, “when an officer’s observations lead him reasonably to suspect that a particular vehicle may contain aliens who are illegally in the country, he may stop the car briefly and investigate the circumstances that provoke suspicion.” Brignoni-Ponce, supra at 881. The Supreme Court’s citation to Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1 (1968), and related cases, put “balancing” in proper context. The Court, referring to Terry and Adams v. Williams, 407 U.S. 143 (1972), indicated that a lesser standard of probable cause (articulable and reasonable suspicion) limits the nature and scope of the permissible seizure and intrusion.
The process I describe brings to mind the well-known comment of Justice Frankfurter, in United States v. Rabinowitz, 339 U.S. 56, 68 (1950) (Frankfurter, J., dissenting): “These decisions do not justify today’s decision. They merely prove how a hint becomes a suggestion, is loosely turned into dictum and finally elevated to a decision. This progressive distortion is due to . . . uncritical confusion . . . .’’Id. at 75.
The court also states, ante at 167, that, “[i]n the analogous context of courthouse entry searches we have approved an initial search not based on articulable individualized suspicion so long as it ‘was no more intrusive than necessary. ’ Commonwealth v. Harris, 383 Mass. 655, 657 (1981).” Harris does not support the court’s position because (a) the “search” was not, as here, for the purpose of detection of crime (Harris, supra); and (b) the “search” was found to be consensual. Id. The fact that the limited intrusion in Harris was consensual was recognized in McGeoghegan, supra *174at 140, where we said, as to Harris'. “We recognized the search to be consensual in the same way as in the airport search cases ... .’’No argument is made that drivers explicitly or impliedly consent to roadblocks, and, despite its unfounded reliance on Harris, I do not understand the court to rest its decision on such a questionable premise.
See also the Court’s review of the automobile stop cases in Villamonte-Marquez, supra at 587-589.
The danger inherent in the Martinez-Fuerte approach is even more strikingly illustrated by INS v. Delgado, 466 U.S. 210 (1984). There, the Court, for the first time, excluded altogether Fourth Amendment consideration from certain law enforcement encounters. The Court held that detailed interrogation of individuals during a factory raid by immigration service agents did not amount to a seizure, notwithstanding the presence of immigration agents moving systematically through the factory asking about immigration status, while other agents stationed themselves at every exit for the duration of a several hour raid. Justice Brennan recognized that “the Court has become so mesmerized by the magnitude of the [illegal immigration] problem that it has too easily allowed Fourth Amendment freedoms to be sacrificed.” Id. at 239-240 (Brennan, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part). Delgado demonstrates all too clearly that constitutional reasoning in one context is ultimately inseparable from other contexts.
See, e.g., Commonwealth v. Blood, 400 Mass. 61, 67-75 (1987) (electronic surveillance); Commonwealth v. Ford, 394 Mass. 421, 426 (1985) (inventory search of automobile); Commonwealth v. Upton, 394 Mass. 363, 373 (1985) (determination of probable cause). See also Murphy, The Role of *177Massachusetts State Constitutional Law in Litigation Strategies for the Trial of Drunk Driving Case under the “Safe Roads Act” of 1986, 72 Mass. L. Rev. 120 (1987).
If the court feels that the issues which I discuss have not been argued by the parties, the wiser course would be to set these cases down for reargument. Fundamental constitutional considerations ought not to be ignored because of the vagaries of the adversary system.
I have not addressed the “less intrusive alternative” issue for two reasons: (1) Justice Lynch’s dissent in Trumble covers the point fully; and (2) the need to address the issue of the basis of a seizure in the context of police roadblocks has seemed to me to be overriding. I remain, however, in accord with Justice Lynch’s views on the point of less intrusive alternatives. Additionally, I have not addressed the warrant requirement. See Almeida-Sanchez v. United States, supra at 275, 282-285 (Powell, J,, concurring). Cf. Camara v. Municipal Court of the City of San Francisco, 387 U.S. 523 (1967); See v. Seattle, 387 U.S. 541 (1967); State v. Olgaard, 248 N.W.2d 392, 395 (S.D. 1976). Compare Opinion of the Justices, 128 N.H. 14 (1986), with State v. Koppel, 127 N.H. 286 (1985).

=== CASE 2213250 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:29.308155+00 ===

167 Ill. App.3d 772 (1988)
521 N.E.2d 1245
NORMA M. LOWE, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
STEVEN KANG, Defendant-Appellant (G.S. Summit, Inc., et al., Defendants).
No. 2-87-0621.
Illinois Appellate Court  Second District.
Opinion filed April 7, 1988.
*773 *774 Van Duzer, Gershon, Jordan & Petersen, of Chicago (Richard J. Loeffler, of counsel), for appellant.
A. Mark Ialongo, of Ialongo & Meyer, of Chicago (James G. Meyer, of counsel), for appellee.
Judgment affirmed.
PRESIDING JUSTICE LINDBERG delivered the opinion of the court:
Defendant, Stephen Kang, appeals from the judgment of the circuit court of Du Page County, entered upon a jury verdict, in favor of plaintiff, Norma Lowe, in the amount of $115,005 for injuries sustained when plaintiff was struck by a car driven by defendant. Plaintiff suffered two broken legs and a broken kneecap. Plaintiff sued under a negligence theory. Defendant denied he was negligent and also pleaded the defense of comparative negligence.
The accident between the parties occurred on June 18, 1985, in the parking lot of the Oak Brook Shopping Center, outside the Sears store in which plaintiff had worked part-time for approximately five years. Defendant was 15 years old at the time of the incident and was not licensed to drive. Defendant testified that he had just looked both ways and turned left into a one-way aisle of the parking lot and was proceeding in the proper direction. Just as he turned into the aisle, defendant testified that he saw plaintiff and attempted to stop but was unable to, and his car hit the plaintiff. Plaintiff testified that she *775 was walking to her car located in another aisle. Plaintiff testified that she had cut over to the aisle and was walking down the aisle when she was struck by defendant's car.
Paul MacLennan testified that he was parked in the second or third stall of this aisle when he saw plaintiff walk by the right side of his car and a moment later heard a scream and saw (in his rearview mirror) plaintiff on the hood of defendant's car. MacLennan testified that he then saw plaintiff slump off the hood onto the ground.
Defendant argued that he had just turned left around an island, into the aisle, when plaintiff cut across the aisle into his path. Plaintiff argued that she had entered the aisle farther up and was walking directly down the aisle. Both parties stated they did not see the other until an instant before the accident. Defendant estimated his speed at 5 to 10 miles per hour. Plaintiff estimated the speed of defendant's car to be 25 to 30 miles per hour.
At trial, after the close of all the evidence, plaintiff moved for a directed verdict as to defendant's liability and plaintiff's freedom from contributory negligence. After extensive argument, both motions were denied. After these motions were denied, plaintiff and defendant presented their closing arguments to the jury. During defense counsel's closing argument, defense counsel repeatedly stated that both parties were at fault and that his client should only be found to be 50% at fault. After defense counsel's closing argument, the jury was excused, and plaintiff moved for a directed verdict as to defendant's liability, arguing that defense counsel had admitted the liability of his client. The trial court directed a verdict on the issue of defendant's liability in favor of plaintiff. The jury returned and was instructed that the issue of defendant's liability was no longer before them for their consideration, and plaintiff presented his rebuttal argument. The issues of plaintiff's comparative negligence and damages were submitted to the jury. The jury found plaintiff 18% at fault and awarded reduced damages in the amount of $115,005 for plaintiff's disability, pain and suffering, medical expenses, and lost earnings.
On appeal, defendant argues that the trial court erred: (1) in directing a verdict as to defendant's liability based on the trial court's finding of a judicial admission; (2) in failing to properly instruct the jury on proximate cause, statutory violations and defendant's theory of comparative negligence based on a "safer alternative route"; (3) in its pretrial rulings on defendant's motion in limine; and (4) that plaintiff's counsel prejudiced the jury by certain comments during the course of trial; and (5) the verdict was against the manifest weight of the evidence.
*776  1-3 We address defendant's contention that the trial court erred when it found defendant's closing argument to be a judicial admission of liability and directed a verdict in favor of plaintiff on the issue. Attorneys are deemed agents of their clients for the purpose of making admissions in all matters relating to the progress and trial of an action. (Beverly Bank v. Coleman Air Transport (1985), 134 Ill. App.3d 699, 481 N.E.2d 54.) Actions of an attorney in the management of a client's case are binding on the client, and the negligence of an attorney is insufficient to warrant a new trial. (Ruggio v. Ditkowsky (1986), 147 Ill. App.3d 638, 498 N.E.2d 747.) Judicial admissions are formal acts of a party or his attorney in court, dispensing with proof of a fact claimed to be true, and are used as a substitute for legal evidence at trial. (Frisch v. International Harvester Co. (1975), 33 Ill. App.3d 507, 338 N.E.2d 90.) An admission by an attorney for a party during trial supersedes all proofs upon the point in question. (Standard Management Realty Co. v. Johnson (1987), 157 Ill. App.3d 919, 510 N.E.2d 986.) What constitutes a judicial admission must be decided under the circumstances in each case, and before a statement can be held to be such an admission, it must be given a meaning consistent with the context in which it is found. (Standard Management Realty Co., 157 Ill. App.3d 919, 510 N.E.2d 986.) The power of a court to act upon facts conceded by counsel is as plain as its power to act upon evidence produced. Petersen v. General Rug & Carpet Cleaners, Inc. (1947), 333 Ill. App. 47, 77 N.E.2d 58.
 4 The issue of whether a party's statement is a judicial admission has arisen in many contexts, including statements by attorneys in opening statements, direct examination, cross-examination and closing argument. (Deel v. United States Steel Corp. (1969), 105 Ill. App.2d 170, 245 N.E.2d 109 (answers to interrogatories); Vincent v. Wesolowski (1967), 87 Ill. App.2d 477, 232 N.E.2d 120 (deposition testimony); Frisch v. International Harvester Co. (1975), 33 Ill. App.3d 507, 338 N.E.2d 90 (direct examination); Darling v. Charleston Community Memorial Hospital (1964), 50 Ill. App.2d 253, 200 N.E.2d 149 (cross-examination); Petersen v. General Rug & Carpet Cleaners, Inc. (1947), 333 Ill. App. 47, 77 N.E.2d 58 (opening statements); Sabo v. T.W. Moore Feed & Grain Co. (1968), 97 Ill. App.2d 7, 239 N.E.2d 459 (closing argument).) While we have not found any case which expressly holds whether or not a closing argument may properly be the basis of a judicial admission, it is clear that an attorney's admission in his opening statement to the jury may be the basis for a finding of a judicial admission. (Standard Management Realty Co., 157 Ill. App.3d 919, 510 N.E.2d 986.) Statements made by an attorney *777 in the course of trial and during cross-examination have been held to be judicial admissions. (Darling, 50 Ill. App.2d 253, 200 N.E.2d 149.) There are situations where statements made in closing argument, under the circumstances of the case and within the context made, were not judicial admissions. (Sabo, 97 Ill. App.2d 7, 239 N.E.2d 459; Bunch v. Rose (1973), 10 Ill. App.3d 198, 293 N.E.2d 8; Deel, 105 Ill. App.2d 170, 245 N.E.2d 109.) What becomes clear, in our review of the cases, is that whether or not a statement by an attorney in the course of trial is a judicial admission depends upon the circumstances of the individual case and the giving of a consistent meaning to the statement within the context in which it is found.
 5 The fact that the statement by the attorney is made in opening or closing argument or on direct or cross-examination is relevant as to the context in which the statement is made and not determinative of whether or not the statement is a judicial admission. We hold that statements made by an attorney in closing argument may be the basis from which a trial court finds a judicial admission. See Petersen v. General Rug & Carpet Cleaners, Inc. (1947), 333 Ill. App. 47, 77 N.E.2d 58 (opening statement).
The next issue is whether the trial court abused its discretion in finding defense counsel's statements in closing arguments to be a judicial admission of defendant's liability. To place defense counsel's closing argument in context, we must briefly discuss the state of the evidence at that point in the trial. The testimony of both parties was that neither party saw the other until an instant before the accident. The evidence also indicated that neither plaintiff's nor defendant's view was obstructed. It was disputed as to whether plaintiff had just cut across the aisle or had been walking down the middle of the aisle. Paul MacLennan, a disinterested witness, saw the plaintiff on defendant's hood just after impact in his rearview mirror. MacLennan was parked two to three stalls up the aisle from the end of the aisle from which defendant's car entered. At the end of the aisle, before the parking stalls began, was a grassy island 10 feet to 15 feet long. This evidence indicates that the accident occurred at least 10 feet and two to three stalls up the aisle. The evidence indicated that, regardless of where plaintiff came from, defendant's view of the area around the point of impact was unobstructed. In summary, the evidence would support a conclusion that both parties failed to look where they were going. It was under these circumstances that defense counsel addressed the jury in closing argument.
At the beginning of closing argument, defense counsel characterized closing argument of counsel as suggestions as to what the jury *778 should find from the evidence. He stated:
"You decide in effect what happened on June 18 of 1985 back in the Oak Brook Shopping Center parking lot. You decide what happened subsequently as far as the medical treatment and the questions of disability, et cetera, that Mrs. Lowe is seeking compensation for.
In general sense, you people will be deciding the fault of the parties here. You people will be deciding the fault as far as Mrs. Lowe is concerned. And that is called comparative negligence, as well as the negligence of my client."
Defense counsel then summarized the evidence and credibility and weight of the various testimony. He stated:
"And I'm not going to stand before you today and attempt to convince you that, as has been said, I'm going for the home run ball. There is no question that there was fault on the part of both parties to this occurrence."
Defense counsel summarized certain aspects of the evidence and argued that it would be reasonable to conclude that plaintiff was "guilty of her own negligence." He stated:
"I'm not trying to say here that Steven Kang did nothing wrong. I said that in the beginning. No one is saying that you're going to return a not guilty verdict in my client's favor. No way. I would be less than reasonable. I would be not very frank with you if I tried to argue that to you today. There is no question that he is somewhat responsible for this. He is in part responsible. And so is Mrs. Lowe. And that's the tough part of your duties as a juror.
You have got to decide the comparative negligence between my client as a defendant and Mrs. Lowe as a plaintiff."
Defense counsel again discussed the evidence and argued that plaintiff didn't look where she was going and stated:
"I'm not saying that Steven Kang is totally innocent in this case, but there is also some responsibility on the part of Mrs. Lowe. You have to determine the comparative fault of the plaintiff in the case. I'm going to suggest to you that I believe the fault of my client and the fault of Mrs. Lowe are equal.
I'm not saying this is an unavoidable accident, but what I'm saying is neither of these parties saw each other. That is a responsibility of not only my client but also Mrs. Lowe."
He stated there was no question that plaintiff suffered two broken legs and a broken knee, and counsel went on to argue that the damages asked for were too high and the jury's award should not be near *779 the $250,000 asked for but maybe $50,000.
Defense counsel stated:
"As I've said, I believe this is a 50/50 case. Both parties were equally at fault.
* * *
Both of us have approached this case openly to you. We have not tried to distort it. We have presented it to you as it happened.
On June 18, of 1985, both parties made some mistakes, both parties were equally at fault.
I'm going to suggest to you that when you reach the verdict form that Mr. Ialongo [plaintiff's counsel] has mentioned to you which reads, take in consideration the reduction of damages which finds the total damages to be, that you put in a figure in the area of $50,000."
Defense counsel summarized the evidence on damages and argued why he felt $50,000 was the fair extent of plaintiff's total damages by stating:
"I think a percentage finding as far as comparative negligence should not be a zero as Mr. Ialongo has suggested to you but something in the area of 25 to 30 percent of Mrs. Lowe's negligence, maybe even up to 50 percent. Because again I must emphasize, the police officer said from her perception of the way he took those photographs the driver's view was not obstructed. And I think it was quite clear after examining Mrs. Lowe that neither was Mrs. Lowe's view obstructed.
* * *
I'm not saying that this accident didn't happen. What I am saying is both parties could have looked out for each other in a better fashion and they didn't. But that's a responsibility that both Steven Kang has and also Mrs. Lowe has.
This does not hit the home run as Mr. Ialongo said. This does not leave her without any compensation. But it does state that she was responsible in part for causing this accident. So I think the figure that I have mentioned to you is a reasonable figure and it's something that a verdict in that area I think fits the facts, the law and the evidence in this case."
 6 Based on closing argument, the trial court found that defense counsel had admitted his client's fault. The trial court stated:
"Well, I did perceive it as an admission of fault and I was surprised in view of the argument we had before. I thought it was perhaps a very, very good strategy on behalf of the defendant. *780 But I do view it as an admission of fault. And of course you do have the authority to bind your client just by saying both people are at fault."
The record and closing argument of defense counsel support the trial court's finding that counsel's closing argument admitted defendant's liability. Counsel for defendant stated unambiguously that defendant was "at fault" and "responsible" for the accident. Nor were these statements, when viewed in the context of defendant's entire closing argument, simple misstatements or inadvertently made. Counsel's closing argument was based on a theory that although his client was at fault, he should not be liable for 100% of the damages because plaintiff was also at fault. Defense counsel did not argue that defendant was not negligent but if the jury found otherwise then plaintiff's negligence must be offset against defendant's negligence so as to reduce plaintiff's damages. If that argument had preceded counsel's statements, then counsel's statements would have appeared in a different context and could have been interpreted consistently as just an alternative argument if the jury found defendant liable. The trial court's finding, that defense counsel's statements in closing argument were judicial admissions of liability, was not against the manifest weight of the evidence.
 7 Defendant argues that, if his statements are judicial admissions, these statements only admit negligence and not proximate cause and that the issue of proximate cause was improperly withdrawn from the jury's consideration. We do not agree. Defense counsel stated his client was "at fault" and "responsible." "Fault" as used by defendant's counsel in closing argument is defined as a "responsibility for wrongdoing or failure." (Webster's Third New International Dictionary 829 (1981).) "Responsible" is defined "creditable or chargeable with the result." (Webster's Third New International Dictionary 1935 (1981).) We agree with the trial court's finding that defendant's counsel's statements admitted liability and not simply negligence. In addition, proximate cause is essentially a question of foreseeability of ensuing harm. A negligent act is a proximate cause of an injury if the injury is of a type which a reasonable man would see as a likely result of his conduct. (Gould v. Spreitzer (1986), 145 Ill. App.3d 938, 940, 496 N.E.2d 307, 308.) We find no merit to defendant's argument that, under the circumstances of this case, running into a pedestrian in a parking lot aisle is not a foreseeable result of the negligent operation of a motor vehicle in the parking lot of a shopping center.
 8 Defendant next argues that the trial court erred in failing to give defendant's instructions Nos. 9 and 10 based on certain statutory *781 violations and in giving plaintiff's instruction No. 17. Defendant's arguments are not supported with any citation to relevant authority and are waived. 107 Ill.2d R. 341(e)(7); Deckard v. Joiner (1970), 44 Ill.2d 412, 255 N.E.2d 900.
Defendant argues the trial court erred in its rulings on defendant's pretrial motion in limine and also erred in admitting certain evidence in violation of its rulings on defendant's motion in limine. Defendant has waived these issues by failing to cite any relevant authority in support of his arguments that certain evidence was prejudicially admitted, and in failing to cite to the record for specific instances at which this allegedly prejudiced evidence was admitted. 107 Ill.2d R. 341(e)(7); Deckard, 44 Ill.2d 412, 255 N.E.2d 900.
 9 Defendant argues that his theory that plaintiff had a "safer alternative route" was not presented to the jury. Defendant's argument is without merit. In a proper case, the theory that a pedestrian-plaintiff was contributorily negligent in failing to take a safer alternative route is an issue upon which defendant is entitled to have the jury instructed. (Blacconeri v. Aguayo (1985), 132 Ill. App.3d 984, 478 N.E.2d 546.) At trial, after the directed verdict on the issue of defendant's liability, a revised version of defendant's instruction No. 11 was given. (See Illinois Pattern Jury Instructions, Civil, No. A20.01 (2d ed. Supp. 1985).) The instruction stated in part:
"The defendant claims that plaintiff was contributorily negligent in one or more of the following respects:
* * *
(b) Failed to use available sidewalks and streets which would have provided a safer route as a pedestrian."
Considering the totality of the jury instructions, the jury was properly instructed on defendant's theories of contributory negligence. Barreto v. City of Waukegan (1985), 133 Ill. App.3d 119, 478 N.E.2d 581.
 10, 11 Defendant contends that plaintiff's counsel prejudiced the jury by commenting on inflation in his closing argument and by making reference to a clavicle fracture of plaintiff, which was erroneously present in certain medical records and which was not an element of damages sought by plaintiff. Determination of what comments of counsel are prejudicial to a party's right to receive a fair trial is a matter resting within the sound discretion of the trial court, and the trial court's ruling will not be disturbed unless there is a clear abuse of discretion. (Carlasare v. Wilhelmi (1985), 134 Ill. App.3d 1, 479 N.E.2d 1073.) Plaintiff's reference to inflation in closing argument was objected to by defendant, and the objection was overruled. The reference was made in the context of explaining plaintiff's estimate *782 of lost income and how it was reasonable and not based on inflation. Plaintiff's reference to inflation did not invite the jury to increase damages. The trial court did not abuse its discretion in overruling defendant's objection to plaintiff's statement.
 12 No prejudicial error occurred when, on direct examination of plaintiff's treating doctor, plaintiff's counsel inadvertently referred to a "fractured clavicle" appearing on plaintiff's medical chart. Defendant objected, and the trial court sustained the objection. Plaintiff's counsel, in the presence of the jury, stipulated that no such injury occurred and that plaintiff was not claiming any such injury. The court instructed the jury accordingly. No prejudicial error occurred since the improper evidence was stricken, and the jury was instructed to disregard the statement. Needy v. Sparks (1977), 51 Ill. App.3d 350, 366 N.E.2d 327.
 13, 14 Defendant's last contention on appeal is that the jury's verdict on plaintiff's comparative negligence was against the manifest weight of the evidence. The jury found plaintiff's comparative negligence to be 18%. In order for a reviewing court to reverse a jury's determination of plaintiff's percentage of comparative negligence, the jury's verdict must be against the manifest weight of the evidence. (Ford v. City of Chicago (1985), 132 Ill. App.3d 408, 476 N.E.2d 1232.) A jury's verdict apportioning the percentage of fault between plaintiff and defendant will not be set aside as against the manifest weight of the evidence unless all reasonably intelligent minds would reach a different conclusion or it is clearly evident that the jury reached a wrong conclusion or incorrect result. (Kohutko v. Four Columns, Ltd. (1986), 148 Ill. App.3d 181, 498 N.E.2d 522 (involved appellate review of jury's verdict on issue of apportionment of fault between joint tortfeasors).) The evidence adduced at trial would support a conclusion that both parties were at fault for the accident which injured plaintiff. Defense counsel suggested in his closing argument that the jury could reasonably find plaintiff's comparative negligence to be 25% to 30%. Our review of the record clearly indicates that the jury's verdict finding plaintiff's comparative negligence to be 18% was not against the manifest weight of the evidence.
We affirm the judgment of the circuit court of Du Page County.
Affirmed.
HOPF and DUNN, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9738046 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:41:27.070089+00 ===

HERNDON, Acting P. J.
Defendant Noah Dietrich appeals from the judgment awarding respondent, his ex-wife, the sum of $57,622.33 and declaring the rights of the parties in the application of one of the provisions of their property settlement agreement. The parties were married on May 23, 1936, and divorced on August 22, 1955. Throughout their marriage, and prior thereto, appellant had been employed by Howard Hughes and the Hughes Tool Company. In connection with their divorce proceedings, the parties entered into a property settlement agreement, which included, for the reasons set forth therein, the following paragraph:
“19A. Should Husband receive or obtain from Howard Hughes, Hughes Tool Company, or any company in which Howard Hughes owns a substantial interest, any bonus (other than the salary and profit participation in effect during the past fifteen (15) years or more of Husband’s employment with Hughes Tool Company) or have any transaction with Howard Hughes or any such company by which Husband realizes an economic benefit not consistent with his capital investment or a capital gain, Wife shall be entitled to participate therein to the extent of one-third (1/3) thereof. Wife’s participation therein shall be by way of a further division of community property. It is the purpose and intent that the provisions of this paragraph shall apply to any economic benefit received by Husband from Howard Hughes, or any such company, regardless of the form which said transaction may take and which benefit is not consistent with Husband’s capital investment, or is in addition to the customary salary and bonus presently being received by Husband. The provisions of this paragraph are an outgrowth of an understanding had by Husband with Howard Hughes that, if it is possible and practical, as a result of the long service by Husband for the Hughes Tool Company, Husband will re*652ceive substantial economic benefit or compensation at some time in the future. It is clearly recognized and understood, however, that there is no definite understanding or agreement with Howard Hughes or the Hughes Tool Company, or any other company which Howard Hughes may own, or in which he may own a substantial interest, to so compensate Husband. The participation by Wife in said unusual bonus or capital gains to the extent herein provided is conditioned, however, upon the fact that said participation must be recognized by any governmental taxing authority as a payment to Wife of her community interest in said bonus, or as payment of alimony. If any taxes are assessed as a result of this provision, Wife agrees to pay said taxes immediately upon notification by Husband, and to hold Husband harmless in regard thereto. ’ ’
Following a nonjury trial, the court made appropriate findings of fact and conclusions of law determining that certain monies received, and to be received, by appellant Noah Dietrich from Howard Hughes and the Hughes Tool Company fell within the terms of this paragraph and entered judgment accordingly.
Appellant’s brief makes no specific assignment of error, and, in effect, reargues, as if upon a trial de novo, the same theories and the same contentions respecting the facts which the trial court rejected. The brief makes no pretense of setting forth or summarizing all the material evidence bearing upon the essential issues, and, for this reason alone, it properly could be held that appellant is foreclosed from questioning the sufficiency of the evidence to support the findings. (Bongiovanni v. Rackow, 212 Cal.App.2d 550, 551-552 [28 Cal.Rptr. 155]; Davis v. Lucas, 180 Cal.App.2d 407, 409-410 [4 Cal.Rptr. 479].)
Viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to respondent, the record discloses that during the many years of appellant’s marriage and of his employment by Hughes or the Hughes companies, Mr. Hughes had told appellant that he could expect in the future to receive some substantial economic benefit or compensation in addition to his regular salary and profit participation. It was to provide for the realization of this expectation that paragraph 19A was drafted and its terms made sufficiently comprehensive to include “any transaction” or “any economic benefit received regardless of the form which said transaction may take” so long as it was in addition to appellant’s customary salary and income.
*653At Mr. Hughes’ suggestion, appellant from time to time had submitted various plans designed to effect capital gains arrangements for himself and for certain other key employees which would not unduly dilute Mr. Hughes’ ownership of the company. None of these plans had been accepted at the time the property settlement agreement was executed and, therefore, its provisions were drafted in the most comprehensive fashion consistent with the expressed intent of the parties.
Appellant testified that on September 15, 1956, he finally told Mr. Hughes that he was going to terminate his employment; that he felt it was obvious that Mr. Hughes was not “going to make any sincere effort to work out a capital gains arrangement for me, and if I continue on it will have to be on some other basis”; that they then proceeded to work out a contract providing that appellant would continue in his employment and would receive $1,000,000 whenever he did resign. Appellant, however, asserted that this oral agreement did not require any particular period of further employment, Mr. Hughes stating that “he would leave it to my judgment.”
Appellant was satisfied with this arrangement, but continued his employment only until May 12, 1957. During this period, he received his regular compensation and submitted no further plans regarding additional compensation. Mr. Hughes resented appellant’s leaving, and bitterness developed between them. Appellant testified that he and Mr. Hughes had not spoken since May 12, 1957, when he resigned.
Shortly after terminating his employment, appellant demanded the $1,000,000 allegedly due him under the oral agreement; this demand was rejected. Initially, appellant consulted respondent’s attorney regarding the possibility of his representing appellant in an action against Mr. Hughes because his client, respondent, would have an interest therein under paragraph 19A of the property settlement agreement. Respondent’s attorney declined to accept the employment. Appellant thereafter retained other counsel and filed suit against Mr. Hughes and the Hughes Tool Company seeking to recover the $1,000,000 allegedly due plus certain lesser items.
This suit was settled by the terms of two agreements entered into between appellant and the respective defendants on August 1, 1959. The agreement with the Hughes Tool *654Company was partly in the form of a “consultation" agreement. Under its terms, appellant was to receive $694,000, payable $100,000 on or before August 10, 1959, and $31,260 on February 20th of each year thereafter for 18 years. The agreement provided further that these payments “are not to cease for any reason whatsoever, and they shall be paid regardless of whether [appellant] dies or is unable to perform any services for the Company for any reason whatsoever, or whether the Company shall ever avail itself of such services. In the event of [appellant’s] death, said payments shall be paid to [appellant’s] estate, unless [appellant], his assignee or representative, otherwise directs by appropriate notice to the company." (Italics added.)
The “consultation services" to be supplied by appellant ivere to be for a maximum of 200 hours for seven years. The tax advantages inherent in arranging the settlement in this fashion are obvious. Appellant testified that, although he had received the required payments Avhen due, he had yet to speak to Mr. Hughes, and while he had engaged in conversations with executives of the Hughes Tool Company who were his old friends, he could not “now and couldn’t then distinguish between formal business conferences and conferences and conversations between friends." He had kept no written records of any sort, although he was required to be available for “consultations" only an average of less than four hours a week.
The settlement agreement with Mr. Hughes referred to the agreement with the company and provided, in part, that when appellant had received the initial $100,000 payment provided for therein, he would cause the action then pending against Mr. Hughes and the company to be dismissed. This second agreement also provided, inter alia, that Hughes would procure for, or make an unsecured $240,000 loan to, appellant within 30 days, to be repaid at the rate of $31,260 per year, principal and interest. The remarkable tax advantages to be obtained from the combination of the “loan" and the extended 18-year “consultation" payments are too apparent to require comment. If successful they might well produce greater net compensation to appellant than any " capital gain ’ ’ plan that could have been conceived.
Respondent made demand for her one-third share in the sums thus received and to be received under these agreements in accordance with the terms of paragraph 19A of the property settlement agreement. This demand was rejected and *655the present suit was instituted. It appears almost indisputable that these transactions were of the type contemplated by the property settlement agreement, and certainly it cannot be seriously contended that there is insufficient evidence to support the findings of the court to that effect.
As indicated, however, appellant does not actually dispute the sufficiency of the evidence. Rather, he appears to assert in a vague fashion that, as a matter of law, the court was bound to accept at face value the form of the agreements entered into with Hughes and the Hughes Tool Company. This contention is made, notwithstanding the obvious fact that respondent was not a party to these agreements, and the drafters of paragraph 19A of the property settlement agreement fortunately had been endowed with sufficient foresight to provide that its terms were to be applicable “to any economic benefit ... regardless of the form which said transaction may take____”
Appellant argues that the trial court was bound to regard the initial alleged promise of Mr. Hughes to pay appellant $1,000,000 whenever he chose to retire as being ordinary compensation for services to be rendered in the future. Prom this, the argument continues, the trial court was bound to find that the sum of $694,000 to be paid appellant under the terms of his agreements with Hughes and the Hughes Tool Company constituted ordinary salary representing the value to the company of his availability as a consultant.
This incredible assertion is made in the face of the fact that the payments therein provided for “are not to cease for any reason whatsoever,” including immediate death. In addition, appellant’s relations with Mr. Hughes were so strained that not only had they not spoken after appellant terminated his employment, but his agreement with Mr. Hughes required him to acknowledge and “expressly covenant” that he would not, “directly or indirectly, voluntarily or negligently, ... cause or permit the disclosure to others of: ... [a]ny fact or claim implying as to [appellant] either any authority to act in behalf of Hughes Tool Company or Howard Hughes or a continuing relationship of trust and confidence with them(Italics added.)
In support of his argument, appellant cites cases dealing with the accepted rule that as between parties who have reduced their agreements to writing, the courts may not rewrite such agreements contrary to the intention of the parties expressed therein, nor accept parol evidence in explana*656tion thereof, in the absence of fraud, mistake, duress, and so forth. Such rules, however, are not applicable where the action is one involving a stranger to the agreement.
“ ‘Strangers are at liberty to show that the written instrument does not disclose the full or true character of the relation between the contracting parties.’ [Citations.]” (Katz v. People’s Finance etc. Co., 101 Cal.App. 552, 558 [281 P. 1097]; also see Marx v. McKinney, 23 Cal.2d 439, 442 [144 P.2d 353]; Pierce v. Nash, 126 Cal.App.2d 606, 623 [272 P.2d 938]; Kassianov v. Raissis, 200 Cal.App.2d 573, 575 [19 Cal.Rptr. 614].)
In addition, the trial court in the instant case was not required to determine the legal effect of the agreements between appellant and Hughes and the Hughes Tool Company, inter se. Its determination was restricted to the terms of paragraph 19A of the property settlement agreement executed by appellant and respondent. The judgment herein merely determines that the economic benefits received, and to be received, by appellant are of such variety as to entitle respondent to share therein. It is in no way determinative of the nature or effect of the agreements between appellant and others in any disputes that may arise in the future between them or any governmental taxing authorities. Neither does it “rewrite” such agreements or measure the various considerations existing in support thereof,  Since the evidence was properly received and abundantly supports the findings made, the judgment is immune from the attack herein made upon it.
The judgment is affirmed.
Roth, J., and Kincaid, J. pro tem.,* concurred.
Appellant’s petition for a rehearing was denied May 25, 1964, and the following opinion was then rendered:
Retired judge of the superior court sitting pro tempore under assignment by the Chairman of the Judicial Council.

=== CASE 9738047 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:41:27.074356+00 ===

THE COURT.
Upon petition for rehearing, appellant argues, inter alia, the contention that if the $694,000 which he is to receive under his agreement with the Hughes Tool Company is not to be regarded as ordinary income for future services (as he has maintained throughout this proceeding), then some unspecified portion of it must be attributable to the various minor items he had included in the complaint he *657had filed in his action against Hughes and the Hughes Tool Company in addition to his principal demand therein for $1,000,000.
While a passing reference to this matter was made in appellant’s opening brief under the titles “Statement of the Case” and “Statement of Facts,” the brief contained no further discussion or argument concerning the subject. It was raised for the first time as a point on appeal in appellant’s closing brief. In accordance with the familiar rule, the point was disregarded by this court in its initial opinion. (Bank of America v. Frost, 205 Cal.App.2d 614, 619 [23 Cal.Rptr. 441], and cases cited.)
Appellant neither urged the trial court to attempt such a segregation of considerations nor introduced any evidence thereon. In his answer to respondent’s complaint, appellant took the following position, which he maintained throughout the trial and upon this appeal, until the filing of his reply brief:
“Defendant further alleges that the proceeds in which plaintiff seeks to participate are for services by the defendant on and after August, 1959, as the result of a contract entered into on or about that date, none of the provisions of which contract was contemplated by either of the parties hereto, nor by the parties to the said contract at the time of the Property Settlement Agreement of June 1, 1954.” (Italics added.)
If, in truth and in fact, and contrary ti appellant’s contentions throughout, the agreement with the Hughes Tool Company was in part a settlement of a claim against the defendants asserted in his prior action and in which his wife was entitled to share, and in part a settlement of lesser claims in which she was not entitled to share, appellant wholly failed to show what, if any, consideration was given to the proportionate value of these latter items. The trial court, however, in its attempt to insure complete fairness to appellant, did consider this possibility, and its findings indicate that such consideration formed the basis of its decision to deny respondent the attorneys’ fees to which she otherwise would have been entitled under the terms of the property settlement agreement. Under the circumstances created by appellant’s own determination to defend this action in the manner which he himself adopted, such resolution by the trial court was abundantly fair to appellant and effected a benefit to him that was in nowise prejudicial.
*658All other arguments made by appellant in his petition for rehearing are repetitive of those heretofore made, and each of them has been fully considered by this court in reaching its original decision herein.
Appellant’s petition for a hearing by the Supreme Court was denied June 24, 1964.

=== CASE 9738048 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:41:27.330306+00 ===

OPINION
EDWARD D. MULALLY, Acting Judge.
This is an appeal from an amended judgment denying appellant Helene Georgens’ claim that she is entitled to an interest in crops grown on land owned by her and her husband and used to secure loans with respondent Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. Appellant contends the trial court erred in its determination because (1) appellant and her husband did not operate a farming partnership; (2) appellant was not estopped from denying respondent’s security interest; and (3) respondent’s security interest is subject to a statutory exemption in favor of appellant. We affirm.
FACTS
Appellant and her husband, Kenneth Georgens, have been married for 32 years. Prior to 1976, appellant and Georgens resided in their jointly owned personal residence in St. Paul. In late 1976, the couple purchased a farm in Filmore County. The Filmore farm was sold in 1979 and the proceeds were used to purchase a farm in Winona County. Both the Filmore and Wi-nona farms were purchased in joint tenancy-
From approximately 1977 through 1983, Georgens obtained a series of operating loans and machinery purchase loans from the First National Bank of Rushford. Repayment of these loans was secured by two security agreements signed and delivered to the bank by Kenneth Georgens. Collateral for the security agreements includes all farm products, all present and future crops, and all real estate where the crops are growing. The last promissory note signed by Kenneth Georgens evidencing this debt is dated April 12, 1983, in the principal amount of $75,275. Appellant did not sign any of the promissory notes or security agreements, although she was aware of Kenneth Georgens’ borrowing and the collateral used to secure the notes. The bank was alsp aware of Kenneth Geor-gens’ marital status. The bank’s interest has since been assumed by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC).
Appellant contends that over the years she assisted with the daily farming operations. Appellant worked full-time off the farm from October 1983 to October 1984, at which time she moved back to her St. Paul residence. It is her claim that her off-farm income was used for family living expenses and farm operating expenses. Appellant does not recall the precise amount of her contribution to the farming expenses.
Kenneth Georgens planted and harvested the 1984 crop, apparently with some assistance from appellant and their son. The crops were harvested and sold after October 1, 1984. Presently, the net proceeds from the crop sale are being held in escrow pending resolution of this action.
Appellant contends she is entitled to one-half of the 1984 crop grown on the farm jointly owned by her and Kenneth Geor-gens, or the proceeds thereof. Respondent contends it is entitled to all of the crop proceeds according to the security agreement executed by Georgens. Initially, the trial court found that appellant and Kenneth Georgens were partners engaged in the farming business and that appellant derived her interest in the crops through her status as a partner. The trial court then found appellant entitled to $5000 of the crop proceeds because she qualified for a statutory exemption.
Both parties moved for amended findings of fact, conclusions of law and order for judgment. In its amended order, the trial court concluded that appellant and Geor-*97gens operated as a partnership; that appellant was estopped from denying respondent’s security interest; and that appellant did not qualify for a statutory exemption because the exemption only applies to natural persons.
ISSUES
1. Did the trial court err in concluding appellant and her husband operated a farming partnership?
2. Did the trial court err in concluding appellant was estopped from denying respondent’s security interest?
3. Did the trial court err in concluding appellant did not qualify for a statutory exemption?
ANALYSIS
1. Although the facts in this matter would support a conclusion that at no time did appellant acquire a definitive legal ownership interest in the 1984 corn crop, the trial court found that appellant possessed an interest in the 1984 crop through her status as a partner in the couple’s farming partnership. It appears to reach this determination by finding that both partners contributed their manual labor and economic funds to the farming operation. The trial court made no findings regarding the existence of a formal partnership agreement, the filing of partnership tax returns or the specific interests of appellant and Kenneth Georgens.
A partnership is a contractual arrangement established by the consent of the contracting parties. Spearman v. Salminen, 379 N.W.2d 627, 631 (Minn.Ct.App.1986). Following the law of contracts, a partnership becomes an objective thing requiring the manifestation of mutual assent. Bergstedt, Waklberg, Berquist Associates, Inc. v. Rothchild, 302 Minn. 476, 479, 225 N.W.2d 261, 263 (1975). If a contract fails to disclose an express agreement, the law may imply one based upon the circumstances or acts of the parties. No legal distinction results from a contract expressed in writing, verbally, through actions or by a combination of the three. Id.
Here, the trial court finds a partnership between appellant and her husband based upon the couple’s actions. It is clear that in Minnesota a husband and wife may form a legally binding partnership. The parties owned the farm jointly and appellant testified that she considered herself Kenneth Georgens’ partner. Whether a contract is to be implied is usually a question for the trier of fact as an inference to be drawn from the conduct and statements of the parties. Id. at 479-80, 225 N.W.2d at 263. Although both parties now deny the existence of a partnership, in absence of conclusive evidence to the contrary, the trial court’s conclusion must be upheld. In Cyrus v. Cyrus, 242 Minn. 180, 64 N.W.2d 538 (1954), the court said:
* * * Except in those rare cases where the evidence is conclusive, partnership or no partnership is a question of fact. Since there is no arbitrary test for determining the existence of a partnership, each case must be decided according to its own peculiar facts; and upon appeal this court will not disturb findings of the trier of fact unless the evidence is conclusive.
Id. at 183, 64 N.W.2d at 541 (footnotes omitted).
In its amicus curiae brief, the Minnesota Family Farm Law Project of Southern Minnesota Regional Legal Services recognizes that courts should be hesitant to find the existence of a partnership relationship in situations such as the present. The trial court, however, has found the existence of a partnership relationship and there is no conclusive evidence negating its existence. Therefore, the trial court’s determination that a partnership existed must stand and is controlling as to all issues in the case.
2. Although the trial court provided appellant a property interest in the crops pursuant to her partner status, it estopped her from protecting that interest from respondent’s security interest. The trial court found that:
although [appellant] did not herself execute either of the documents associated with the loan, she was aware of their *98existence and did not at any time prior to the 1984 harvesting season inform [respondent] of any alleged lack of authority in her husband to execute the documents or to bind any and all interest which she might have in the property covered by them.
Based upon this finding, the trial court concluded:
that in signing the note and security agreement, [appellant’s] husband had an apparent authority to bind [appellant’s] interest in the crops, which apparent authority was never denied nor withdrawn by [appellant], whose acceptance of the existence of the documents and the benefits of the loan now estops her from denying the security interest of [respondent].
Appellant argues the trial court erred in estopping her from denying respondent’s security interest in the crop proceeds. Where there is a conflict of evidence, it is for the trial court to weigh the evidence and determine the facts, and its findings will not be upset if reasonably supported by the evidence. Peterson v. Johnston, 254 N.W.2d 360, 362 (Minn.1977).
While the trial court’s findings as to the issue of estoppel were not as complete as they might have been, a reviewing court is not required to reverse simply because the trial court might have gone into more detail. Id., citing Caroga Realty Co. v. Tapper, 274 Minn. 164, 143 N.W.2d 215 (1966). The record supports the trial court’s determination to invoke estoppel. Appellant admits knowledge of the security agreements and her failure to object to her husband’s collaterizing the 1984 crop. Furthermore, the security agreements have been in existence since approximately 1979. It seems appellant’s sudden objection to the security agreements might well result from the couple’s current financial straits.
The trial court’s estoppel determination is also supported by a recent appellate court decision. In Farmers Security State Bank of Zumbrota v. Voegele, 386 N.W.2d 760 (Minn.Ct.App.1986), this court upheld the lower court’s determination that a farming wife was not estopped from denying a bank’s security interest where the bank failed to obtain her signature on the corresponding documents. The court affirmed because, unlike the facts in this case, the bank could not produce the document it claimed the wife signed; it had reason to inquire about the wife’s interest since she had signed prior loan documents; and because the bank had some notice of wife’s ownership interest but failed to recognize it. The Voegele court went on to state that “our holding is confined to the peculiar facts of this case * * Id. at 763.
The distinguishable facts and limited application of Voegele supports the trial court’s determination on the estoppel issue. Although the bank was aware of Kenneth Georgens’ marital status, appellant never signed any of the loan documents. Unlike Voegele, here respondent had no reason to inquire about appellant’s interest since she had never been involved in any of the prior financing transactions. Appellant’s lack of participation supports the trial court’s conclusion that Kenneth Georgens had authority to transact business for the farm.
3. Although it appears that appellant made no claim for the exemption under Minn.Stat. § 550.37, subd. 5, until the time of trial, the trial court found that the existence of a partnership precluded appellant from qualifying for the exemption provided therein, even in the absence of a waiver of such protection pursuant to Minn.Stat. § 550.37, subd. 9.
Minn.Stat. § 550.37, subd. 18 reads: “The exemptions provided for in subdivisions 3 to 15 extend only to debtors who are natural persons.” Since the filing of the trial court’s decision, the Minnesota Supreme Court has filed its opinion in Moyer v. International State Bank of International Falls, Minnesota, 404 N.W.2d 274 (Minn.1987), which clarifies Minn.Stat. § 550.37.
The Moyer court held that except as to the exceptions referred to in Minn.Stat. § 550.37, subd. 4, the exemption statute (Minn.Stat. § 550.37) does not deprive a debtor, who holds a perfected security interest, of any of the ordinary incidents of *99ownership of exempted Moyer court further stated that Minn.Stat. § 550.37 does not restrict the debtor’s freedom to dispose of exempted possessions as desired, even in the absence of a waiver in the statutory form. property. The
Since appellant is estopped from denying respondent’s security interest in the crop, and a waiver is not required, appellant has no basis for a claim under Minn. Stat. § 550.37, subd. 5.
DECISION
The trial court did not commit reversible error in concluding appellant and her husband operated a farming partnership; that appellant’s partner status estopped her from denying respondent’s security interest; and that appellant has no basis for claiming a statutory exemption.
Affirmed.

=== CASE 2213259 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:29.438419+00 ===

167 Ill. App.3d 608 (1988)
521 N.E.2d 257
NATIONAL SURETY CORPORATION, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
SWISSLER PLUMBING, INC., et al., Defendants-Appellants (The Northern Trust Company, as Plenary Guardian of the Estate of Norman A. Petersen, a Disabled Person, Plaintiff; Swissler Plumbing, Inc., et al., Defendants).
No. 2-87-0547.
Illinois Appellate Court  Second District.
Opinion filed March 21, 1988.
*609 *610 Aldo E. Botti, of Botti, Marinaccio, DeSalvo & Pieper, Ltd., of Oak Brook (John N. Pieper, of counsel), for appellants.
Pretzel & Stouffer, Chartered, of Chicago (Robert Marc Chemers, of counsel), for appellee.
Order affirmed.
JUSTICE REINHARD delivered the opinion of the court:
Plaintiff, the National Surety Corporation (National), filed a declaratory judgment action in the circuit court of Du Page County naming as defendants Swissler Plumbing, Inc., Steven K. Swissler, and the Northern Trust Company, as plenary guardian of the estate of Norman A. Petersen, and seeking a declaration of the parties' rights and liabilities under an excess liability insurance policy issued by National to Swissler Plumbing, Inc. Following the circuit court's granting of summary judgment in favor of plaintiff, defendants filed this appeal.
The issue presented in this appeal is whether the trial court erred in ruling, as a matter of law, that Steven K. Swissler was not covered by National's excess liability insurance policy.
On January 6, 1981, Norman A. Petersen filed a complaint seeking damages for personal injuries incurred in an automobile accident on December 25, 1980, and naming as defendants Steven K. Swissler and Swissler Plumbing, Inc. According to the complaint, Steven Swissler was the owner and operator of a 1979 Ford pickup truck *611 which struck a vehicle driven by Petersen. The complaint further alleged that the same 1979 Ford pickup was owned and maintained by Swissler Plumbing, Inc., and that Steven Swissler was acting as an agent and employee of Swissler Plumbing, Inc., at the time of the accident.
During the course of the tort litigation, the trial court granted summary judgment in favor of Swissler Plumbing, Inc., which was not appealed. The case against the remaining defendant, Steven K. Swissler, proceeded to jury trial. On August 26, 1982, the jury returned a verdict in favor of Norman Petersen in the amount of $1,275,000.
Both defendants were defended during the tort litigation by United States Fidelity & Guaranty Company (USF&G), pursuant to an insurance policy issued by USF&G to Swissler Plumbing, Inc. Following the judgment, USF&G paid to Northern Trust Company, as the plenary guardian of the estate of Norman Petersen, $500,000, which was the liability limit under the policy issued to Swissler Plumbing, Inc.
On July 15, 1982, prior to the final judgment in the tort litigation, National filed its declaratory judgment action naming Steven Swissler and Swissler Plumbing, Inc., as defendants. National sought a declaration that it was not liable under an excess liability policy that it had issued to Swissler Plumbing, Inc., because Steven Swissler was not an "insured" within the meaning of that policy. On December 14, 1982, subsequent to the jury verdict in the tort case, National amended its complaint to include the Northern Trust Company as a defendant. National later amended its amended complaint and raised the additional issue of whether USF&G owed a duty to National to defend under the primary policy so as not to prejudice National. That amendment, however, was dismissed. National then filed an amended amendment to its amended complaint in which it raised the issue of whether Steven Swissler was covered under the primary policy issued by USF&G. The trial court again dismissed the amended amendment to the amended complaint. National filed a notice of appeal from the second dismissal order, but never prosecuted the appeal.
In its motion for summary judgment, National raised two arguments in support of its nonliability under its excess liability policy issued to Swissler Plumbing, Inc. First, it argued that Steven Swissler was not an "insured" within the meaning of its excess liability policy. Second, it contended that it was not liable for coverage under its excess liability policy because Steven Swissler was not covered by the primary policy issued by USF&G. National submitted the discovery *612 depositions of Allan N. Young, a former assistant claims manager with National, and Herbert A. Hausmann, a branch manager with National, which, in essence, provided their interpretations of certain terms of the two policies as well as the interrelationship of both policies. Additionally, National included in its memorandum in support of summary judgment an affidavit of Steven Swissler and excerpts from Jack Swissler's discovery deposition both of which stated that Steven Swissler, not Swissler Plumbing, Inc., owned the 1979 Ford pickup truck. Defendants submitted the affidavit and discovery deposition of John D. Ingram, a law professor, to rebut National's agents' opinions interpreting the policies.
The trial court, in granting summary judgment to National, disposed of the case based upon National's argument that Steven Swissler was not covered under USF&G's primary policy. As to the issue of whether Steven Swissler was an insured within the terms of the excess policy, the court found there was no issue because language in the excess policy provided that anyone who was insured under the primary policy would be insured under the excess policy. Consequently, the court concluded that National was entitled to challenge the decision of USF&G to provide coverage to Steven Swissler and that there was no basis in the record to support coverage under the USF&G policy.
On appeal, the defendants make several arguments related to the question of coverage under the excess policy issued by National. Defendants contend first that National is bound by USF&G's determination that there was coverage under the primary policy. They further maintain that coverage was properly extended under the USF&G primary policy. Defendants also argue that National's excess liability policy provides coverage for Steven Swissler in that it incorporates the primary policy of USF&G and that because Steven Swissler was covered by the primary policy, he is necessarily covered by the excess policy.
National responds that Steven Swissler is not an "insured" under the primary policy and, therefore, is not covered by its excess policy. It also argues that Steven Swissler was excluded from coverage under its excess policy and, as a result, it is not liable for coverage.
 1 Initially, we note that defendants mention in one sentence in their appellate brief the issue of whether there was a question of material fact as to the existence of coverage under the primary policy. Defendants, however, provide no argument or citation of authority for this contention, nor is the contention raised in the issues presented for review statement in their brief. Therefore, it is waived. See 107 *613 Ill.2d R. 341(e); People ex rel. Aldworth v. Dutkanych (1986), 112 Ill.2d 505, 511, 493 N.E.2d 1037.
 2-5 The purpose of summary judgment is to determine whether there are any genuine issues of material fact (Purtill v. Hess (1986), 111 Ill.2d 229, 240, 489 N.E.2d 867), and it should only be granted when "the pleadings, depositions, and admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law" (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 110, par. 2-1005(c)). Although summary judgment is an expeditious method of disposing of a lawsuit, it should only be allowed when the right of the moving party is clear and free from doubt. (111 Ill.2d at 240, 489 N.E.2d at 871.) The court must consider all of the evidence before it and construe it strictly against the movant and liberally in favor of the nonmovant. (111 Ill.2d at 240, 489 N.E.2d at 871.) Furthermore, if the moving party supplies facts which, if not contradicted, would entitle such party to judgment as a matter of law, the opposing party cannot rely on the pleadings alone to raise issues of material fact. (111 Ill.2d at 240-41, 489 N.E.2d at 871.) The reviewing court's function is limited to a determination of whether the trial court correctly ruled that no genuine issue of material fact has been raised, and if none was raised, whether judgment as a matter of law was correctly entered. (Fuller v. Justice (1983), 117 Ill. App.3d 933, 938, 453 N.E.2d 1133.) The construction of an insurance policy is a matter of law, and, as such, summary judgment is an appropriate disposition. Maryland Casualty Co. v. Chicago & North Western Transportation Co. (1984), 126 Ill. App.3d 150, 155, 466 N.E.2d 1091.
 6-8 Courts are empowered to enforce the provisions of an insurance contract (Weeks v. Aetna Insurance Co. (1986), 150 Ill. App.3d 90, 94, 501 N.E.2d 349), and if such provisions are clear and unambiguous, there is no need for construction, and the provisions will be applied as written. (United States Fire Insurance Co. v. Schnackenberg (1981), 88 Ill.2d 1, 4, 429 N.E.2d 1203.) If the words of a policy can reasonably be given their plain, ordinary, and popular meaning, they should be applied as written. (Western Casualty & Surety Co. v. Brochu (1985), 105 Ill.2d 486, 495, 475 N.E.2d 872.) In determining whether an insurance contract is ambiguous, it is necessary to examine the complete document and not only isolated portions thereof. (105 Ill.2d at 493, 475 N.E.2d at 876.) The contract is ambiguous if it is subject to more than one reasonable interpretation. (Schweighart v. Country Mutual Insurance Co. (1984), 122 Ill. App.3d 40, 42, 460 N.E.2d 89.) Where a provision in a policy is determined to be ambiguous, *614 it is to be construed in favor of the insured. (Strzelczyk v. State Farm Automobile Insurance Co. (1986), 113 Ill.2d 327, 331, 497 N.E.2d 1170.) Finally, in construing an insurance contract, the court should attempt to give meaning to the intent of the parties. (Weeks, 150 Ill. App.3d at 94, 501 N.E.2d at 351.) Such intent may be ascertained from the policy and the circumstances surrounding its issuance, including the situation of the parties and the purpose for which the policy was obtained. (Dora Township v. Indiana Insurance Co. (1980), 78 Ill.2d 376, 378, 400 N.E.2d 921.) Although the parties in this case urge different interpretations of the policies in question, we do not find the various language relied on by the parties to be ambiguous, and we, therefore, apply the plain meaning of those sections in determining the extent of coverage provided by the policies.
We choose to address first the issue of whether National's excess liability policy does not provide coverage for Steven Swissler because he is not within the definition of an insured in that policy. National relies on the following language contained in the definitions section of the policy:
"2.                           * * *
(4)                         * * *
None of the following is an insured:
* * *
(ii) the owner or lessee (of whom the named
insured is a sub-lessee) of a hired automobile or
the owner of a nonowned automobile, or any agent
or employee of any such owner or lessee * * *."
Subsection 7 of the definitions section defines a nonowned automobile as one which is not an owned automobile, and an owned automobile as one owned by the named insured. The named insured in the National policy is Swissler Plumbing, Inc. National contends that because Steven Swissler was driving an automobile owned by him, and not by Swissler Plumbing, Inc., that he is not an insured within the meaning of subsection 2(4)(ii).
Defendants, on the other hand, argue that under subsection 2(3) of the definitions, Steven Swissler is included within the meaning of insured. Subsection 2(3) states:
"2. The unqualified word `INSURED' includes the named insured as above defined and also includes:
* * *
(3) any person or organization, except the named insured or other insured under this policy, included as an additional insured in any primary policy, but only to the extent that insurance *615 is afforded to such person or organization under such primary policy * * *."
Defendants contend that, although the term "additional insured" is not defined in National's policy, subsection 2(3) refers to the primary policy, and, under that policy, Steven Swissler is an additional insured. According to defendants, because Steven Swissler is an additional insured under the primary policy, he is an additional insured within the meaning of the excess liability policy.
 9 We begin by examining subsection 2(4)(ii) to determine if Steven Swissler falls within the meaning of a noninsured under that subsection. Subsection 2(4)(ii), read in conjunction with subsection 7, excludes as an insured anyone who is driving an automobile not owned by the named insured, in this case Swissler Plumbing, Inc. The question of whether the vehicle driven by Steven Swissler at the time of the accident was one owned by Swissler Plumbing, Inc., can be resolved by the undisputed evidence before the trial court. National submitted, in its motion for summary judgment, the affidavit of Steven Swissler in which he stated that he was the sole owner of the 1979 Ford pickup truck. Additionally, National submitted excerpts from the deposition of Jack Swissler, the owner of Swissler Plumbing, Inc., in which he stated that Swissler Plumbing, Inc., had no ownership interest in the 1979 Ford pickup truck. Defendants, however, submitted no evidence to rebut National's assertion that Steven Swissler was the sole owner of the 1979 Ford pickup truck. Because Steven Swissler, and not Swissler Plumbing, Inc., owned the 1979 Ford pickup truck, he is a noninsured within the meaning of subsection 2(4)(ii).
 10, 11 Defendants also contend that National cannot assert the exclusionary language in subsections 2(4)(ii) and 7 of the excess policy because of its own binding judicial admission in paragraph 9 of the previously dismissed "Amended Amendment to the Amended Complaint for Declaratory Judgment," which states as follows:
"9. That the Plaintiff contends that its policy incorporates as an `insured' a person who is an `insured' under the UNITED STATES FIDELITY & GUARANTY COMPANY policy and that Plaintiff is not required to afform [sic] coverage to such an `insured' where no coverage exists under the UNITED STATES FIDELITY & GUARANTY COMPANY primary policy except by reason of UNITED STATES FIDELITY & GUARANTY COMPANY's failure to recognize a policy defense of no coverage or its waiver of such defense, either negligently or intentionally."
Defendants argue that the exclusionary language, relied on by National, *616 is not applicable when coverage exists under the primary policy, which is purportedly admitted by National in the above-quoted paragraph. We disagree.
The pleading referred to above was dismissed in the trial court and was never reinstated. While an original verified pleading remains a part of the record, even though dismissed or superseded by subsequent pleadings, and any admission contained therein which is not a product of mistake or inadvertence is a binding judicial admission (see Michael v. First Chicago Corp. (1985), 139 Ill. App.3d 374, 379, 487 N.E.2d 403), the pleading here was not verified and may be used only as an evidentiary admission. (Robins v. Lasky (1984), 123 Ill. App.3d 194, 198, 462 N.E.2d 774.) Moreover, from our examination of the pleading, it is evident that National was only admitting that its excess policy incorporates as an insured only an insured under the primary policy. The pleading is not inconsistent with National's theory of defense and cannot be construed to be an admission that Steven Swissler is, in fact, an insured under the primary policy. We must, however, examine subsection 2(3) of the excess insurance policy to determine if Steven Swissler was an insured under that policy.
 12, 13 The plain language of subsection 2(3) defines an insured as an "additional insured in any primary policy." The excess policy does not provide its own definition of "additional insured" but instead refers to the primary policy. Consequently, we must examine the primary policy to determine if Steven Swissler is an additional insured under that policy. Because an additional insured in an automobile insurance policy is anyone insured under the policy other than a named insured (Couch on Insurance (Second) § 45:273, at 589-90 (1986)), we must determine if Steven Swissler is an insured under the primary policy issued by USF&G.
The primary policy in this case defines who is an insured for purposes of liability coverage under the policy. "Insured" is defined as:
"[a]ny person or organization qualifying as an insured in the WHO IS INSURED section of the applicable insurance."
The "who is insured" section of the primary policy states, in pertinent part:
"WHO IS INSURED.
1. You are an insured for any covered auto.
2. Anyone else is an insured while using with your permission a covered auto you own, hire or borrow except:
a. Someone using a covered auto you hire or borrow from one of your employees or a member of his or her household."
*617 Pursuant to the above language, Steven Swissler can only be considered an insured if he was using a covered auto that was owned, hired, or borrowed by the named insured, Swissler Plumbing, Inc.
The question of whether the vehicle driven by Steven Swissler was one hired or borrowed by Swissler Plumbing, Inc., was never raised in the trial court, nor has it been raised in this appeal and, therefore, is not at issue. The question of whether the vehicle driven by Steven Swissler at the time of the accident was a vehicle owned by Swissler Plumbing, Inc., is, however, properly before this court. National initially alleged in its complaint that Steven Swissler was the owner of the 1979 Ford pickup truck. Defendants denied that allegation in their answer. National later submitted, in its motion for summary judgment, the affidavit of Steven Swissler in which he stated that he was the sole owner of the pickup truck. Additionally, National submitted excerpts from the deposition of Jack Swissler, the owner of Swissler Plumbing, Inc., in which he stated that Swissler Plumbing, Inc., had no ownership interest in the pickup truck. Defendants, however, never submitted any evidence to challenge National's evidence establishing Steven Swissler as the sole owner of the 1979 Ford pickup truck.
We find that, based on the undisputed evidence in the record, Steven Swissler was the owner of the pickup truck and not Swissler Plumbing, Inc. Steven Swissler was not, therefore, an additional insured under the terms of who is an insured in the primary policy because he was not driving a vehicle owned by Swissler Plumbing, Inc. As he is not an additional insured under the primary policy, subsection 2(3) does not provide a basis for coverage under the excess policy in this situation. We recognize that the 1979 pickup truck is listed as a "covered auto you own" on the primary policy issued to Swissler Plumbing, Inc. The fact that USF&G and Swissler Plumbing, Inc., chose to schedule the pickup truck as one owned by Swissler Plumbing, Inc., does not compel a different result as to National, however, in light of the reality of the situation. The undisputed facts establish that Swissler Plumbing, Inc., did not own the pickup truck, and we find that controlling as to our determination of ownership within the meaning of who is an insured in the primary policy. USF&G's decision to provide coverage notwithstanding the policy language is not one with which we must concern ourselves.
In view of our resolution of the case on this issue, it is unnecessary to address any other questions presented by the parties in the briefs.
 14 For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the trial court order *618 granting summary judgment in favor of National Surety Corporation. Although we have affirmed on a ground not expressly relied on by the trial court, a judgment may be sustained upon any ground warranted, regardless of whether the reason given by the trial court was correct. Material Service Corp. v. Department of Revenue (1983), 98 Ill.2d 382, 387, 457 N.E.2d 9.
Affirmed.
UNVERZAGT and DUNN, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 2213263 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:29.476732+00 ===

406 N.W.2d 726 (1987)
In the Matter of the Appeal on Remand From the 1984 Decision of the State Board of Equalization In re All Property Located in MURDO, South Dakota.
No. 15448.
Supreme Court of South Dakota.
Considered on Briefs March 26, 1987.
Decided June 3, 1987.
*727 Robert B. Anderson of May, Adam, Gerdes & Thompson, Pierre, C.D. Kell, Jones County States Atty., Murdo, for petitioner and appellant Jones County.
Laurence J. Zastrow of Gors, Braun, Carlon, Smith & Zastrow, Pierre, for appellee City of Murdo.
PER CURIAM.
Jones County appeals from an order of the circuit court denying its demand for a trial de novo in an equalization matter. We reverse.
In 1984, the Jones County commissioners, sitting as the county board of equalization, made certain decisions which decreased the taxable value of agricultural land in Jones County. The city of Murdo appealed to the State Board of Equalization, which on two separate occasions reversed the actions of the county board. Jones County appealed the decisions of the State Board and made a written demand for a trial de novo before the circuit court. The circuit court denied the demand and ordered that the appeal proceed on the record pursuant to the provisions of SDCL ch. 1-26, the South Dakota Administrative Procedures Act. Jones County then filed a petition for allowance of appeal from an intermediate order of the circuit court, which petition was granted by this court.
The sole issue raised by Jones County is whether an appeal from the State Board of Equalization to the circuit court is a de novo proceeding pursuant to SDCL 10-11-43 or an appeal on the record pursuant to SDCL 1-26-35. We faced precisely the same issue in the Matter of the Appeal of AT & T Information Systems, 405 N.W.2d 24 (S.D.1987). There we held that a de novo proceeding is the exclusive remedy authorized by law in appeals from the State Board of Equalization when the assessment is made by the Board. SDCL 10-11-43, SDCL 7-8-30. Therefore, the circuit court erred in denying the demand of Jones County for a trial de novo.
The order of the circuit court is reversed.

=== CASE 9738051 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:41:28.776023+00 ===

SULLIVAN, Judge,
dissenting.
For the reasons set forth in my dissenting opinion to the original decision published March 13, 1986, I dissent from the denial of the Petition for Rehearing.
In addition I would express my disagreement with the suggested modification proposed by Judge Buchanan. If I interpret the proposed modification correctly, it would reverse the summary judgment upon each and every conceivable basis of liability contained in the complaint. In so doing, the modification would require a trial upon the merits upon each theory advanced by the Embers.
The breadth and vagueness of the proposed modification make it, in my view, ill advised. It merely suggests that the summary judgment is erroneous in every respect-even as to possible theories or bases not discussed in the original opinion.
Because I dissent to the denial of rehearing and because Presiding Judge Shields does not concur in the proposed modification, the posture of the case, pending possible transfer to the Supreme Court, is as disclosed in the opinion of March 18, 1986.

=== CASE 2213271 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:29.582593+00 ===

226 Cal.App.2d 189 (1964)
HARRY R. ERWIN et al., Plaintiffs and Appellants,
v.
THE GAGE CANAL COMPANY, Defendant and Respondent.
Civ. No. 7353.
California Court of Appeals. Fourth Dist.
April 8, 1964.
Walker, Sullivan, Hews, Brown & Yakutis and Alexander B. Yakutis for Plaintiffs and Appellants.
Redwine & Sherrill, Earl Redwine and Justin M. McCarthy for Defendant and Respondent.
STONE, J.  [fn. ]
This action by four shareholders of defendant corporation is the outgrowth of a prior action by the City of Riverside in eminent domain to condemn the assets of the defendant herein, a mutual water company. Defendant appeared in that action and by its answer alleged ownership of the water rights, diversion works, canals, pumping plants and other property used to deliver water to the company's shareholders. Thereafter the directors of defendant and a shareholders' committee worked out a proposed agreement to be used as the basis for a judgment in condemnation and thus obviate a trial. It appears that the proposed settlement agreement was approved by the number of shareholders required by the articles of incorporation and the bylaws of defendant.
Riverside's complaint in condemnation and the proposed agreement both recognize and guarantee the integrity of each shareholder's entitlement to water according to the terms appearing on each share certificate.
Plaintiffs, shareholders of defendant water company, dissatisfied with the proposed solution of the condemnation proceeding, filed two actions against defendant. By the first action plaintiffs sought to quiet title to the water rights in the shareholders, to secure an injunction restraining defendant from proceeding with the agreement and the settlement of the condemnation action, and for declaratory relief. By the second complaint plaintiffs sought to enjoin defendant's execution of the proposed agreement or to settle the condemnation action by a judgment pursuant to the agreement, upon *192 the ground such acts are ultra vires. Despite the various kinds of relief sought by plaintiffs in the two actions, the matrix of each and every claim lies in plaintiffs' contention that the shareholders of the corporation hold title to the water rights and to all property utilized by defendant mutual water company to divert and deliver water. In short, plaintiffs argue that defendant holds title to all of its property, including water rights, as trustee or agent for the shareholders.
The trial court entered judgment for defendant in each action, and the shareholders are here on appeal.
Plaintiffs base their contention that title to The Gage Canal Company water rights is vested in the shareholders, upon cases holding that a water right which is appurtenant to specific land is real property, and that it possesses the characteristics of an easement. Therefore, argue plaintiffs, the canals, ditches, pumps and flowage rights used to transport water pursuant to the water rights, constitute the servient tenement.
The argument begs the question because it presupposes that it is the water right itself, the basic property right from which emanate all other property rights or interests here in issue, that is appurtenant to the land of each shareholder. The primordial question is whether it is the water right or simply the right to receive water, that is appurtenant to the land. The answer depends upon whether at the time defendant acquired the water rights it became the owner thereof, or whether ownership remained in the landowners- grantors, so that defendant now holds the water rights as a mere trustee or agent.
Likewise, the argument of some of the plaintiffs that they own the actual water rights since they can trace their titles to predecessors in interest who conveyed water rights to defendant, is a non sequitur, because this argument, too, ignores the pivotal question of whether each predecessor conveyed title to the water rights to defendant or whether each simply designated the water company his trustee or agent to hold the water rights in trust for him.
One of the earliest cases making the distinction is Hildreth v. Montecito Creek Water Co., 139 Cal. 22 [72 P. 395], a case decided in 1903. [1] The following language pertinent to the question here, appears at page 29: "If the persons owning such rights see fit to form a corporation and delegate to such corporation the work of making the diversion and distribution, and of constructing and keeping in repair the *193 dams and conduits, reserving to themselves their rights in the water, as was done in this case, they do not thereby dedicate or appropriate to public use the water thus reserved and used by them. The corporation becomes merely their agent for the purpose of serving their several interests, so far as they may be served by a common system of works, the water remaining the subject of individual ownership and private use as before."
A later case, City of Glendale v. Crescenta Mut. Water Co., 135 Cal.App.2d 784, decided in 1955, puts the distinction in a nutshell, at page 801 [288 P.2d 105]: "Respondent's counsel assert that the water belongs to the shareholders, that they pay nothing for it when delivered, that the only charge paid is for production and distribution, and hence there is no purchase or sale. Reliance is placed upon Stratton v. Railroad Com., 186 Cal. 119 [198 P. 1051]; Frazee v. Railroad Com., 185 Cal. 690 [201 P. 921]; Hildreth v. Montecito Creek Co., 139 Cal. 22 [72 P. 395]. Those decisions hold that in the case of shareholders who own and pool water rights their mutual water company becomes merely their agent in producing and delivering to them their own water. But that is not true of water which is owned by the mutual company and delivered by it to its shareholders even though their stock is appurtenant to their respective lands. (See Consolidated People's Ditch Co. v. Foothill Ditch Co., 205 Cal. 54, 63-64 [269 P. 915].)"
[2] Obviously the issue is one of fact to be determined from the circumstances surrounding the conveyances to The Gage Canal Company of water rights and other property that it now holds, and the manner in which it has exercised control thereof. The history of the company, particularly its acquisition of water rights, its acquisition of other property, its development of water and water rights, and its relations with its shareholders over the years, must be considered in determining the issue.
[3] Since the history of defendant covers more than 60 years, we have not burdened this opinion by setting it forth in full. We have, however, appended to this opinion plaintiffs' condensation of the history related in their opening brief, so that these facts are available to anyone interested. We merely note here that the history of The Gage Canal Company reflects no reservation of title by the owners who conveyed the various water rights to Gage, nor does it reflect a pooling of water rights by property owners as a more convenient *194 and economical means of getting water to the land to which the water rights are appurtenant.
The Gage Canal Company's operations over the years reflect a corporate organization and operation in the conventional sense. The relations between defendant and its shareholders were, from the beginning, carried on in a manner usual for a corporation acting not as a trustee or agent but as an independent corporate entity, that is, as a principal. The trial court found that defendant obtained its water rights from different sources. Some were obtained by deed, some by purchasing stock in other water companies, others by exchanging water rights and privileges. Defendant also obtained water by digging wells. Significantly, the record bears out the finding of the trial court that of the 2,300 inches of water now owned and controlled by defendant, over 1,000 inches were developed after 1900 and were never owned by plaintiffs' predecessors in interest. The trial court also found that all of the water rights obtained by defendant were conveyed or transferred to it for a valuable consideration, a persuasive finding which is incompatible with plaintiffs' contention that the grantors of the water rights conveyed no title to defendant but that each merely exchanged muniments of his own title.
We conclude that the shareholders of defendant do not own the water rights and the facilities of the corporation but, rather, that they own a right to have water delivered to their properties, a right that is appurtenant to the land. Therefore the trial court correctly decided against plaintiffs in their action to quiet title to a portion of defendant's property, including water rights.
[4] It follows that the trial court also properly denied plaintiffs' request for an injunction prohibiting defendant from entering into negotiations to settle the pending action by which the City of Riverside is condemning defendant's property. The trial court's denial of an injunction is given additional support by the fact that plaintiffs' right to receive water from any successor of defendant is not threatened. [5] Plaintiffs concede this to be the fact, since in their opening brief they state: "The established rule is that a successor operator of a water company takes the system subject to all existing burdens. This is true whether the transfer is voluntary or by way of condemnation; whether preexisting water service is under private rights or under the law of public service; and whether the successor is a private entity, public utility, or governmental agency [citations]." *195
We agree with this assertion of plaintiffs, which they support by 11 citations of authority.
Turning to plaintiffs' cause of action for declaratory relief, two questions confront us: First, what is the status of a shareholder of a mutual water company as compared with shareholders of corporations in general and, second, how can an individual shareholder protect his right to receive water if the water company is condemned? [6] The first question is answered by the Supreme Court in Consolidated People's Ditch Co. v. Foothill Ditch Co., 205 Cal. 54, at page 63 [269 P. 915]: "The term 'Mutual Water Company,' much stressed by the appellants herein as defining these several corporations, has no defined legal meaning which would serve to differentiate corporations, organized for the acquiring of water rights and the distribution of water, from other corporations owning and administering property for the benefit of their stockholders, nor have the stockholders in that class of corporations any other or further rights than have those of corporations in general with respect to the administration of the affairs and properties of the corporation. [7] The stockholders in corporations organized chiefly for the purpose of acquiring and distributing water have, it is true, a definite right to their proportion of the distribution of such water when so acquired, and the cases are uniform to the effect that they may individually enforce that right by appropriate proceedings in the event of its evasion or denial on the part of the officers of the corporation." (Italics added.)
[8] The answer to the second question, how the shareholder can protect himself, is found in a series of three cases decided by the Supreme Court, South Pasadena v. Pasadena Land & Water Co., 152 Cal. 579 [93 P. 490]; Graham v. Pasadena Land & Water Co., 152 Cal. 596 [93 P. 498]; and Orcutt v. Pasadena Land & Water Co., 152 Cal. 599 [93 P. 497]. All of these cases are cited by plaintiffs in support of their concession that a successor operator of a water company takes the system subject to all existing burdens. The Pasadena Land & Water Co. cases determined that if there should be an attempt by a water company's successor in interest to cut off the supply of water to which a shareholder or user is entitled, the injured person has a remedy by a suit in mandamus. Further, that since there is an adequate remedy at law, a suit in equity to enjoin the threatened transfer cannot be maintained. *196
We come now to the cause of action which alleges that the acts of defendant are ultra vires. As to plaintiffs' contention that the directors are attempting to convey or to facilitate the condemnation of property defendant does not own, we recur to our earlier determination that plaintiffs-shareholders do not own the water rights or other property to which defendant holds title; rather, defendant owns the water rights, while each shareholder of defendant is entitled to receive at his property the amount of water appurtenant to his land.
A word must be said, however, about plaintiffs' additional argument that the settlement agreement is ultra vires because a judgment in condemnation if entered pursuant thereto would give the City of Riverside title to defendant's assets. This, plaintiffs contend, would enlarge the service area, would permit the city to substitute water from new sources, and would create privileges and preferences in the distribution of the water, to the advantage of the City of Riverside as a shareowner, and to the disadvantage of the irrigation owners. Plaintiffs overlook that all of these results which they find objectionable, flow from the law that permits a city or a municipal water district to condemn the water rights of a private or a mutual water company. In the event of such condemnation the boundaries of the private company are no longer controlling, since the boundaries of the condemning entity control. New sources of water and different sources of water are naturally going to be available, since the condemning entity, particularly if a city, usually already owns water rights or water sources used to supply its inhabitants. [9] A political subdivision of the state takes a private water company that it has condemned under the power of eminent domain, unfettered by the articles of incorporation and bylaws of the company other than the obligation to continue supplying water to the shareholders.
[10] A settlement with a condemner consistent with the rights vested in the condemner by state law, can hardly be ultra vires. Furthermore, the amicable settlement of matters in litigation is encouraged by the courts. Condemnation actions are no exception.
The judgment is affirmed.
Griffin, P. J., and Coughlin, J., concurred.
The History of the Gage Canal Company
The History of the Gage Canal From its Inception to the Formation of The Gage Canal Company.
(a) Operation under Mr. Gage
In 1882, Matthew Gage filed for entry under the United States Desert Land Act of 1877 on Section 30, Township 2 South, Range 4 West, San Bernardino Base and Meridian, which lay adjacent to and immediately north of a large ravine known as the Tequesquite Arroyo. He also owned a supply of water situated some twelve miles northerly in the valley of the Santa Ana River. Mr. Gage constructed a canal from the water source lands to Section 30 during 1884 to 1886.
In order to pay for the water source lands and the canal, Mr. Gage, by various deeds and agreements, bound himself, the water source and canal system, to produce water in exchange for grants to him of the necessary land, or for cash to purchase such land. (These obligations are later referred to as the "Hunt and Cooley" and "East Riverside" rights.)
(b) The Crewdson Agreement" of 1889."
In the years 1888 and 1889 an extension of the canal was constructed by Matthew Gage, extending across the Tequesquite Arroyo, from the north bank of the Arroyo in a southerly direction a distance of about ten miles. In the latter year, Mr. Gage entered into an agreement with Wilson Crewdson of London, England.
The "Crewdson Agreement," dated December 13, 1889, recites that Mr. Gage owned the "Victoria Tract" (formerly the "Carit Tract") containing 2377 acres, with water rights, and a second tract of 4,794 acres known as "Arlington Heights," plus a recently constructed canal. The agreement continues, to say that a company named the Riverside Trust Company, Limited, is about to be formed to acquire and work the lands, canals and water rights owned by Mr. Gage, and to take over the rights and duties described in the agreement.
Provision is then made that Mr. Gage sell to the trust company the described lands, canal, and water rights, along with plant machinery and furniture used therewith, and the benefit of all contracts relating thereto. The trust company in turn would undertake to perform the obligation of Mr. Gage under two contracts for the sale of water, one being the *198 "East Riverside" right and the second being the "Hunt and Cooley" right. The agreement stated that after January 1, 1890, Mr. Gage would be deemed to be carrying on business on behalf of the trust company. The agreement then permitted that an "American Company" be formed to take title to such property as the trust company considered desirable, Mr. Gage to be managing director likewise of the "American Company."
(c) The Formation of the Riverside Trust Company, Limited
The Riverside Trust Company, Limited, was formed in London, England, contemporaneously with the execution of the "Crewdson Agreement," and the articles provided that it was to adopt and carry that agreement into effect. The articles included the stated objective to promote an "American Company," or to appoint any person the "trustee, attorney or agent" of the trust company to arrange for management of the affairs of the trust company in America.
(d) The Deed of 1890.
In March, 1890, Matthew Gage conveyed to the Riverside Trust Company, Limited, the water source lands along the Santa Ana River (the "Carit" or "Victoria" Tract), the land some miles to the south of the water source lands and south of the Tequesquite Arroyo ("Arlington Heights"), and the canal linking the two tracts. The deed included Mr. Gage's right to take water from the Santa Ana River, subject to outstanding grants of water or water rights.
The Formation of The Gage Canal Company
The Gage Canal Company was incorporated in November, 1890. The original articles stated the basic purpose "To procure in exchange for shares in the Company water and water rights and a right of flowage for the same in and from the Gage Canal ... such waters and water rights to belong only to the stockholders or to the corporation for distribution and allotment to its sotckholders and to be used for such purposes only as may be endorsed on the share certificate of the stock representing the same, and such water to be supplied to the stockholders without profit to the Company, and also for the purposes (in aid of such first named purpose)," including those as follows: To contract with the Riverside Trust Company, Limited, in relation to water and water rights in the water source lands along the Santa Ana River; to acquire an easement for the flowage of such water in the Gage Canal; "to use and dispose of and supply such water or water rights *199 or privileges to the stockholders of this corporation ..."; to undertake obligations to other lands having vested water rights in the Gage Canal system; to provide that a share in the company carry an entitlement of one inch of water under a four inch pressure for every ten shares.
The articles included that all shares shall be the same in every respect, shall be proportionately taxed for maintenance costs, and shall be subject to the articles and by-laws of the company.
Matthew Gage and Wilson Crewdson were named among the original directors of the new company.
The Years Between 1890 and 1910.
(a) The "Easement in the Canal"
In 1891, the Riverside Trust Company, Limited, conveyed an easement for the flowage of water in the canal to The Gage Canal Company.
At the same time the canal company agreed to purchase water from the trust company by giving shares in the canal company "with water right attached and issued to said Trust Company, or order, at the rate of ten shares for each inch of water ... so sold." The trust company agreed that the amount of water sold "shall be a first lien" on the water sources conveyed by Matthew Gage to the trust company. It was also agreed that, after the trust company had supplied as much water as it desired, the canal system would be quit- claimed by the trust company to the canal company.
(b) The "Deeds to Water"
A "Deed to Water" was given in 1892 by the Riverside Trust Company, Limited, to The Gage Canal Company, in the amount of 1,000 inches under a four inch pressure.
The trust company reported to the canal company that 1,000 inches of water was flowing or ready to flow at the headgates of the canal. In exchange for the deed of water the canal company issued 10,000 shares of its stock to the trust company.
In 1903, the trust company in exchange for 1,968 shares in the canal company, conveyed to the canal company 196.82 inches of water, the deed describing them as "water and water rights in the Gage Canal ... The said water and water rights being those received by [The Riverside Trust Company, Limited] from the hereinafter named grantors by deeds duly recorded upon the records of the hereinafter named Counties, upon the book and page hereinafter named, *200 and covering the specific amounts of water, measured under a four inch pressure hereinafter set forth, to wit: ..." The deed went on to recite the names of numerous grantors, recording data for 26 deeds in Riverside County and two deeds in San Bernardino County, and specifying the flow of water involved in each deed, in amounts ranging from 50 inches to less than one inch.
A similar deed was given by the trust company to the canal company in 1909, being (in exchange for 280 shares) the "water and water rights in the Gage Canal, lying within the Counties of San Bernardino and Riverside, in the State of California, and amounting in all to twenty-eight (28) inches of water measured under a four inch pressure. The said water and water rights being those received by [The Riverside Trust Company, Limited] from the hereinafter named grantors by deeds duly recorded upon the records of the County of Riverside, State of California, upon the book and page hereinafter named, and covering the specific amounts of water, measured under a four inch pressure, hereinafter set forth, to wit: ..." The deeds referred to were recorded in Riverside County between the years 1904 and 1909.
(c) The Lands of Arlington Heights are Sold.
Between 1892 and 1909, the lands of Arlington Heights were sold to individuals by The Riverside Trust Company, Limited. When the trust company conveyed a parcel of land, it would also transfer shares in The Gage Canal Company on the basis of two shares for every acre in the parcel sold. The shares became appurtenant to the land described in each case on the certificate, and entitled the owners to a flow of .1 inches of water per share. A lump sum was charged for the land and the accompanying water shares.
The transactions among the canal company, the trust company and purchasers from the trust company involving shares in the canal company, were handled as follows:
The canal company kept a share register for the trust company. Upon receiving the first deed to water, the canal company issued a certificate to the trust company for 10,000 shares.
When the trust company made its first sale of land, it returned the certificate for 10,000 shares to the canal company. The canal company (1) cancelled the trust company certificate; (2) issued as many new shares from the regular share register in the name of the land purchaser as were *201 called for in the deed the purchaser had received from the trust company, and (3) issued a new certificate to the trust company from the register for the original number of shares less the number of shares just issued to the purchaser.
When the trust company gave the canal company further deeds to water, a new certificate was issued to the trust company to show the increased number of shares given in exchange therefor. Whenever land was sold by the trust company, the transaction described in the paragraph above was repeated until the trust company had disposed of all its shares in the canal company in this manner.
(d) The Deed of 1910.
In March 1910, The Riverside Trust Company, Limited, conveyed the water sources and the canal to The Gage Canal Company, and the canal company agreed to carry out the obligations of the trust company in regard thereto.
At the same time the deed was given, the trust company entered into a contract with the canal company which included these provisions: That the canal company has the right to take from the water source lands, in addition to the 1224.8 inches of water deeded to it, and additional 200 inches, "but not for sale, rental or distribution to other parties," plus other water necessary to satisfy the rights of others under deeds or contracts of Matthew Gage or the trust company; that the canal company has no other right to take water from the water source lands except by the contract with the trust company; and that excess flowage rights in the Gage Canal are reserved to the trust company.
Three Final "Deeds to Water"
Two additional "deeds to water" were given by The Riverside Trust Company, Limited, to The Gage Canal Company in exchange for shares in the canal company.
One, dated September 1909, was given in exchange for ten shares, being for "One (1) inch of water in the Gage Canal, together with the right of flowage therefor in said canal, said water and water right being that conveyed to the Riverside Trust Company, Limited, heretofore by C. E. Rumsey and wife. ..."
A second deed, dated February, 1911, included similar recitations, except for the names of the original grantors, and except that the deed exchanged twenty shares in the canal company for two inches of water.
A final deed to water was given in 1924, whereby J. F. *202 Walin exchanged for ten shares in the canal company a right to water originally conveyed by Matthew Gage as a "water right in the Gage Canal System" being the flow of one inch, the pre-existing right being described as 'substantially equivalent to the right to water represented by ten shares of the capital stock of said Gage Canal Company.' ""
Development of New Water Sources.
(a) New Sources: 1910 to 1955
The original water supply for the canal system was from the water source lands along the Santa Ana River. The Gage Canal Company takes 2,300 inches of water from the source, which is comprised of the water deeded to The Gage Canal Company, the "Hunt and Cooley" right to 159.2 inches, and the "East Riverside" rights to 696.88 inches.
After the shares originally issued to The Riverside Trust Company, Limited, were sold along with land on the basis of two shares to the acre, it appeared that the flow of .1 inch per share was inadequate to irrigate the citrus groves as the trees grew larger. The canal company increased the water supply available to its shareowner in several ways. Between 1913 and 1920, the canal company acquired five-sevenths of the original "Hunt and Cooley" right, giving the canal company an additional 113.7 inches of water, leaving "Hunt and Cooley" with 45.5 inches. In 1923, the canal company developed the DeBerry Street well, which produces 170 inches of water. In 1926, The Gage Canal Company developed the Olivewood Avenue wells, which produce 470 inches of water. The Gage Canal Company also acquired 100 inches of water by contract with The Riverside Water Company. This additional supply of water was allocated to the 12,278 shares issued by The Gage Canal Company and located on 6,139 acres of land; except that in 1926, after the Olivewood Avenue wells were developed The Gage Canal Company issued 500 shares covering an additional 250 acres.
Of the 500 shares issued in 1926, two were acquired by a predecessor in interest to the appellant R. F. Irving and one by a predecessor of appellant R. S. Malloch. Otherwise, the chain of title to plaintiffs' shares go back to those originally issued to the trust company, and their title to land in the Arlington Heights area includes land originally owned by Matthew Gage and conveyed by him to the trust company.
The company continues to furnish water to approximately 6.400 acres of irrigated farm lands, an area roughly equal to that irrigated in 1927. *203
(b) New Sources: Since 1955.
The Gage Canal Company was engaged exclusively in irrigation operations until 1956. At that time, the canal company acquired 450 shares in The East Riverside Water Company, making available a flow of 90 inches of water. Against this flow, the canal company issued 600 shares in the canal company to the City of Riverside. The city takes the water to which it is entitled as a shareowner in the canal company from the well-heads at the water source lands along the Santa Ana River. Also in 1956, the canal company issued 667 shares to the California Electric Power Company, covering a new extraction of 100 inches of water which is used by the California Electric Power Company in its cooling towers in a generating plant overlying water source lands along the Santa Ana River.
(c) 1955 Amendments to Articles.
Prior to the share issue of 1956, The Gage Canal Company amended its articles of incorporation with the following principle objectives, as they were set forth at that time by the president of the company: Elimination of obsolete references to The Riverside Trust Company, Limited; provision for special rates for non-irrigation water; specification that the water entitlement is one and one-half inches per ten shares.
(d) "Extra Water."
In 1956, The Gage Canal Company also exchanged its old form of share certificate for a new form, which expressly provides for an entitlement of .15 inches of water per share. After the 14,055 shares outstanding are multiplied by .15 inches of water, there is still a flow left over of about 350 inches. This "extra water" is divided among the shareowners, who order "extra water" as needed for the citrus groves. The canal company treats all irrigation shareowner alike in regard to this supply of "extra water."
A petition for a rehearing was denied April 29, 1964, and appellants' petition for a hearing by the Supreme Court was denied June 3, 1964.
NOTES
[fn. ]  . Assigned by Chairman of Judicial Council.

=== CASE 2213236 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:29.119184+00 ===

226 Cal.App.2d 588 (1964)
THE PEOPLE, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
GILBERT RODRIQUEZ ROSALES et al., Defendants and Appellants.
Crim. No. 8678.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. Four.
April 21, 1964
William G. Emslie, under appointment by the District Court of Appeal, for Defendants and Appellants.
Stanley Mosk, Attorney General, William E. James, Assistant Attorney General, C. Anthony Collins and Gilbert F. Nelson, Deputy Attorneys General, for Plaintiff and Respondent.
JEFFERSON, J.
By indictment, defendants were charged, in four counts, with unlawfully selling narcotics in violation of section 11501 of the Health and Safety Code. In count one defendants were jointly charged with the unlawful sale of narcotics on January 3, 1962. In count two defendant Rosales (originally charged as Gilbert Rodriquez), was separately charged with a violation of section 11501 on January *590 5, 1962. In counts three and four defendant Roybal was separately charged with two violations of section 11501, which allegedly occurred on January 29 and February 6, 1962, respectively. Defendants were jointly tried by the court sitting without a jury and found guilty as to each count of the lesser and necessarily included offense of possession of narcotics in violation of Health and Safety Code section 11500. Probation was denied as to each defendant and each was sentenced to the state prison for the term prescribed by law, the sentences on each count to run concurrently. Defendants appeal from the judgments of conviction.
[1a] A summary of the evidence is as follows:
On January 3, 1962, undercover Narcotics Officer Allen, in the company of two police informers, observed defendants at the intersection of Whittier and Ditman streets in the County of Los Angeles. After a short conversation between defendants and the two informers, one of the informers told Officer Allen, "They are going to score for us." (To "score" in narcotic jargon means to secure or purchase narcotics.) Defendants and the two informers then got into the officer's car and defendant Roybal directed the officer to drive to another location. There, Officer Allen gave Roybal a $20 bill, defendants left the car, returning in a few moments. When Officer Allen inquired of defendant Roybal, "Where's the stuff?" Roybal replied, "Rosales has got the stuff." ("Stuff" in narcotics parlance means narcotics.) Defendant Rosales then handed a balloon (which was later determined to contain heroin) to one of the informers, who in turn, passed it to the officer. This evidence formed the basis for the convictions on count one.
As to count two, which charged only Rosales, the evidence established that on January 5, 1962, Officer Allen, again in the company of the two informers, met defendant Rosales. The officer told Rosales, "I want to score a gram." Allen gave Rosales $20 and the latter directed the officer to drive to Fickett and Boulder Streets. Defendant then left the officer, returning in approximately five minutes. He passed Allen a small orange balloon (which contained narcotics).
The evidence as to counts three and four, which separately charged Roybal, showed that on January 29, 1962, Officer Allen and the two informers met defendant Roybal. After talking with defendant one of the informers said, "He (defendant) can score for us again. Do you still want to get that gram?" (A "gram" refers to a quantity of narcotics.) The *591 officer gave Roybal $20 saying, "Here, man, get me a gram." Roybal got out of Officer Allen's car and told the officer to drive around the block. In a short time defendant reentered the car, handed one of the informers a cellophane package containing three capsules and $8.00 in change, and said, "Here's all he had." The informer handed the package and the $8.00 change to the officer. The capsules were found to contain heroin. On February 6, 1962, Allen again met defendant Roybal, who stated, "Man, I can score. I know about six places I can go right now and score." Officer Allen handed defendant $20, and at Roybal's direction, drove to the 1000 block on Gage Avenue. Defendant got out of the car and entered a house. He returned in a few minutes with a pair of gloves in his hand. Officer Allen asked "Do you have the stuff?" Defendant stated, "It is in the gloves." A small yellow balloon was then removed from one of the gloves and handed to the officer. This balloon also contained heroin.
Defendants contend that the evidence was insufficient to support their convictions on any of the counts charged. [2] As stated by the Supreme Court in the case of People v. Groom, 60 Cal.2d 694, 696 [36 Cal.Rptr. 327, 388 P.2d 359], "Unlawful possession of narcotics is established by proof (1) that the accused exercised dominion and control over the contraband, (2) that he had knowledge of its presence, and (3) that the accused had knowledge that the material was a narcotic. [Citation.] [3] The foregoing elements may be established by circumstantial evidence and any reasonable inferences drawn from such evidence. [Citation.]" [1b] Viewed in this light, we conclude that the evidence before the trial court convincingly established the requisite elements of unlawful possession of narcotics and was amply sufficient to support the convictions as to each of the counts.
[4a] Defendants contend that the crime of which they were convicted (possession of narcotics in violation of Health & Saf. Code,  11500) is not a lesser and necessarily included offense in the crime with which they were charged (sale of narcotics in violation of  11501).
[5] It is clear that defendants may be convicted of any offense which is necessarily included in that which is charged. (Pen. Code,  1159.) [6] To determine whether an offense is necessarily included in the offense charged the test is whether the offense charged cannot be committed without committing it. (People v. Babb, 103 Cal.App.2d 326, 330 [229 P.2d 843].) [7] The crime of illegal possession of *592 narcotics may be proved by showing that the defendant had either actual or constructive possession of the narcotics. (People v. Birch, 190 Cal.App.2d 647, 650-651 [12 Cal.Rptr. 122].) [4b] Defendants argue that a person may be convicted of the sale of narcotics by merely being an aider and abettor of one who actually does the prohibited acts (Pen. Code,  31). In such cases, they assert, it is conceivable that such an aider or abettor, while assisting in making a sale, and therefore being guilty of sale, might have neither actual nor constructive possession of the narcotics. Defendants in advancing their argument, fail to distinguish between the substantive crime, together with its elements, on the one hand, and those who may be found guilty of committing it, on the other. No sale of narcotics is possible without possession, actual or constructive. (People v. Richardson, 152 Cal.App.2d 310, 315-316 [313 P.2d 651].) Since every sale includes possession, the crime of illegal possession of narcotics is therefore a necessarily included offense in the offense of sale of narcotics. The fact that an aider and abettor in a sale may be convicted of sale even though he did not have possession of the narcotics, in no way affects this result, for, a person may be convicted of a crime even though he did not commit one or more of the prohibited acts constituting the elements of the crime. (Pen. Code,  31.) The "lookout" man who remains outside the burglarized premises need not have entered the building to be found guilty of burglary, if in fact he aided in the burglary. Similarly, the aider in a sale need not have personally possessed or controlled the narcotics to be found guilty of aiding and abetting in a charge of sale or possession.
The judgments of conviction are affirmed.
Burke, P. J., and Kingsley, J., concurred.

=== CASE 3030403 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2015-10-13 22:44:18.109258+00 ===

FILED
NOT FOR PUBLICATION                            DEC 14 2009
MOLLY C. DWYER, CLERK
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS                     U .S. C O U R T OF APPE ALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,                       No. 08-30070
Plaintiff - Appellee,             D.C. No. 4:07-CR-00099-SEH
v.
MEMORANDUM *
JACK DEAN WALKING EAGLE, AKA
Jack Deon Walking Eagle,
Defendant - Appellant.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the District of Montana
Sam E. Haddon, District Judge, Presiding
Submitted November 17, 2009 **
Before:        ALARCÓN, TROTT, and TASHIMA, Circuit Judges.
Jack Deon Walking Eagle appeals from his 271-month sentence imposed
following his guilty-plea conviction for assault with intent to commit murder, in
*
This disposition is not appropriate for publication and is not precedent
except as provided by 9th Cir. R. 36-3.
**
The panel unanimously finds this case suitable for decision without
oral argument. See Fed. R. App. P. 34(a)(2).
sko/Research
violation of 18 U.S.C. §§ 1153(a), 113(a)(1), and use of a firearm during a crime of
violence, in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 924(c)(1)(A).
Pursuant to Anders v. California, 386 U.S. 738 (1967), Walking Eagle’s
counsel has filed a brief stating there are no grounds for relief, along with a motion
to withdraw as counsel of record. We have provided the appellant the opportunity
to file a pro se supplemental brief. No pro se supplemental brief or answering brief
has been filed.
Our independent review of the record pursuant to Penson v. Ohio, 488 U.S.
75, 80-81 (1988), discloses no arguable grounds for relief on direct appeal.
Accordingly, counsel’s motion to withdraw is GRANTED, and the district
court’s judgment is AFFIRMED.
sko/Research                               2                                    08-30070

=== CASE 2213289 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:29.79007+00 ===

406 N.W.2d 37 (1987)
STATE of Minnesota, Respondent,
v.
Michael John MARTIN, Appellant.
No. C7-86-1823.
Court of Appeals of Minnesota.
May 19, 1987.
Review Denied June 30, 1987.
*38 Hubert H. Humphrey, III, Atty. Gen., St. Paul, John E. MacGibbon, Sherburne Co. Atty., Richard D. Clough, Asst. Sherburne Co. Atty., Elk River, for respondent.
Wilbur F. Dorn, Anoka, for appellant.
Heard, considered and decided by CRIPPEN, P.J., and LESLIE and STONE,[*] JJ.
MEMORANDUM OPINION
LESLIE, Judge.
On January 4, 1986 an Elk River police officer observed appellant sitting in a parked vehicle in front of Dick's Main Tap, a liquor establishment, around 10:30 p.m. The officer observed appellant place something up to his mouth and he became suspicious that appellant was drinking an intoxicating beverage. The officer then followed appellant's vehicle from Dick's Main Tap and observed appellant's vehicle weave within its lane and cross the fog line twice. After proceeding for about two miles appellant signaled and turned into the Broadway Bar parking lot. At this point the officer activated his lights and stopped appellant. The police arrested appellant for D.W.I. Intoxilyzer test results showed appellant had a blood alcohol concentration of over .10.
At the omnibus hearing the trial court found the stop of appellant's vehicle was based on reasonable and articulable suspicion. Appellant was later convicted of driving with an alcohol concentration of over .10 and of D.W.I. He appeals the conviction and claims the stop of his vehicle was based on mere idle curiosity.
DECISION
An investigatory stop is valid if the police who make the stop have a "particularized and objective basis for suspecting the particular person stopped of criminal activity." United States v. Cortez, 449 U.S. 411, 417-18, 101 S.Ct. 690, 695, 66 L.Ed.2d 621 (1981). All that is required is that the stop be not the product of mere whim, caprice, or idle curiosity. Marben v. State, Dept. of Pub. Safety, 294 N.W.2d 697, 699 (Minn.1980). In the present case, the observations justifying the stop were that the vehicle was parked near a bar late in the evening, the driver put something to his mouth, the vehicle was weaving, and the driver drove to another bar. From these observations, the officer suspected the driver had been drinking or was intoxicated. The officer was not acting on mere whim, caprice or idle curiosity and the stop was therefore constitutionally valid.
Affirmed.
NOTES
[*]  Acting as judge of the Court of Appeals by appointment pursuant to Minn. Const. art. 6, § 2.

=== CASE 2213295 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:29.862479+00 ===

226 Cal.App.2d 609 (1964)
THELMA LUNDELL, Plaintiff and Appellant,
v.
LEO FRANK HACKBARTH et al., Defendants and Respondents.
Civ. No. 10682.
California Court of Appeals. Third Dist.
April 22, 1964
Robert J. Rishwain, Nels B. Fransen and Simonelli & Fransen for Plaintiff and Appellant.
Clarence D. Knutsen, Honey, Mayall, Hurley & Knutsen and Albert E. Cronin, Jr., for Defendants and Respondents.
PIERCE, P. J.
Plaintiff was a rider in an automobile owned and driven by defendant Acker. Mr. Acker was *611 involved in a collision when his car struck the rear end of a vehicle being driven by defendant Hackbarth. When the accident happened, the latter was either making, or preparing to make, a left turn at an intersection. Plaintiff was injured and sued both Mr. Acker and Mr. Hackbarth to recover damages. The jury returned a general verdict for both defendants.
The evidence clearly showed Mr. Acker's negligence but he was concededly not guilty of wilful misconduct and was not intoxicated. On appeal plaintiff contends she was not a guest. We hold substantial evidence supports the jury's implied finding that she was. Although in the domestic employment of Mr. Acker on the day of the accident, the jury reasonably determined it happened during an interlude when plaintiff and the employer were on a wholly social excursion. Plaintiff, also appealing from the judgment for defendant Hackbarth, contends that the trial court erred in failing to instruct the jury in terms of Vehicle Code section 22504, forbidding the stopping of a vehicle upon the roadway of a highway when it is practicable to stop off such portion of the highway. This contention cannot be sustained either. That section, under the facts, is inapplicable.
Re: The Contention that Plaintiff was a Passenger.
[1] Plaintiff and her husband lived near the Acker home. Acker employed plaintiff on a part-time basis to do housework, including some cooking. Usually she worked from 8 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., although the hours were variable, and she would quit when the day's chores were completed. The two were good friends. Mr Acker had loaned plaintiff money, had given her husband old clothes, and had performed other favors for plaintiff.
On March 28, 1961, plaintiff worked at the Acker home in the morning. Mr. Acker arrived at the house around 11 a.m. Plaintiff told him she had run out of olive oil needed for cooking, and Mr. Acker said he would drive her over to the orchard of his friend, "Uncle Charlie" Derivi, and obtain some olive oil, also some olives. He had noticed that plaintiff's hip, injured a few months earlier, was bothering her. He asked her if she would care to go with him for the ride and to rest. She consented. She planned to complete her chores (ironing and cooking dinner) upon their return. According to Mr. Acker, plaintiff had already been at work for five hours when work was interrupted for this trip.
The two drove to Derivi's. They made two stops on the *612 way, one at plaintiff's home for plaintiff to notify her husband and to obtain money for shopping. The other stop was at a grocery store where they each drank a beer and where Acker bought salami, cheese and cigars to take to Mr. Derivi. At Derivi's place they had lunch and purchased olive oil and olives. Plaintiff told Mr. Derivi the kind of olives they wanted. The latter removed them from the crock on the service porch where they were kept and placed them in a container. Some of the olives were purchased by plaintiff, some by Mr. Acker. The two had been visitors at Derivi's before on two occasions. Those occasions had been on days when plaintiff had not been working.
Destination on departure was the Acker place, where plaintiff was to complete the day's work. The accident occurred en route.
These facts support the implied finding that under Vehicle Code section 17158  [fn. 1] plaintiff was a guest in Mr. Acker's car at the time of the accident.
[2] Plaintiff had the burden of proving she was not a guest. (Martinez v. Southern Pac. Co., 45 Cal.2d 244, 250 [288 P.2d 868].)
The last cited case states on page 250: " 'Whether a person riding with another was a passenger or a guest is to be determined on the basis of the answer to the factual question: Did the rider confer a benefit on the driver for the ride? (Malloy v. Fong, 37 Cal.2d 356, 376-378 [232 P.2d 241].) It is for the trier of fact to determine whether the rider conferred a benefit or whether the ride was merely of a social nature. (... Gosselin v. Hawkins, 95 Cal.App.2d 857, 861 [214 P.2d 110].) ...'"
"... Where the driver receives a tangible benefit, monetary or otherwise, which is a motivating influence for furnishing the transportation, compensation may be said to have been given, with the result that the rider is a passenger and the driver is liable for ordinary negligence. (Thompson v. Lacey, supra, 42 Cal.2d 443, 447 [267 P.2d 1]; Whitmore v. French, supra, 37 Cal.2d 744, 746 [235 P.2d 3].) But the benefit to the driver must be something more than simply the pleasure *613 of the rider's company (Whitechat v. Guyette, 19 Cal.2d 428, 433 [122 P.2d 47]). ..."
[3] Plaintiff did not pay Mr. Acker for the ride. It is doubtful whether it may accurately even be said that Mr. Acker received plaintiff's assistance in the selection of the olives. As to this, the evidence is not altogether clear. There is evidence that both indicated the choice from samples. Plaintiff selected some olives for herself. But even assuming plaintiff's aid in this respect, this unplanned act was so trivial the jury was justified in finding it did not amount to her giving compensation for the ride. [4] The only other benefit received by Mr. Acker was the pleasure of plaintiff's company. This, as we have shown, is not deemed "compensation."
[5] The fact that an employer-employee relationship exists is an important consideration in the determination of whether or not a benefit is being conferred. "... A benefit would be received if the transportation was within the terms of the employment, or part of the agreed consideration for the work, or was directed by the employer during working hours, or was furnished to facilitate or speed a task the employee was to perform. ..." (Humphreys v. San Francisco Area Council, Boy Scouts, 22 Cal.2d 436, 442 [139 P.2d 941].) But the mere existence of the employer-employee status alone is insufficient in and of itself to make the guest statute inoperative. (Humphreys v. San Francisco Area Council, Boy Scouts, supra; Bummer v. Liberty Laundry Co., 48 Cal.App.2d 648 [120 P.2d 672]; and see Note 49 A.L.R.2d 341.)
[6] Under the facts here plaintiff was not required to travel with her employer on a shopping expedition. Although she testified she had been directed by Mr. Acker to make this trip, he testified he merely asked her if she would care to go for her own rest and pleasure. It did not speed performance of any assigned task. While Mr. Acker did testify that he told plaintiff "she did not have to worry about being paid for a full day," it had also been their understanding that they would return after the excursion so plaintiff could complete her ironing and cook the evening meal. Asked why he had actually compensated her for a full day, Mr. Acker replied: "Well, it was no more than right, because she would have come back and finished up, so I felt, in the condition of the whole family, that I would pay her a full day's wages." These facts did not necessitate a finding that Acker compensated plaintiff for the trip. The facts as a whole seem to *614 depict a social excursion, just as the other visits by the two to Mr. Derivi's place had been. Although this visit was an interlude in a workday, where the others had not been, this was an undistinguishable difference.
Re: The Contention that the Court Erred in its Refusal to Instruct on Hackbarth's Duty to Stop.
The trial judge refused to give an instruction based upon Vehicle Code section 22504. That section provides, in part, that "Upon any highway in unincorporated areas no person shall stop, park, or leave standing any vehicle ... upon the roadway when it is practicable to stop, park, or leave the vehicle off such portion of the highway, ..."  [fn. 2]
[7a] We examine the facts to determine the merits of this contention. At the time and date of the accident, Mr. and Mrs. Hackbarth were driving west on Highway 8. Their *615 destination was the Beecher Nursery located on Beecher Lane, and they were looking for the intersection at which they would turn left to reach the nursery. When they had reached a point 300 feet from this intersection, they identified it by a sign directing them to the nursery. At this time Mr. Hackbarth, in his rearview mirror, saw Mr. Acker's car overtaking him from the rear. He estimated the distance then separating the two cars at 300 yards. Mr. Hackbarth testified that 175 to 200 feet back from the intersection he commenced giving a left-turn arm signal which was continuous thereafter. When the Hackbarths were "just approaching" the intersection, Mr. Hackbarth again noted the Acker vehicle and then estimated it to be 100 yards back. There was no other traffic on either highway and Mr. Hackbarth prepared to make his left turn "figuring" that Mr. Acker had sufficient room to go around him on the right. As his left wheel had just reached the white center line of the highway he was struck forcibly from the rear by the Acker automobile. Immediately before the impact Mr. Hackbarth applied his brakes.
Mr. Acker testified that traveling at 45 miles per hour he did not become aware of the Hackbarth automobile until it was 200 feet in front of him; this notwithstanding a clear day, unobstructed vision, and the absence of any other traffic on the highway. Eight car lengths behind the other vehicle he commenced to apply his brakes. He testified he did not observe Mr. Hackbarth's arm signal; his testimony in this regard was: "Q. As a matter of fact, you don't know whether he gave one or not? A. No, I did not see it. That is the only thing I can say."  [fn. 3]
Mr. Acker admitted to plaintiff that the accident was his fault. He testified that "my equipment was not adequate."
Mr. Hackbarth testified his car was still in motion at the time of the impact, although it was almost at a stop. He had his foot on his brake pedal just before the accident. At his deposition he testified he believed his wheels had laid down skid marks.
Early in his testimony Mr. Acker had said: "Q. The car of *616 Mr. Hackbarth--was it stopped? A. It sure must have been, from the speed I was going and the impact it made."
Later this testimony was qualified: "Q. Mr. Acker, do you know for a positive fact that car was at a dead stop? A. Nobody would know that. I don't think he knew it. I didn't know. Q. That is what I am getting at--you don't know whether he was stopped, or moving? A. No, I don't know."
[8] "[A] party has a right to instructions on his theory of the case, if it is reasonable and finds support in the pleadings and evidence or any inference which may be properly drawn from the evidence." (2 Witkin, Cal. Procedure, Trial,  52, p. 1780, and cases there cited.) [7b] However, under the facts related above Vehicle Code section 22504 (and therefore the instruction based thereon) could have had no application. There was no evidence that Mr. Hackbarth had deliberately stopped his automobile on the roadway portion of the highway or that he was starting to do so. Actually, driving on a highway with a permissible 65-miles-per-hour speed limit he was preparing to make a left turn into an intersecting road, a maneuver which normally requires a motorist to slow down. While doing so he observed Mr. Acker's approach and "figured" the latter would pass him on the right. (Plaintiff offered no evidence that he could not have done so.) [9] Application of brakes by Mr. Hackbarth no doubt occurred at the moment he realized the Acker car was going to hit him in the rear. Even if at the point of impact the Hackbarth vehicle had come to a complete stop due to the application of brakes, no blame could attach to the act. Vehicle Code section 22504 has no relevancy to a sudden involuntary stopping prompted by a threatened imminent impact from the rear.
[7c] The offered instruction was properly refused. In this connection, however, it may be noted that the court instructed the jury fully (in the language of Veh. Code,  22107, 22108) on the duties of a driver preparing to make and making a left turn. It also gave the following instruction: " 22109. ... No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle on a highway without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided in this chapter to the driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is opportunity to give the signal."
Also given was the instruction that violation of the statutes read created a presumption of negligence. The sections read properly informed the jury of the law applicable to the facts of this case. The giving of the rejected instruction *617 would have been, as the court declared in rejecting it, "[c]onfusing when considered in connection with facts involved here." It would also have been error to give it.
Appellant has also appealed from the order denying her motion for a new trial. This is a nonappealable order and the purported appeal therefrom is dismissed.
Judgment is affirmed.
Schottky, J., and Friedman, J., concurred.
"Section 22504 of the Vehicle Code prohibits stopping or parking a vehicle on the roadway of a highway in an unincorporated area whenever it is practicable to stop, or park the vehicle elsewhere. The roadway is that part of a highway which is improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic."
"In determining whether it was practicable for a driver to stop or park his vehicle somewhere other than in the roadway, you should consider not only the physical conditions bordering the roadway and what other places are available for stopping or parking but also the driver's reason for stopping."
"Except when a vehicle is so disabled that the driver cannot avoid stopping, anyone who stops or parks on the roadway must leave space on the highway opposite wide enough for other vehicles to pass freely by. Also a clear view of the vehicle must be available for a distance of 200 feet in each direction the highway."
"Evidence that a driver stopped, or parked a vehicle on the roadway of a highway in an unincorporated area is prima facie evidence of a violation of law. It will support a finding that the driver's conduct in this respect was unlawful unless he presents evidence of equally convincing force to show that it was not practicable for him to stop, park or leave the vehicle elsewhere, that there was sufficient free passageway for other vehicles on the highway opposite and that the stopped vehicle was clearly visible from a distance of 200 feet in either direction on the highway."
"If a party to this action violated Section 22504 of the Vehicle Code, the terms of which have just been explained to you, a presumption arises that he was negligent. This presumption is not conclusive. It may be overcome by other evidence showing that under all the circumstances his conduct in stopping or parking a vehicle on the roadway was excusable or justifiable."
"To prove that such a violation of law was excusable or justifiable so as to overcome the presumption of negligence, the evidence must support a finding that the driver did what might reasonably be expected of a person of ordinary prudence who desired to comply with the law acting under similar circumstances."
NOTES
[fn. 1]  1. Vehicle Code section 17158 provides in pertinent part: "No person who as a guest accepts a ride in any vehicle upon a highway without giving compensation for such ride, ... has any right of action for civil damages against the driver of the vehicle ... on account of personal injury to ... the guest during the ride, unless the plaintiff in such action establishes that the injury ... proximately resulted from the intoxication or wilful misconduct of the driver"
[fn. 2]  2. The full instruction offered was:
[fn. 3]  3. Mr. Acker told an investigating highway patrol officer he did not see the arm signal but the officer testified Mr. Acker had told others at the scene that Mr. Hackbarth had given a signal. Although hearsay, this was received without objection, and can be considered to support the judgment. (Crocker- Anglo Nat. Bank. v. American Trust Co., 170 Cal.App.2d 289, 299 [338 P.2d 617]; Estate of Fraysher, 47 Cal.2d 131, 135 [301 P.2d 848].)

=== CASE 9738054 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:41:39.010703+00 ===

JUSTICE MILLER delivered the opinion of the court: Following a jury trial in the circuit court of Rock Island County, the defendant, Leslie Foggy, was convicted of aggravated criminal sexual assault and unlawful restraint. The trial judge sentenced the defendant to concurrent 30-year and 3-year terms of imprisonment for those offenses. The appellate court affirmed the judgment (149 Ill. App. 3d 599), and we allowed the defendant’s petition for leave to appeal (107 Ill. 2d R. 315(a)). The defendant does not contest the sufficiency of the evidence of his guilt, and that evidence may be summarized briefly. The offenses in question occurred in Rock Island on July 18, 1985. The complaining witness, a 26-year-old woman, was abducted from in front of her home around three o’clock that morning by the defendant, who forced her into a car and drove off. The defendant told the victim that he had a gun, and he compelled her to perform oral sex. The defendant eventually drove to a park in the area, where he raped the victim. The defendant later released her near a convenience store, and she told the sales clerk what had happened. The victim was then taken to a local hospital. There, she was shown a photographic array by police, and she identified the defendant as her attacker. The defendant was arrested at his home following the identification. He testified at trial, and he said that the sexual acts were consensual and that afterwards the victim became upset when he refused to give her money. The sole issue raised by the defendant in this appeal concerns the constitutionality of the statutory privilege for communications made to rape crisis counselors. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 110, par. 8 — 802.1.) The Illinois Coalition Against Sexual Assault has filed a brief as amicus curiae in support of the provision. Section 8 — 802.1 of the Code of Civil Procedure provides, in its entirety: “(a) Purpose. This Section is intended to protect victims of rape from public disclosure of statements they make in confidence to counselors of organizations established to help them. On or after July 1, 1984, ‘rape’ means an act of forced sexual penetration or sexual conduct, as defined in Section 12 — 12 of the Criminal Code of 1961, as amended, including acts prohibited under Sections 12 — 13 through 12 — 16 of the Criminal Code of 1961, as amended. Because of the fear and stigma that often results from those crimes, many victims hesitate to seek help even where it is available at no cost to them. As a result they not only fail to receive needed medical care and emergency counseling, but may lack the psychological support necessary to report the crime and aid police in preventing future crimes. (b) Definitions. As used in this Act: (1) ‘Rape crisis organization’ means any organization or association the major purpose of which is providing information, counseling, and psychological support to victims of any or all of the crimes of aggravated criminal sexual assault, criminal sexual assault, sexual relations between siblings, criminal sexual abuse and aggravated criminal sexual abuse. (2) ‘Rape crisis counselor’ means a person who is employed in any organization or association defined as a rape crisis organization under this Section, who is a psychologist, social worker or a volunteer who has undergone 40 hours of training and is under the control of a direct services supervisor of a rape crisis organization. (3) ‘Confidential communication’ means any communication between an alleged victim of aggravated criminal sexual assault, criminal sexual assault, sexual relations between siblings, criminal sexual abuse and aggravated criminal sexual abuse or an attempt to commit any such offense and a rape crisis counselor in the course of providing information, counseling and advocacy. The term includes all records kept by the counselor or by the organization in the course of providing services to an alleged victim concerning the alleged victim and the services provided. (c) Confidentiality. No rape crisis counselor shall disclose any confidential communication or be examined as a witness in any civil or criminal proceeding as to any confidential communication without the consent of the victim. (d) Any rape crisis counselor who knowingly discloses any confidential communication in violation of this Act commits a Class C misdemeanor.” Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 110, par. 8-802.1. In the aftermath of the assault, the victim sought and obtained counseling from the Quad City Rape/Sexual Assault Counseling Program. Before trial, the defendant issued a subpoena duces tecum on that organization seeking information regarding the complaining witness. Motions to quash were filed by the State and by Joni Dittmer, who was the rape crisis counselor assisting the victim. They contended that the victim’s communications with Dittmer were absolutely privileged under section 8 — 802.1 and therefore could not be disclosed without the victim’s consent, which she had not given. A copy of the subpoena does not appear in the record in this case; according to the circuit judge’s order, the defendant sought production of “ ‘all records, reports, notes, memoranda, statements, oral, recorded, or written, and any and all other documents concerning the alleged assault upon the witness.’ ” A hearing was conducted on the matter, and at that time counsel narrowed the scope of his request for information, indicating that he was seeking information that could be used for impeachment purposes. At the hearing, the State presented testimony from Berlinda Tyler-Jami-son, the program director, and from Joni Dittmer, the counselor in this case, regarding the operation and services of the Quad City Counseling Program. In her testimony, Joni Dittmer explained that she had told the victim that the counseling services were free and confidential. Dittmer said that part of her assistance involved what she termed legal advocacy, which, she explained, meant that she helped the victim keep track of the legal proceedings in the case and would attend court sessions with her. The circuit judge quashed the subpoena, ruling that the communications between Dittmer and the victim were protected from disclosure by the statutory privilege and that the statute was constitutional. Specifically, the circuit judge found that the Quad City Counseling Program was a rape crisis organization within the meaning of section 8 — 802.1(b)(1), that Dittmer was a rape crisis counselor within the meaning of section 8 — 802.1(b)(2), and that Dittmer and the victim had had six separate conversations and that each one was a confidential communication within the meaning of section 8 — 802.1(b)(3). The court also found that at no time had the victim consented to Dittmer’s disclosure of any of those communications. The circuit judge also rejected the defendant’s argument that the statute was unconstitutional. The judge noted that the victim in this case would be testifying in court and therefore subject to cross-examination. For those reasons, the court did not believe that the communications at issue here represented “a significant or irreplaceable means of impeaching her as a government witness.” The judge concluded that there was no substantial conflict in this case between the statutory privilege and the defendant’s right to conduct a defense to the charges against him. The circuit judge therefore quashed the subpoena. The appellate court affirmed the trial court’s judgment, rejecting the defendant’s challenge to the constitutionality of section 8 — 802.1. The defendant renews here his argument that the privilege accorded by section 8 — 802.1 to communications between sexual assault victims and counselors violates his Federal constitutional rights to due process and to confront the witnesses against him. (U.S. Const., amends. VI, XIV; Pointer v. Texas (1965), 380 U.S. 400, 13 L. Ed. 2d 923, 85 S. Ct. 1065; see also Ill. Const. 1970, art. I, §8; People v. Tennant (1976), 65 Ill. 2d 401, 408 (the Federal and State confrontation clauses “are meant to protect the same interest”).) The defendant asks for an in camera inspection of the records of the Quad City Counseling Program concerning the victim, with disclosure to the defense of her statements recounting the occurrence. -In support of his argument, the defendant cites the decisions of other courts that have refused to enforce, or have refused to recognize, an absolute privilege for communications made by sexual assault victims to counselors. In addition to applying their own precedents concerning privileges, those courts have relied on Davis v. Alaska (1974), 415 U.S. 308, 39 L. Ed. 2d 347, 94 S. Ct. 1105, and Washington v. Texas (1967), 388 U.S. 14, 18 L. Ed. 2d 1019, 87 S. Ct. 1920, which found constitutional violations in State laws excluding certain forms of evidence from trial, and on United States v. Nixon (1974), 418 U.S. 683, 41 L. Ed. 2d 1039, 94 S. Ct. 3090, which rejected a broad claim of executive privilege in the face of an articulated need for information. (See In re Robert H. (1986), 199 Conn. 693, 509 A.2d 475; Advisory Opinion to the House of Representatives (R.I. 1983), 469 A.2d 1161; see also Matter of Pittsburgh Action Against Rape (1981), 494 Pa. 15, 428 A.2d 126 (refusing to recognize a common law privilege for communications made to rape counselors; the legislature has since enacted a statute providing an unqualified privilege (see 42 Pa. Cons. Stat. §5945.1 (1982)).) A contrary result has been reached by the Colorado Supreme Court, which held that an in camera inspection of a sexual assault victim’s counseling records was barred by that State’s psychologist/patient privilege. People v. District Court (Colo. 1986), 719 P.2d 722. In Davis v. Alaska (1974), 415 U.S. 308, 39 L. Ed. 2d 347, 94 S. Ct. 1105, the Court found a violation of the defendant’s confrontation right in a prohibition on certain impeachment. Before trial in that case, the prosecution requested a protective order to preclude defense counsel from cross-examining one of the State’s principal witnesses regarding his juvenile record. Defense counsel argued that the information would be relevant to show possible bias on the witness’ part in assisting the police in the matter. The trial judge granted the protective order, relying on State provisions that generally precluded use of juvenile records in judicial proceedings. At trial, defense counsel asked the witness whether he was biased in the State’s favor but, consistent with the trial judge’s ruling, did not make any inquiry concerning the witness’ juvenile record. The United States Supreme Court reversed the defendant’s conviction. The Court did not believe that the cross-examination of the witness had been adequate, for although defense counsel had been able to ask the witness whether he was biased, counsel had not been able to explore the possible sources of bias. Moreover, the Court did not believe that the State’s interest in preserving the confidentiality of juvenile records warranted their broad exclusion in that case. The Court concluded that “[t]he State’s policy interest in protecting the confidentiality of a juvenile offender’s record cannot require yielding of so vital a constitutional right as the effective cross-examination for bias of a defense witness.” (Davis, 415 U.S. at 320, 39 L. Ed. 2d at 356, 94 S. Ct. at 1112.) The Court remanded the cause for further proceedings. Discussing Davis, one commentator has noted: “In the first instance, it is probable that the defendant’s ability to challenge claims of privilege as impairing his 'right to present a defense’ will to some extent be dependent upon the criticality to that defense of the matter protected by the privilege. In Davis, the privileged matter in effect represented a significant and irreplaceable means of impeaching the chief prosecution witness. By contrast, where the privileged matter desired is of significantly lesser probative force or simply cumulative, its denial to the defendant has been held not to violate the constitutional guarantees.” (McCormick, Evidence §74.2, at 179 (3d ed. 1984).) In quashing the subpoena, the circuit judge concluded that the material requested by the defendant in this case did not represent critical or irreplaceable information, citing the quoted passage. A similar question was considered recently in Pennsylvania v. Ritchie (1987), 480 U.S. 39, 94 L. Ed. 2d 40, 107 S. Ct. 989, which is cited by both the State and the defendant in support of their arguments here. In that case, which involved a confidentiality statute, a plurality of the Court rejected a confrontation clause argument like that made by the defendant in this case. The Court held that an in camera inspection of certain records was required, however. The defendant in Ritchie was charged with committing a number of sexual offenses against his 13-year-old daughter. Before trial, Ritchie subpoenaed the records of a State agency, Children and Youth Services (CYS), seeking information that had been developed in his daughter’s case; CYS investigated allegations of mistreatment and neglect of children, and Ritchie’s daughter had been referred to the agency by police. CYS claimed a statutory privilege in the records and refused to disclose them. The trial judge agreed with the agency and denied disclosure; Ritchie’s case then went to trial, and he was convicted of the charges. The United States Supreme Court considered Ritchie’s claim under both the confrontation and compulsory process clauses. Ritchie argued that nondisclosure of the State agency’s file interfered with his confrontation right because the files might have contained information, such as inconsistent statements, that would have been useful in cross-examining the complaining witness. The Pennsylvania Supreme Court had agreed with Ritchie, relying in part on Davis v. Alaska (1974), 415 U.S. 308, 39 L. Ed. 2d 347, 94 S. Ct. 1105. The plurality in Ritchie characterized confrontation as essentially a trial right and believed that it would be satisfied by the defendant’s physically facing the witnesses against him and by counsel’s cross-examination of them. The plurality opinion said: “If we were to accept this broad interpretation of Davis, the effect would be to transform the Confrontation Clause into a constitutionally-compelled rule of pretrial discovery. Nothing in the case law supports such a view. The opinions of this Court show that the right of confrontation is a trial right designed to prevent improper restriction on the types of questions that defense counsel may ask during . cross-examination. [Citations.] The ability to question adverse witnesses, however, does not include the power to require the pretrial disclosure of any and all information that might be useful in contradicting unfavorable testimony.” (Emphasis in original.) (Ritchie, 480 U.S. at 52-53, 94 L. Ed. 2d at 54,107 S. Ct. at 999.) The plurality concluded that “[bjecause defense counsel was able to cross-examine all of the trial witnesses fully,” the failure to disclose the agency’s records did not violate Ritchie’s confrontation right. 480 U.S. at 54, 94 L. Ed. 2d at 55-56, 107 S. Ct. at 1000. In Ritchie the Supreme Court also considered the defendant’s argument that nondisclosure of the agency’s file violated his sixth amendment guarantee of compulsory process. Analyzing that question in terms of due process, the Court concluded that, under the Pennsylvania statute at issue in that case, the defendant was entitled to have the trial judge conduct an in camera inspection of the records at issue. In Ritchie’s case, neither the prosecution nor the defense had seen the information, and the trial judge had not reviewed the entire file. Because the privilege was not absolute, the Court rejected the State’s argument that the statutory privilege would preclude an examination of the agency’s records in the case. Citing the Pennsylvania statute that provides an absolute privilege for communications between sexual assault victims and their counselors, the Court noted that it was expressing “no opinion on whether the result in this case would have been different if the statute had protected the CYS files from disclosure to anyone, including law-enforcement and judicial personnel.” (Emphasis in original.) (Ritchie, 480 U.S. at 57 & n.14, 94 L. Ed. 2d at 57 & n.14, 107 S. Ct. at 1002 & n.14.) Rather, the statutory privilege at issue was not absolute, and one exception permitted CYS to “disclose the reports to a ‘court of competent jurisdiction pursuant to a court order.’ ” (Ritchie, 480 U.S. at 44, 94 L. Ed. 2d at 49, 107 S. Ct. at 995.) In light of that exception, the Supreme Court said: “Given that the Pennsylvania legislature contemplated some use of CYS records in judicial proceedings, we cannot conclude that the statute prevents all disclosure in criminal prosecutions. In the absence of any apparent state policy to the contrary, we therefore have no reason to believe that relevant information would not be disclosed when a court of competent jurisdiction determines that the information is material to the defense of the accused.” (Emphasis in original.) (Ritchie, 480 U.S. at 58, 94 L. Ed. 2d at 58, 107 S. Gt. at 1002.) The Court did not believe, however, that defense counsel was entitled to review the file himself so that he could argue for the relevance of particular information. Rather, the Court held that an in camera inspection of the file by the trial judge would be sufficient. Ritchie, 480 U.S. at 60, 94 L. Ed. 2d at 59, 107 S. Ct. at 1003. The privilege contained in section 8 — 802.1 is unqualified, and we are therefore met with an issue unresolved by Ritchie: whether an absolute privilege must yield to a criminal defendant’s pretrial discovery request for otherwise privileged information that may provide material for use in cross-examining witnesses. Again, we note that the defendant here was requesting only an in camera inspection of the material, with disclosure limited to communications recounting the commission of the offenses. The defendant’s request was merely general, however, and was not supported by any allegations that material useful to the defense of this case was likely to be found in the files of the Quad City Counseling Program. From the following analysis of the statutory privilege, we conclude that the defendant’s suggested procedure was not constitutionally required in this case. The legislature’s intent in section 8 — 802.1 of the Code of Civil Procedure to protect the confidentiality of communications between sexual assault counselors and victims is clear. The stated purpose of the statute is as follows: “This Section is intended to protect victims of rape from public disclosure of statements they make in confidence to counselors of organizations established to help them. *** Because of the fear and stigma that often results from those crimes, many victims hesitate to seek help even where it is available at no cost to them. As a result they not only fail to receive needed medical care and emergency counseling, but may lack the psychological support necessary to report the crime and aid police in preventing future - crimes.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 110, par. 8 — 802.1(a).) Moreover, as the appellate court noted in this case, the legislature originally allowed only a qualified privilege for communications between sexual assault counselors and victims but later decided to strengthen the privilege and make it absolute. (149 Ill. App. 3d 599, 601-03.) The predecessor statute expressly provided for an in camera inspection of those records, in the manner -urged by the defendant here. (See Ill. Rev. Stat., 1982 Supp., ch. 110, par. 8 — 802.1(c).) The legislature later eliminated that provision, replacing it with a broader statement of confidentiality and adding the penalty provision found in section 8 — 802.1(d), which makes an unauthorized disclosure a class C misdemeanor. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 110, pars. 8 — 802.1(c), (d).) With these amendments, the statute thus became one of the type left unexplored in Ritchie. We also find significant the contention of amicus that the role of rape crisis counselors is not to investigate the occurrence. Rather, the primary purpose of the counseling is to help the victim understand and resolve her feelings about the event. Thus, according to the amicus, an in camera inspection of counseling records would not likely result in the disclosure of any material useful to an accused. It is important to note that in this case the defendant’s request for an in camera inspection of the counseling records was merely general; he did not allege that information may exist in the counseling files that would be subject to disclosure. Moreover, the defendant had access to the array of unprivileged statements made by the complaining witness to other persons following the commission of the offenses, including the nearly contemporaneous statements made by the victim to the store clerk, and also had available the victim’s testimony at the preliminary hearing. Because of the strong policy of confidentiality expressed in section 8 — 802.1 and the absence of any indication by the defendant that the victim’s communications with the counselor would provide a source of impeachment, we do not believe that the privilege was required to be breached in this case. “The vague assertion that the victim may have made statements to her therapist that might possibly differ from the victim’s anticipated trial testimony does not provide a sufficient basis to justify ignoring the victim’s right to rely upon her statutory privilege.” (People v. District Court (Colo. 1986), 719 P.2d 722, 726; see also Commonwealth v. Two Juveniles (1986), 397 Mass. 261, 269, 491 N.E.2d 234, 239 (before in camera inspection of otherwise privileged sexual assault counseling records may be ordered, accused “must show a legitimate need for access to the communications”).) Under the circumstances present here, to abrogate the privilege in this case would require its abrogation in every case, and that we decline to do. We note that under the theory proposed by the dissent, in every case a trial judge could become privy to all counseling records of a sexual assault victim, regardless of what was discussed in the counseling sessions and in the absence of any demonstrated need that would justify such an intrusion. The victim in this case was told that the services of the Quad City Counseling Program were both free and confidential, but under the dissent’s view that advice would no longer be appropriate — a special admonition would become necessary, to accommodate the very real possibility that a judge later would be examining the records of the counseling sessions. This, we believe, would seriously undermine the valuable, beneficial services of those programs that are within the protection of the statute. In sum, section 8 — 802.1 of the Code of Civil Procedure evinces a strong public policy in favor of the confidentiality of communications between sexual assault victims and counselors. Unlike the defendant in Davis v. Alaska (1974), 415 U.S. 308, 39 L. Ed. 2d 347, 94 S. Ct. 1105, who knew of specific information that could show bias or motive to fabricate on the part of the prosecution witness, and who had no other means of achieving that end, the defendant here has offered no reason to believe that the victim’s counseling records would provide a source of impeaching material unavailable from other sources. We conclude that the defendant was not denied due process, nor was his confrontation right violated, by the trial judge’s refusal in this case to conduct an in camera inspection of the victim’s counseling records. For the reasons stated, the judgment of the appellate court is affirmed. Judgment affirmed.