=== CASE 9741669 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:00:23.841706+00 ===

Simmons, C. J,,
dissenting.
The court, in my opinion, reaches a conclusion here that is unsound and unjust. In doing so it ignores many of our decisions of long standing, overrules in effect several decisions to which no reference is made, and finally reaches a revolutionary construction of a long-established and construed provision of our code of civil procedure.
The right of the plaintiffs to assert and have tried the issue of damages here involved is a valuable property right. It is proposed that it be largely denied. The basis of the denial is a procedural rule which is sound when properly applied. If there be doubt as to the application of the rule, we should follow that which protects and does not deny a property right. Here, as I see it, it is proposed that the rule be erroneously stated and applied, with the result that a grave injustice is to be done not only to these plaintiffs but to others that hereafter may be similarly situated.
A summary statement of the litigation involved is necessary. All italics appearing herein indicate emphasis supplied by me.
In Bahm v. Raikes, 160 Neb. 503, 70 N. W. 2d 507, the Wischmanns and others proceeded in equity to secure “an injunction, preventive and mandatory” to abate a nuisance. That was the only issue tried in the district court and in this court on trial de novo. There was no issue of damages pleaded, attempted to be proven, or determined.
In the instant case the Wischmanns brought a law action to recover for destruction of crops, for preventing *753planting and harvesting of crops, for loss of livestock, and for damages to fences. 167 Neb. 251, 92 N. W. 2d 708. They did not seek to recover damages to land. So the former litigation was solely an action in equity for an injunction. The instant case is solely an action at law for the recovery of property damage, excluding damage to land.
Of course in the injunction action damages to crops and land were shown as an incident to the proof of a right to injunction. It does not follow that evidence of damages to crops and land as a foundation for proof of damages was an issue or was determined in the former action. . Our opinion in the first case makes . no reference to damages as a recoverable item and of necessity they were neither proven or determined. It is elementary that there is a material distinction between the two kinds of proof. The court holds that the plaintiffs may not “split” their “cause of action and in separate actions ask for two different types of relief when each type of relief is fundamentally based on the same facts or cause of action.”
As above pointed out, the facts to prove an injunction action may be in part the same as the facts to prove a damage action, but in other respects are materially different. The court fails to recognize that elementary fact.
Insofar as the prayer for “two different types of relief” is concerned the holding is directly contrary to our holding in City of Alliance v. Cover-Jones Motor Co., 154 Neb. 900, 50 N. W. 2d 349, wherein we held that the relief sought “is no part of the cause of action.”
I submit that the court is in error on both of the premises on which it predicates this feature of its decision.
There is no dispute as to the correctness of the rule of law stated in the first syllabus point prepared by the court: “It is a fundamental principle of jurisprudence that material facts or questions which were an issue in *754a former action, and were there admitted or judicially determined, are conclusively settled by a judgment rendered therein, and that such facts or questions become res judicata and may not again be litigated in a subsequent action.”
That rule is by its terms applicable when a question has been “an issue” and “judicially determined” in a former action. The rule is not applicable to the situation which we have here. The quoted rule is taken from Blum v. Truelson, 139 Neb. 282, 297 N. W. 136. It in turn relies solely on a quote from an opening statement in American Jurisprudence which is now 30A Am. Jur., Judgments, § 371, p. 411. That it has no application here is shown by other statements in the following texts: “Where a second action is upon a different claim, demand, or cause of action, the established rule is that the judgment in the first action operates as an estoppel only as to the points or questions actually litigated and determined, and not as to matters not litigated in the former action, even though such matters might properly have been determined therein. Accordingly, the view is generally taken that before the doctrine of res judicata is applied in such cases, it should appear that, the precise question involved in the subsequent action was determined in the former action.” 30A Am. Jur., Judgments, § 373, p. 418. See, also, Burke v. Munger, 138 Neb. 74, 292 N. W. 53; State ex rel. Caldwell v. Lincoln Street Ry. Co., 80 Neb. 333, 114 N. W. 422, 14 L. R. A. N. S. 336; Slater v. Skirving, 51 Neb. 108, 70 N. W. 493, 66 Am. S. R. 444; Haines v. Flinn, 26 Neb. 380, 42 N. W. 91, 18 Am. S. R. 785; Gayer v. Parker & Son, 24 Neb. 643, 39 N. W. 845, 8 Am. S. R. 227.
“As far as subsequent proceedings under a different cause of action are concerned, the doctrine of res judicata is held not to apply to issues raised in the previous case which were not passed on by the court or jury in deciding it.” 30A Am. Jur., Judgments, § 374, p. 421.
*755“If a matter was actually in issue in a former proceeding and judicially determined therein, the matter is conclusively settled by the judgment rendered in such proceeding. However, the conclusiveness of a judgment is confined to the thing in controversy, or in issue as determined from the pleadings.” 30A Am. Jur., Judgments, § 375, p. 422.
“It is generally declared that a judgment operates as res judicata only with respect to matters which were necessarily involved or determined in the former proceedings, or only with respect to the facts and matters necessary to uphold the judgment.” 30A Am. Jur., Judgments, § 377, p. 425.
“Questions passed upon in the opinion of a court in rendering a judgment are not necessarily within the doctrine of res judicata. The reasoning and opinion of the court upon a subject, on the evidence before it, do not have the force and effect of the thing adjudged, unless the subject matter is definitely, disposed of by the judgment of the court.” 30A Am. Jur., Judgments, § 380, p. 429.
“Where a question of fact essential to the judgment is actually litigated and determined by a valid and final judgment, the determination is conclusive between the parties in a subsequent action on a different cause of action, except as stated in §§ 69, 71 and 72. * * *A judgment on one cause of action is not conclusive in a subsequent action on a different cause of action as to questions of fact not actually litigated and determined in the first action.” Restatement, Judgments, § 68, p. 293.
Tested by these rules I submit that the stated rule here discussed has no applicability to the situation before us.
There is no dispute here about the rule stated in the second syllabus point prepared by the court: “Where cases are interwoven, and interdependent and the controversy involved has already been considered and de*756termined by the court in former proceedings involving one of the parties now before it, the court has the right to examine its own records and také judicial notice of its own proceedings and judgments in the former action.” It relates to “interwoven and interdependent” controversies that have been considered and determined. There can be no contention here that the issue of property damage was interwoven or interdependent with the issue of injunction and most certainly property damage was not “considered and determined” by the court.
The fourth syllabus point as prepared by the court is as follows: “An adjudication by this court extends to all matters decided expressly or by necessary implication and not alone to the questions actually and formally presented but to all existing in the record and necessarily involved in the decision.” This is quoted from Anderson v. Anderson, 155 Neb. 1, 50 N. W. 2d 224. The sole authority for it is Kuhns v. Live Stock Nat. Bank, 138 Neb. 797, 295 N. W. 818. What was the Kuhns case? It involved this rule: Matters expressly, or by distinct and necessary implication, adjudicated at a former hearing, will not be considered again in the same case. It turned upon the “law of the case” rule as the opinion clearly shows. Obviously it has no bearing here. What was the Anderson case? The first action was one to quiet title. The second action was one for partition. We stated: “* * * the over-all contention in the suit to quiet title to the land and in this partition action was and is the- ownership of the land, * * *.” Appellants “attempted in each of the actions to put in issue two questions of fact” which were “both adjudicated adversely to appellants in the suit to quiet title.” On that statement of fact we held that the determination of the first case was “final and binding” in the second case.
We quoted the rule stated in syllabus point 1 by the court, and the rule here discussed. When Anderson v. Anderson, supra, is analyzed and its rules applied *757to the question being decided, it gives no support to the position now taken by the court.
Syllabus point 5 as prepared by the court is as follows: “The plea of res judicata applies, except in special cases, not only to points upon which the. court was actually required by the parties to form an opinion and pronounce a judgment, but to every point which properly belonged to the subject of litigation arid which the parties exercising reasonable diligence might have brought forward at the time.”
Syllabus point 6 as prepared by the court is as follows: “A litigant may not be permitted to split a cáuse of action or preserit ah issue for determination' and avoid the effect of an estoppel by withholding proof of it.”
Both are direct quotes from statements made in Anderson v. Anderson, supra. I have already discussed the fact situation that was being décided in the Anderson case. I refer now briefly to the authorities cited in Anderson v. Anderson, supra, to sustain the text:
Boomer v. Olsen, 143 Neb. 579, 10 N. W. 2d 507. The first syllabus point in that case is: “Whether a former judgment is a bar to an action ordinarily depends on whether the same evidence will sustain both the present and former action, and when it appears that different proof is required, a judgment in one of them is no bar to the other.” If appears obvious that in a damage action “different proof is required” than in an injunction action to abate a nuisance. The second syllabus point in the Boomer case is: “Where the parties stipulated a single issue in the former action, a plea of res adjudicata is of no avail in a subsequent action between the same parties where it appears that the issues are outside the scope of the stipulation.” Here insert “pleadings in the first case” for “stipulation” and the rule is: Res judicata is of no avail in a subsequent action between the same parties where it appears that the issues are outside the scope of the pleadirigs in the first case.
*758At the expense of repetition I point out that there is no contention here that damages as such were an issue in the first case.
The next case cited is Williams v. Beckmark, 150 Neb. 100, 33 N. W. 2d 352. A mere statement of the facts of that case, taken from the opinion, shows it has no bearing on the question presented here: “The present action is between the same parties as the former. They both involved the recovery of accrued rentals and damages for the unlawful possession of the same property. The relevant evidence in the case at bar was practically identical with that in the former. The only difference in the two defenses was that in the former action defendant prayed for relief under the Occupying Claimants Act and for such other relief as might be just and equitable, while in the case at bar defendant sought only the latter relief.”
The third and final case cited to sustain syllabus points 5 and 6 is Pettijohn v. County of Furnas, 150 Neb. 736, 35 N. W. 2d 828. This began as a tax foreclosure case resulting in a decree that all proceedings, including the treasurer’s return of a public sale, were regular. Plaintiff later brought an action attacking the regularity of the proceedings. We held: “Under such circumstances the decree of the district court was a final determination of the issues before it and such decree is not subject to collateral attack.” Plaintiff asserted a material alteration of the tax sale certificates. We held: “What we have heretofore said about collateral attack is applicable here. The plaintiff here was a defendant in the tax sale certificate foreclosure and was personally served with summons. If she had any defense to the action she was obliged to assert it there. The finding of the court that the tax sale certificates were properly and lawfully made, and entitled to be foreclosed, constitutes a final adjudication of that issue in so far as the parties to that action are concerned.”
Accordingly I submit that syllabus points 5' and 6, *759when analyzed in the light of the case decided and the cases cited to sustain the decision, do not support the application now given to them.
This brings us to syllabus point 7 as prepared by the court: “It is a well-settled principle of equity jurisprudence that, where a court of equity has obtained jurisdiction of a cause for any purpose, it will retain it for all, and will proceed to a final determination of the case, adjudicate all matters in issue, and thus avoid unnecessary litigation.”
Here the court in applying the rule reads out of it the words “adjudicate all matters in issue.” That is the material element in the rule.
The syllabus point is a quote from Schreiner v. Witte, 143 Neb. 109, 8 N. W. 2d 831. That case holds directly to the contrary of the application which the court now makes of the cited rule. There plaintiff brought an action in equity to foreclose a chattel mortgage. The defendant denied generally and by cross-petition advanced three causes at law: (1) Damages for breach of a partnership agreement; (2) a recovery of one-half of personal taxes; and (3) recovery for goods sold and delivered. Plaintiff answered the cross-petition by denying causes (1) and (2) and admitting cause (3). The court found for the plaintiff on his petition and on defendant’s causes (1) and (2) and entered judgment for defendant on cause (3). The court denied a deficiency judgment. Plaintiff appealed. We held: “The defendant in the instant case submitted himself to a court of equity, set up his defense by way of cross-petition, and affirmatively alleged damages, that plaintiff was indebted to defendant for merchandise purchased and personal taxes paid by defendant.” We followed that by a statement of the rule quoted as syllabus point 7. We then held: “The plaintiff in the instant case followed the correct procedure. The defendant is not now entitled to a jury trial. He voluntarily brought a law issue into the case. He had a right, if he was so minded, to file *760his amended cross-petition for damages in this equity-suit. It was an independent cause of action, existing in defendant’s favor, and would not be lost to him, or barred, if he had left it out of this suit.”
I fail to see where the court gets support out of that decision.
The court quotes from Wheeler v. Brady, 126 Neb. 297, 253 N. W. 338, but does not dignify it by making it a syllabus point. I quote the quotation used by the court, with the unanswered question in my mind as to where the court applies that rule, or follows it, of gets support from it: “ ‘Any right, fact or matter in issue, and directly adjudicated upon, or necessarily involved in, the determination of an action before a competent court in which a judgment or decree is rendered upon the merits is conclusively settled by the judgment therein and cannot again be litigated between the parties and privies whether the claim or demand, purpose, or sübject-matter of the two suits is the same or not.’ ”
Wheeler v. Brady, supra, originated as an action to quiet title to real estate. A deed was involved. The trial court held that the deed was testamentary in character and not executed in accord with the law pertaining to the execution of wills. We affirmed. Then the second action was brought to reform the deed and to quiet title by the defendant in the first action. We held: “The former decision is not of course an adjudication that the contract cannot be reformed. That question was not presented nor considered at that time. That suit only decided that the purported deed as it stood did not convey title to the real estate in question, because it was testamentary in character, but since it was not executed according to the law relating to wills, title to a portion of the property was quieted in the other heirs at law. The cases in which the fundamental principles of res judicata are discussed are legion. * *' * The right of reformation was not a right, fact, *761or '¡natter litigated in the first suit 'and the judgment therein was not a bar to this -suit.” - .
We cited the rule which the court quotes. It was taken from 34 C. J., Judgments, §1154, p. -743.- If an action to quiet title is not res judicata of an action to reform a deed and quiet title, then certainly an action in equity to enjoin a nuisance-is not res judicata of an action for damages , at law.
The court, after more discussion and quotations from decisions to which I shall refer presently, then holds that “the doctrine of res judicata includes not only the things which were determined in the former suit, but also any other matter properly involved which might have been raised and determined.”
About the first clause of this holding there is no dispute. I submit that the second clause (which I have emphasized) is contrary to the very decisions of this court which I have' referred to herein and which the court quotes in part.
Cromwell v. County of Sac, 94 U. S. 351, 24 L. Ed. 195, is cited and followed repeatedly in these cases. It holds that: “In all cases, therefore, where it is sought to apply the estoppel of a judgment rendered upon one cause of action to matters arising in a suit upon a different cause of action, the inquiry must always be as to the point or question actually litigated and determined in the original action, not what might have been thus litigated and determined. Only upon such matters is the judgment conclusive in another action.”
I now refer to a series of our decisions that are exactly to the contrary of the rule now announced by the court.
Wilcox v. Saunders, 4 Neb. 569, was decided in 1876. In that action Saunders had sued Wilcox in equity for specific performance of a contract to convey land. In that action Saunders specifically prayed for damages to the land. The issue of damages was tendered. The trial court decreed specific performance and specifically *762did not determine the issue of damages. The judgment became final. Saunders then sued Wilcox in tort for damages for trespass “upon the same premises in controversy in the former suit.” So there was in that case first an equity action for specific performance and then a law action for damages. The court held as to the issue of damages that when the trial court, in the first action, dismissed the issue of damages “they were left in the same condition precisely as if they had never been brought into the case In the case now being decided damages were never “brought into the case.” The court held it was not necessary to decide whether or not damages “could have been joined” in the former action and that only questions “determined” remained determined. The court, however, considered the question and held that damages “might be” included in the former action.
In the second action at law for damages, Saunders secured a verdict and judgment. We affirmed the judgment. Wilcox v. Saunders, supra, is the earliest of our decisions on the matter. It has been repeatedly cited favorably. I shall refer to one of the decisions later. It has never been criticized or modified. There it stands since 1876. It is now ignored by the court.
I next go to Herpolsheimer v. Acme Harvester Co., 83 Neb. 53, 119 N. W. 30. In the body of the opinion we held: “Where issue has not been joined nor any trial had on the merits, the doctrine of res judicata does not apply.” That exactly describes the situation in the instant case. In the syllabus point prepared by the court we stated: “Where cases are interwoven and interdependent and the controversy involved has already been considered and determined by the court in former proceedings involving one of the parties now before it, the court has the right to examine its own records and take judicial notice of its own proceedings and judgments in the former action.”
In Bowker v. Drainage District, 102 Neb. 571, 168 *763N. W. 193, we held: “A judgment is not res judicata of a matter not involved and tried in the action. * * It is quoted with approval in Lincoln Nat. Bank & Trust Co. v. Grainger, 129 Neb. 451, 262 N. W. 11, wherein we held: “A judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction upon a question directly involved in one suit is conclusive as to that question in another suit between the same parties. Such, judgment will not so operate, unless it appears either on the face of the record or is shown by extrinsic evidence that the precise question was raised and determined in the former suit.”
I next cite Gulizia v. Royal Indemnity Co., 139 Neb. 832, 299 N. W. 220. In that case we followed Plattsmouth Bridge Co. v. Turner, 128 Neb. 738, 260 N. W. 562, and reaffirmed this rule: Judgment is not res judicata as to any fact at issue in subsequent action where neither issues nor parties are the same. In both of the above cases the parties to the second action were not the same as those in the first. We pointed that out in the opinion. We also pointed out that “neither were the issues identical” in the Plattsmouth case; nor “was the * * * liability of the insurer as to the claim * * * involved” in the Gulizia case. The opinion in the Gulizia case was written by the same judge who is the author of the instant decision.
The above rule was restated and followed in Kuhl v. School District, 155 Neb. 357, 51 N. W. 2d 746. The opinion was adopted by six of the seven members now on the court. Two of the six of us now adhere to our former decisions.
I now go to two of our decisions, which the court considered at length. They are Ledingham v. Farmers Irr. Dist., 135 Neb. 276, 281 N. W. 20, and Shepard v. City of Friend, 141 Neb. 866, 5 N. W. 2d 108.
I first take up Ledingham v. Farmers Irr. Dist., supra. This opinion was written by Judge William B. Rose, who for over a third of a century was one of the ablest judges to serve on this court. The court now under*764takes to distinguish- the Ledingham case from the instant case by reaching the conclusion -that damages were no part of the cause of action in the first- case. How-*ever, the theory upon which it might have been written is not controlling and should not concern us.
In that decision we. stated the contention of res judicata as follows: “Defendant urges the further defense that the cause of action in which equitable relief was granted to plaintiff in the former suit nécéssarily included the damages allowed herein and precluded recovery therefor in the action at bar. It is argued that the entire ■ controversy involving the equitable relief granted and the subsequent recovery of damages in the present action at law was determinable in the former suit in equity and that the splitting of what defendant calls a' single cause of action is condemned as wholly untenable.”
It was that contention which the court decided and which in effect is the contention made here .which the court now sustains. How did we decide it? We .held: “Damages were not pleaded, presented, proved or determined in the former case. There is some diversity of judicial opinion on this subject in vast fields of litigation, but the better view seems to be that, in, a situation like the present, the granting of an injunction is not necessarily a bar to an action at law for damages caused by the wrong enjoined.”
The Ledingham case cannot be brushed aside by conceiving some other basis upon which it might have been decided and reach the same result.
In the Ledingham case we followed Perdue v. Ward, 88 W. Va . 371, 106 S. E. 874, 14 A. L. R. 539, “and cases cited in note in 14 A. L. R. 543.” There can- be no question, from that annotation what was being decided. In Perdue v. Ward, supra, the court refused to follow Gilbert v. Boak Fish Co., 86 Minn. 365, 90 N. W. 767, 58 L. R. A. 735. The annotation shows that this case *765is .the “only authority” contrary to Perdue v. Ward— and this court followed Perdue v. Ward.
Our decision in the Ledingham case further rested on Chapman v. General Petroleum Corp., 152 Or. 147, 52 P. 2d 190. I quote two paragraphs from that opinion:- .“The defense is based upon, two major propositions: ' (1) That res adjudicata precludes plaintiffs from recovering damages in the instant action for the reason that they had an opportunity to adjudicate such matter in the suit instituted in December, 1931; that, equity, having assumed-jurisdiction, was.able to grant complete relief and thereby avoid a multiplicity of suits; (2) that there is no evidence to support the finding of the jury that plaintiffs had sustained damage in the amount awarded, or in any sum. * * * The authorities in other jurisdictions, relative to the' applicability of res adjudicata in such cases, are in conflict (see cases in note 14 A. L. R. 543), but in this state it is not an open question. In Norwood v. Eastern Oregon Land Co., 139 Or. 25, (5 P. (2d) 1057, 7 P. (2d) 996), the identical point was decided adversely to the contention of the appellant herein. It will be remembered that the question- of damages was not an issue in the equity proceeding. We see no need to restate the law.” The language is applicable here. There Oregon followed the same authority that we followed in the Ledingham case and in their own decision in Norwood v. Eastern Oregon Land Co., 139 Or. 25, 5 P. 2d 1057, 7 P. 2d 996. The latter case was one where the plaintiff had a decree for an injunction. He then sued for damages. Res judicata was offered as a defense. The court held: “In White v. Ladd, 41 Or. 324, (68 P. 739, 93 Am; St. Rep. 732), it is said: ‘The potency of a judgment as an estoppel concludes every fact necessary to uphold it and extends, not only to matters actually determined, but to every other matter which thé parties might have litigated and have had decided as incident to and essentially connected with the Subject matter of the litigation, *766and every matter coming within the legitimate purview of the original action, * * *.’
“The evidence relative to the issue of damages was not essential to the validity of the decree for injunction. The question of damages was merely incidental to the main relief sought in the equity proceeding. It was not necessarily involved therein. In the instant action there is a different claim or demand than was at issue in the injunction suit, hence the decree therein is no bar here.” This language is applicable here.
The court refused to follow Gilbert v. Boak Fish Co., supra, and stated that the contra rule followed by it was in accord with the “weight of authority.” It relied on Perdue v. Ward, supra, and cases cited in 14 A. L. R. 539.
The Oregon Court tied its decision to ours. It quoted at length from “the best statement of the rule” found in Cromwell v. County of Sac, supra.
We relied on and quoted from the Cromwell case in Hanson v. Hanson, 64 Neb. 506, 90 N. W. 208. We relied on it again in Gering v. School District, 76 Neb. 219, 107 N. W. 250. We described the Cromwell case as one “recognized by all text writers.” We held that: “* * * where the second action is upon a different claim or demand, the judgment in the prior action operates as an estoppel only as to those matters in issue upon the determination of which the judgment was rendered.”
Notwithstanding the direct positive refusal of this court to follow Gilbert v. Boak Fish Co., supra, on the precise issue here involved, the court now quotes from it with approval. The court’s justification for so doing is that Gilbert v. Boak Fish Co., supra, was cited with approval in Brchan v. The Crete Mills, 155 Neb. 505, 52 N. W. 2d 333. It was so cited, but for a rule that is not in dispute here. The mere fact that the case was so cited does not justify the overruling, in effect, of the Ledingham case and the adoption of a contrary rule that was rejected after consideration of the precise question. I would adhere to the Ledingham case rule.
*767At this point it may be well to quote from 1 Am. Jur., Actions, § 103, p. 486, where under the title “Legal and Equitable Relief” the text states: “* * * although there is authority to the contrary, it is held that a suit for an injunction is not a bar to a later action for past damages on account of the thing enjoined, where there was no prayer for damages in the prior suit and no award of damages made.” The “contrary” case is Gilbert v. Boak Fish Co., supra, which we refused to follow in the Ledingham case. The rule is that of Perdue v. Ward, supra, which we followed in the Ledingham case.
Before going to other cases of this and other jurisdictions, I cite other texts which are considered as authority.
In 50 C. J. S., Judgments, § 657, p. 102, this rule is stated: “A judgment on the merits, rendered in a former suit between the same parties or their privies, on the same cause of action, by a court of competent jurisdiction, operates as a bar not only as to every matter which was offered and received to sustain or defeat the claim, but as to every other matter which might with propriety have been litigated and determined in that action. In other words, he must present his whole case, extending his claim so as to embrace everything which properly constitutes a part of his cause of action or defense, and cannot bring a new suit to recover something more on the same cause of action.
“The general rule does not mean, however, that the prior judgment is conclusive of matters not in issue or adjudicated, and which were not germane to, implied in, or essentially connected with, the actual issues in the case, although they may affect the ultimate rights of the parties and might have been presented in the former action, and is not applicable to issues the trial of which rests within the discretion of the court. Moreover, it has also been held that the rule cannot properly be invoked as to an issue which affirmatively ap*768pears not to have been determined by the judgment in the former action.”
Here our Wightman v. City of Wayne, 144 Neb. 871, 15 N. W. 2d 78 (a case cited by the court’s opinion), is relied on. But that rule relates to the splitting of a cause of action, a situation erroneously- assumed by the majority opinion to exist here. This is made clear by the following paragraph of 50 C. J. S., Judgments, § 658, p. 104: “As discussed supra. § 657, the rule that a judgment is res judicata as to every matter which might with propriety have been litigated and determined in the action does not mean that a prior judgment is conclusive of matters not in issue or adjudicated, and which were not germane to, implied in, or essentially connected with, the actual issues in the case, although they may .affect the ultimate rights of the parties and might have been presented in the former action. Accordingly distinct rights, claims, or demands of the parties growing out of the same subject matter, but which were not put in issue or necessarily involved or adjudicated in a prior action have been held not to be barred by the judgment therein.” Here our Ledingham case is cited along with others from several jurisdictions..
I now desire to call attention to Triska v. Miller, 86 Neb. 503, 125 N. W. 1070, cited but not discussed in the majority opinion. The holding there is: “A, judgment on the merits constitutes an absolute bar to a subsequent action founded upon the same claim or demand, concluding parties and those in privity with them, not only as to every matter which was offered and received to sustain or defeat the claim or demand,'but also as to any other admissible matter which might have been offered for that purpose.” It shows that the bar of the former action relates to the “claim or demand” and not the cause of action.
Woodbury v. Porter, 158 F. 2d 194, was an action for damages. Plaintiff in á former proceeding had secured an injunction. The defendant contended that' there *769was a splitting of causes of action. The court denied that contention. It held: “If the same evidence will support both actions there is deemed to be but one cause of action. Of course, the mere fact that the same evidence may be admissible under the pleadings in each action is not necessarily controlling, but even though the evidence may be admissible and is in part the same, but the subject matter is essentially different, the actions are not identical. In the final analysis the test would seem to be whether the wrong for which redress is sought is the same in both actions. (Citing case.) The mere fact that different demands may spring out of the same act or contract does not itself render a judgment on one a bar to a suit upon another. * * * The first suit was an injunction action, while the second suit was for damages. The pleadings in the action for damages would be wholly inadequate as a basis for an injunction. To sustain an action for injunction it would be necessary to plead and prove threatened violations of the act and it has been held that if it is clear that violations will not be repeated, an injunction cannot be obtained as the purpose of an injunction is to prevent continued wrongful acts rather than to redress past grievances. (Citing case.) No such pleading nor proof would be essential in the action to recover damages.”
In Morency v. Plourde, 96 N. H. 344, 76 A. 2d 791, the court held: “Where damages in injunction proceedings are neither sought nor granted, the injunctive relief is not a bar to the law actions for damages on account of the thing enjoined.” It relied on Woodbury v. Porter, supra, and Perdue v. Ward, supra, upon which we relied in the Ledingham case.
I now go to the case of Shepard v. City of Friend, supra, from which the court quotes and sustains the quotation by quote from Gilbert v. Boak Fish Co., supra, which I have discussed above.
The opinion in the Shepard case was written by Judge Yeager. Judge Yeager analyzed the Shepard case in *770the, now withdrawn, opinion in this case in 167 Neb. 251, 92 N. W. 2d 708. The court does not now criticize his analysis of that opinion.
The court now quotes from parts of two paragraphs of that opinion. The quote appears in that part of the opinion which related to the following contention. It was used in answer to it: “It then becomes necessary for us. to sustain the judgment of the district court unless it may be said, as plaintiffs contend, that1 this case comes within the rule that, where a party mistakenly chooses a remedy that is not available to him, he- is not under the doctrine of res adjudicata barred from availing himself of the proper remedy.”
The court ignores the question decided before we reached the above matter — and in doing so overlooks the fact that the issue now presented here was decided in the Shepard case contrary to the present decision.
In the second case the trial court, with reference to the decree in the first case, held: “ ‘Said decree was'more than a judgment that no enjóinable nuisance existed. It was, in effect, a determination that the defendants had a legal right to flowage and that rio liability for damage therefrom existed in favor of the plaintiffs. This decree disposed of the primary issue of any claim for damages, namely, liability for damages, and therefore made it wholly immaterial and unnecessary to go into the matter of the quantum of the' alleged damages/ ” The trial court’ decided that the issue of damage's had been determined in the first action. We affirmed on the following basis, citing our decisions: “The defense of res adjudicata becomes available when a question- of fact has been put directly in issue in an action between the same parties or their privies and an adjudication had thereon. (Citing cases.)' Under the doctrine of res adjudicata, when a question of fact is drice determined, on the merits, that question is settled, so far as the litigants and those in privity are concerned. Such question'When decided cannot be relitigated'between the same parties *771or their' privies.” Obviously that case is not the instant case, but the rules of law followed there determining the question of res judicata require a denial of the plea here. This is made clear at the conclusion of the opinion Whéré we held “if there was a finding of fact in * * * the equity action, or the action at law on the same issues of fact, as were presented in the action *' * * before the court, such finding would be res adjudicata.”
I concur with Judge Messmore in his conclusion that the ;Ledingham case is in effect overruled by the court’s present decision. To that I add that the opinion in Shepard v. City of Friend, supra, is likewise overruled on .the issue here presented.
I now go to the “basis for the breadth of this rule” which the court now adopts. It is that because of the code provision there “has been a complete merger of legal and equitable remedies.” The code provision is section 25-101, R. R. S. 1943, which is: “The distinctions between actions at law and suits in equity, and the forms of all such actions and suits heretofore existing, are abolished; and in their place there shall be hereafter but one form of action, which shall be called a ‘civil action.’ ”
The court quotes to sustain its rule Hopkins v. Washington County, 56 Neb. 596, 77 N. W. 53. The quoted provision is requóted here to show by emphasis the scope of that decision: “In this state there is but one form of:action, to be called a ‘civil action,’ (Code of Civil Procedure, sec. 2); but the distinction between law arid equity is not abolished. There is one. form of action, in which either relief may be sought and obtained; and if the facts pleaded and proved demand, the -rules of either law or equity, or both, may be enforced.” - Obviously we are not here presented With a case where facts were pleaded and proved in the former action. No one contends that such is.the case. It is interesting to noté that Wilcox v. Saunders, supra, cited to sustain the rule. I have heretofore analyzed that decision; and *772obviously it does not sustain the “breadth” of the rule now adopted. None of our subsequent decisions citing the Hopkins case give it that breadth.
The court says: “See, also, City of Beatrice v. Gage County, 130 Neb. 850, 266 N. W. 777.” That case decides that in a “civil action * * * legal and equitable principles, either or both, may be enforced according to the facts * * It relies on the Hopkins case. I fail to “see” any expression of a “breadth” of a rule in that case nor where it in anywise is supporting the position taken by the court.
The court relies for its sole authority as to the “breadth of this rule” upon a statement taken from Restatement, Judgments, § 66, p. 282. This refers to the impact of code provisions on the questions here. Before discussing section 66 I desire to quote from the same authority: “Where a plaintiff obtains an equitable decree against the defendant by which the defendant is directed to do an act other than to pay money, the plaintiff’s claim is not merged in the decree. * * * Since the original cause of action is not merged in a decree in favor of the plaintiff which is not a decree for the payment of money, the plaintiff is not thereby precluded by the doctrine of res judicata from maintaining an action at law or a suit in equity upon the original cause of action. * * * The rule that a judgment, whether in favor of the plaintiff or of the defendant, is conclusive in a subsequent action between the parties upon the issues ’’actually litigated in the first action is applicable not only to judgments for the payment'of money * * *, but also to judgments in actions other than for the payment of money.” Restatement, Judgments, § 46, pp. 178, 180. So the Restátement gives the court no comfort except as to the code provision.
The court quotes from the comment under section 66 of Restatement, Judgments. It emphasizes the last sentence, and evidently accepts it as controlling. I quote the sentence preceding, as it described precisely *773the rule sustained by the wealth of our decisions. It is: “In some States, although a court of equity may award damages, there is not such a merger of legal and equitable remedies that the plaintiff is. compelled to seek damages in the equitable proceeding or be precluded from thereafter seeking damages in an action at law; in such States if the plaintiff brings a suit in equity to enjoin the continuance of a tort and does not seek damages which he has suffered from the tort, he is not precluded from thereafter maintaining an action at law to recover damages ”
Section 25-101, R. R. S. 1943, of our code .of civil procedure was adopted in 1867. See Laws 1867, § 1, p. 71. There were earlier provisions when, this state was a territory. So our code provision is now 92 years old. The parent code was adopted in New York over a century ago. It is a matter of common knowledge that many states have likewise adopted a similar code provision.
I call attention to the age of this provision and the fact that the court has been unable to find one adjudicated case that puts Nebraska and its code within the scope of the more “complete merger” rule which it now adopts. Nor has the court found one single text that does so. Nor has the court found an adjudicated case to support the rule it adopts.
I am aware that the court says “See, also, 2 Freeman on Judgments (5th Ed.), § 593, p. 1250.” I have obeyed the mandate and have seen that section. It makes no reference to code provisions. It consists of three paragraphs. The first deals with the rule of Gilbert v. Boak Fish Co., supra, which as I have pointed out we have heretofore refused to' follow. The second paragraph deals with the rule of Perdue v. Ward, supra, which as I have pointed out we followed in the Ledingham case. The third paragraph contains the language to which the court refers. It is: “Assuming that but a single cause of action is involved, whether the granting of equitable relief alone, in a case in *774which legal; relief is not sought,. operates as bar to future, legal relief, would on principle seem to depend upon whether, a court of equity would be bound to grant such .relief if a proper case for it were made ” 2. Freeman on. Judgments, § 593, pp. 1251, 1252. That language assumes a “single cause of action” and a “proper case” being.made. That sentence is followed by. this: “If the matter be one resting in the discretion of the: court,, in view of the somewhat different modes of procedure followed in law and equity cases and the absence of a right to jury trial in the latter, it would seem that the failure of the plaintiff to present his claims, for .legal relief should not bar. a subsequent action therefor.. On.the other hand if the court would have' no alternative .but to grant or deny legal relief on the facts, presented, then it would appear to be the plaintiff’s duty to. present all of his grounds for relief, legal and equitable, in one action, on the- general principle that any grounds for relief not urged are barred.” 2 Freeman. on Judgments, § 593, p. 1252. I see no support for either the “breadth of this rule” or for a construction of the code provision in that citation. The rule from Freeman, upon which the court relies, then depends on whether or not a court has no discretion to grant or deny legal relief "on the facts presented.” I emphasize this because of the .concluding phrase in the quoted rúle “if a proper case for it were made.”’ But where a party, as here, neither pleads, claims, or attempts to prove damages, how can it be said that “a proper case” is made or the “facts presented.”
The quoted sections of Restatement relate to “equitable- claims or defenses.” It makes no reference to forms of action.
The court holds that because section 25-101, R. R. S. 1943, provides, that there shall hereafter be “one form of action” that: there has been “a complete merger of legal and equitable remedies'.”" ■ -. , •• u" •
*775• But forms of action and legal and: equitable remedies are not synonymous. 1 C. J. S., Actions, § 39, p. .1084, states: “Where the codes have done away with the formal aspects of the common-law forms of action and substituted a single form of action for the enforcement of civil rights, the substantive phases of such actions remain untouched.”
In.-:1 C. J. S., Actions, § 1(d), p. 941, remedy is defined as follows: “ ‘Action’ is also distinguishable from ‘remedy,’ in that the term ‘remedy’ includes various means of enforcing rights or redressing injuries other than by action.”
In 1 Am. Jur., Actions, § 3, p. 405, it is stated: “Causes of action should be distinguished from, remedies. The cause- of action and the remedy sought are entirely different matters. The one precedes and, it is true, gives rise to the other, -but they are separate and distinct from each other and are governed by different rules and principles. The cause of action should be distinguished not only from the remedy but also from the relief, sought, which is no part of the cause of action.” The same authority, § 5, p; 407, states: ■ “It has been said; also that the term ‘action’ is not as broad and inclusive as the term ‘remedy,’ which does not necessarily imply an action, being the means employed to enforce a right or redress an injury, usually by action, but not necessarily so.”
If there is merit to the court’s position it then must depend for the “merger of legal and equitable remedies” on the language in section 25-101, R. R. S. 1943, which provides that the “distinctions between actions at law and,suits in equity * * * are abolished; * * Here the statute does not abolish or purport to abolish distinctions between remedies at law or in equity. It relates to distinctions between actions and suits.
■ I' now return to the decision in Wilcox v. Saunders, supra. ' The precise question of the effect of the code provision was there determined,' directly contrary to *776the construction which the court now gives it. I point out that the verb “merge” now used by the court and the verb “blend” used by the court in the Wilcox case are synonymous.
As I have heretofore pointed out, Saunders sued Wilcox in equity for specific performance of a contract to convey land. He obtained a decree which became final. Saunders then sued Wilcox for damages for trespass committed upon the same premises involved in the former action. Saunders recovered a judgment in a jury trial. We affirmed. Wilcox contended that the former judgment was res judicata, relying on the code provision. Judge Gantt proposed to hold that the code provision was unconstitutional. He analyzed the act as follows: “First. The abolition of the distinction between actions at law and in equity. Second. The abolition of all forms of suits in equity as well as actions at law heretofore existing. Third. The substitution in their place of but one form of action, called a civil action; or in other words, the merger of the two jurisdictions and the blending of law and equity in one form of action, called a civil action.”
He proposed to hold: “* * * but an attempt to blend the two in respect to matters of substance and principle, it seems to me, would not only subvert the jurisdiction of the courts but would also be clearly repugnant to the constitution.”
But the court did not agree with him. It held: “In regard to the power of the legislature, under the constitution of 1867, to blend law and equity cases in one form of action by the abolition of the distinction formerly existing between them, and authorizing their joinder in the same petition, we entertain no doubt whatever. On the contrary we think the authority to do all that the code provides in this particular is clear. * * * We cannot give assent to the notion that it was the design of the constitution to deprive the legislature of the authority to control the action of these *777courts in matters of mere practice, so long as no substantial right of a suitor was taken from him. Parenthetically I point out here that a substantial right is taken from the plaintiff.)
“The code does not profess to abrogate that distinction, which in the very nature of things must always exist between legal and equitable rights and remedies, nor to deprive any person of as complete redress, for every conceivable wrong done to him in his person or estate, as he formerly could have had. But it does require that, whatever the nature of the right to be enforced, or the wrong to be redressed may be, whether such as formerly would have been cognizable in either a court of chancery, or in a court of law, the simple form of a ‘civil action’ must be followed, in which a plain statement of the material facts constituting the cause of action, or the defense, must be set forth in concise language, and without repetition. Thus while the ancient forms of action are now abolished, all the various remedies known to the law still remain, and are administered through the medium of the single ‘civil action’ of the code, quite as certainly and much more speedily, than they were under the former practice.”
Quoting from Willard on Equity Jurisprudence, p. 43, the court held: “ ‘Relief may be obtained under the code in all cases where it could be granted before, whether at law or in equity. The subject of rights and wrongs remains unchanged. The remedy to enforce them, or to prevent their violation, or to obtain satisfaction for their violation, still exists, but under a different name. A civil action, nomen generalissimum, comprises within itself all the former actions both at law and in equity.’ ”
Here then is a direct holding that there has been no blending (merging) of the “remedy to enforce” legal or equitable rights. The court went on: “This is sufficient, we think, to show that, notwithstanding the two systems of procedure — the common law with its arbitrarily formal actions, of assumpsit, debt, detinue; tres*778pass, trover, and the like, on the one hand — and the chancery with its next to interminable bills, having their nine distinct sub-divisions on the other, together with their almost endless paraphernalia, have been dispensed with in this state, and by the act of June 19th, 1867, at the first session of the legislature under our former constitution, the two systems united in one single form of action, — still the constitutional jurisdiction of the courts was not thereby in the least abridged, but in .complete harmony with both the language and the spirit ■of the code of civil procedure, yet remains as formerly, and extending to all rights and remedies of whatsoever nature, whether of chancery or common law cognizance under the former system. The mere forms, it is true, have departed, but the entire substance of both jurisdictions is still preserved to us ”
i Here again is a direct holding that “rights and remedies” remain “as formerly” — only “mere forms” have departed.
The above decision was followed in Hart v. Barnes, 24 Neb. 782, 40 N. W. 322, where this statement is found: “The code has simplified the forms of procedure, and provides but one form known as a civil action, .but has not changed the rights and remedies of the common law ” Contrary thereto the court now holds that legal and equitable “remedies” have been merged. The above decision was again followed in Hopkins v. Washington County, supra, from which the court quotes. So there can be no doubt that thé court in the Hopkins case was not departing from the rule of Wilcox v. Saunders, supra.
The above decision was again followed in State ex rel. Wright v. Barney, 133 Neb. 676, 276 N. W. 676, wherein we held: “ ‘The Code provides that there shall be but one form of action which shall be denominated a civil action. This provision has not changed the ■substantive rights of the parties. The substance of the common-law rules of legal'procedure, and the principles by which the different forms of actions were pre*779viously governed, still remain as before. As it has been said, the abolition of the common-law names has not and cannot change the essential character of judicial remedies. And the common-law names are still used in Code states for convenience.’ ” The court now holds that the legal and equitable remedies have been changed and merged.
State ex rel. Wright v. Barney, supra, was quoted with approval in First Nat. Bank of Wayne v. Gross Real Estate Co., 162 Neb. 343, 75 N. W. 2d 704, in which we held: “By section 25-101, R. R. S. 1943, this distinction was abolished. The statute however did not abolish either the distinction between legal and equitáblé rights or'the methods necessary to assert or defend respectively' those rights.”
It was again cited with approval in Fuchs v. Parsons Constr. Co., 166 Neb. 188, 88 N. W. 2d 648.
So we have an unbroken line of decisions beginning with Wilcox v. Saunders, supra, decided in 1876, down to and including'the opinion in Fuchs "v. Parsons Constr. Co., supra, written by Judge Boslaugh and decided in 1958, all sustaining a rule contrary to that which the court now adopts.
I do not favor cutting down or "overruling all of the established precedents of this state construing and applying section 25-101, R. R. S. 1943. I submit that there has not’ been a “complete” or even a partial merger of legal and' equitable remedies as a result of the adoption of the code" provision.
In view of the number and'"definiteness of our holdings it would not seem necessary to cite texts on the matter. The'subject is discussed in 1 C. J. S., Actions, § 55, p. 1168.- I "venture to quote from, that authority: ‘•‘While there has been some uncertainty and diversity Of opinion, particularly in the " earlier case's, as to the exact nature and extent of the change thereby effected, it is well settled that it is not' so extensive as the broad terms of the provisions might imply. Without question *780the mere formal distinctions have been abolished, but this seems to be practically all that has been effected, it being said that the distinction between law and equity is as naked and broad as ever.”
Under the latter text statement in 1 C. J., Actions, § 176, p. 1047, the case of Wilcox v. Saunders, supra, is cited.
In 1 Am. Jur., Actions, § 56, p. 448, the rule is stated as follows: “In short, the effect of constitutional and statutory provisions for one form of civil action, whether the cause of action is in its nature legal or equitable, is that while all relief is sought in the same way from the same tribunal, the distinction between law and equity is as naked and broad as ever, and the plaintiff, to be entitled to the equitable interposition of the court, must show a proper case for the interference of a court of chancery.”
Wilcox v. Saunders, supra, definitely decides that section 25-101, R.' R. S. 1943, did not create a complete “merger of legal and equitable remedies” — nor any in fact. It is directly contrary to the construction which the court now puts upon the code.
Wilcox v. Saunders, supra, now being in effect overruled, I submit the court is now directly confronted with the constitutional contention advanced by Judge Gantt. The court did not criticize that view in Wilcox v. Saunders, supra, but held it did not arise under the construction there given to section 25-101, R. R. S. 1943. As a result of the present decision the constitutional question is now here. The court ignores it.
All of our decisions mentioned in this feature of the dissent cover a period of over 80 years and 162 volumes of our reports. They are ignored by the court.
The rule''now adopted must necessarily operate In a situation where an action at law is had, followed by an attempt to' secure equitable relief; :
' Suppose in this cáse plaintiffs had known of their- damages to personal property. The amount of the dam*781ages were ascertainable. Damages to .land from the trespass were known but the amount not ascertainable until such time as the full effect of the trespass had become a tangible result. Suppose then .they had brought an action at law to recover their ascertainable damages to personal property. They would have that right and on that issue have a right of trial by jury; However, not being able to presently ascertain the permanent damages to their land, except on a speculative basis, they withheld that issue. Likewise not knowing the full extent of the effect of the trespass, they withheld seeking an equity decree enjoining the trespass because they might not be presently able to establish a right to an injunction.
Under this decision, by suing for damages to personal property, they would of necessity be held to have forfeited their right to permanent damages to land and a right to enjoin a violation of their property rights. I cannot reconcile our decisions with such a result or deem it to. be a proper decision by a court administering justice according to law.
I now return to one sentence from Freeman on Judgments which the court suggests be seen. It is this: “If the matter be one resting in the discretion of the court, in view of the somewhat different modes of procedure followed in law and equity cases, and the absence of a right to jury trial in the latter, it would seem that the failure of the plaintiff to present his claim for legal relief should not bar a subsequent action therefor.” 2 Freeman on Judgments (5th Ed.), § 593, p. 1252.
I suggest the court should follow the test which it recommends.
It is axiomatic that a remedy at law involves the right of trial by jury. A remedy in equity does not involve that right. These distinctions have been recognized in our decisions without number. They have a constitutional base.
If this decision means what it says, it means that *782these distinctions are now wiped out. We no longer have actions at law or suits in equity — they have been completely “merged” in a civil action..
Webster’s new Twentieth Century Dictionary (2d Ed.), p. 1127, defines merge as “to unite indistinguishably.” The rule now adopted makes no exceptions. The court makes no exceptions, and none could be made in the “breadth of this rule” that there has been a complete merger of legal and equitable remedies.
What about the constitutional right of trial by jury in what was formerly an action at law and is now indistinguishably merged in a civil action?
The court.' is now confronted with not only the constitutional question raised by Judge Gantt in Wilcox v. Saunders, supra, but also the constitutional right of trial by jury so vigorously asserted, and as I saw it unduly extended in scope by the court, in Gillespie v. Hynes, ante p. 49, 95 N. W. 2d 457. There the court held that where a litigant invoked an equitable remedy (now merely a civil remedy), and a claim for a money judgment was advanced (formerly a law remedy, now merely a civil remedy), and the court denied equitable relief (now merely civil relief), a party could not, by remaining silent, waive his constitutional right of trial by jury as to the law issue (now merely a civil issue).
■It is inconceivable that the court intends by this decision to “unite indistinguishably” what were formerly remedies at 'law and remedies in equity. I challenge its constitutional power to do so. If language means anything by holding that there has been a “complete merger of legal and equitable remedies” in this state, the court now has accomplished that result.
Using the terms which up to now were commonplace, the court now compels a litigant to go into equity, and if equitable relief is granted, he must waive his constitutional right of trial by jury of the law issue; but if he desires to secure a jury trial of the law issue he must therebyi waive his equitable rights.

=== CASE 9741670 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:00:23.848826+00 ===

*783Yeager, J.,
dissenting.
I concur in the dissent of Simmons, C. J., which has been filed in this case. I also dissent from that phase of the majority opinion which rejects the opinion originally adopted herein.
I shall direct my remarks first, not in repetitioh of what has been said in the dissent of Simmons, C. J., but to the disclosure of the reasonably anticipated consequences of the majority opinion. I take the view that this majority opinion, in addition to its own immediate mischief, contains the potential for broad and far-reaching mischief and confusion which will inevitably rise to plague the bench and the bar. This mischief , may be readily demonstrated by some pertinent observations and related questions.
If this opinion is allowed to stand, what becomes of the right to trial by jury? Is the right to trial by jury abolished in cases where equitable and legal rights must be asserted in the same action? If a jury is to be called, must there be one hearing without the. jury and another with one in attendance? . If a jury is to be called, must it be done as a matter of right of the parties, or must there be a demand in order to secure a jury, and if no demand is made, is it necessary that this be regarded as a waiver? These are all questions which have not been answered which will require answers if this departure from traditional, well-established, and long-uninterrupted procedures is allowed to obtain.
Assuming that as regards the matters involved in this case and in Bahm v. Raikes, 160 Neb. 503, 70 N. W. 2d 507, the plaintiffs in Bahm v. Raikes, supra, had instituted action at law for damages instead of an action in equity to have destroyed the causative factor and had succeeded in recovering damages, but the causative factor was continued, would they, because1 they did not join their equitable right with their legal right, be barred from separate action in equity thereáfter to have élim*784inated the causative factor? Would the action at law be res judicata of an action in equity?
The majority opinion holds that the decree in Bahm v. Raikes, supra, since no claim for damages was presented in that case, is res judicata and prohibits an action for damages caused by the wrongful acts of defendant which were enjoined. Despite this, however, it grants the right to assert that part of the pleaded cause of action relating to the period after February 1954. If the decree became res judicata for the reasons given in the majority opinion, why is it hot res judicata as to the period after February 1954 as well as before? If the theory presented by the majority opinion is correct, does not consistency require the application of the rule to all periods? The relief sought in Bahm v. Raikes, supra, had reference to a situation involving past, present, and future injury and damage growing out of an existing and continuing condition. Wherein lies the power of this court to make a separation and division of this claim or rather failure to assert a claim? Other questions of related character could be asked but I think these are sufficient to demonstrate my concern.
I do not know what the answers to these questions should be and I decline to try to predict what they will be, but I am sure that the mischief and confusion which they foreshadow can all be avoided, without price or sacrifice in the area of either law or equity, by adherence to the principles set forth in Wilcox v. Saunders, 4 Neb. 569, and consistently and assiduously adhered to thereafter until the adoption of the majority opinion in this case.
From this it becomes clear that I do not think that the majority opinion contains a proper basis for the •decision in this case.
I am still convinced that the opinion which has been rejected contains the proper basis for consideration of the .case by this court, and further that the ultimate conclusion and decision outlined therein is the only one *785which is capable of support on the record made at the trial in the district court.
It was asserted in that opinion that there was no proof of causal connection between the damage alleged by the plaintiffs in their pleaded cause of action and any act or failure to act on the part of the defendant. That assertion is repeated herein. The authenticity of this assertion is challenged by the present majority opinion, but significantly only in general terms. There has been no effort to point to evidence from the witnesses, or otherwise, the legal substance of which is to say that the particular damage occurring within the period not excluded by the statute of limitations was caused by any act or failure to act on the part of the defendant. It is true that there is evidence of damage from water, but there was not even an effort made on the trial to trace the source of the water back to any act or failure to act on the part of the defendant. In this connection the following is repeated from the rejected opinion: “Inexplicably, however, the plaintiffs failed to offer any testimony or other evidence that any of these things were caused or came about by reason of the matters charged against the defendant in Bahm v. Raikes, supra, which was prohibited or commanded by the adjudication in that case, or that they were caused by any other act of omission or commission on his part.”
Despite the statements made in the majority opinion, with assurance I rest my statements on what appears, or more correctly does not appear, in the bill of exceptions.
It is of course true that thére was evidence of a general nature on the trial of the case that over a long period of years works of the defendant caused damage to lands and crops of the plaintiffs. It is likewise true that in Bahm v. Raikes, supra, there was evidence, the result of which came into this case under the law of the case theory, that over a long period of years works of the *786defendant generally caused damage to lands and crops of the plaintiffs.
It might well be said that these two phases of evidence could be regarded as corroborative in character, provided of course that there was evidence disclosing the source of the thing which caused the particular damage claimed. But here there was not the primary evidence which is the basis for corroborative proof.
I earnestly insist therefore that the present majority opinion should have been rejected and the one rejected should have been allowed to stand.

=== CASE 9741671 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:00:24.170699+00 ===

JUSTICE RAPP delivered the opinion of the court: Defendant, Mark A. Didier, was charged with 22 counts of burglary in 10 separate cases. On February 3, 1997, defendant entered simultaneous guilty pleas to 15 counts of burglary. In exchange for his pleas, the State agreed to a sentence cap of 14 years’ imprisonment and to nol-pros seven counts. On May 21, 1997, the trial court sentenced defendant to serve 10-year concurrent terms of imprisonment on all 10 cases. After defendant was sentenced, the trial court told defendant that he had 30 days to file either a motion to withdraw his guilty plea or a motion asking the court to reconsider his sentence. On May 30, 1997, defendant filed a motion to reconsider his sentence. The trial court amended defendant’s sentence, imposing 3- and 7-year consecutive terms in two of the cases, and ordering 10-year concurrent terms in the remaining eight cases. Defendant timely appealed. On appeal, defendant argues that (1) his 10-year sentences should be reduced to the statutory maximum 7-year terms; (2) the consecutive 3- and 7-year terms should be modified to run concurrently; (3) he should be granted credit against both consecutive terms for time spent in simultaneous custody; and (4) the case should be remanded to allow him to file a new motion to reconsider because his counsel failed to file a certificate under Supreme Court Rule 604(d) (145 Ill. 2d R. 604(d)). We affirm in part, reverse in part, and remand the cause with directions. I. WHETHER THE TRIAL COURT ERRED IN IMPOSING CONCURRENT 10-YEAR SENTENCES IN EIGHT BURGLARY CONVICTIONS. Defendant argues that the trial court erred in imposing 10-year concurrent terms in eight of his burglary convictions. Defendant contends that these terms exceeded the statutory maximum. The State argues that defendant has waived this issue by failing to file a motion to withdraw his plea.  The issue of waiver turns on whether defendant must move to withdraw his guilty plea and vacate the judgment prior to challenging the trial court’s statutory authority to impose a particular sentence. In People v. Evans, 174 Ill. 2d 320 (1996), the supreme court held that when a defendant pleads guilty in exchange for a specific sentence, he must move to withdraw his guilty plea and vacate the judgment prior to challenging his sentence. Evans, 174 Ill. 2d at 332. In People v. Williams, 179 Ill. 2d 331 (1997), the supreme court held that Evans is inapplicable when a defendant claims that his sentence is void because it does not conform with the statute. Williams, 179 Ill. 2d at 333, citing People v. Arna, 168 Ill. 2d 107, 113 (1995) (holding that a sentence that is not authorized by statute is void and the appellate court has authority to correct it at any time). In People v. Wilson, 181 Ill. 2d 409 (1998), the supreme court found that under Williams a challenge to a trial court’s statutory authority to impose a particular sentence is not waived when a defendant fails to withdraw his guilty plea and vacate the judgment. Wilson, 181 Ill. 2d at 413. Subsequently, in People v. Clark, 183 Ill. 2d 261 (1998), the supreme court held that a plea agreement that leaves open only the applicability of a mandatory sentencing statute constitutes a negotiated plea agreement and that even though a defendant seeks to challenge only the consecutive aspect of his sentence, he is required to withdraw the guilty plea, because his plea of guilty was given in exchange for a specific sentence, regardless of whether the statute mandated a consecutive sentence. Clark, 183 Ill. 2d at 267-68. The supreme court recently followed Evans and Clark in People v. Linder, 186 Ill. 2d 67 (1999), in which it held that, when a defendant agrees to plead guilty in exchange for the State’s dismissal of certain charges and recommendation of a sentence cap, he may not seek reconsideration of the sentence unless he also moves to withdraw his guilty plea. Linder, 186 Ill. 2d at 74. The court stated that where a defendant fails to withdraw his guilty plea and vacate the judgment the appellate court must dismiss the appeal, leaving the Post-Conviction Hearing Act (725 ILCS 5/122 — 1 et seq. (West 1996)) as the defendant’s only recourse. Linder, 186 Ill. 2d at 74.  We find that the instant case is distinguishable from Evans, Clark, and Linder and therefore follow the decisions in Williams and Wilson. In Evans, Clark, and Linder, the sentences imposed did not exceed the statutory limits. In Williams and Wilson, however, the sentences imposed violated statutory requirements and were thus void. In this case, defendant argues that the trial court imposed terms that violated statutory requirements. We find that, under Williams and Wilson, defendant’s challenge to the trial court’s statutory authority to impose a particular term was not waived by his failure to withdraw his guilty plea and vacate the judgment.  Therefore, we will address the merits of defendant’s claims of improper sentencing in these eight burglary convictions. Burglary is a Class 2 felony (720 ILCS 5/19 — 1(b) (West 1996)) carrying a sentencing range of three to seven years’ incarceration (see 730 ILCS 5/5— 8 — 1(a)(5) (West 1996)). In this case, the State has admitted, and the record is clear, that defendant was not eligible for extended-term sentencing. At no time did the trial judge indicate that he was applying the extended term under these sentences. Thus, the maximum term that could be imposed was seven years on each of the burglary convictions.  In this case, defendant was sentenced in two of the burglary convictions to 3- and 7-year consecutive prison terms, and 10-year terms were imposed on the remaining eight burglary convictions and ordered to run concurrently with the 3- and 7-year terms. We find that the trial court erred in imposing 10-year terms on the eight remaining burglary convictions. We hold that the 10-year terms on the remaining eight burglary convictions are void because they exceed the statutory maximum. Pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 615(b)(4) (134 Ill. 2d R. 615(b)(4)), we remand the cause with directions for the trial court to reduce the terms on the eight remaining burglary convictions to seven years in accordance with section 5 — 8 — 1(a)(5) of the Unified Code of Corrections (the Code) (730 ILCS 5/5 — 8 — 1(a)(5) (West 1996)). II. WHETHER THE TRIAL COURT ERRED IN IMPOSING CONSECUTIVE THREE- AND SEVEN-YEAR SENTENCES IN TWO BURGLARY CONVICTIONS. Defendant also contends that the trial court, in reconsidering his sentences, lacked statutory authority to modify two of the 10-year concurrent terms to 3- and 7-year consecutive terms. Defendant argues that section 5 — 8 — 1(c) of the Code (730 ILCS 5/5 — 8 — 1(c) (West 1996)) prohibits the trial court from modifying the sentence from concurrent to consecutive terms. Because we hold that defendant’s challenge to the trial court’s statutory authority to impose a particular sentence was not waived by his failure to withdraw his guilty plea and vacate the judgment, we will address the merits of defendant’s claims of improper sentencing in these two burglary convictions.  Section 5 — 8 — 1(c) provides: “A motion to reduce a sentence may be made, or the court may reduce a sentence without motion, within 30 days after the sentence is imposed. A defendant’s challenge to the correctness of a sentence or to any aspect of the sentencing hearing shall be made by a written motion filed within 30 days following the imposition of sentence. However, the court may not increase a sentence once it is imposed.” (Emphasis added.) 730 ILCS 5/5 — 8 — 1(c) (West 1996).  Here, upon reconsideration by the trial court, two of defendant’s concurrent 10-year terms were reduced to consecutive 3- and 7-year terms. The aggregate of these consecutive terms does not exceed the original concurrent 10-year terms. Thus, the trial court did not increase the sentences on reconsideration. We therefore reject defendant’s argument that the trial court lacked statutory authority to modify the concurrent sentences to consecutive sentences.  Defendant further argues that, because of his rehabilitative potential, the imposition of consecutive terms was an abuse of discretion. In accordance with the reasoning of Evans, Clark, Linder, Williams, and Wilson, we find that defendant has waived this issue by failing to withdraw his guilty plea and vacate the judgment. In any event, we find no merit in defendant’s argument. A trial court has considerable discretion in imposing a sentence and will be reversed only if the court abused that discretion. People v. Smith, 288 Ill. App. 3d 308, 316 (1997). We will not substitute our judgment for that of the sentencing judge simply because we might have balanced the sentencing factors differently. Smith, 288 Ill. App. 3d at 316. In this case, defendant was charged with 22 separate burglaries in 10 separate cases. He pleaded guilty to 15 of those burglary charges, and the State dismissed 7 of the burglary charges as part of the plea agreement. Additionally, at the sentencing hearing the State introduced evidence of numerous other burglaries for which defendant had not been charged. In order to sustain the imposition of a consecutive sentence, the record must establish that the trial court is of the opinion that a consecutive sentence is necessary to protect the public. People v. Rivera, 212 Ill. App. 3d 519, 526 (1991). Like the defendant in this case, the defendant in Rivera was charged with numerous burglaries over a short span of time, was young, and had no significant criminal record. In Rivera, we found no abuse of discretion on the part of the trial court, and we upheld the imposition of consecutive sentences, as the decision was supported by the record. Rivera, 212 Ill. App. 3d at 526-27. In People v. Moore, 258 Ill. App. 3d 167 (1994), the defendant, who had committed several armed robberies in a relatively short time, was young and had no significant criminal history. We likewise found that the trial court did not abuse its discretion, and we upheld the imposition of consecutive sentences as necessary to protect the public. Moore, 258 Ill. App. 3d at 173. In sentencing defendant in this case, the trial court noted that defendant had been involved in over 30 separate burglaries. At the hearing on defendant’s motion to reconsider, the trial court indicated that defendant was getting a substantial benefit by having pleaded guilty, since a more severe sentence would have been appropriate. We find that the record in this case supports the trial court’s decision to impose consecutive terms to protect the public from further criminal conduct by defendant. We find no abuse of discretion. III. WHETHER DEFENDANT IS ENTITLED TO CREDIT AGAINST THE CONSECUTIVE SENTENCES FOR TIME SPENT IN SIMULTANEOUS CUSTODY.  Defendant next argues that he is entitled to credit against the consecutive sentences for time spent in simultaneous presentencing custody. Although defendant acknowledges in his brief that he did not raise this issue in the trial court, he urges us to review the issue as one of plain error. Because sentencing issues are regarded by courts as matters affecting a defendant’s substantial rights and have thus been excepted from the doctrine of waiver, we will address the merits of defendant’s argument. See People v. Burrage, 269 Ill. App. 3d 67, 71 (1994). We note that our supreme court recently rejected this argument in People v. Latona, 184 Ill. 2d 260 (1998). In Latona, the supreme court held: “[T]o the extent that an offender sentenced to consecutive sentences had been incarcerated prior thereto on more than one offense simultaneously, he should be given credit only once for actual days served. *** Defendants must be given credit for all the days they actually served, but no more.” Latona, 184 Ill. 2d at 271-72. Thus, under Latona, defendant is not entitled to credit against the consecutive sentences for time spent in simultaneous presentencing custody. IV WHETHER DEFENDANT IS ENTITLED TO A REMAND FOR COMPLIANCE WITH SUPREME COURT RULE 604(d).  We note that the trial court advised defendant at the sentencing hearing that he could file either a motion to withdraw his guilty plea or a motion to reconsider his sentence. Fundamental fairness requires that we remand the cause and direct the trial court to admonish defendant of his right to file a motion to withdraw his guilty plea and allow him to do so if he so chooses, in accordance with Supreme Court Rule 604(d) (145 Ill. 2d R. 604(d)). Because we are remanding the cause for new admonishments under Rule 604(d), we find it unnecessary to address defendant’s argument that the cause must be remanded to allow him to file a new motion to reconsider since his counsel failed to file a certificate pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 604(d) (145 Ill. 2d R. 604(d)). For the foregoing reasons, (1) we affirm the consecutive three- and seven-year sentences in two of defendant’s burglary convictions; (2) we remand the cause and direct the trial court to reduce the sentences to seven-year terms in the remaining eight burglary convictions, to run concurrently with the three- and seven-year consecutive terms; (3) we hold that defendant is not entitled to credit against the consecutive sentences for time spent in simultaneous custody; and (4) we direct the trial court to admonish defendant of his right to file a motion to withdraw his guilty plea and allow him to do so if he so chooses, in accordance with Supreme Court Rule 604(d). Affirmed in part and reversed in part; cause remanded with directions. GALASSO, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9741672 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:00:24.174836+00 ===

JUSTICE McLAREN, dissenting: I dissent because I do not believe the parties’ “minds” ever “met” and therefore the trial court either should have refused to entertain the plea agreement or should have vacated the agreement upon reconsideration. The State wanted a 14-year cap on the sentence. That portion of the agreement could be achieved only if at least two of the sentences were consecutive. Paradoxically, the defendant only agreed to concurrent sentences. I believe the record reflects that the trial court was aware of this contradiction by its responses to the arguments of defense counsel as to what the court should do in reconciling the impossibility of a 10- or 14-year sentence without making some of the sentences consecutive when the defendant agreed only to concurrent sentences. I believe the trial court should have refused to entertain the plea agreement or vacated the plea agreement at the conclusion of the motion to reconsider sentence because the patent contradiction contained in the plea agreement clearly established that there never was a meeting of the minds. I continue to believe that the law regarding contracts applies equally to all parties and that the majority is subverting the law by giving the State the “benefit of a bargain” that was never realized because it would have been, and still is, impossible to simultaneously sentence the defendant to solely concurrent and solely consecutive sentences. See People v. Knowles, 304 Ill. App. 3d 472, 475 (1999) (McLaren, J., dissenting); see also People v. Mast, 305 Ill. App. 3d 727 (1999) (adopting the rationale of the dissent in Knowles). Because there could not possibly be such a sentence as agreed, there never was a “meeting of the minds,” and the “agreement” should not be enforced against either party. Rather than affirm the sentence as modified, I would vacate the sentence and the plea and remand the cause for further proceedings. Therefore, I respectfully dissent.

=== CASE 9741673 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:00:24.780067+00 ===

Carr, J.
The defendants in this case were tried in'the circuit court of Genesee county on an information charging them with conspiracy to violate the laws of the State relating to the suppression of gambling. They were convicted by the jury and sentences were imposed. The prosecution followed an investigation conducted in said county by a visiting circuit judge, under the provisions of CLS 1956, § 767.3 (Stat Ann 1954 Rev § 28.943). The statutory provisions involved are commonly referred to as the one-man grand-jury act of the State, and are a part of the code of criminal procedure as enacted by the legislature. The section cited provides, in substance, that on the filing of a complaint or upon the application of the prosecuting attorney or attorney general any judge of a court, of law and of record may make an order directing an inquiry into the matters set forth in the complaint or application, such order to indicate the scope of the proceeding. The judge making such order may require the attendance of witnesses and the taking of testimony therefrom. The proceedings for the summoning of witnesses and requiring them to testify are, insofar as possible, identical with those in other criminal proceedings.
No claim is made in the instant case that the proceeding as conducted by the circuit judge was not in accord with the provisions of the statute as *688amended by the legislature. Following the taking of proofs the judge issued his warrant for the arrest of 11 individuals, including the 4 defendants in this case, reciting as the basis therefor that there was-“just cause to believe,” and such belief on the part of the judge, that on divers days between the 15th of April, 1956, and the 1st day of February, 1957, the persons named had conspired among themselves and with others to violate the provisions of certain designated sections of the Michigan criminal code prohibiting gambling and other conduct incidental thereto. The warrant further alleged that the object of the conspiracy was effected by taking and registering “policy, pool and mutuel numbers bets,” and the keeping of places for the carrying on of such operations. Following the issuance of the warrant on February 8, 1957, the defendants named therein were taken into custody, a preliminary examination was held, and they were bound over to the circuit, court for trial on an information charging conspiracy to violate the gambling laws. It further appears-that the case was dismissed as to 1 of the defendants, and 6 pleaded guilty to violations of the law and received sentences. The appellants in this case were tried, with the result above indicated.
No claim is made that the preliminary examination and the trial were not conducted in accordance with the law of the State, or that the rights of the defendants were not properly protected therein. The appeal taken by defendants to this Court is directed wholly to the constitutionality of the provisions of the criminal code relating to inquiries under the section above cited. It is claimed, in substance, that such section violates the 14th Amendment to the Federal Constitution in that it does not provide for due process of law, and that it also offends article 2, § 10, of the Constitution of Michigan (1908), as amended in 1952, which section has reference to the *689issuance of warrants as the bases of searches and seizures.
The arguments advanced on behalf of appellants do not relate in any way to alleged prejudicial invasion of their rights other than by the investigation under the statute by the circuit judge and the subsequent issuance of the warrant. Rather, the statute is assailed on the basis of the policy and wisdom of the legislative enactment and occurrences that might take place in proceedings under it. Primarily, it is asserted that the law vests too much power in the judge conducting a one-man grand-jury investigation. The right of the State to provide for a grand jury composed of a number of individuals is not questioned, but it is insisted, in effect, that a State may not provide for an investigation of alleged criminal activities in a judicial inquiry conducted by the judge of a court of record. Such argument rests solely on the theory that the authority granted may be abused. Such a claim might obviously be made with reference to possible acts of officials generally, acting pursuant to legislative authority in the performance of public functions. It may not be assumed, however, that such an official will abuse his prerogatives, and if he does so an aggrieved party is not without remedy.
In view of appellants’ argument the statement of Mr. Justice Frankfurter in In re Groban, 352 US 330, 335-337 (77 S Ct 510, 1 L ed 2d 376), is significant-involved there was a statute of the State of Ohio, providing for investigations of fires by the State, fire marshal. Said statute authorized the fire marshal to summon witnesses and take testimony, with authority to punish for refusing to testify. It was further provided that the investigation might be private, and that all persons other than those required to be present might be excluded. The appellants in the case refused to testify without having *690their attorney with them. By a divided court the supreme court of the United States sustained the decision of the supreme court of Ohio upholding the statute. With reference to arguments that had been advanced by counsel for petitioners, Justice Frankfurter said, in part:
“To whatever extent history may confirm Lord Acton’s dictum that power tends to corrupt, such a doctrine of fear can hardly serve as a test, under the due process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, of a particular exercise of a State’s legislative power. And so, the constitutionality of a particular statute, expressive of a State’s view of desirable policy for dealing with one of the rudimentary concerns of society — the prevention of fires and the ascertainment of their causes — and directed towards a particular situation, cannot be determined by deriving a troupe of hobgoblins from the assumption that such a particularized exercise of power would justify an unlimited, abusive exercise of power.
“If the Ohio legislation were directed explicitly or by obvious design toward secret inquisition of those suspected of arson, we would have a wholly different situation from the one before us. This is not a statute directed to the examination of suspects. It is a statute authorizing inquiry by the chief guardian of a community against the hazards of fire into the causes of fires. To be sure, it does not preclude the possibility that a suspect might turn up among those to be questioned by the fire marshal. But the aim of the statute is the expeditious and expert ascertainment of the causes of fire. The fire marshal is not a prosecutor, though he may, like others, serve as a witness for the prosecution. In various proceedings, as for instance under some workmen’s compensation laws, the presence of lawyers is deemed not conducive to the economical and thorough ascertainment of the facts. The utmost devotion to one’s profession and the fullest recognition of the great role of lawyers in the evolution *691of a free society cannot lead one to erect as a constitutional principle that no administrative inquiry can be had in camera unless a lawyer be allowed to attend.
“The assumption that as a normal matter such an inquiry carries with it deprivation of some rights of a citizen assumes inevitable misuse of authority. For good reasons, and certainly for constitutional purposes, the contrary assumption must be entertained. The potential danger most feared is that it will invade the privilege against self-incrimination in States where it is constitutionally recognized. But that privilege is amply safeguarded by the decision of the supreme court of Ohio in this case. We are not justified in invalidating this Ohio statute on the assumption'that people called before the fire marshal would not be aware of their privilege not to respond to questions the answers to which may tend to incriminate. At a time when this privilege has attained the familiarity of the comic strips, the assumption of ignorance about the privilege by witnesses called before the fire marshal is too farfetched an assumption on which to invalidate legislation.”
Of like import are the comments of Mr. Justice Frankfurter in In re Oliver, 333 US 257 (68 S Ct 499, 92 L ed 682), which involved a contempt proceeding resulting from a judicial investigation under the one-man grand-jury act of Michigan. With reference to the power of the State to enact the statute here involved, the Justice said (pp 283, 284):
“Under the Fourteenth Amendment, a State may surely adopt as its own a procedure which was the established method for prosecuting crime in nearly half the States which ratified that amendment. And! so, it may abolish the grand jury, or it may reduce the size of the grand jury, and even to a single member. A State has great leeway in devising its judicial instruments for probing into conduct as a basis; *692for charging the commission of crime. It may, at the same time, surround such preliminary inquiry with safeguards, not only that crime may he detected and criminals punished, but also that charges may be sifted in secret so as not to injure or embarrass the innocent.”
We are not unmindful of the fact that a majority of the United States supreme court concluded that Oliver had been improperly adjudged in contempt of court because of the procedure observed in his case. Such conclusion did not affect the constitutionality of the statute as a whole, particularly in yiew of the fact that the legislature had not undertaken to specify in said statute the procedure to be followed in a contempt matter arising in connection with the statutory inquiry.
This Court has heretofore recognized the constitutionality of the provisions of the Michigan criminal code providing for a one-man grand jury. In the case of In re Slattery, 310 Mich 458, attention was directed to prior decisions holding that a circuit judge in conducting an inquiry under the statute was acting in a judicial capacity. The arguments advanced against the validity of the legislative enactment were considered at some length and rejected. The Supreme Court of the United States denied a petition for writ of certiorari to review the case. 325 US 876 (65 S Ct 1553, 89 L ed 1993).
The section of the criminal code, above cited, specifically provides that:
“Any person called before the grand jury shall at all times be entitled to legal counsel not involving delay and he may discuss fully with his counsel all matters relative to his part in the inquiry without being subject to a citation for contempt. All matters so revealed to the attorney shall be subject to the requirements of secrecy in section 4, and any revela*693tion thereof by the attorney shall make him subject to punishment as provided in said section.”
This provision of the statute was considered in In re White, 340 Mich 140, where it was held that the statute did not mean that a witness had the right to have his attorney with him while testifying, but, rather, that he was entitled to consult an attorney with reference to his part in the inquiry and his rights as a witness, before and after entering the jury room, and at intermissions in the course of the inquiry in the discretion of the judge conducting same. The statute as so interpreted adequately protects the right of a witness.
In People v. Lauder, 82 Mich 109, it was held that a witness testifying before a 23-man grand jury was not entitled to have the assistance of counsel inasmuch as he was not upon trial for any offense. A witness in such a proceeding may obviously claim the privilege of refusing to give testimony that will tend to incriminate him. As Mr. Justice Frankfurter pointed out in the excerpt, above quoted, from his opinion in the Groban Case, supra, it may not be assumed that witnesses are not informed as to their right to make answers to questions that will tend to disclose guilt of a crime or otherwise debase or degrade the witness. The claim that the statute here involved does not provide for due process of law because a witness may not take his attorney with him into the grand-jury room is not tenable. Neither is it a valid objection to the statute that a witness may indulge in conduct rendering him guilty of contempt. If his rights with reference to the trial of such a charge against him are not safeguarded, he, as in any other case, has his remedy by proper review.
Complaint is also made that the proceedings before the judge of a court of record under the statute are *694secret. It is insisted that the inquiry may not be properly regarded as a grand-jury proceeding, it being conceded that such a proceeding must necessarily be secret for reasons of public policy. However, no provision of either State or Federal Constitutions forbids the legislature to provide a method of inquiry for the investigation of claims of criminal conduct, in addition to the 23-man grand-jury procedure. The same reasons deemed essential to a proceeding of the latter nature likewise obtain where the inquiry is conducted by a judge acting in his judicial capacity. If this were not so the purpose of the inquiry might be defeated as a result of publicity. The difficulty of obtaining the attendance of desired witnesses would also be increased. Furthermore, an inquiry of the nature here under consideration, like a 23-man grand-jury proceeding, may well involve persons not guilty of any violation of the law, but concerning whom rumors have been circulated tending to raise questions in such respect. Secrecy is requisite for the protection of the innocent as well as for the effective conducting of the investigation.
In the main the arguments advanced by counsel for appellants present nothing of a material nature that has not been carefully considered in prior decisions relating to the one-man grand-jury act, the constitutionality of which this Court has recognized in, several cases, including People v. Hancock, 326 Mich 471, 491. In People v. Pickett, 339 Mich 294 (45 ALR2d 1341), the conviction of the defendants on a charge of conspiracy to violate the gambling laws of the State was affirmed, the Court holding that objections that defendants had been deprived of constitutional rights were not well-founded. Writ of certiorari was denied by the Supreme Court of the United States. Pickett v. Michigan, 349 US 937 (75 S Ct 781, 99 L ed 1266). We find that there is no merit in the claim that the statute in question is *695in any of the particulars argued in violation of the 14th Amendment to the Federal Constitution, and that the legislature of the State did not exceed its authority in the enactment thereof and the amendments thereto. As before noted, we are not here confronted with a situation involving claims of specific prejudicial acts, in the course of the proceedings against the appellants, in violation of their constitutional or statutory rights.
It is further urged that the statute is in violation of article 2, § 10, of the State Constitution (1908), as amended in 1952, which provides that:
“The person, houses, papers and possessions of every person shall be secure from unreasonable searches and seizures. No warrant to search any place or to seize any person or things shall issue without describing them, nor without probable cause, supported by oath or affirmation.”
Like claim was made in People v. Kert, 304 Mich 148, which resulted from a one-man grand-jury proceeding. Defendant claimed that the warrant issued against him was in violation of the provisions of the section of the Constitution quoted. It was held, however, that said section refers entirely to unlawful searches and seizures, and that it had nothing to do with the procedure in the case.
Attention is also directed to the fact that the warrant of the grand jury in the instant case used the term “just cause,” rather than “probable cause.” We do not think the variation in terms was material. As pointed out in the brief for the people, the statute  does not prescribe the form of the warrant that the grand juror may issue if he is satisfied that an offense has been committed and has probable cause to suspect any person or persons to be guilty thereof. It states that the judge may “cause the apprehen*696sion of such person or persons by proper process.” In any event, the term “just cause” is broader in its implications than the term that appellants claim should have been used. It does not appear that the question was raised in the trial court and, in any event, we think it without merit. A somewhat analogous question in a civil action was involved in King v. Neller, 228 Mich 15. There the trial judge in charging the jury trying an action for damages for personal injury indicated that future damages might be allowed if the jury found that “in all probability” such damages would be sustained. The expression was inadvertently used in the form quoted, the general rule being, as recognized in prior decisions of this Court, that such damages must be found “to a reasonable certainty.” Verdict for the plaintiff was sustained, however, this Court concluding that the charge was more favorable to defendant than that to which he was entitled.
On the record before us we conclude that appellants were not'deprived of due process of law in the proceedings against them, that the one-man grand-jury act is not unconstitutional for the reasons advanced, and that the provision of the Michigan Constitution, above cited, was not violated by the legislature in the enactment of the statute. The convictions and sentences are affirmed.
Dethmers, C. J., and Kelly, and Kavanagh, JJ., concurred with Carr, J.

=== CASE 9741743 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:01:15.615808+00 ===

OPINION
DARDEN, Judge
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
Michael Sangsland appeals his convictions by jury of burglary, a class B felony, and theft, a class D felony.
We affirm.
ISSUES
I.Whether sufficient evidence exists to sustain Sangsland’s convictions.
II. Whether the trial court abused its discretion by permitting the State’s undisclosed rebuttal witness to testify.
III. Whether reversal of Sangsland’s convictions is required as a result of a Brady violation by the State.
FACTS
On February 11, 1997, at approximately 5:00 p.m., Mr. Coffelt returned to his rural home located at 3759 East Hartman Road in Whitley County and discovered that his collection of guns and rifles, ammunition, and other items had been stolen. He then called the police and reported the burglary. When Deputy Charles Vogely arrived at the Coffelt residence, Mr. Coffelt indicated that he was last in the residence on February 9, 1997. The police subsequently received an anonymous tip that Sangsland had been selling guns. Upon further investigation, the police discovered that the guns being sold by Sangsland were Coffelt’s guns. When police apprehended Sangsland, he still had some of Coffelt’s guns in his possession.
The State subsequently charged Sangsland by information with burglary and theft, alleging that the crimes occurred on or about February 9. Sangsland filed a notice of alibi defense. In its answer to the notice of alibi, the State alleged that charged offenses occurred between February 9 and 11.
A trial by jury commenced on February 3, 1998. A.L., a juvenile, testified that he and Sangsland had stolen the guns and ammunition .from the Coffelt residence. Although A.L. could not remember the exact date of the burglary, he indicated that it took place sometime in February prior to Valentine’s Day. Jarrod Adams, an acquaintance of Sangsland, testified that Sangsland approached him about selling the guns on Feb•ruary 13 or 14. Adams further testified that Sangsland told him that he and A.L. had taken the guns from a farmhouse. A.L.’s girlfriend testified that Sangsland admitted that he and A.L. had stolen guns from a house “on 13 Curves.” 1
Joseph Harter and Ryan Robbins each testified that they had purchased a gun from *878Sangsland which was identified at trial as belonging to Coffelt. Finally, the State introduced into evidence a letter written by Sangsland to A.L.’s girlfriend, wherein Sangsland complained that A.L. had “nar[k]ed” and requested that the girlfriend convince A.L. not to testify against him. (R. 365). Sangsland also requested that the girlfriend tell A.L. to tell the authorities that someone named Josh had committed the burglary, and that he had “nar[k]ed” on Sangs-land because he was scared of Josh.
The defense proceeded along two theories. First, Sangsland’s counsel attempted to show the alleged burglary occurred on or before February 5, 1997, prior to the period alleged in the State’s answer to the notice of alibi. In support of this theory, Sangsland presented testimony from Candy Adair and Sangs-land’s mother, who each testified that they had learned through conversations with the Coffelts on February 5, 1997, that Mr. Cof-felt’s guns had been taken in a burglary.
Second, Sangsland advanced an alibi defense. Sangsland introduced the testimony of his parents in an attempt to show that he was incapable of committing the crimes alleged because he was on home detention in his parents’ mobile home from January 13 through February 12, 1997. Sangsland’s mother testified that during this time period, Sangsland was never outside the home without her knowledge, that she knew where he was “24 hours a day,” and that he only went outside briefly to smoke cigarettes. (R. 533, 551). She indicated that Sangsland could not have exited the home without her knowledge because he did not have a key to the deadbolt lock on one door, and that the other door had a bar securing it which could not be moved without making noise. (R. 531). She also stated that Sangsland could not exit the home through any windows because plastic had been placed over them. Sangsland’s father also testified that during the months of January and February 1997, Sangsland was at home during the hours when he was not at work.
The jury found Sangsland guilty of burglary and theft.
DECISION
I. Sufficiency of the Evidence
Sangsland argues that there is insufficient evidence to support his convictions because the State failed to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the burglary occurred between February 9 and 11, 1997, as alleged in the State’s answer to his notice of alibi. Specifically, Sangsland argues that while the State’s evidence is adequate to support a conclusion that the elements of burglary and theft have been established, there is nevertheless insufficient evidence to permit a rational trier of fact to infer that he committed those crimes between February 9 and 11 as alleged in the State’s answer to his notice of alibi.2 Sangs-land contends that once he “premised his defense upon the existence of an alibi and proof that the alleged crime could not have occurred upon the date charged, proof of the date of the burglary became a fact essential to conviction,” which the State was obligated to prove beyond a reasonable doubt. Appellant’s Brief, p. 12.
As Sangsland correctly notes, it is fundamental that the State has the burden of proving beyond a reasonable doubt each essential element of the crime charged. Time, however, is not an essential element of the crime of burglary or theft. See Ind.Code § 35-43-2-1; Ind.Code § 35-43-1-2; Hammond v. State, 240 Ind. 313, 164 N.E.2d 640 (1960). The law is well settled that where time is not an element or “of the essence of the offense,” the State need not prove the precise date alleged in the indictment or information but may prove that the crime occurred at any time within the statutory period of limitations. Quillen v. State, 271 Ind. 251, 391 N.E.2d 817, 818-19 (1979); Cf. Herman v. State, 247 Ind. 7, 210 N.E.2d 249, 256 (1965) (“where time is not of the essence of the offense, under an allegation of a specific date, the offense may ordinarily be proved as having occurred at any date preceding the *879filing of the affidavit or indictment which is within the statute of limitations.”).
Generally, variance between the date alleged and the State’s proof at trial does not mandate acquittal or reversal. A variance between the date alleged in a charging information and the evidence at trial is not fatal unless it misleads the defendant in the preparation of his defense or when it subjects him to the likelihood of another prosecution for the same offense. Downs v. State, 656 N.E.2d 849, 852 (Ind.Ct.App.1995).
Nevertheless, Sangsland suggests that because he filed a notice of alibi, proof of the alleged time period became an essential element of the crimes charged. We disagree. Although our supreme court has stated that the filing of a notice of alibi defense makes the time of the offense critical or “of the essence,” it has also made clear that the mere filing of an alibi defense does not impose a greater burden of proof on the State than would be otherwise required absent such a filing. Jennings v. State, 514 N.E.2d 836, 837 (Ind.1987). In Quillen, our supreme court stated that “although time becomes of the essence when the alibi statute has been invoked, it is also well settled that a variance, in order to be fatal, must be of such substantial nature as to mislead the accused in preparing and maintaining his defense or be of such a degree as is likely to place him in second jeopardy for the same offense.” 391 N.E.2d at 819 (citing Aikens v. State, 154 Ind.App. 36, 289 N.E.2d 152 (1972)).
In Stewart v. State, 521 N.E.2d 675 (Ind.1988), the defendant contended that the State’s response to his notice of alibi, in which the prosecution alleged that the offense occurred on July 6, required the State to prove that the incident occurred on that date as an element of the offense. The defendant further contended that the invocation of the alibi statute added an essential element to the crime charged. In rejecting the defendant’s contentions, our supreme court stated that “[wjhere the State at trial restricts its proof to the time frame within the information or within its answer to the notice of alibi, it has met its obligation under Ind. Code § 35-36-4-2,” the Alibi Statute. Id. at 676-77. After concluding that the State had discharged its duty under the statute, the court stated that “[t]he time of commission was not an element of the offense.” Id.
In light of the language in Quillen and Stewart, we conclude that the mere fact that a defendant raises an alibi defense does not necessarily make time an essential element of an offense.3 However, where the State’s answer to the notice of alibi and evidence points exclusively to a specific date, and the defendant presents a defense based on that date, the jury’s consideration of the defendant’s guilt should be restricted to that date. See Jennings, 514 N.E.2d at 837 (reversible error to instruct that State’s proof need not establish particular date of charged offenses when alibi defense was asserted; instructions circumvented and nullified defendant’s opportunity to assert his alibi defense).
Here, the State, in its answer to Sangsland’s notice of alibi, asserted that the offenses occurred sometime between February 9 and 11, 1997. The State’s evidence at trial was consistent with that answer although there was evidence that suggested that the crimes could have occurred as early as February 1. A.L. testified that he and Sangsland burglarized the Coffelt residence in February 1997, sometime before Valentine’s Day. Mr. Coffelt testified that he called the sheriff on the same day he discovered that his guns were missing, and Deputy Vogely testified that he responded to the call on February 11. Thus, the State’s evidence clearly established that the offenses occurred between February 1 and 11. Sangsland pre*880sented an alibi defense and witness testimony accounting for his whereabout during this time frame. In fact, Sangsland presented an alibi defense for the period between January 13 and February 12. Sangsland’s mother and father each testified that during this time period he was at their home on home detention. Accordingly, any variance in the time frame alleged and the State’s'proof at trial did not circumvent or nullify Sangs-land’s opportunity to assert his alibi defense to the jury.4 Under these circumstances, we cannot say that time was “of the essence” or critical to the defense.
As set forth in FACTS, the State presented overwhelming evidence placing Sangsland at the scene of the crime and demonstrating that he had in fact committed the burglary and theft. The State needed to prove no more. See Harris v. State, 617 N.E.2d 912 (Ind.1993) (once an alibi defense is invoked, the State “has the burden of proving that the defendant in fact was at the scene of the crime and committed the offense.”), overruled in part on other grounds, Wright v. State, 690 N.E.2d 1098, 1109 (Ind.1997).
II. Untimely Disclosure of Witness and Evidence
Before the presentation of evidence, the State made a motion in limine seeking to exclude evidence of any other burglary at the Coffelt residence.5 Sangsland’s counsel did oppose the motion. However, as his second witness, Sangsland called his mother who testified that on February 5, 1997, Mrs. Coffelt told her that the Coffelt home had been burglarized and their g-uns and ammunition stolen. Sangsland presented this testimony to demonstrate that the burglary and theft occurred prior to February 9th date alleged in the charging information. At a recess following Mrs. Sangsland’s testimony, the State sought permission to call Officer Frederick Dellinger as a rebuttal witness to demonstrate that the Coffelts were in fact burglarized on February 4, in an entirely separate incident. Sangsland’s counsel objected to Officer Dellinger’s testimony on the grounds that the State had failed to timely disclose him as a witness. After the conclusion of Sangsland’s presentation of evidence, the trial court permitted Officer Dellinger to testify for the limited purpose of establishing the fact “that there was another burglary and that could have created some confusion between the parties.” (R. 556).
On appeal, Sangsland claims that the trial court deprived him of fundamental due process of law by permitting the State to rebut evidence that the burglary occurred on a date other than alleged in the charging information because the State failed to disclose Officer Dellinger as its rebuttal witness. We disagree.
Absent clear error and resulting prejudice, the trial court’s determinations as to discovery violations and sanctions should not be overturned. Cliver v. State, 666 N.E.2d 59, 64 (Ind.1996) (citation omitted). Here, assuming that Sangsland could demonstrate that the State failed to comply with discovery, we are still unpersuaded that he suffered any harm as a result of the trial court’s refusal to exclude Officer Dellinger’s testimony. First, the evidence supporting Sangsland’s convictions was overwhelming. Second, as noted above, proof of the precise dates alleged in the State’s answer to the notice of alibi was not necessary to sustain his convictions. Thus, even assuming that the State had been prevented from rebutting defense evidence suggesting that the crimes occurred on or before February 5, his convictions would still stand. We therefore find no abuse of discretion in refusing to preclude the State’s rebuttal witness.
III. Brady Violation
After Sangsland presented the testimony from his mother to demonstrate that the burglary and theft of the guns occurred on or before February 5, 1997, the State disclosed a prior sworn statement made by Mr. *881Coffelt. In the sworn statement, Mr. Coffelt indicated that sometime between February 3 and 4, 1997, his rental property was vandalized and tools were taken from his garage, and that a “couple of days later” his residence was burglarized. (R. 590-91). On appeal, Sangsland contends that the State’s delayed disclosure of this sworn statement precluded him from effectively using it to make strategic trial decisions crucial to his defense in violation of his right against self-incrimination, his right to assistance of counsel and compulsory process, and his right to a fair trial. Specifically, he argues that the State’s delayed disclosure violated the dictates of Brady v. Maryland, 373 U.S. 83, 83 S.Ct. 1194, 10 L.Ed.2d 215 (1963), and its progeny.
In Brady, the United States Supreme Court held that “the suppression of evidence favorable to an accused upon request violates due process where the evidence is material either to guilt or punishment, irrespective of the good or bad faith of the prosecution.” 373 U.S. at 87, 83 S.Ct. at 1196-97. Impeachment evidence as well as exculpatory evidence falls within the Brady rule. Giglio v. United States, 405 U.S. 150, 154, 92 S.Ct. 763, 766, 31 L.Ed.2d 104 (1972). To succeed on a Brady claim, a defendant must establish (1) that the prosecution suppressed evidence; (2) that this evidence was favorable to the defense; and (3) that the evidence was material either to guilt or punishment. United States v. Bagley, 473 U.S. 667, 685, 105 S.Ct. 3375, 3385, 87 L.Ed.2d 481 (1985). Evidence is material under the Brady rule only if “there is a reasonable probability that, had [it] been disclosed to the defense, the result of the proceeding would have been different.” Id., at 682, 105 S.Ct. at 3383.
We initially note that the State did not suppress the sworn statement at issue but immediately disclosed it upon Sangsland’s presentation of evidence supporting his theory that the burglary and theft occurred prior to the dates alleged in the State’s answer to his notice of alibi. (See footnote 5). Other jurisdictions have stated that to the extent that the Brady rule applies to delayed disclosure claims, an aggrieved defendant must
demonstrate prejudice arising from the delay. See United States v. Sepulveda, 15 F.3d 1161, 1179 (1st Cir.1993); United States v. Neal, 27 F.3d 1035, 1050 (5th Cir.1994), cert. denied 513 U.S. 1179, 115 S.Ct. 1165, 130 L.Ed.2d 1120 (1995); United States v. Beale, 921 F.2d 1412 (11th Cir.1991); Cf. United States v. Dean, 55 F.3d 640, 663 (D.C.Cir.1995) (“When the government delays disclosing exculpatory evidence, the defendant must show a reasonable probability that an earlier disclosure would have changed the trial results.”), cert. denied 516 U.S. 1184, 116 S.Ct. 1288, 134 L.Ed.2d 232 (1996); United States v. Kelly, 14 F.3d 1169, 1176 (7th Cir.1994).
Our examination of the record convinces us that there is no reasonable probability that the result of the trial would have been different had the evidence been disclosed to the defense earlier. First, Sangs-land’s counsel effectively used the sworn statement during the rebuttal testimony of Officer Dellinger and featured the statement in his closing argument. Second, earlier disclosure of the sworn statement would have not been especially damaging to Mr. Coffelt’s credibility in light of the fact that at trial he candidly acknowledged on direct examination that he did not know when the burglary occurred and could not recall when he discovered that his guns were missing. Sangs-land’s counsel apparently recognized that the impeachment value of the sworn statement was negligible as counsel declined the opportunity to recall Coffelt to the stand to impeach or clarify his prior testimony. Finally, although Sangsland argues he would have strenuously objected to the State’s efforts to secure his convictions through Deputy Vogely’s testimony had he had the sworn statement during the State’s case-in-chief, he fails to point to specific objections he might have lodged (but forewent) as a result of the State’s alleged late disclosure. We see no basis for concluding that Sangsland was prejudiced or that the outcome could have been different if the statement had been disclosed earlier.
We affirm.
SHARPNACK, C.J., concurs.
*882ROBB, J., concurs in result with separate opinion.
. Hartman Road was formerly known as "13 Curves.” (R. 258-59).
. Sangsland argues that no witness could state when the burglary actually occurred, and that. Mr. Coffelt did not offer any testimony to establish when he had last seen the guns or knew them to be in his possession.
. Other jurisdictions have reached this same conclusion. See People v. Suter, 292 Ill.App.3d 358, 226 Ill.Dec. 568, 685 N.E.2d 1023, 1029 (1997) ("The mere fact that defendant raises an alibi defense does not make time a material element of the offense.”); United States v. King, 703 F.2d 119, 124 (5th Cir.) (time does not become a material element of the offense merely because an alibi defense is presented), cert. denied, 464 U.S. 837, 104 S.Ct. 127, 78 L.Ed.2d 123 (1983); State v. Siems, 535 S.W.2d 261, 266 (Mo.App.1976); State v. Jackson, 221 Or. 315, 351 P.2d 439, 444 (1960) (defendant in a criminal proceeding cannot make time a material element by a defense of alibi).
. We further note that Sangsland cannot be heard to complain that he was somehow misled by the variance because it was Sangsland, not the State, who sought to prove it.
. Apparently, the motion in limine was not in writing or documented as part of the record. Sangsland's counsel, however, referred to the motion in limine in challenging the admissibility of the State's rebuttal evidence. (R. 554).

=== CASE 9741675 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:00:25.592293+00 ===

PRESIDING JUSTICE GORDON delivered the opinion of the court: Plaintiff, Vicki Joseph, filed a one-count complaint on April 23, 1998 against defendants Chicago Transit Authority (CTA) and the City of Chicago seeking to recover for injuries she sustained on October 27, 1997, when she fell while boarding at a CTA bus stop alleged to be in an unsafe condition. The CTA moved to dismiss the complaint pursuant to sections 2 — 615 and 2 — 619(9) of the Code óf Civil Procedure (735 ILCS 5/2 — 615, 2 — 619(9) (West 1996)), arguing that the plaintiff failed to plead and could not prove compliance with the six-month notice requirements of section 41 of the Metropolitan Transit Authority Act (the Transit Act) (70 ILCS 3605/41 (West 1996)). The trial court granted the CTA’s motion to dismiss and provided language in its order allowing appeal pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 304(a) (155 Ill. 2d R. 304(a)). . The sole issue raised in this appeal is whether the plaintiffs complaint, which was filed during the six-month notice period but served after the expiration of that period, satisfies the notice requirement of section 41 of the Metropolitan Transit Authority Act. For the reasons discussed below, we affirm the dismissal of plaintiffs complaint against the CTA. BACKGROUND FACTS  Section 41 of the Metropolitan Transit Authority Act provides in pertinent part as follows: “No civil action shall be commenced in any court against the Authority [the CTA] by any person for any injury to his person unless it is commenced within one year from the date that the injury was received or the cause of action accrued. Within six (6) months from the date that such an injury was received or such cause of action accrued, any person who is about to commence any civil action in any court against the Authority for damages on account of any injury to his person shall file in the office of the secretary of the Board [the Chicago Transit Board] and also in the office of the General Counsel for the Authority *** a statement, in writing, *** giving the name of the person to whom the cause of action has accrued, the name and residence of the person injured, the date and about the hour of the accident, the place or location where the accident occurred and the name and address of the attending physician, if any. If the notice provided for by this section is not filed as provided, any such civil action commenced against the Authority shall be dismissed and the person to whom any such cause of action accrued for any personal injury shall be forever barred from further suing.” 70 ILCS 3605/41 (West 1996).1  Plaintiff’s alleged injury occurred on October 27, 1997. It is conceded that no notice of that injury was provided to the CTA other than plaintiff’s complaint, which was filed on April 23, 1998, and served upon the CTA on April 30, 1998. That complaint alleged that the plaintiff was injured when she stepped down into a depression or hole at an area “adjacent to the west curb south of the appropriate loading zone” (bus stop) near 3472 North Lake Shore Drive. It alleged that the CTA was negligent by allowing its loading zone and/or bus stop to be adjacent to the condition of the depression or hole, which it knew or should have known was present; by enticing plaintiff to board its motor bus in a location other than an authorized loading zone or bus stop; and by being otherwise negligent in the operation and control of its motor bus. As discussed, the trial court dismissed plaintiffs complaint finding that section 41 notice had not been provided to the CTA within the six-month statutory time period. The court found that the CTA did not have notice of the injury, even though plaintiffs complaint had been filed within that time period, because the CTA. was not served with the complaint until after the time period had expired. DISCUSSION  A motion to dismiss a complaint pursuant to section 2 — 615 of the Code of Civil Procedure admits all well-pleaded facts and attacks the legal sufficiency of the complaint, whereas a section 2 — 619 motion admits the legal sufficiency of plaintiffs complaint and raises defects, defenses or other affirmative matters that appear on the face of the complaint or are established by external submissions that act to defeat the plaintiffs claim. E.g., Illinois Graphics Co. v. Nickum, 159 Ill. 2d 469, 639 N.E.2d 1282 (1994); Kedzie & 103rd Currency Exchange, Inc. v. Hodge, 156 Ill. 2d 112, 619 N.E.2d 732 (1993); Moran v. City of Chicago, 286 Ill. App. 3d 746, 676 N.E.2d 1316 (1997); Reuben H. Donnelley Corp. v. Brauer, 275 Ill. App. 3d 300, 655 N.E.2d 1162 (1995). Both motions raise questions of law, which are reviewed de novo. Hodge, 156 Ill. 2d 112, 619 N.E.2d 732; Doe v. TCF Bank Illinois, FSB, 302 Ill. App. 3d 839, 707 N.E.2d 220 (1999); Village of Evergreen Park v. Commonwealth Edison Co., 296 Ill. App. 3d 810, 695 N.E.2d 1339 (1998).  The requirement under the Transit Act to file notice within six months of an accident “in the office of the secretary of the Board and also in the office of the General Counsel for the Authority” (70 ILCS 3605/41 (West 1996)) is mandatory (Streeter v. Chicago Transit Authority, 272 Ill. App. 3d 921, 651 N.E.2d 579 (1995)), and the plaintiff has the burden of strictly complying with that requirement. Niziolek v. Chicago Transit Authority, 251 Ill. App. 3d 537, 620 N.E.2d 1097 (1993); Sanders v. Chicago Transit Authority, 220 Ill. App. 3d 505, 581 N.E.2d 211 (1991). In accordance with the mandatory nature of that requirement, courts have dismissed lawsuits filed against the CTA when the plaintiff sent a timely letter to a transit authority claims manager or representative, rather than to the secretary of the Chicago Transit Board (the Board) and the general counsel of the CTA (Murphy v. Chicago Transit Authority, 191 Ill. App. 3d 918, 921, 548 N.E.2d 403, 405 (1989); Niziolek, 251 Ill. App. 3d at 542, 620 Ill. App. 3d at 1100); when the plaintiff sent notice of intent to sue to the CTA’s general counsel but not to the secretary of the Board (Sanders, 220 Ill. App. 3d at 507, 581 N.E.2d at 212); and when the plaintiff timely communicated with CTA personnel and completed a claim form (Streeter, 272 Ill. App. 3d at 923, 651 N.E.2d at 580-81). Several cases involving section 41 of the Transit Act have held, albeit by way of dictum, that the failure to give timely notice to commence a lawsuit to the CTA can be cured by filing a complaint within the six-month period. See Streeter, 272 Ill. App. 3d at 923, 651 N.E.2d at 580; Murphy, 191 Ill. App. 3d at 921, 548 N.E.2d at 405. These cases relied on the Illinois Supreme Court decision in Saragusa v. City of Chicago, 63 Ill. 2d 288, 348 N.E.2d 176 (1976), which was decided under section 8 — 102 of the Local Governmental and Governmental Employees Tort Immunity Act (the Tort Immunity Act) (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1971, ch. 85, par. 8 — 102). The plaintiff relies on dicta in Streeter and Murphy to support her contention that dismissal of her complaint was erroneous because, even though she did not give notice of intent to commence her civil action within six months of sustaining injury, she did file her complaint within that six-month period. The CTA takes the position that, even though the plaintiff filed her lawsuit within the six-month period, she did not cure her failure to give proper notice because the complaint was not served on the CTA until after the six-month period expired.2   There are no cases directly addressing the extent to which the filing of a complaint can substitute or cure the lack of adequate statutory notice under section 41 of the Transit Act. There are, however, a number of cases that address that issue with respect to similar but now-repealed language in section 8 — 102 of the Tort Immunity Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1973, ch. 85, par. 8 — 102).3 See, e.g., Rio v. Edward Hospital, 104 Ill. 2d 354, 472 N.E.2d 421 (1984); Dunbar v. Reiser, 64 Ill. 2d 230, 356 N.E.2d 89 (1976); Saragusa, 63 Ill. 2d at 294, 348 N.E.2d at 180; Williams v. City of Chicago, 206 Ill. App. 3d 762, 768, 565 N.E.2d 80, 84 (1990); Lane v. Chicago Housing Authority, 147 Ill. App. 3d 876, 880, 498 N.E.2d 604, 606 (1986); Oliver v. City of Chicago, 137 Ill. App. 3d 958, 960, 485 N.E.2d 428, 430 (1985). Section 8 — 102 of the Tort Immunity Act required a person about to bring suit against a local public entity to give written notice within one year from the date the injury was received or the cause of action accrued. Earlier language in that provision, like the language in section 41 of the Transit Act, required that written notice be given within six months from the date injury was received or the cause of action accrued. See Ill. Rev. Stat. 1971, ch. 85, par. 8 — 102. Applying the tort immunity provision then applicable, which contained a notice provision nearly identical to section 41 of the Transit Act (compare Ill. Rev. Stat. 1971, ch. 85, par. 8 — 102, with 70 ILCS 3605/41 (West 1996)), our supreme court held in Saragusa, 63 Ill. 2d at 294, 348 N.E.2d at 180, that the filing of a complaint within six months following plaintiffs injury cured the defect in her prior written notice. That defect consisted of a failure to give the name and address of the treating physician. In reaching its conclusion, the court noted that the purpose of the notice and limitations provisions of the Tort Immunity Act was “to encourage early investigation into the claim asserted against the local government at a time when the matter is still fresh, witnesses are available, and conditions have not materially changed.” Saragusa, 63 Ill. 2d at 293, 348 N.E.2d at 179-80. The court found this purpose was furthered by the filing of the complaint within the six-month notice time period because information bearing on the defendant’s liability could be obtained by defendant’s commencement of discovery which, in the court’s opinion, would allow the defendant to obtain information “more complete than what would be obtained under the limited and generalized specifications called for in the statutory notice.” Saragusa, 63 Ill. 2d at 293-94, 348 N.E.2d at 180. Cf. Zavala v. City of Chicago, 66 Ill. 2d 573, 363 N.E.2d 848 (1977) (dictum that plaintiff could have cured the insufficiency in the statutory notice by filing a complaint within the statutory notice period). In Oliver, 137 Ill. App. 3d 958, 485 N.E.2d 428, a case decided subsequent to Saragusa, the court held that incomplete notice given during the statutory time period could be cured by the filing of a complaint on the last day before expiration of that time period. According to the court, the complaint in that case cured the notice defect because it provided information that was necessary but missing from the notice previously sent to the defendant. Oliver, 137 Ill. App. 3d at 960, 485 N.E.2d at 430. The filing of a complaint within the statutory time period for notice also can cure plaintiffs failure to provide any prior notice to the defendant because it provides notice of the injury or cause of action within the statutory time period and allows the defendant time to obtain more complete information. Rio, 104 Ill. 2d 354, 472 N.E.2d 421 (the filing of a complaint containing substantially all information required by section 8 — 102 of the Tort Immunity Act within six months of injury satisfies the notice requirement of that act (applying Ill. Rev. Stat. 1971, ch. 85, par. 8 — 102)); Dunbar, 64 Ill. 2d 230, 356 N.E.2d 89 (the filing of a complaint that does not contain substantially all information required by section 8 — 102 of the Tort Immunity Act within the statutory notice period still satisfies the notice requirement because the defendant is afforded as much time to investigate the claim as would have existed if notice had been filed within that period). However, the filing of a complaint can cure the failure to serve any notice only if the complaint is served upon the defendant before expiration of the statutory notice period. Williams, 206 Ill. App. 3d at 768, 565 N.E.2d at 84; Lane, 147 Ill. App. 3d at 880, 498 N.E.2d at 606. Cf. Rio, 104 Ill. 2d at 367-68, 472 N.E.2d at 426 (where supreme court noted that service occurred well within four months of injury); Dunbar, 64 Ill. 2d at 232, 356 N.E.2d at 89 (where supreme court alleged in its facts that complaint was filed and served less than one month after injury occurred). The first case to address date of service of the complaint was Lane, 147 Ill. App. 3d 876, 498 N.E.2d 604, which involved the now-repealed one-year notice period of the Tort Immunity Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 85, par. 8 — 102). In Lane, the plaintiff was allegedly injured on April 11, 1984. He filed his complaint on April 8, 1985, but the sheriffs return of service showed that the summons and complaint were not served on the housing authority until April 12, 1985. Affirming the trial court’s dismissal, the appellate court found that the housing authority had no notice of the plaintiffs injury within the notice period because the housing authority was not served with the summons and complaint until after the time period had expired. The court reasoned that the filing of the complaint, even one that provides insufficient information, cures a plaintiffs failure to provide any notice to the defendant because it allows the defendant the opportunity to engage in pretrial discovery to obtain any necessary information in the same time period that would have been available had the statutory notice been served. Lane, 147 Ill. App. 3d at 880, 498 N.E.2d at 606. It was on this basis that Lane distinguished Rio and Dunbar, wherein the complaints had been filed and served before expiration of the statutory notice period so as to afford the defendants the same investigatory time period as would have been available had notice been served. Lane, 147 Ill. App. 3d at 880, 498 N.E.2d at 606; see Rio, 104 Ill. 2d at 367-68, 472 N.E.2d at 426; Dunbar, 64 Ill. 2d at 236, 356 N.E.2d at 91-92. The Lane court also distinguished Oliver, wherein the complaint that cured the notice defect was filed on the last day of the one-year notice period, finding that the defendant there had received prior actual, but incomplete, written notice of the claim before the statutory time period expired which became complete when the complaint was filed. Lane, 147 Ill. App. 3d at 880, 498 N.E.2d at 606. The more recent case of Williams, 206 Ill. App. 3d 762, 565 N.E.2d 80, is in accord with Lane. In Williams, as in Lane, the plaintiff gave no notice to the defendant and filed her complaint one day before the notice period in section 8 — 102 of the Tort Immunity Act was to expire. Service of the complaint, which contained all necessary information, occurred after the notice period expired. Finding Lane persuasive, the court stated: “[T]he key to satisfying the notice requirement of section 8 — 102 by the filing of a lawsuit is this: As long as the filing of the complaint within the statutory period cures an earlier, defective or incomplete notice of claim, notice is adequate under the statute because the defendant is thereby given the opportunity to investigate within the time intended by the legislature. If, on the other hand, no notice of claim whatsoever is filed within the statutory period, even a complaint which furnishes the necessary information is not considered timely notice unless it is served upon the defendant before the expiration of the time period.” Williams, 206 Ill. App. 3d at 768, 565 N.E.2d at 84. The plaintiff in the instant case argues that Lane and Williams should not control the outcome here because they applied the Tort Immunity Act rather than the Transit Act; because they applied notice provisions in the Tort Immunity Act that have since been repealed; and because in those cases the limitations periods ás well as the notice periods had expired before the complaints were filed. We disagree. First we note that cases interpreting the notice provisions of the Tort Immunity Act then in force have been analogized by courts applying the Transit Act. In fact, dicta from Murphy and Niziolek upon which the plaintiff relies, that the filing of the complaint within the statutory notice period may cure a notice defect, finds its source in Saragusa, a tort immunity case. We also disagree with plaintiffs argument that Lane can have no persuasive effect because it applied a notice provision that is no longer in force. Although the notice statute applied in Lane has since been repealed, the court’s reasoning in its application of that statute can still be persuasive in the interpretation and application of a similar notice provision, especially where both notice provisions are the product of similar legislative intent. Here, as discussed, the rationale for the notice provision in the Tort Immunity Act was to encourage early investigation by the defendant while the matter was fresh, the witnesses were available and the conditions had not materially changed. E.g., Saragusa, 63 Ill. 2d at 293, 348 N.E.2d at 179-80. Likewise, the purpose of the notice provision of the Transit Act was to ensure prompt investigation. See, e.g., Fujimura v. Chicago Transit Authority, 67 Ill. 2d 506, 511, 368 N.E.2d 105, 107 (1977), quoting Schuman v. Chicago Transit Authority, 407 Ill. 313, 320-21, 95 N.E.2d 447, 451 (1950). Finally, plaintiff’s third attempt to distinguish Lane is ill-founded. Contrary to plaintiffs contention, service in Lane did not occur outside the limitations period. Service occurred a year and a day after the alleged injury occurred, but the limitations period applicable to that cause of action was two years. Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 85, par. 8 — 101.  We can see no reason not to apply the holdings in Lane and Williams to the instant case. The chronology of events in all three cases is nearly identical. In each case, the plaintiff made no attempt to comply with the notice requirements of the applicable statute; the plaintiff filed his or her complaint within the notice and limitations periods; the defendant was served within the limitations period but after the notice period had expired; and the defendant had no actual knowledge of the plaintiffs alleged injuries until after the notice period had expired. The complete failure to give notice to the defendant within the required notice period has never been excused, either under the Transit Act or the Tort Immunity Act. See Niziolek, 251 Ill. App. 3d at 543-44, 620 N.E.2d at 1101 (finding no cases under the Tort Immunity Act or the Transit Act excusing a complete failure to give notice to the proper parties within the required time period). There can be no doubt as to the legislative intent behind the notice requirement of the Transit Act or the need to give prompt notice of injury or cause of action to the CTA to allow for prompt investigation. Indeed, that legislative desire may be even stronger with respect to the CTA than with respect to other public entities, as evidenced by the fact that the notice requirements of the Transit Act generally have been stricter. For example, as discussed previously, between 1973 and 1986, the notice time period for the Transit Act was shorter than that set forth in the Tort Immunity Act; and, in 1986, the notice requirements of the Tort Immunity Act were eliminated while those in the Transit Act were retained. We note that the more stringent time requirements under the Transit Act have withheld constitutional equal protection attack because of the magnitude of the CTA’s operations. In that regard the court in Fujimura stated: “ ‘We are aware, and take judicial notice, of the magnitude of the operations of defendant [CTA]. A transportation system of its size, operating, as it does, *** becomes involved in the largest volume of personal injuries litigation in the State. *** The Authority is a municipal corporation, not entitled to make a profit, *** and is surely entitled, as is a city, town or village, to an opportunity to protect itself by prompt investigation. The requirement of six months’ notice affords the Authority this opportunity ***. *** An adequate investigation of a “blind” accident [those not reported to the authority by its employees], if the first notice of it came one year or two years later upon instituting an action, would, in most instances, be impracticable, if not impossible.’ ” Fujimura, 67 Ill. 2d at 510-11, 368 N.E.2d at 107, quoting Schuman, 407 Ill. at 320-21, 95 N.E.2d at 451. To hold that the notice requirement of the Transit Act is satisfied by the mere filing of a complaint when service of that complaint occurs after the statutory time period has expired would defeat the legislative intent to ensure the CTA’s ability to make prompt investigation. See Lane, 147 Ill. App. 3d at 880, 498 N.E.2d at 607 (same conclusion regarding application of notice provision of Tort Immunity Act). Such a holding would allow for actual notice of the injury , or cause of action to occur well beyond the intended six-month notice period in instances where service is not timely. While Illinois Supreme Court Rule 102 provides for “prompt” service, it also provides that the summons does not expire until 30 days from issuance. 134 Ill. 2d Rs. 102(a), (b). Moreover, issuance of a new summons can occur after that time if the plaintiff can show the “exercise [of] reasonable diligence” to perfect service on a defendant. 177 Ill. 2d R. 103(b). See, e.g., McCormack v. Leons, 261 Ill. App. 3d 293, 296-97, 634 N.E.2d 1, 3-4 (1994) (reasonable diligence found with respect to service after 16 months); Clemons v. Atlas, 185 Ill. App. 3d 894, 897, 542 N.E.2d 40, 42 (1989) (reasonable diligence found with respect to service after 14 months). While the plaintiff may argue that delayed service on the CTA is unlikely because of the notoriety of that public entity and its office location, service could still be delayed for other reasons such as errors within the sheriffs office or errors in the information supplied by plaintiffs counsel. See Clemons, 185 Ill. App. 3d at 897, 542 N.E.2d at 41 (“[w]ith the great volume of work in the sheriffs office, it is understandable that an occasional service goes awry”). More overridingly, the provisions of Supreme Court Rule 103(b) cannot act as an appropriate substitute for the clear and strictly enforced time limitations provided by section 41 of the Transit Act. Diligence under Rule 103(b) is measured in terms of reasonableness, approximations and time spans which may involve delay in terms of months, while the strictly enforced time limitations of section 41 of the Transit Act, as well as those previously enforced under section 8 — 102 of the Tort Immunity Act, invalidate notices that are delayed for even one day. See 70 ILCS 3605/41 (West 1996); Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 85, pars. 8 — 102, 8 — 103; Williams, 206 Ill. App. 3d at 768, 565 N.E.2d at 84 (delay of service by 14 days); Lane, 147 Ill. App. 3d at 880, 498 N.E.2d at 606 (delay of service by one day). As a result, although a complaint may be filed within the statutory notice period, it may very well he that the CTA would not obtain actual notice of the injury or cause of action until well beyond the expiration of the statutory notice period. We do not believe that the legislature intended such a result. As stated in Williams, 206 Ill. App. 3d at 768, 565 N.E.2d at 84, “[sjtrict adherence to time limitations [is] necessary to effect the legislative intent, however harsh a result may appear to the plaintiff who has missed the limitation by only a few days.” Contrary to plaintiffs contention, Oliver, 137 Ill. App. 3d 958, 485 N.E.2d 428, does not require a result different from that reached in Lane and Williams. As discussed previously, the plaintiff in Oliver sent notice to the defendant within six months of sustaining his alleged injuries but failed to include certain information in that notice, specifically, the date of the accident. The plaintiffs complaint, filed one year from the date of the accident and on the last day before expiration of the statutory notice period (see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 85, par. 8 — 102), contained that date. The court held that the filing of the complaint which contained the necessary information missing from the previously filed notice cured the defect. Oliver, 137 Ill. App. 3d at 960, 485 N.E.2d at 430. Here, as in Lane and Williams and unlike in Oliver, no notice of any kind was provided before the six-month statutory time period for notice expired. The complaint, although filed within that time period, did not supplement and complete statutorily required information previously submitted. Since the complaint was not served until after the expiration of the statutory notice period provided in section 41 of the Transit Act, it cannot cure the defect of the failure to provide actual notice of the alleged injury. See Williams, 206 Ill. App. 3d at 768, 565 N.E.2d at 84; Lane, 147 Ill. App. 3d at 880, 498 N.E.2d at 607.4   The plaintiff next contends that strict compliance with the notice provision of the Transit Act is not required. She urges this court to adopt the substantial compliance test applied to the notice requirements under the Tort Immunity Act and to find that the timely filing of the complaint alone would satisfy the notice time requirements of section 41 of the Transit Act. We disagree. As discussed, cases applying the Transit Act have generally held that compliance with section 41 of the Transit Act is mandatory and occurs only under a strict application of its requirements. See, e.g., Niziolek, 251 Ill. App. 3d at 542, 620 N.E.2d at 1100; Sanders, 220 Ill. App. 3d at 507, 581 N.E.2d at 213. Moreover, while cases applying the Tort Immunity Act have applied a substantial compliance test to that statute’s notice provisions enacted in 1973 (see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1973, ch. 85, par. 8 — 102 (requiring notice “giving in substance” enumerated information)), they have done so only with respect to the informational requirements of those provisions. See Bickel v. City of Chicago, 25 Ill. App. 3d 684, 692, 323 N.E.2d 832, 837-38 (1975) (“the statute is to be liberally construed with respect to the sufficiency of the elements as set forth in the written notice”). See also Niziolek, 251 Ill. App. 3d at 543-44, 620 N.E.2d at 1101, citing, e.g., Rio, 104 Ill. 2d at 366-67, 472 N.E.2d at 426 (absence of plaintiffs address in notice is not fatal); Reese v. Village of Arlington Heights, 204 Ill. App. 3d 129, 134, 561 N.E.2d 1156, 1160 (1990) (incorrect date on notice not fatal); Stewart v. County of Cook, 192 Ill. App. 3d 848, 854-55, 549 N.E.2d 674, 678 (1989) (same). However, as discussed above, no cases interpreting the Tort Immunity Act have held that a complete failure to give notice to the proper parties within the required time period is not fatal. Niziolek, 251 Ill. App. 3d at 543-44, 620 N.E.2d at 1101. See, e.g., Williams, 206 Ill. App. 3d at 768, 565 N.E.2d at 84 (failure to give actual notice within time limits of Tort Immunity Act then in force was fatal); Shortt v. City of Chicago, 160 Ill. App. 3d 933, 935, 514 N.E.2d 3, 4-5 (1987) (failure to send notice to city clerk as required by the Tort Immunity Act was fatal); Lane, 147 Ill. App. 3d at 880, 498 N.E.2d at 607 (failure to give actual notice within time limits of Tort Immunity Act then in force was fatal). Thus, the result in the instant case would be no different even if we were to analogize to Tort Immunity case law regarding substantial compliance. For the foregoing reasons, the order of the circuit court of Cook County dismissing plaintiff’s lawsuit against the Chicago Transit Authority is affirmed. Affirmed. McNULTY, J. concurs.  The Metropolitan Authority Transit Act was amended effective July 1, 1998. That amendment does not affect the disposition of this case. It added a second paragraph to section 41, imposing a duty upon the transit authority to provide a copy of section 41 of the Act to any person who notifies the authority of an injury. The transit authority must send this notice within 10 days of its receipt of the notice of injury, provided the notice of injury occurs within six months of the date of the injury or accrual of the cause of action. The amendment further provided, “Compliance with this Section shall be liberally construed in favor of the person required to file a written statement.” 70 ILCS 3605/41 (West Supp. 1997).   The CTA also argues that dismissal was proper because no notice in the manner set forth in section 41 of the Transit Act was ever provided. The CTA argues that the filing of the complaint does not excuse the sending of notice. This argument finds support in Erford v. City of Peoria, 229 Ill. 546, 82 N.E. 374 (1907), a tort immunity case which held that the filing of a complaint within the six-month statutory notice period does not constitute compliance with the notice statute. However, Erford was specifically overruled in Saragusa, 63 Ill. 2d at 295-96, 348 N.E.2d at 181, also a tort immunity case. See Dunbar v. Reiser, 64 Ill. 2d 230, 235, 356 N.E.2d 89, 91 (1976) (stating that Saragusa overruled Erford and holding that the filing of complaint without service of any notice within the statutory notice period satisfies the notice requirement of section 8 — 102 of the Tort Immunity Act).   The notice provision in section 8 — 102 of the Tort Immunity Act was repealed effective November 25, 1986. Pub. Act 84 — 1431, eff. November 25, 1986 (repealing Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 85, par. 8 — 102).   The plaintiff also argues that Gass v. Metro-East Sanitary District, 186 Ill. App. 3d 1077, 542 N.E.2d 1229 (1989), which applied the notice provision of the Metro-East Sanitary District Act of 1974 (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 42, par. 501 — 5), rejected Lane’s reliance on the service date as the date of first notice rather than the date of the filing of the complaint. We disagree. In Gass, the court explicitly stated that it was required to adopt the date of the filing of the complaint as the date of first notice because the date of service of summons and complaint could not be determined from the record. Gass, 186 Ill. App. 3d at 1090, 542 N.E.2d at 1238. The court did not reject Lane since it was not faced with the same factual issue as was present in Lane.

=== CASE 9741676 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:00:25.597666+00 ===

JUSTICE COUSINS, dissenting: The issue presented to us in this appeal is whether the filing of the complaint within the six-month period satisfied the notice requirement of section 41 of the Metropolitan Transit Authority Act (70 ILCS 3605/41 (West 1996)). The majority answers no. I dissent. In my view, the majority’s holding in the instant case does not comply with the Illinois Supreme Court decisions in Saragusa v. City of Chicago, 63 Ill. 2d 288, 348 N.E.2d 176 (1976), and Dunbar v. Reiser, 64 Ill. 2d 230, 356 N.E.2d 89 (1976). Although Saragusa and Dunbar were decided under section 8 — 102 of the Local Governmental and Governmental Employees Tort Immunity Act (Tort Immunity Act) (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1971, ch. 85, par. 8 — 102), significantly, the trial court judge’s dismissal of Joseph’s complaint in the instant case against the Chicago Transit Authority (CTA) was predicated on the holding in Lane v. Chicago Housing Authority, 147 Ill. App. 3d 876, 498 N.E.2d 604 (1986). And Lane was decided under section 8 — 102 of the Tort Immunity Act. An analysis of Saragusa indicates that the controlling factor in the case was the filing of the complaint within the six-month notice period. In Saragusa, the plaintiff’s accident took place on April 20, 1970. On June 23, 1970, the plaintiffs attorney served upon the city clerk of Chicago a written notice of claim. Then, on September 21, 1970, five months after the injury, plaintiff filed her complaint. The complaint was thus filed within six months of the injury. Saragusa, 63 Ill. 2d at 290, 348 N.E.2d at 178. The defendant in Saragusa filed its answer to the complaint on October 15, 1970, and on the same date propounded interrogatories to the plaintiff. Plaintiff filed her answers to the interrogatories on December 22, 1970, and these answers to interrogatories included information about plaintiffs hospitalization and the names of physicians by whom plaintiff had been treated. Saragusa, 63 Ill. 2d at 291. Notably, in Saragusa, our Illinois Supreme Court wrote: “We are inclined to believe that if any effect is to be given the 1969 amendment to section 8 — 102, the plaintiffs notice cannot be deemed to comply with that section. We hold, however, that the claimed deficiency in the notice did not warrant the dismissal of the plaintiffs complaint since the complaint itself was also filed within six months of the injury for which recovery was sought. The notice requirement of section 8 — 102 is to be read together with the limitations provision of section 8 — 101, which, at the time of the plaintiffs accident, required that suit be filed within one year (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1971, ch. 85, par. 8 — 101), as opposed to the two-year period of limitations which is generally applicable to actions for personal injuries (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1971, ch. 83, par. 15). A common purpose of these two provisions, whose antecedents were first enacted in 1905 (Laws of 1905, at 111, secs. 1, 2), is to encourage early investigation into the claim asserted against the local government at a time when the matter is still fresh, witnesses are available, and conditions have not materially changed. [Citations.]” Saragusa, 63 Ill. 2d at 292-93, 348 N.E.2d at 179-80. Saragusa is instructive. In Saragusa, the notice was inadequate. However, the Illinois court held, “the notice did not warrant the dismissal of the plaintiffs complaint since the complaint itself was also filed within six months of the injury for which recovery was sought.” (Emphasis added.) Saragusa, 63 Ill. 2d at 293, 348 N.E.2d at 179; see also Oliver v. City of Chicago, 137 Ill. App. 3d 958, 960, 485 N.E.2d 428, 430 (1985). In the instant case, the majority writes: “[T]he filing of a complaint can cure the failure to serve any notice only if the complaint is served upon the defendant before expiration of the statutory notice period. Williams, 206 Ill. App. 3d at 768, 565 N.E.2d at 84; Lane, 147 Ill. App. 3d at 880, 498 N.E.2d at 606. Cf. Rio, 104 Ill. 2d at 367-68, 472 N.E.2d at 426 (where supreme court noted that service occurred well within four months of injury); Dunbar, 64 Ill. 2d at 232, 356 N.E.2d at 89 (where supreme court alleged in its facts that complaint was filed and served less than one month after injury occurred).” 306 Ill. App. 3d at 933. In my view, however, the cited cases afford an insufficient predicate for the majority holding in the instant case. Although the cited cases discuss the necessity to afford the public entity opportunity to obtain timely discovery, none of the cited cases uphold the dismissal of a complaint filed within a six-month notice period. In Lane, the case relied upon by both the trial court and the majority in the instant appeal, the plaintiff, Lane, claimed that he was injured on April 11, 1984, and filed his complaint on April 8, 1985. The summons and complaint were not served on defendant, Chicago Housing Authority, until April 12, 1985, more than one year after plaintiffs injury. The majority contends that to hold that the six-month notice period is satisfied by the filing of a complaint within six months without service within six months of the statutory notice period would defeat the legislative intent to insure the CTA’s ability to make prompt investigation. 306 Ill. App. 3d at 936. The majority cites McCormack v. Leons, 261 Ill. App. 3d 293, 296-97, 634 N.E.2d 1, 3-4 (1994) (reasonable diligence found with respect to service after 16 months). However, significantly, the majority cites no cases that name the Chicago Transit Authority as a defendant where service has been unduly delayed. This, because the CTA is easily located. In my view, the opportunity for timely service of notice and investigation is insured when a complaint is filed against the CTA within the six-month statutory notice period. This is because, when a lawsuit is filed within six months of the injury, both parties can be protected through existing civil litigation and discovery rules. See Saragusa, 63 Ill. 2d 288, 348 N.E.2d 176; see also Dunbar, 64 Ill. 2d at 237, 356 N.E.2d at 92 (where the Illinois Supreme Court wrote: “[W]e hold that the filing of the complaint within the six-month period satisfied the notice requirement of section 8 — 102 of the Tort Immunity Act”). Accordingly, I dissent.

=== CASE 9741677 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:00:25.835037+00 ===

Garfield, J.
Plaintiff, divorced mother of a girl and boy, filed applications in equity against two married couples with whom the children lived the preceding five years asking modification of decrees in habeas corpus denying plaintiff’s claim to their custody and granting it to defendants. The applications were consolidated and tried to the court in May 1958. From judgment in August as prayed defendants appeal.
Plaintiff, 39 at the time of trial, and LaVern Thein are parents of the children in question, a girl, LaVerna Kay, born June 22, 1949, and a boy, Charles, born September 10, 1951. In *1151August 1953 the husband was granted an uncontested divorce from plaintiff and awarded custody of the children. However, he had placed the little girl with defendants Mr. and Mrs. Harold Squires in March 1953 and the little boy with defendants Mr. and Mrs. Ben Huebbe in June of that year. "When they were so placed Charles was about a year and nine months old and LaVerna Kay about three years, nine months. The children have lived in the respective homes of defendants since they were taken there — about six years in all. In argument here it was agreed there had been no change in their custody up to then.
Mrs. Squires is a sister of LaVern, father of the children. The Squires live on a rented 160-acre farm about 18 miles from Oelwein where plaintiff lives with her mother. The Huebbes live in Cedar Rapids where Mr. Huebbe has worked for Penick & Ford, a large concern, since 1946. No other children live in either home. Mr. and Mrs. Squires were respectively, 37 and 35, Mr. and Mrs. Huebbe 45 and 43 at time of trial.
March 30, 1955, the divorce decree was modified by changing the custody of the children from their father to their mother (plaintiff here). However defendants, with whom the children lived, were not parties to this proceeding and of course were not concluded by it. April 8, 1955, plaintiff brought two actions in habeas corpus against the Squires and Huebbes respectively, seeking custody of the children. These actions were consolidated and tried in May.
May 27 decrees were entered therein finding it was for the best interests of the children that they remain in the homes of defendants, denying plaintiff’s claim to custody and granting it to defendants, subject to plaintiff’s right to take each child for a week end of two days not oftener than every three months. Jurisdiction was reserved to make such further orders as the welfare of either child “shall dictate.” The present applications to modify the decrees of May 27, 1955, by awarding custody to plaintiff, were filed April 24, 1958.
At the outset it was stipulated the decrees of May 1955 are an adjudication defendants were then better fitted than plaintiff to have custody of the children, the hearing on the applications shall be concerned solely with matters arising since May 1955 but the court may consider evidence then heard for what*1152ever bearing it may have upon the character and fitness of the parties to have custody of the children.
After hearing evidence for and against the applications for modification of the 1955 decrees the trial court concluded the children’s welfare will be best served by placing them with plaintiff to whom their custody was granted, subject to the privilege of defendants respectively, to have the respective children during two months each summer. It is this judgment from which defendants have appealed.
Our review is de novo. Stevenson v. McMillan, 250 Iowa 737, 740, 95 N.W.2d 719, 721, and citations; In re Guardianship of Plucar, 247 Iowa 394, 396, 397, 72 N.W.2d 455, 457. However, we give weight to the trial court’s decision.
I. It is admitted that when the 1955 decree was entered and prior thereto plaintiff was an alcoholic, guilty of at least occasional immoral conduct with men. She had been a patient for treatment as an inebriate in the state institution at Independence. Plaintiff testifies she did not use liquor during the summer of 1955 but was unable to resist the urge for four months commencing about September 1. She admits she went to Prairie du Ghien, Wisconsin, on Labor Day with her former husband and two other men, became intoxicated, drove an automobile into a ditch and wrecked it. No one speaks well of the former husband and the trial court characterizes him as a thoroughly disreputable character.
Plaintiff also admits that in December 1955 she became intoxicated while with a married man and the two occupied a room for the night in an Oelwein hotel. She also admits use of liquor on other occasions during this period. The first week in January 1956 plaintiff rejoined Alcoholics Anonymous and insists she has not used liquor since then. She is corroborated in this and there is no evidence to the contrary. Plaintiff had belonged to AA about nine months commencing in 1954. Since rejoining the organization she has regularly attended its meetings. She and her mother have also been regular attendants at their church during this time of nearly two and one-half years.
As the trial court observed in his findings, plaintiff’s applications to modify the 19155 decree are based upon her claim *1153that since the end of 1955 she has completely rehabilitated herself. However, some fault is found with defendants’ care and treatment of the children and conditions under which they live, particularly as to the Huebbes.
Since the 1955 decree plaintiff sold cosmetics eight months. She then clerked in a variety store in Oelwein where she was working at the time of trial. She gets along well with her coworkers and customers. Her earnings are as much as $65 a week, her hours from 9 to 5. She and her mother, 60, occupy the latter’s home of four rooms (two bedrooms), bath and inclosed porch. The mother has income of $175 a month and would like the children to come there to live. Plaintiff has taken each child two days every three months, as permitted by the 1955 decree, except once when her father died.
The Catholic priest at Oelwein testifies plaintiff has lived an exemplary life and attended church regularly since 1955 and is a fit and moral person to have the children, the mother’s home — adjoining the church property — is clean and fit for the children and her reputation is above reproach. The chief of police says he has heard of no misconduct of plaintiff since 1955, she has done a wonderful job of rehabilitating herself and gaining respect of others, and he thinks she is a fit and proper person to have the children. A woman friend of plaintiff and her mother, who is with them frequently, and another clerk in the variety store each gives her opinion plaintiff is fit and proper to have the children.
A member of Alcoholics Anonymous testifies he thinks plaintiff is morally responsible and would handle responsibility of the children well if awarded their custody. On cross-examination this witness says it happens quite often that a member of AA for two years or longer falls again and becomes intoxicated, his belief is that once an alcoholic always one and belonging to the organization two years is not real evidence they will not fall again.
The foregoing, although of course condensed, fairly indicates the showing for plaintiff as to her rehabilitation.
II. Principal complaint of consequence against Mr. or Mrs. Squires is that the latter does not permit the little girl to visit with, or show affection for, her mother when they occa*1154sionally meet. It is not claimed plaintiff’s visitation rights under the decree have been denied. It must be conceded, however, this criticism of Mrs. Squires is justified. Complaint is also made that the little girl was asked to and did share her bed with her father’s present wife at least once or perhaps oftener.
It is undisputed that the Squires home, a 9-room farmhouse, is clean and orderly. LaVeraa Kay has an upstairs room of her own, nicely furnished. Several witnesses characterize Mr. and Mrs. Squires as industrious, sober, law-abiding and responsible. It is admitted the little girl is always clean, neat and well dressed. She has regularly attended the public school four years and gets “B” grades. She attended a Baptist Sunday school regularly for the year before the trial and irregularly before then. In the summer she attends Bible school. The Squires seem to be kind to her and she is happy and contented.
III. Regarding the boy, plaintiff, her mother and their friend Mrs. Wade testify he was not clean when plaintiff took him from the Huebbe home for the quarterly week-end visits. Particular complaint is made of his ears and fingernails, also his underwear unless it was new. Plaintiff and Mrs. Wade also say the Huebbe home was untidy and not clean. Condition of the windows and floor is specially criticized. Once, when it is claimed the floor was dirty, workmen were there remodeling the house.
There is some evidence of drinking by Mr. Huebbe and that on one occasion there was a bottle on the kitchen table at which Huebbe and another man were seated. Plaintiff says the Huebbes usually had a bottle of wine in their refrigerator and she had a drink of wine with Huebbe about seven years ago. The Huebbes and the man who says he was seated at the table strenuously deny their use of liquor. Several close acquaintances say they never saw Mr. or Mrs. Huebbe drink. The printed record at page 87, line 27, contains this misstatement: “I have seen the Huebbes drink intoxicating liquor.” The transcript of the evidence, certified to us pursuant to rule 341, R. C. P., shows the true record is, “I have never seen the Huebbes drink * * *.” The trial court found “Neither Mr. or Mrs. Huebbe drinks to any excess.”
*1155Mrs. Huebbe has a “heart condition” for which she takes medicine. The court found “She does not appear unduly handicapped and has not consulted a physician for several years.” Mr. Huebbe had a kidney infection and was off work at Penick & Ford from November 14, 1957, to January 20, 1958.
Plaintiff and Mrs. Wade testify they saw Mr. Huebbe on one occasion shake his fist at Charles and call him a vile name. Huebbe denies this and Mrs. Huebbe and some close acquaintances say they never observed anything of the kind. Mr. Huebbe was convicted of a felony, attempt to break and enter, and served time in the reformatory at Anamosa in 1936 and 1937. He owes $800 on his home and about $1700 aside from that. He has a cabin on the Cedar River which he values at about $700 or $800 and a boat. His cabin, furniture, automobile and television set are mortgaged. He earns $4800 to $5000 a year and, as stated, has worked for the same employer since 1946.
The four defendants are church members but do not attend church. Charles had not attended Sunday school at the time of trial but Mr. Huebbe testifies he is ready and willing to send him “since he is old enough now that he can grasp it.” (His age was then six years, eight months.) Charles had attended kindergarten and was to enter the first grade of a public school the September after the trial.
The above sufficiently indicates the evidence that is derogatory to the Huebbes. Both of them and four close acquaintances say Charles and his clothes were kept clean except when he was playing in the dirt, the home was not dirty and was as clean, or cleaner than, the average home. One witness states Mrs. Huebbe is not a slave to her home, another that she is not a fanatic as a housekeeper. The home has four rooms and bath, with two bedrooms. Charles sleeps in his own bed in the room with Mr. Huebbe. The boy is healthy and robust. He is happy in the Huebbe home and the trial court so found. The Huebbes are attached to the boy and anxious to keep and rear him. Mr. Huebbe, when he can, plays with Charles outdoors. Witnesses for the Huebbes say theirs is a good home for the boy and they are fit persons to have him.
Both the Squires and Huebbes bore the entire expense, without reimbursement, of keeping the children respectively, *1156during the approximately five years before the trial when they were in defendants’ custody.
At the conclusion of the evidence the trial court, by agreement of counsel, talked privately to each child. According to the court “they expressed an affection for each other and a desire to be together, as well as an affection for the persons with whom they were now living. They appeared happy and well adjusted.”
Although the court felt the children’s welfare will be best served by placing them with plaintiff, his conclusions of law state, “defendants deserve the thanks of plaintiff and commendation of the court for the wholehearted manner in which they have devoted themselves to the care of these children, beginning at a time of their greatest need. * * * It is the court’s hope * * * the children will continue to enjoy the company and affection of defendants.” And, as stated, the decree provides defendants may have the children during two months of each summer.
IY. There can be no' doubt, as the parties stipulated at the outset, the decrees (we have sometimes referred to “the decree”) of May 1955 are an adjudication defendants were then better fitted than plaintiff to have custody of the children. The burden rested upon plaintiff to show that because of what has happened since that time the welfare of the children will be best served by taking them from defendants and placing them with plaintiff. The decrees themselves reserve jurisdiction to make only such further orders as the welfare of either child shall dictate. See in this connection Jensen v. Jensen, 237 Iowa 1323, 1324, 25 N.W.2d 316, 317, and citations; Maron v. Maron, 238 Iowa 587, 592, 28 N.W.2d 17, 19; York v. York, 246 Iowa 132, 135, 67 N.W.2d 28, 30, and citations.
The precedents just cited involve applications to modify custody provisions of decrees of divorce, rather than in habeas corpus. But it seems clear the present case is governed by the same principles, especially in view of the stipulation- at the outset and the terms of the 1955 decrees. See in this connection Werling v. Heggen, 208 Iowa 908, 911, 225 N.W. 952.
As previously explained, plaintiff’s applications are based upon her claim she has rehabilitated herself since the end of 1955. It appears she did refrain from use of liquor and im*1157moral conduct and otherwise properly demeaned herself during the two and one-third years preceding the trial. The ultimate question is whether it follows from these facts that the welfare of the children will he served by changing their custody from defendants to plaintiff.
There is no evidence defendants did not furnish the children as desirable homes or as good care during the period since the 1955 decrees as they did before then. And during this period, now four years, the children have naturally become more strongly attached to defendants and their homes, and defendants to the children, than they were in May 1955. In other words, while plaintiff was rehabilitating- herself the children were becoming more firmly rooted in their present surroundings.
We have held so often that the primary consideration in cases of this kind is the welfare and best interests of the children that citation of precedents for the proposition is unnecessary. See, however, Ball v. Ball, 250 Iowa 763, 765, 96 N.W.2d 317, 319, and citations; Stevenson v. McMillan, supra, 250 Iowa 737, 740, 95 N.W.2d 710, 721, and citations.
We have also repeatedly held that all other considerations, such as parental rights, must yield readily to that of the best interests of the children. Their welfare is superior to the claim of either parent and the feelings and wishes of the parent are entitled to little, if any, consideration. See precedents last above and citations therein; Maron v. Maron, supra, 238 Iowa 587, 591, 28 N.W.2d 17, 19, and citations. “Nor should the decree be modified to reward or punish either parent.” Jensen v. Jensen, supra, 237 Iowa 1323, 1325, 25 N.W.2d 316, 317; Dean v. Dean, 244 Iowa 1297, 1313, 60 N.W.2d 551, 560.
An annotation in 15 A. L. R.2d 432, 435, states: “It is universally recognized by all courts that in fixing the custody of a child considerations of the welfare and interests of the child outweigh all other considerations; * *
Where the right of custody has not been adjudicated it will be presumed, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, that a child’s welfare will best be served by committing it to the custody of a parent. This presumption is resorted to merely to aid the court in determining what is for the best interests of the child. But the presumption is not applicable to such a *1158case as this where the children’s custody has been awarded third persons by a decree — here the 1955 decrees. It is to be assumed the court knew and respected the presumption referred to in arriving at these earlier decrees. The presumption here is in favor of the reasonableness of the decrees now sought to be modified. Jensen v. Jensen, supra, 237 Iowa 1323, 1330-33, 25 N.W.2d 316, 320-22, and citations; Maron v. Maron, supra, 238 Iowa 587, 592, 28 N.W.2d 17, 19; Blundi v. Blundi, 243 Iowa 1219, 1225, 55 N.W.2d 239, 243.
Commencing with Jensen v. Jensen, supra, down to Stevenson v. McMillan, supra, 250 Iowa 737, 745, 95 N.W.2d 719, 724, we have approved this statement at least six times: “When a child is legally placed in a home where it receives good treatment and moral training, it should never be removed from that home, except for the most cogent reasons.” Wiggins v. Wiggins, 239 Iowa 1279, 1297, 34 N.W.2d 607, 616; Scheffers v. Scheffers, 242 Iowa 563, 570, 47 N.W.2d 157, 161; Blundi v. Blundi, supra, 243 Iowa 1219, 1230, 55 N.W.2d 239, 245; York v. York, supra, 246 Iowa 132, 141, 67 N.W.2d 28, 33.
Incidentally, in five of the six precedents just cited (all but Blundi v. Blundi) the trial court was reversed for changing, in favor of a parent, custodial provisions of a previous decree. And in Blundi v. Blundi no change was ordered.
Much the same language as quoted last above is expressed in Durst v. Roach, 245 Iowa 342, 346, 62 N.W.2d 159, 161; Jensen v. Sorenson, 211 Iowa 354, 364, 233 N.W. 717; Knochemus v. King, 193 Iowa 1282, 1285, 188 N.W. 957, 959. Durst v. Roach quotes with approval from Winter v. Winter, 184 Iowa 85, 88, 166 N.W. 274, 275: “It is highly desirable that the status of the child be fixed as quickly as possible, and that it be disturbed thereafter as little as possible.”
It appears without doubt that when these children were placed with defendants plaintiff was taking an extended vacation from the responsibilities of motherhood and consequently the children were in great need of good homes. They have lived with defendants, as stated, six years up to now. Freese v. Freese, 237 Iowa 451, 460, 22 N.W.2d 242, 247, and Scheffers v. Scheffers, supra, 242 Iowa 563, 571, 47 N.W.2d 157, 161, *1159approve this statement: “* * * motherhood is something with respect to which it is very difficult to take a holiday; it can be taken only with the incidental formation of new and substituted attachments. To break such cannot be done lightly.” See also Dow v. Dow, 240 Iowa 145, 35 N.W.2d 853.
Plaintiff is surely to be commended for mending her ways and it is to her credit that she sought the custody of her children even belatedly. However, we are not persuaded it is for their best interests to transplant them now from the only homes they remember, where they have done so well, have grown healthy and strong, are contented and (as the trial court found) happy and well adjusted, from their friends and playmates, from the schools they have attended, and place them in another home and new surroundings. To do so would be in the nature of an experiment which should not be made upon the showing here. There is no reason to think the children will not be as well cared for by defendants in the future as they have been in the past.
Unless we are to depart from what we have often said in the past, custody of the children should not be taken from defendants and placed with plaintiff as a reward to her for recent conduct which befits a lady.
It is of course true the children have been separated from each other the past six years. But they are no worse off in this respect sinee the 1955 decrees than they were before. This is a circumstance which has existed without change throughout the six-year period. Nothing has arisen in connection with this fact to warrant modification of these decrees.
As previously explained, the trial court gave defendants the privilege of having the children two months of each summer. We have difficulty in reconciling the court’s finding that the welfare of the children will be best served by taking them from defendants and placing them with plaintiff and the provision they may be with defendants one sixth of the time. If it were true the welfare of the children dictates a change of custody to plaintiff, the change should be made without such a provision for divided custody.
We have held several times experience shows it is usually not for the best interests of children, and in many in*1160stances is destructive of discipline, to live part time in one household and part time in another. York v. York, supra, 246 Iowa 132, 138, 139, 67 N.W.2d 28, 32, and citations; Maron v. Maron, supra, 238 Iowa 587, 590, 591, 28 N.W.2d 17, 19, and citations. See also Mansfield v. Mansfield, 230 Minn. 574, 42 N.W.2d 315, 316, 317, and citations.
In its broad outlines this case finds its counterpart in a good many that have come before us in recent years where, due to the inability or unwillingness of one or both parents to make a desirable home or provide good care for a young child, it is placed with a third person. After an extended period the parent’s situation is changed so he or she can probably provide a good home for the child and its custody is demanded. Almost without exception, with little disagreement among the members of the court, we have held the change in the situation of the parent demanding the child’s custody is insufficient basis for disturbing the existing custodial arrangement. In few of our cases have the living arrangements sought to be changed existed for such an extended period as we have here.
Precedents just referred to include Werling v. Heggen, supra, 208 Iowa 908, 225 N.W. 952; Paulson v. Windelow, 236 Iowa 1011, 20 N.W.2d 470; Herr v. Lazor, 238 Iowa 518, 28 N.W.2d 11; Wiggins v. Wiggins, supra, 239 Iowa 1279, 34 N.W.2d 607; Dow v. Dow, supra, 240 Iowa 145, 35 N.W.2d 853; Scheffers v. Scheffers, supra, 242 Iowa 563, 47 N.W.2d 157; Joiner v. Knieriem, 243 Iowa 470, 52 N.W.2d 21; Blundi v. Blundi, supra, 243 Iowa 1219, 55 N.W.2d 239; Durst v. Roach, supra, 245 Iowa 342, 62 N.W.2d 159; Finken v. Porter, 246 Iowa 1345, 72 N.W.2d 445. Many other decisions might be cited.
For decree in harmony with this opinion the cause is — • Reversed and remanded. ,
Thompson, C. J., and Bliss, Oliver, Peterson, and Garrett, JJ., concur.
Larson and Hats, JJ., dissent.
Thornton, J., takes HO' part.

=== CASE 9741678 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:00:25.840603+00 ===

Larson, J.
(dissenting) — I must respectfully dissent, for *1161I feel, as did the trial court, that the best interests of these children will be served by placing them together in a home with their mother and grandmother. I am greatly concerned with the slight consideration apparently given to this important aspect by the majority. It is agreed that the primary consideration in eases of this kind is the welfare and best interests of the children, but we are not of the same mind as to what that is in this instance. York v. York, 246 Iowa 132, 136, 67 N.W.2d 28.
The majority seem to concede that there is evidence of a material and substantial change in circumstances sufficient to justify a court’s exercise of its power to modify custodial care, yet, with little more than a reluctance to change the status quo and a suspicion or fear that the mother will not continue her obviously successful attempt to rehabilitate herself, they decide the trial court abused its discretion by ordering the change. The rule, as I understand it, requires a rather strong showing to rebut the presumption in favor of the mother’s custody of small children. Bell v. Bell, 240 Iowa 934, 938, 38 N.W.2d 658, and citations. Also, while it is true our review is de novo, considerable weight, where justified in the record, is given the trial court’s decision. Ash v. Ash, 248 Iowa 1310, 1313, 85 N.W.2d 530; Stillmunkes v. Stillmunkes, 245 Iowa 1082, 1086, 65 N.W.2d 366, and cases cited; Finken v. Porter, 246 Iowa 1345, 1347, 72 N.W.2d 445; Justice v. Hobbs, 245 Iowa 707, 708, 63 N.W.2d 882; Watters v. Watters, 243 Iowa 741, 742, 53 N.W.2d 162; Joiner v. Knieriem, 243 Iowa 470, 481, 52 N.W.2d 21, 27, 28, and citations; Durst v. Roach, 245 Iowa 342, 344, 62 N.W.2d 159, 160.
The record clearly indicates the trial court carefully and deliberately weighed the matter. We have repeatedly -said the trial court is often in a much better position than we to solve such a perplexing problem, and I think that pronouncement was never more applicable. Here the court visited with these children in his chambers in addition to seeing and hearing the witnesses. Its finding, then, should not be disturbed without compelling reasons, and I find none. Finken v. Porter, supra, 246 Iowa 1345, 1347, 72 N.W.2d 445, and citations, Joiner v. Knieriem, supra, 243 Iowa 470, 481, 52 N.W.2d 21, and citations, *1162and Slattery v. Slattery, 139 Iowa 419, 116 N.W. 608, refer to the trial court’s discretion on matters of this nature.
It is not a question as to whether the present homes of these children have been unsatisfactory. They have, according to the record, been good, and although there is some evidence that the Squires refused to permit the little girl to visit or show affection for her mother when they occasionally met, and the Huebbes have not been sending the boy to Sunday school, yet there is no serious contention that these custodial arrangements have not been satisfactory or disclose circumstances which in themselves would warrant a change. On the other hand, we have held, “If the present custodians are schooling the child to hate the [parent] * * * the welfare of the child might require a change of custody * * Shepard v. Gerholdt, 244 Iowa 1343, 1347, 60 N.W.2d 547; Albertus v. Albertus, 178 Iowa 1124, 1127, 160 N.W. 830. We said in Paintin v. Paintin, 241 Iowa 411, 415, 416, 41 N.W.2d 27, 29, 16 A. L. R.2d 659: “It is not shown the mother * * * has attempted to turn them against their father * * inferring at least that such an act might be sufficient change in circumstances to warrant a change in custody.
Here the change of circumstances alleged, and I think proven by a preponderance of the evidence, was that plaintiff, the mother of these children, in addition to securing a suitable dwelling place for them, has done a wonderful job of rehabilitating herself since May 1955, when custody of the children was denied her, and has gained the respect of others in the community over a substantial period of time. It should also be pointed out that in its 1955 order the court contemplated this change and reserved jurisdiction to make further orders as the welfare of the children “shall dictate.” If she has done that well without the compulsion she would naturally have when her retention of the children’s custody would be at stake, I can see no justification in the majority’s fear that she will abandon her firm resolution to live a moral, sober and upright life. A man of the cloth believes her. The trial court believes her. Why should we doubt her?
The other reason given for reversing the trial court, a reason which seems to be getting more than its fair share of *1163weight, is this court’s reluctance to change custody of children if their present situation is satisfactory. Lursen v. Henrichs, 239 Iowa 1009, 33 N.W.2d 383; McKay v. Ruffcorn, 247 Iowa 195, 203, 73 N.W.2d 78. Status quo maintenance as applied here is that if there is any chance of error by the move, do not do it. I think such a rule is very bad. There is always a- chance of human failure, but we should weigh the benefits for the children and give them consideration along with any detriments. This is not a ease where these children, who know their real mother and have visited in her home, will be rudely transplanted to a new and strange environment. Nothing but pleasantness should be anticipated by this change. The facilities offered in the mother’s home are quite adequate.
The compelling argument in favor of the trial court’s decision, I feel, is well pointed out in Shepard v. Gerholdt, supra, at pages 1348 and 1349 of 244 Iowa, page 550 of 60 N.W.2d where Justice Thompson said, “There was * * * a very material factor concerning welfare which the court stressed —the affection between the two sisters * * * and the benefit to Diana from living with the elder girl. * * * We agree with the able and long-experienced trial court that the welfare of Diana will be best promoted by a modification which permits her to live in the same home with her sister.”
I hope we have not changed this view, and feel that one of the paramount considerations the courts should consider is that it is for the best interest of the child to be brought up in a home with his brothers or sisters. It should be considered in the same category as the benefit a child gets from a good mother’s love and care. Joiner v. Knieriem and Durst v. Roach, both supra. It should be presumed beneficial to the child’s welfare.
It is true each cáse must be decided upon its own facts, but they are not here unfriendly to plaintiff’s case. There is no other child in either of the defendants’ homes. The Thein children are just now reaching the age when a brother-and-sister relationship becomes important, i.e., the school age. They need the companionship of each other. In their mother’s home they will have that, plus their mother’s love and care, and an *1164adequate and proper religious training. They will not only be sent to Sunday school, but will be taken to the church next door by their mother and grandmother.
I think these factors, when carefully weighed, justified the trial court’s conclusion that it would be for these children’s best interests to be together in one -home, to receive the same love and care from a repentant mother, and to receive the same religious training to prepare them for their family responsibilities of the future.
While I would affirm, I would delete the provision granting defendants the privilege of having the children for two months each summer, for that provision might have the effect of upsetting rather than securing their family discipline and unity. I would prefer to express appreciation for the devotion of these foster parents in other manners than by such a court order. Their unselfish devotion to' the child should receive compensation in some other manner than the granting to them of any possessive right in the child. I am sure these children themselves will remember and take care of that gratitude later.
I would modify and affirm.
Hays, J., joins in this dissent.

=== CASE 9741679 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:00:27.612856+00 ===

Messmore, J.
This is an action at law brought in the district court for Douglas County by Willis Baer, hereafter referred to as the plaintiff, against Otto Schaap, doing business as Speedway Scaffold Company, hereafter referred to as the defendant, and Parsons Construction Company, hereafter referred to as Parsons. The Parsons Construction Company made payments to the plaintiff under the provisions of the Nebraska Workmen’s Compensation Act for injuries he sustained while in the course *581of his employment and was made a defendant in this action as required by the provisions of that act. The purpose of this action was to recover damages from the defendant for injuries sustained by the plaintiff when he fell from a scaffold constructed by the defendant. The case was tried to a jury, resulting in a verdict for the plaintiff in the amount of $20,000. The defendant moved for dismissal of the plaintiff’s petition and for a directed verdict at the close of the plaintiff’s evidence and at the close of all of the evidence. These motions were overruled. The defendant filed a motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict and for a new trial. Both of these motions were overruled, and the defendant perfected appeal to this court.
The plaintiff’s petition alleged that he was a bricklayer; that on or about September 14, 1954, he was employed by Parsons as a construction foreman in charge of certain alterations to be made on a building located on the southeast corner of the intersection of Seventeenth and Farnam Streets in Omaha; that pursuant to a contract with Parsons, the defendant, through his agents, servants, and employees, had erected, set in place, and rented to Parsons certain scaffolding around the outside of the building so that the plaintiff and his crew, and all employees of Parsons, might have access to the upper portion of the building; that the scaffolding thus erected by the defendant was erected in such a careless and negligent manner that one of the planks thereon gave way and thereby dropped the plaintiff to the sidewalk below, a distance of approximately 40 feet; that as a direct and proximate result of such negligence and carelessness the plaintiff suffered severe injuries; and that the scaffolding erected as aforesaid was not erected in a safe, suitable, and proper manner as required by section 48-425, R. R. S. 1943.
The amended answer of the defendant denied that he was guilty of any negligence, and alleged that on or about August 23, 1954, pursuant to an order of and *582rental agreement with Parsons, and subject to the usual rental conditions existing between the defendant and Parsons, this defendant caused a steel scaffold to be ei-ected around the building specified, in accordance with the specifications of Parsons; that the scaffolding was erected in a safe, suitable, and proper manner; that after the scaffolding was completely erected it was inspected and accepted by Parsons; that Parsons assumed and thereafter maintained control, supervision, and maintenance of the scaffolding for the duration of the particular construction in which Parsons was engaged; that the plaintiff was the foreman of and in general supervision over the contruction job being done by Parsons from and after August 23, 1954, and up to and including September 14, 1954; that the scaffolding was in the possession and control of the plaintiff; and that if any dangerous or defective condition existed, the plaintiff knew, or should have known, of its existence and thereby assumed any risk incident to the use of the scaffold. The defendant further alleged that after the scaffolding was completely erected by him and inspected and accepted by Parsons, alterations were made to the scaffolding by employees of Parsons working under the supervision of the plaintiff.
The plaintiff’s reply to the amended answer of the defendant denied each and every allegation contained therein.
The defendant assigns as error the following: The trial court erred in denying defendant’s motions to dismiss the plaintiff’s petition and in denying the defendant’s motions for directed verdict, also defendant’s motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict; the verdict and judgment were not supported by the evidence; the trial court erred in giving instruction' No. 8 on its own motion; the trial court denied the defendant his right to have the jury instructed upon his theory of the case by refusing defendant’s requested instructions Nos. 4, 8, and 9; and the verdict and judgment *583were excessive, not supported by the evidence, and, in part, based upon instruction No. 15 given by the trial court, which instruction was erroneous.
• The record discloses that the plaintiff had been engaged in general construction, work for 30 years;, that he had been a journeyman bricklayer since 1948; that he was 46 years of age at the time of the accident; that he had been a foreman for about a year or a year;and a half with supervisory duties; and that he was acting in such capacity at the time of the accident while working for Parsons on the Patterson Building at Seventeenth and Farnam Streets in Omaha. The scaffolding around the building was erected before August 23, .1954, and when Parsons took over the job on August 24 or 25, the scaffolding was complete and ready for the plaintiff to go to work. Parsons had contracted to perform a portion of a remodeling job on the Patterson Building. This work consisted of replacing the cornice at the top of the 3-story building. Parsons ordered the necessary scaffolding to be erected by the defendant. The order was written by the defendant on a standard rental form and mailed to Parsons,' but it was not signed by Parsons or anyone in authority for the corporation. The defendant erected a steel scaffold for Parsons and floored it with wooden planks.
It might be said at this point that the plaintiff does not contend that there was any defect in the steel scaffolding or that any plank in the flooring broke. ' The case has to do with the wooden planks that were used for flooring on the scaffolding.
When the scaffolding was erected to the proper height, planks were laid on the top of the frame to provide the flooring. In order to bring the scaffolding closer to the building on the north side, side brackets were attached to all top frames except the first three, between the' scaffold and the building and extending straight toward the building. These side brackets were triangular in shape and approximately 21% inches in *584length across the top. The flooring was five planks in width, and one plank on the side bracket. These planks were 10 or 12 inches in width, and laid on the scaffold frames. A 16-foot plank was laid across three forms, or two spaces which were 14 feet in length. Two spaces were skipped and another 16-foot plank was laid across the next two spaces. A 14-foot plank was laid across the space skipped and on top of the 16-foot planks at either end, and overlapped the 16-foot planks a foot at each end. Nails were then driven through the planks where they overlapped to keep them from slipping.
The general foreman on the job for Parsons was Henry Chris Sorenson who made an inspection of the scaffolding and found 5 to 10 percent of the planks were unnailed. He and an employee undertook to nail the unnailed planks. This witness testified that after the scaffold had been inspected and accepted, Parsons added one plank on the side brackets along the north side of the building to provide a rest for a protective plywood wall. One side of this protective wall rested upon and was nailed to the flooring on the side brackets of the scaffold and the other side laid against and was supported by the building. A piece of wood was nailed to each plank in the flooring of the scaffold and side brackets where the planks overlapped and cleats were nailed to the underside of the flooring. The flooring and the protective plywood were covered with tarpaulin. This work was done by employees of Parsons under the supervision of Sorenson. This installation and the subsequent removal of the canvas and plywood did not change the structure of the scaffolding. Sorenson also testified that he replaced a defective plank on the other side of the scaffold from where the plaintiff fell.
On September 14, 1954, the plaintiff and his crew of workmen had almost completed the work for which the scaffold was required. By 1 o’clock that afternoon they had removed all of the tarpaulin, the pro*585tective plywood wall, and a portion of the safety rail on the outer side of the scaffold. Sometime between 2 and 3 o’clock on September 14, 1954, the plaintiff was standing upon the scaffold on the north side of the building on the plank in the flooring next to the building. The plank upon which he was standing was not covered, but was open to view. The plaintiff was washing the brick wall of the building with water, using a stone and brush. Dale Gosch, one of the workmen, was standing on the roof right above the plaintiff handing him material. He was approximately 3 feet from the plaintiff, and looking right at him when he fell. A plank suddenly “upended,” dropping the plaintiff to the sidewalk below. The plank did not break, and no part of the steel scaffold was broken prior to the accident. The plank was 14 feet in length, and there were no nails in it. The plaintiff struck a canopy at a level lower than the floor of the scaffold. The plank fell between the scaffold and the building, and struck the building. The end of the plank which raised nearly struck the witness Gosch. Gosch testified that the plank which fell was from the main floor of the scaffolding and was one of the planks between the uprights of the scaffold.
Charles Cato, a workman on the job, testified that he arrived at the point where the plaintiff fell about the time the rescue squad arrived. This witness went up onto the scaffold to retrieve the plank which was teetering on the scaffold. He inspected the plank and found that it had no nails or nail holes in it. He further testified that this plank would barely reach across 3 supports on the scaffold, and that when it was placed across three supports it had only to slip an inch or so either way to upend.
The witness Edward Connolly testified that he was a salesman for the defendant and had experience in the erection of tubular steel scaffolding; that he was familiar with the manner in which such scaffolding *586should be erected; and that planking should be- laid across the frames and nailed if work on the scaffold was to be done for any length of time as planks have a tendency to “work,” and the nailing would keep- the planks from sliding back and forth so one end could drop. This witness further testified that in the interest of good safety it would be advisable to wire the end planks and nail all the others; and that in this particular scaffolding the planks laid for flooring were 14 and 16 feet in length, except for a few planks used only at the northwest corner of the building.
There is evidence to the effect that Parsons -had safety rules in effect governing the use of scaffolds. There is no evidence to disclose that safety books or rules were given to the plaintiff, nor were they directed to his attention. It appears there were some safety slogans attached to the tool boxes on the job. Also, some reference is made to the custom of bricklayer foremen making daily inspections of scaffolds. The plaintiff testified that this was in accordance with the by-laws of bricklayers. Just what is meant by this statement is not clear from the record. The plaintiff made no inspection of the scaffold flooring between August 24, 1954, and the date of his injury, September 14, 1954. At various times during the progress of this construction work, other employees of Parsons used this scaffolding. The plaintiff testified that in his trade, at times, he erected low scaffolds; that he inspected the scaffolds as he felt responsible for the men working under him; also that he felt he had a right to rely upon the scaffolding furnished by the defendant.
There are certain well-established rules of' law applicable to this case.
In determining the question of whether or not a motion for a directed verdict or for judgment notwithstanding the verdict should be sustained the court is required to consider the evidénce in the light 'most favorable to the plaintiff and to resolve every - con*587trover ted fact in his favor, and he' should have the benefit of every inference that can reasonably be deduced therefrom. See Anderson v. Evans, 164 Neb. 599, 83 N. W. 2d 59.
. Negligence is the omission to do something which a reasonable and prudent man,, guided by those considerations which ordinarily regulate the conduct of human affairs, would do, or doing something which a reasonable, prudent man would not do; want of that degree of care that an ordinarily prudent person would have exercised under the same circumstances. See Bohmont v. Moore, 138 Neb. 784, 295 N. W. 419, 133 A. L. R. 270.
“Where different minds may draw different inferences or conclusions from the facts proved, or if there is a conflict in the evidence, the matter at issue must be submitted to the jury to be determined; but, where the evidence is undisputed, and but one reasonable inference can be drawn from the facts, the question is one of law for the court. * * * It is not the province of this court in reviewing the record in an action at law to resolve conflicts in or weigh the evidence. * * * It is presumed in such an action that controverted facts were decided by the jury in favor of the successful party, and its finding based on conflicting evidence will not be disturbed unless clearly wrong.” Snyder v. Farmers Irr. Dist., 157 Neb. 771, 61 N. W. 2d 557.
“If contributory negligence is relied upon by defendant as an affirmative defense, the burden is upon him, to prove it by a preponderance of the evidence pertinent to that issue contained in the whole record, except insofar as the same may appear in evidence adduced for plaintiff.” Meyer v. Platte Valley Constr. Co., 147 Neb. 860, 25 N. W. 2d 412. See, also, Roberts v. Carlson, 142 Neb. 851, 8 N. W. 2d 175.
Thé plaintiff’s petition charged the defendant with having violated his common-law duty by not using due' care *588in the erection of the scaffold, that is, the defendant was charged with negligence in the erection of the scaffold. In this connection we deem the following to be applicable.
The case of Tegler v. Farmers Union Gas & Oil Co., 124 Neb. 336, 246 N. W. 721, was an action for damages for alleged negligence which caused the death of the plaintiff’s 4-year-old daughter against the defendant, a dealer engaged in buying and selling gasoline, kerosene, and other oils. This court said: “This is a tort action. Tt is a general rule that no cause of action in tort can arise from the breach of a duty existing by virtue of contract, except as between the parties thereto. Privity of contract is essential to the right of action. 20 R. C. L. 49, sec. 44.’ 42 A. L. R. 1249, stating the foregoing rule and the reasons therefor in the annotation, and suggesting a rule affording a basis for liability, not inconsistent with the present trend of the courts to liberalize rules of liability for negligent acts which result in injuries to third parties. Briefly sketched, that enlarged rule suggests a duty of inspection and the use of ordinary care to see that a manufactured article, which, if defective, is imminently dangerous to persons the manufacturer knows will come in contact therewith, is not put upon the market in that condition. There was not privity of contract or of dealing between the parties hereto, but plaintiff has brought himself by his pleadings under the liberalized rule above suggested that, if the kerosene was actually inherently or imminently dangerous by reason of its content, then defendant would be liable for negligence to the plaintiff, if such negligence was the proximate cause of the injury.”
The latest case touching upon this subject is Driekosen v. Black, Sivalls & Bryson, Inc., 158 Neb. 531, 64 N. W. 2d 88. This case concerned a suit against a supplier and installer of a propane gas system installed in the plaintiff’s home. An explosion occurred re*589lating to such installation, resulting in damages. The plaintiff sought to recover damages from the manufacturer or installer of the gas system. We can see no difference between a bailor furnishing scaffolding and a manufacturer or installer of propane gas equipment, both of which are imminently dangerous if manufactured, installed, or erected in an unsafe manner, and both would fall into the same class of dangerous instrumentalities. With this in mind, we conclude that certain language in the above-cited case would be applicable to the instant case.
In the above-cited case, the court said: “As stated in 46 Am. Jur., Sales, § 817, p. 943: ‘Moreover, where the seller of an article reasonably must know that if it is defective it will be imminently dangerous to persons likely to come in contact therewith, a duty rests upon him to use ordinary care to ascertain the condition of the article and see that it is safe, especially where, by representation or warranties that the article is safe, he induces the sale. If he fails to exercise ordinary care to ascertain the safety of the article, so that he actually sells it in an imminently dangerous condition, he is liable for injuries to third persons who he knows will come in contact with the article.’ See, also, 46 Am. Jur., Sales, § 803, p. 928.” See, also, Annotation, 164 A. L. R. 569.
The relationship between a supplier engaged in the business of erecting scaffolds for rental, and a construction company which rented one of the scaffolds from him for use in its business, is one of bailment. In other words, the defendant in the instant case is the bailor and Parsons is the bailee. See 8 C. J. S., Bailments, § 1, p. 222.
The rule announced in 6 Am. Jur., Bailments, § 317, p. 416, reads as follows: “Although there is authority in support of the view that the bailor of such an instrumentality for gratuitous use is responsible only for injuries from defects of which he is aware, and can*590not be made liable for not communicating anything, he did not in fact know,'whether he ought to have known it or not, yet if the bailment is. a lucrative one, the obligation by which his liability to third persons is tested may include a duty to exercise reasonable diligence or ordinary care to see that the instrumentality is in a reasonably safe condition to avoid injuries to such persons, and it has even been held that he is required, in the exercise of such diligence, to inspect the machine to the end that such danger may not arise, and to make such simple and available tests as to its. condition as the intended use would suggest to sensible and right-minded persons. Of course, even under this view, the bailor is, not to be held responsible as a guarantor of the absolute integrity of the machine he lets.” See, also, Rumsey v. Schollman Bros. Co., 156 Neb. 251, 55 N. W. 2d 668.
Restatement, Torts, § 388, p. 1039, reads as follows: “The words ‘those whom the supplier should expect to use the chattel’ and the words ‘a person for whose use it is supplied’ include not only the person to whom the chattel is turned over by the supplier but also all those who are members of a class whom the supplier should expect to use it or occupy it or share in its use with the consent of such person, irrespective of whether the supplier has any particular person in mind.” See, also, MacPherson v. Buick Motor Co., 217 N. Y. 382, 111 N. E. 1050, L. R. A. 1916F 696, Ann. Cas. 1916C 440.
Under the foregoing authorities we conclude that the bailor of a scaffold for hire would be liable to an employee of the bailee who could have been expected to use the scaffold, if he has failed to exercise reasonable care to make the scaffold safe for the use for which it was supplied.
In,this connection, the court instructed the jury on the degrees of negligence applicable to this case.
■ The plaintiff’s petition alleges that there is a status tory duty imposed upon the defendánt by section 48r *591425, R. R. S. 1943. This statute provides in part: “All scaffolds, * * * supports or other mechanical contrivances . used in the erection, repairing, alteration, removal or painting of any house, building, * * * or other structure, shall be erected and constructed in a safe, suitable and proper manner.”
For a comprehensive review of the history of the legislation relating to what is now section 48-425, R. R. S. 1943, we make reference to Johnson v. Weborg, 142 Neb. 516, 7 N. W. 2d 65. In that case the plaintiff sought to recover damages for personal injuries caused by a fall from the roof of a barn upon which he was working for the defendant. The holding in the case is to the effect that a scaffold must be safe, suitable, and proper for the purpose for which it is used, and the employer is liable if it does not meet this requirement. The court said: “In construing legislation of the class herein considered, this court has long followed the rule that a failure to perform a mandatory duty enjoined by statute is negligence per se, and if any person to whom the duty is owed, or for whose protection the statute is enacted, is injured in consequence of such violation a case is made. Tralle v. Hartman Furniture & Carpet Co., 116 Neb. 418, 217 N. W. 952, and cases there cited.”
The case of Butera v. Mardis Co., 99 Neb. 815, 157 N. W. 1024, was decided in 1916, before the amendment to the statute in 1919. An injured workman sued his employer and the owner of the real estate. The question before the court was the sufficiency of the evidence and the constitutionality of the provision holding the owner of the real estate liable. Reference was made to sections 3602 and 3612, Rev. St. 1913. Section 3602, Rev. St. 1913, is similar to section 48-425, R. R. S. 1943. It was held that: “* * * the intention of the statute is that the employer is to be an ‘insurer as to furnishing such a place as it requires.’ ” The court said: “The employee may confidently rely upon the performance of this duty by his employer, * * In Johnson v. *592Weborg, supra, it was pointed out that statutes such as ours appeared to have originated in New York.
In Winterson v. Pantel Realty Co., 135 Neb. 472, 282 N. W. 393, this court said: “ ‘Statutes requiring protective devices * * * scaffolding statutes, * * * and other statutes of like nature, impose a mandatory and affirmative duty upon the owners of such property, * * * the courts generally hold that a failure to perform a mandatory duty so enjoined is negligence per se, and if any person to whom the duty is owed, or for whose protection the statute is enacted, is injured in consequence of such violation, a case is made.’ ”
What the defendant seeks to show in the instant case is that section 48-425, R. R. S. 1943, has no applicability for the reason that the burden of this statute is laid upon employers only.
Referring to section 48-425, R. R. S. 1943, it states in part: “All scaffolds, * * * supports or other mechanical contrivances used in the erection, repairing, alteration, * * * of any house, building, * * * shall be erected and constructed in a safe, suitable and proper manner.” (Emphasis supplied.)
In Johnson v. Weborg, supra, this court said, with reference to the reenactment of this act in 1919, quoting from Strahl v. Miller, 97 Neb. 820, 151 N. W. 952, Ann. Cas. 1917A 141: “ ‘The fact that the statute does not in terms impose civil liability is immaterial. It is not necessary to the maintenance of an action that the statute so expressly provide.’ ”
Referring to a few of the New York cases, in Duggan v. National Constructors & Engineers, Inc., 223 App. Div. 163, 228 N. Y. S. 126, the plaintiff, an employee of a subcontractor engaged on a building under construction in the erection of the iron work, was injured when a ladder collapsed and he fell. The subcontractor engaged in doing the concrete work, who made the ladder, was liable for the injuries suffered, since it appeared that the ladder was used not only by his employees but also by *593employees generally, and especially by the employees engaged in the erection of the iron work. The court said: “* * * a person who constructs a scaffold or erects a ladder to be used in the performance of labor in the erection of a building has a duty incapable of delegation, not merely to his own employees, but to all others making use of the structure for that purpose, to make such instruments of performance safe. * * * We think, therefore, that the question as to whether or not the ladder was properly constructed or whether it provided a safe and suitable means for performance of the work should have been submitted to the jury, * *
In Quigley v. Thatcher, 207 N. Y. 66, 100 N. E. 596, the case involved an employee of a subcontractor who sued the general contractor for injuries received when he fell from a defective scaffold erected by the general contractor. The court said: “* * * section 18 of the Labor Law (Cons. Laws, ch. 31), which provides: ‘A person employing or directing another * * * in the erection, repairing, altering or painting of a house, building * * * shall not furnish * * * scaffolding, hoists, stays, ladders or other mechanical contrivances which are unsafe, unsuitable or improper, and which are not so constructed, placed and operated as to give proper protection to the life and limb of a person so employed or engaged.’ * * * this statute is one for the protection of workmen from injury and undoubtedly is to be construed as liberally as may be for the accomplishment of the purpose for which it was thus framed, and under such interpretation we think that a contractor may by course of events become liable to a sub-contractor and his employees for the safety of a scaffold although originally and expressly he assumed no such responsibility.”
Section 48-425, R. R. S. 1943, is not limited in its scope to an employer or landowner, but may include a supplier or bailor, who erects and rents a scaffold to a bailee, and the employees of the bailee who are required, during the progress of their work, to use the scaffold.
*594In the light of the authorities above cited, a mandatory duty is imposed upon the bailor to furnish the proper materials and to see to it that the scaffold is constructed in such a manner as to give proper protection to the life and limb of a person employed to work upon and use the scaffold. If the bailor fails to comply with such duty and negligently erects a scaffold, and an employee of the bailee is injured while working upon the same in the course of his employment, the bailor would be liable within the contemplation of section 48-425, R. R. S. 1943.
The defendant predicates error upon the giving of instruction No. 8 which defendant claims is drawn from the language of section 48-425, R. R. S. 1943, and is based upon an application of that statute to the defendant. The defendant asserts that the statute does not impose a burden upon one situated as is the defendant for the benefit of one situated as is the plaintiff; that the statute does not apply to the defendant; and that the instruction is in error, which would call for a reversal of this case.
As we read instruction No. 8, the trial court made some reference to section 48-425, R. R. S. 1943. The court did instruct the jury on the common-law duty of due care and the essential elements relating thereto. The instruction did not impose a mandatory duty upon the defendant in any respect as provided by statute, but-defined the common-law duty of a supplier or bailor. ■ We fail to find any prejudicial error in the giving of instruction No. 8.
If an examination of all the instructions given by the trial court discloses that they fairly and correctly state the law applicable under the evidence, error cannot be predicated thereon. Blanchard v. Lawson, 148 Neb. 299, 27 N. W. 2d 217.
We conclude that the defendant’s contention is without merit.
The defendant contends that the plaintiff’s petition is insufficient to constitute a cause of action.
*595This court in Behrens v. Gottula, 160 Neb. 103, 69 N. W. 2d 384, held: “Where a petition charges specific grounds of negligence as a basis for recovery, and. also contains a general allegation of negligence on the part of the .defendant in causing the damage, and where no motion for a more specific statement is filed, it is conupetent under the general allegation of negligence to offer evidence of any fact which contributed to the injury.” See, also, Union P. Ry. Co. v. Vincent, 58 Neb. 171, 78 N. W. 457.
We -,conclude that the defendant’s contention is without merit.
The defendant contends that the trial court denied him his right to have the jury instructed upon his theory of the case, which he contends was supported by evidence, when the court refused the defendant’s tendered instructions Nos. 4, 8, and 9.
We have examined these instructions and find requested instruction'No. 4 to be applicable to the instant case if the defendant has no statutory duty under section 48-425, R. R. S. 1943.
Tendered instructions Nos. 8 and 9, refused by the trial court, are alleged to be correct statements of the law based upon the decisions in Ring v. Duey, 162 Neb. 423, 76 N. W. 2d 433, and Wright v. Salvation Army, 125 Neb. 216, 249 N. W. 549. The defendant asserts that there was evidence that the plank which fell with the plaintiff was exposed to his full view, that is, the alleged defects, consisting as they do only in the placement of the plank and the absence of nails, could be seen.
The first above-cited case has no applicability to the instant case. It involves the proposition that when a person, being in a place of safety, sees or could have seen the approach of a moving vehicle in close proximity to him and suddenly moves from the place of safety intó the path of such vehicle and is struck, his own conduct constitutes contributory negligence ' more than *596slight in degree, as a matter of law, and precludes recovery.
The other case relied upon, Wright v. Salvation Army, supra, held: “One who walks into an open elevator shaft, on premises with which he is familiar, without looking to see whether the elevator had been moved, is guilty of gross contributory negligence and cannot recover for injuries thereby sustained.”
In this connection, from the evidence there was nothing to indicate to the plaintiff that an inspection of each plank should be made by him. The defect which caused the accident was not an open and patent danger. In Johnson v. Weborg, supra, this court said: “* * * we hold that plaintiff had a right to rely upon the safe condition of the scaffold provided for him.”
The defendant contends that the verdict and judgment are excessive, not supported by the evidence, contrary thereto, and, in part, based upon instruction No. 15 given by the trial court upon its own motion.
We have examined the evidence relating to the injuries sustained by the plaintiff as a result of his falling from the scaffold. The plaintiff suffered a compressed fracture of a vertebra, compressing it to approximately one-third its normal size, and had a permanent disability of his body as a whole of 10 to 15 percent. He was hospitalized for 17 days and returned to light work in the latter part of October 1954. The plaintiff suffered a heart attack which caused him to abandon his regular type of work, and he took work as a taxicab driver.
The defendant asserts that the trial court, in instruction No. 15, instructed the jury with reference to future loss of earnings as an element of damages, and that this instruction was misleading for the reason that it can be concluded that the verdict included an award for the future loss of earnings, which was contrary to the evidence.
With reference to instruction No. 15, the court told the jury: “* * * if the evidence shows with reasonable *597certainty the extent of any depletion in his earning power for the future you will consider that too and allow for the same, * * *. No evidence has been offered that the heart attack suffered by plaintiff was proximately caused by or resulted from plaintiff’s fall from the scaffold, and, therefore, plaintiff’s heart condition and any disability resulting from it may not be considered by you in determining the measure of damages in this case.”
In Arnold v. Lance, 166 Neb. 834, 90 N. W. 2d 814, this court held: “A verdict may be set aside as excessive only when it is so clearly exorbitant as to indicate that it was the result of passion, prejudice, mistake, or some means not apparent in the record, or that it is clear that the jury disregarded the evidence or controlling rules of law.”
We conclude that there was no prejudicial error in instruction No. 15 given by the trial court, and see no reason to set aside the verdict as being excessive.
From the evidence heretofore set out, we conclude that a jury question was presented as to whether or not the defendant was negligent as contended for by the plaintiff.
We conclude that the judgment of the trial court should be, and is hereby, affirmed.
Affirmed.

=== CASE 9741680 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:00:27.618239+00 ===

Carter, Yeager, and Boslattgh, JJ.,
dissenting.
The Parsons Construction Company contracted to replace the cornice and supporting firewall on the north and west sides of the Patterson Building in Omaha. Parsons contracted with the defendant Schaap, doing business as the Speedway Scaffold Company, to furnish and erect a steel scaffold from which this work could be done. The scaffold was erected on or before August 23, 1954, and turned over to Parsons for use. On September 14, 1954, the plaintiff fell from the scaffold due to the upending of a plank upon which he was standing while at work. The question to be determined on this appeal *598is whether or not the evidence is sufficient to support a judgment' based on a finding that Speedway furnished and negligently installed the plank which upended and caused the accident.
The evidence is undisputed that Speedway properly constructed the steel or iron portions of the scaffold. The main platform of the' scaffold was planked with five planks 10 and 12 inches in width. Between the main platform and the building brackets were attached having a width of 21% inches on which one additional 10 or 12 inch plank was laid. All planks overlapped on the ends and were spiked together, although some issue was raised on this which we will hereafter discuss.
The evidence of the witness Connolly, who erected the scaffold for Speedway, is that he personally spiked every plank. The testimony of the witness Sorenson, the general superintendent for Parsons, is that he found about 5 percent of the planks not spiked and that he caused these to be spiked before employees of Parsons were permitted to use the scaffold. As an additional precaution he spiked some of the planks from the under side and added some cleats to insure safety in the use of the scaffold. Sorenson testified that the scaffold was erected in an excellent manner, although he took further steps to insure safety in its use.
The evidence further shows that Parsons caused long strips of % inch plywood to be leaned against the wall of the building which were toe-nailed to the inside plank of the main platform put in by Speedway to prevent debris falling through to the sidewalk below. Parsons also set up plywood, four feet in height, around the outside of the scaffold platform to prevent workmen from falling from the scaffold, in addition to the guard posts and chains erected by Speedway. The platform and ■ plywood were then covered with canvas. After this was done the employees of Parsons used the scaffold" from August 23, 1954, to September 14, 1954, without mishap in rebuilding the cornice and firewall on the building. *599During, this period Speedway did not inspect nor was it required to inspect the scaffold.
On the morning of September 14, 1954, the employees of Parsons removed the canvas, the plywood guard around the platform, and the plywood over the space next to the building. In the afternoon the plaintiff was engaged in washing the lime and mortar stains off the newly constructed firewall. While standing on the plank nearest the building in the performance of this work, the plank upended and he fell through the space nearest the building to the sidewalk below and was injured. It is not disputed that the plank which upended had no nail holes in it and had not, therefore, been spiked. The question at issue, reduced to its simplest form, is whether there is any evidence that the plank was one furnished and negligently installed by Speedway sufficient to take that issue to the jury.
The plaintiff testified he was standing on the plank closest to the building and that he fell through the space nearest the building. After his fall he observed the space through which he fell and stated that it was the space next to the building. The witness Cato stated that the brackets were completely covered with planks which means that planks had been added after Speedway had turned the scaffold over to Parsons. The witness Gosch testified that it was the inside board of the main platform which upended. His statement is clearly explainable by his evidence that there were no brackets on the scaffold, a statement which is in conflict with the evidence of every other witness having any knowledge of the facts. His evidence is in direct conflict with that of plaintiff, Cato, Sorenson, and Connolly as to where the upended plank came from. His conclusion rested on a completely false premise, a situation which produced a false conclusion.
The witness Connolly states that he made a record of all materials used in the erection of the scaffold which he supervised. He dismantled the scaffold 'short*600ly after the accident and he testified that every plank he installed was in place and properly spiked. No witness testified that any plank installed by Speedway was missing from its proper place after the accident.
The witness Sorenson who was Parsons’ general superintendent testified that he inspected the scaffold immediately after the accident. He found no plank installed by Speedway out of its proper place. He testified that Speedway covered the main platform its full width with five planks which were 10 and 12 inches in width and placed one plank on the brackets, all of which were properly in place after the accident. He testified also that he examined the plank which had upended, that it contained no nail holes, and that it was covered with paint and plaster lime. He recognized the plank which had upended as a used one that he had taken from Parsons’ material yard for use in anchoring the Parsons’ derrick on the roof of the Patterson Building. He was positive that the plank was not one installed by Speedway. Sorenson testified that Speedway placed but one plank on the brackets. At the time he supervised the installation of the plywood over the space next to the building, the number of planks on the brackets varied from one to two in through there. This clearly shows that some planks had been added after the scaffold had been turned over to Parsons.
We submit that there is not a scintilla of evidence that the plank which upended belonged to or was negligently installed by Speedway. We point out that after the scaffold was erected it was turned over to Parsons. Speedway is not shown to have been under any obligation to inspect or maintain the scaffold after it passed under the control of Parsons. Parsons inspected and took additional safety precautions before its employees were permitted to use it. For more than 3 weeks Parsons’ employees had been using the scaffold in the performance of their work. Parsons not only had added plywood and canvas to the scaffold as before *601stated, but it had dismantled its contributions to the safety of the scaffold. The scaffold had been inspected, changed with additions, and exclusively controlled by Parsons for more than 3 weeks before the accident. The maintenance of the scaffold was assumed by Parsons and in the absence of proof that the plank which upended was furnished and negligently installed by Speedway, negligence by Speedway cannot be presumed. In our opinion, the plaintiff has failed to sustain his allegations of negligence by Speedway, and that the verdict and judgment have no support in the evidence.
A jury will not be permitted to return a verdict when there is no evidence sufficient to support it. It has long been the rule in this state that when the verdict is clearly wrong because of a want of support in the evidence, the verdict and judgment thereon cannot stand. See Pueppka v. Iowa Mutual Ins. Co., 165 Neb. 781, 87 N. W. 2d 410, and cases therein cited. It seems clear to us that the motion of Speedway for a directed verdict made at the close of all the evidence should have been sustained. We think the judgment of the district court should be reversed.

=== CASE 2228404 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:00.321444+00 ===

7 Wis. 2d 643 (1959)
REDEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY OF CITY OF MADISON, Plaintiff,
v.
CANEPA and wife, Defendants.
Supreme Court of Wisconsin.
June 2, 1959.
June 26, 1959.
*646 For the plaintiff there was a brief by Harold E. Hanson, city attorney, and Alton S. Heassler, assistant city attorney, and Harry G. Slater of Milwaukee of counsel, and oral argument by Mr. Heassler and Mr. Slater.
For the defendants there were briefs by La Follette, Sinykin, Doyle & Anderson and Gordon Sinykin and James E. Doyle, attorneys, and Richard E. Gordon, Maurice B. Pasch, and F. D. Shuttleworth of counsel, all of Madison, and oral argument by James E. Doyle and Gordon Sinykin.
A brief was filed by the Attorney General and Roy G. Tulane, assistant attorney general, pursuant to sec. 269.56 (11), Stats., and oral argument by the Attorney General.
FAIRCHILD, J.
The legislature has said clearly that plaintiff is authorized to acquire private property by condemnation proceedings without submitting the question of necessity to a jury. Sec. 66.431 (5) (b), Stats., created by ch. 3, Laws of Sp. Sess. 1958. The primary issue is whether this authorization is void under sec. 2, art. XI of the constitution of Wisconsin. That section provides: "No municipal corporation shall take private property for public use, against the consent of the owner, without the necessity thereof being first established by the verdict of a jury."
Defendants contend that (1) the plaintiff Redevelopment Authority is an agency of the city; (2) if it be a "state agency," sec. 66.431, Stats., would be unconstitutional because it authorizes the Redevelopment Authority to contract debts and carry on works of internal improvement which things the state is forbidden to do by secs. 4 and 10, art. VIII of the constitution; and (3) that the invalid portion of ch. 3, Laws of Sp. Sess. 1958, is inseverable from the remainder and the entire act is therefore void.
Plaintiff contends that (1) sec. 2, art. XI of the constitution applies only to cities and villages and that the Redevelopment Authority is neither the city nor an agent of *647 the city; (2) that the constitutional prohibitions against the contracting of state debt and carrying on works of internal improvement by the state do not apply to an agency such as the Redevelopment Authority; and (3) if the provision permitting the Redevelopment Authority to acquire private property by condemnation without a jury verdict of necessity be invalid, this provision is severable from the balance and plaintiff may properly proceed to carry out its functions.
The present problem arises from a collision between several important public needs and policies and the constitutional provision requiring the jury verdict of necessity where cities are concerned. There is a compelling need in our growing metropolitan areas for the redevelopment of some of their land so as to bring about the use of that land for purposes which fit sensibly into the present and prospective needs of the entire community. Federal funds are available in order to assist in the expensive task of redevelopment. The people of Wisconsin, as of other states, naturally desire to make good use of the available federal funds which their tax payments have helped to provide. Our cities desire to control their own affairs in the field of redevelopment, yet they are clearly subject to the requirement that any contest over the necessity of taking private land must be determined by the verdict of a jury. From the point of view of the officer or body planning redevelopment, the selection of parcels to be included in a project must be made with the thought of the project as a whole, but when the necessity of taking each parcel is submitted to a jury, with the emphasis on the point of view of the individual owner which doubtless pervades such trials, the verdict may frequently be adverse.
The National Housing Act of 1949, as amended, 42 USCA, p. 529, sec. 1441 ff., provides for the extension of financial aid for urban-renewal projects. Sec. 1455 provides that an urban-renewal plan for an urban-renewal area must be approved by the governing body of the locality in which *648 the project is situated and that such approval include findings by the governing body that the financial aid to be provided is necessary; that the urban-renewal plan will afford maximum opportunity consistent with sound needs of the locality as a whole for the rehabilitation or redevelopment of the urban-renewal area by private enterprise and that the urban-renewal plan conforms to a general plan for the development of the locality as a whole. In order for any state-created body to take advantage of the important federal assistance, it must be clear that such agency and its operations readily fit into the outlines of the Federal Act as interpreted by the officials charged with its administration.
Sec. 66.43, Stats., was originally enacted in 1945 and was entitled "Blighted Area Law." As amended, from time to time, it conferred upon cities a power to carry on slum clearance and redevelopment similar to the power now granted to Redevelopment Authorities like plaintiff by sec. 66.431. In David Jeffrey Co. v. Milwaukee (1954), 267 Wis. 559, 66 N. W. (2d) 362, this court decided that redevelopment as provided for in the Blighted Area Law was a proper public purpose for which cities might take private property by condemnation proceedings. Thus the exercise of the power of eminent domain by the city or other state-created public body to acquire land for redevelopment purposes is no longer open to question. In State ex rel. Milwaukee v. Circuit Court (1958), 3 Wis. (2d) 439, 88 N. W. (2d) 339, we had before us questions as to the manner of submission of the issue of necessity to a jury in condemnation proceedings under the Blighted Area Law. It was asserted to us at that time that the federal government would probably withdraw from financing the particular redevelopment project if the jury should find that there was no necessity for the taking of certain parcels included within the boundaries of the area sought to be acquired. This suggests at least that where the federal law authorizes financial assistance if certain findings *649 are made by the governing body of the particular locality, that law does not contemplate what amounts to a review of some of those findings with respect to particular pieces of real estate by the verdict of a jury. We were told that Wisconsin is one of only two states having a constitutional requirement of this type.
Apparently because of the difficulty caused by the constitutional requirement of a jury verdict of necessity the consideration of this problem was included within the call for the special session of the legislature in 1958. The governor called attention to the possibility that the existence of the jury-verdict requirement might result in the lapse of millions of dollars from the federal government to complete urban-renewal programs and asserted that the bill which presumably became ch. 3, Laws of Sp. Sess. 1958, "has the approval of the Milwaukee authorities and removes the objections raised by the federal authorities."
In response the legislature created sec. 66.431, Stats., entitled, "Blight Elimination and Slum Clearance Act." This act created a Redevelopment Authority in every city where certain described conditions exist. The Authority's power to commence to transact business is conditioned upon a declaration by the common council of the city of the existence of a need for blight-elimination, slum-clearance, and urban-renewal plans and projects. After such declaration the mayor is required to appoint seven resident freeholders as commissioners. The appointments are subject to confirmation by the common council by a four-fifths vote. The commissioners are required to have certain qualifications and their term of office is five years, except that at the time of the first appointment, the terms vary in length so that their expirations will be staggered. Removals may be made by the mayor for cause after notice and hearing. After the council's declaration the city is precluded from exercising the powers provided in sec. 66.43 (4) and the Authority has exclusive *650 power in the field of blight elimination, slum clearance, and urban renewal in that city except that a redevelopment project previously initiated by the city may be completed and operated by it. On the other hand, the Authority and the city may provide by agreement that the Authority take over a project instituted by the city. The council continues to have the power to determine that an area is a blighted area and in need of redevelopment, to approve redevelopment plans and modifications, to approve the general plans for the city, and to approve the terms of disposal of property in project areas. By the language of the statute, sec. 66.431 (3) (f), "The Authority is deemed an independent, separate, and distinct public body and a body corporate and politic." It is authorized to take title to real and personal property in its own name and, as has been said, is specifically exempted from the requirement of obtaining a jury verdict of necessity when exercising the power of eminent domain.
The Authority is empowered to prepare redevelopment and urban-renewal plans and to carry out projects within the corporate limits of the city in which it functions, to enter into contracts, and to acquire property within the boundaries of the city by purchase, lease, eminent domain, or otherwise, to borrow money and issue revenue bonds. Its obligations shall not be deemed the obligations of the city. It may sue and be sued and shall have an official seal.
While the Authority is authorized to designate the boundaries of a proposed project area, its power to proceed is dependent upon an adoption of a resolution by the council by a two-thirds vote declaring the area to be a blighted area in need of redevelopment. Its power to proceed is also subject to the approval of the council, by a two-thirds vote, of the redevelopment plan which it has prepared. An approved redevelopment plan may be amended by the Authority but the amendment will not become effective until approved by the *651 council by a two-thirds vote. The city is authorized to make grants and loans to the Authority. While the Authority has power to transfer or lease property, property may not be sold to a Housing Authority unless the sale is approved by the council by a four-fifths vote, and before the Authority transfers or leases any property in a project area, the Authority must report the terms of the proposed disposition to the council and the council must approve the report before the Authority proceeds with the disposition. Any lease which can run a total of more than five years must be approved by the council. Modifications of the plan after lease or sale may be made only upon approval by the council. The council is given power to approve the budget of the Authority, including the power to alter or modify any item relating to salaries, office operation, or facilities.
Defendants contend that the Authority is an agency of the city and in the course of their argument assert that if it were not so, the law would be invalid because it authorizes the Authority to do things, i.e., contract debt, and carry on works of internal improvement, which the state itself could not do. Clearly this suggestion of defendants is untenable. It has been held from almost the beginning of the state that while the state is subject to the prohibitions limiting the power of the state to contract a debt and prohibiting the carrying on of works of internal improvement, governmental units created by the state and carrying on their public functions in particular localities or geographical subdivisions of the state are not so subject. Bushnell v. Beloit (1860), 10 Wis. *195; Clark v. Janesville (1859), 10 Wis. *136; Jensen v. Board of Supervisors (1879), 47 Wis. 298, 2 N.W. 320.
Defendants' argument in this regard is founded upon the language of sec. 66.431, Stats., declaring the legislative purpose and the necessity of carrying out redevelopment activities by agencies which are variously referred to as "state-created *652 agencies" and "state agencies," and upon plaintiff's stress upon the same language in order to demonstrate that the Authority is not an agency of the city; we do not attach great significance to this particular language because in a sense all governmental bodies created under the constitution of the state, including cities and villages, could be termed "state agencies." We have no doubt that this statute would not violate the state-debt and internal-improvement provisions of the constitution even if construed so as to classify the Redevelopment Authorities as independent from the cities in which they operate.
Defendants argue that the Redevelopment Authority is an agency of the city. They do not appear to claim that plaintiff is itself a municipal corporation in the strict sense that the term is used in sec. 2, art. XI of the constitution. In any event, the meaning of "municipal corporation" in that section is restricted to cities and villages. State ex rel. Bare v. Schinz (1927), 194 Wis. 397, 216 N.W. 509. For a discussion of the strict and the broad senses of the term "municipal corporation" see 1 McQuillin, Mun. Corp. (3d ed.), p. 445, sec. 2.01 et seq.
We do not hesitate to hold that if plaintiff be an independent public corporate body, it is not a municipal corporation within the meaning of the constitutional provision requiring a jury verdict of necessity.
The real question is whether the relationship between the Authority and the city is such that the constitution requires a jury verdict in condemnation proceedings initiated by the Authority. We approach this question with diffidence because the legislature has said in the statute that the Authority is deemed an independent, separate, and distinct public body and a body corporate and politic as well as that it may condemn without submitting the question of necessity to a jury. All reasonable presumptions must be made in favor of *653 the legislative declaration. Is the Authority, nonetheless, a department of the city or a body which is subordinate to the city even if separate in some degree?
Defendants point to 20 elements which they assert show that the Authority is an agency of the city. They are as follows: (1) There is one Authority for each city; (2) the Authority cannot function until the city council adopts an appropriate resolution; (3) the mayor appoints the commissioners, who must be residents of the city and whose appointments must be confirmed by the council; (4) the Authority may operate only within the corporate limits of the city; (5) filing of the resolution of the council with the city clerk is made prima facie evidence of the Authority's right to proceed; (6) once an Authority is operating within a city, that city may not in its own name carry on blight-elimination, slum-clearance, and urban-renewal projects; (7) an Authority can take over a redevelopment project from the city without retracing the procedural steps the city has already taken; (8) employees of the Authority are eligible to participate in the pension system for employees of the city; (9) the Authority's comprehensive redevelopment plan must be consistent with the general plan of the city; (10) before the Authority can exercise its powers in a "project area," the council must declare the area blighted and must approve the redevelopment plan for the project area; (11) any changes in the redevelopment plan for the project area must have approval by the council; (12) in addition to the Authority's determination of necessity, the council's approval of the plan must occur before the Authority can proceed with acquisition of property; (13) a city may make grants, loans, advances, or contributions to the Authority operating within the city for carrying on its purposes; (14) any proposed sale or any lease for more than five years must be approved by the council; (15) the Authority must prepare and submit to the council for approval a plan assuring *654 the availability of other housing for residents of the project area; (16) the Authority's property is tax exempt, but the city can charge an amount in lieu of taxes if the Authority is financially able to pay; (17) the city may furnish services, facilities, or property and may otherwise co-operate with the Authority; (18) a city may borrow funds in order to aid the Authority; (19) the council controls the budget of the Authority; and (20) the city attorney is the attorney for the Authority. To this list should be added a further element, No. (21), which is that the Authority has no financial resources other than its power to borrow or accept gifts. It has no power to tax nor any power to compel the city to provide it with resources.
We have no doubt that a number of the listed elements could be true of the Authority without making it a department or a subordinate of the city. These might have been included in the statute without compelling the Authority to seek a jury verdict of necessity in its condemnation proceedings. The elements of which we think this is clearly true are those which have been numbered (1), (2), (4), (5), (6), (7), (8), (13), (16), (17), and (18).
The Authority could be limited to operation within a single city without making the Authority the agent or subordinate of the city. The legislature, having determined that an Authority should commence to function in any city where certain facts were true, could delegate to the city council the determination of those facts. Filing with the city clerk is an administrative detail. The legislature might well decree that all new projects should be carried on by an Authority and leave the choice of which would complete existing projects to the agreement of the city and the Authority. Permitting the employees of the Authority to participate in the pension fund of the city would not make the Authority an agent or subordinate of the city. Neither would permission to the city to borrow money, supply funds and the like, and otherwise *655 co-operate. The city's power to levy a charge in lieu of taxes is conditioned upon the ability of the Authority to pay. None of the first group of elements show that the city has either general control over the affairs of the Authority nor specific control over its decisions to take private property by condemnation.
Elements numbered (9), (15), and (20) fall into a similar group, but require special mention. With reference to elements numbered (9) and (15), we appreciate that the activities of the Authority must conform to a sound and workable community plan in order to accomplish their purpose. The fact that the Authority is required to make a comprehensive plan which is consistent with the general plan of the city and that it must demonstrate to the council that adequate substitute dwellings are available for persons displaced from a project area may be considered as means to achieve common purposes rather than as subjection of the Authority to control by the city. A requirement that the council find as a fact that any plan for a project area is consistent with the general plan of the city would not appear to render the Authority dependent upon the city.
The fact that the legislature requires (element No. (20)) that the city attorney be the attorney for the Authority would doubtless be construed as inoperative where a conflict of interest arose between the Authority and the city, but, so construed, would be a provision tending to promote administrative convenience and not make the Authority subordinate to the city.
Elements numbered (3), (14), (19), and (21) suggest that in fact the city may have general control over the Authority almost, if not quite, to as great a degree as if the Authority were a department of the city. As to No. (3), there is a difference of opinion among members of this court, some being of the opinion that the appointment of the commissioners by the mayor and confirmation by the council *656 would make the Authority virtually a department of the city, while the others are of the opinion that because the appointment is made for fixed terms and removals are authorized only for cause, the fact that each commissioner is initially appointed by the city government does not in itself render the Authority so dependent as to be a department, agency, or subordinate of the city. Elements (19) and (21), however, show that the city will have power to withhold all financial resources, except the money which can be borrowed, and that the city has absolute control over expenditures for salaries, office operation, or facilities. It does appear that the city has power to control the activities of the Authority to so great a degree as to deprive the Authority of independence.
Furthermore, elements numbered (10), (11), and (12) pertain specifically to the decisions which the Authority must make as a foundation for its acquisition of private property by condemnation proceedings and seem to us to determine this case in any event. A proposed project area must be declared by the council to be blighted. The redevelopment plan for the area must be approved by it. Any changes in the plan must also be approved by the council and all these steps must occur before the Authority can proceed with condemnation or other acquisition of property. Thus the Authority's determination of the necessity of taking a particular piece of private property is wholly dependent upon decisions of the city council. If the Authority decides that parcels A and B must be included in a project area, that decision is of no force without approval of the plan for that area by the council. If, after approval by the council, the Authority should conclude that either parcel A or B could properly be left out of the plan, its decision would have no force unless the council approved the change. Thus the necessity of the taking of the parcel of property is not determined independently by the Authority, but the taking is merely proposed *657 by it to the council and the council makes the ultimate decision. It seems clear to us that sec. 2, art. XI of the constitution means that a city cannot be authorized to make a final decision that private property must be taken for a public purpose without the concurrence of a jury, but the provisions before us do exactly that. Thus we conclude that the constitution requires a jury verdict of necessity in condemnation proceedings under this statute.
Two recent cases have been cited in which cities were involved in acquiring property by condemnation without the verdict of a jury, but in both these cases the real decision as to the necessity for taking property for a public use of benefit to the state was made by a department of the state and not by the city. In Ferguson v. Kenosha (1958), 5 Wis. (2d) 556, 93 N. W. (2d) 460, we held that the state aeronautics commission may proceed with condemnation proceedings without a jury verdict of necessity even though the land was being taken for a proposed municipal airport and the city had requested the institution of the condemnation proceeding. The statute involved granted to the commission the power to approve the airport site as a portion of the state airport system. In State Highway Comm. v. Grant (1959), 7 Wis. (2d) 308, 96 N. W. (2d) 346, the condemnation proceeding was brought by a city at the direction of the state highway commission, but the determination of necessity was made by the latter and the lands to be acquired were to be in the name of the state. It was held that the requirement of a jury determination of necessity did not apply. In the case before us the situation is approximately the reverse of the situations in the cases just cited. In the first case the city was eventually to acquire the property but the decision that it should be acquired was given vitality by action of a department of state government. In the second case the city was carrying out the acquisition procedure, but was doing it for *658 and on behalf of a department of the state which had itself determined the necessity. In the case before us, the Authority which is acquiring private property is allegedly independent from the city, but the real decision on the necessity of the acquisition is made by the city council.
We have reviewed this legislation with great care, both because of the presumption of validity which applies and because of the importance of the need in our great cities for a method of effective redevelopment of areas within them. It seems strange and an anachronism that in 1959 the legislature is prohibited from intrusting to the officers of our cities the power to take private land for public purposes similar to the power which the legislature is permitted to give to the officers of privately owned utility corporations as well as the officers of numerous governmental bodies other than cities and villages. Nevertheless, as noted in State ex rel. Milwaukee v. Circuit Court, supra, page 444, as recently as 1948 a proposed amendment to the constitution which would have eliminated the jury-verdict requirement was defeated at a general election by a vote of 807,318 to 210,086. If it be true that the federal assistance, which is essential to great progress in the field of redevelopment and urban renewal, cannot be made available as long as the inclusion of particular parcels of land is subject to a jury verdict, and if it is not considered feasible to assign the task of urban renewal and redevelopment to any unit of government other than a city or an agency subordinate to the control of the city, then we are in a stalemate where it is impossible to have substantial progress in this field as long as sec. 2, art. XI of the constitution remains in its present form.
Defendants finally urged that if, as we have concluded, the provision for exemption of the authority from the jury-verdict requirement is invalid, ch. 3, Laws of Sp. Sess. 1958, was so clearly intended for that purpose alone that we must consider that the presumption of severability is overcome *659 and must hold the entire law invalid. We do not agree. The presumption of severability is created by sec. 990.001 (11), Stats. This court has said that, "While this declaration of legislative policy [severability] is not absolutely controlling upon the court, it will not be ignored except in a case where it clearly appears that the remainder of the act is dependent on the part held invalid." J. C. Penney Co. v. Tax Comm. (1940), 233 Wis. 286, 298, 289 N.W. 677. While it is quite clear that one important purpose of the enactment of ch. 3 was to permit urban-redevelopment projects to proceed without the requirement of the jury verdict of necessity, we cannot say that the remainder of the act is not a "`living, complete law capable of being carried into effect "consistent with the intention of the legislature which enacted it in connection with the void part."'" State ex rel. Wisconsin Development Authority v. Dammann (1938), 228 Wis. 147, 198, 277 N.W. 278, 280 N.W. 698.
Viewing ch. 3, Laws of Sp. Sess. 1958, without the provisions which exempt the Authority from obtaining a jury verdict of necessity, it does provide for certain administrative changes in the carrying out of urban redevelopment in a city. Plaintiff may carry out condemnation proceedings following the same procedure as is prescribed for the city. In view of the statutory presumption of severability we conclude that our determination of the invalidity of portions of the statute does not establish the invalidity of the act as a whole.
By the Court.It is declared and adjudged that the portions of ch. 3, Laws of Sp. Sess. 1958, which exempt a Redevelopment Authority from the requirement of obtaining a jury verdict of necessity in condemnation proceedings are invalid, but that the invalidity of those portions does not render the chapter wholly void. Defendants to have costs.
MARTIN, C. J., took no part.

=== CASE 2228405 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:00.358021+00 ===

7 Wis. 2d 608 (1959)
CITY OF MILWAUKEE, Respondent,
v.
HURLESS and another, Appellants.
Supreme Court of Wisconsin.
June 2, 1959.
June 26, 1959.
*611 For the appellants there were briefs by Herbert L. Mount, attorney, and Robert A. Hess of counsel, and oral argument by Mr. Mount and by Mr. John A. Keck, all of Milwaukee.
For the respondent there was a brief by Walter J. Mattison, city attorney, and John F. Cook, assistant city attorney, and oral argument by Mr. Cook.
DIETERICH, J.
In determining whether a complaint is subject to a demurrer, the most-liberal interpretation possible must be given to it. If the complaint states any facts upon which the plaintiff can recover, it must be held to state a cause of action.
*612 Considerable freedom is allowed to parties in stating in their pleadings the facts relied upon to establish their rights.
In Hall v. Bell (1910), 143 Wis. 296, 299, 127 N.W. 967, it is said:
"If the pleading, giving it the benefit of every reasonable inference, expressly or by such inference, or both, states facts showing the plaintiff to be entitled to some relief within the competency of the court to grant, it states a good cause of action for such relief."
See also Manning v. School District No. 6 (1905), 124 Wis. 84, 102 N.W. 356, and Conrad v. Evans (1955), 269 Wis. 387, 69 N. W. (2d) 478.
The complaint alleges facts showing the fiduciary capacity under which the defendant Hurless received the money; that the transactions involved are so complicated that the remedy for the plaintiff at law would be inadequate; and that a demand was made for an accounting which was refused or not rendered.
We conclude that, under our liberal rules of pleading and giving the complaint the benefit of every reasonable inference, a cause of action is stated. Therefore, it devolves upon the defendants to answer the amended complaint.
By the Court.Order affirmed.
MARTIN, C. J., took no part.

=== CASE 2228408 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:00.479513+00 ===

97 N.W.2d 331 (1959)
168 Neb. 786
Application of NEBRASKA LIMESTONE PRODUCERS ASSOCIATION, etc.
NEBRASKA LIMESTONE PRODUCERS ASSOCIATION, Appellant,
v.
ALL NEBRASKA RAILROADS, Chicago & North Western Railroad Co., et al., Appellees.
No. 34554.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
June 26, 1959.
*333 Nelson & Harding, Lincoln, for appellant.
J. W. Weingarten, Geo. C. Holdrege, J. A. C. Kennedy, R. D. Neely, Omaha, Guy C. Chambers, Lincoln, for appellees.
Heard before SIMMONS, C. J., and CARTER, MESSMORE, YEAGER, CHAPPELL, WENKE and BOSLAUGH, JJ.
CARTER, Justice.
This is an appeal from an order of the Nebraska State Railway Commission denying an application to adjust the rail rates and charges on crushed rock and stone to the same level as those applicable to sand and gravel.
The record discloses that the single-car rates on crushed rock and sand and gravel were about to be fixed at identical rates by agreement of all concerned. The real issue before the commission therefore was whether or not the 10-car rates on crushed rock should be reduced to the lesser 10-car rates on sand and gravel. The applicant contends that the issue is whether or not the 10-car rates on crushed rock and sand and gravel should be placed on a parity by either raising or lowering one or the other to accomplish that result. This difference in the statement of the issues is not a material one in determining the questions raised by the appeal. For the purposes of this opinion we shall refer to the 10-car rates on crushed rock and stone and the 10-car rates on sand and gravel as the "crushed rock" and the "gravel" rates.
The evidence shows that the State of Nebraska is underlaid with vast deposits of sand and gravel which is suitable for building and road construction purposes. This makes it possible to open sand and gravel pits close to large building and road construction projects and to transport sand and gravel by motor truck to such points. Most of the shippers of sand and gravel by rail are located in the eastern edge of *334 the state. In order that the railroads might meet the competition of these roadside operators of sand and gravel pits, and participate in the transportation of sand and gravel, the commission authorized a 10-car gravel rate in 1939 which was substantially less than the rate on crushed rock.
It is the contention of the shippers of crushed rock that, as a result of the fixing of a lesser rate on gravel than on crushed rock, a greater charge is made against crushed rock producers for a like and contemporaneous service and amounts to an unjust discrimination. It is contended also that it amounts to an undue and unreasonable preference and advantage to gravel shippers as compared to shippers of crushed rock, resulting in unjust discrimination.
The evidence shows that although there are outcroppings of rock in various parts of the state, most of the crushed rock is quarried and shipped from substantially the same area from which sand and gravel are shipped by rail. The evidence indicates that gravel and crushed rock are usually transported at the same rate by the railroads of the country. We think this is true, and unless other factors are present justifying the lesser rate on gravel, the latter would clearly be discriminatory.
The appellant urges that crushed rock and gravel are competitive products and that the reduced rate on gravel has the effect of granting to gravel shippers by rail an economic preference over shippers of crushed rock by rail. The evidence shows that 50 percent or more of the crushed rock shipped by rail is sold to state and federal government agencies for use in the construction of roads and airport facilities. Practically all of these shipments are pursuant to contracts which specify the composition of the aggregates to be used, including the percentage of each and the grade to be used. In such construction projects crushed rock and gravel are not competitive. When alternatives are provided for the use of crushed rock or gravel, they are competitive products. After a consideration of all the evidence we conclude that crushed rock and gravel are not competitive in most instances but they are competitive in many. This is a factor to be considered in determining the factual situation passed upon in dealing with the application for the adjustment of rates in the instant case.
We conclude from a consideration of all the evidence that there is competent evidence to sustain a finding that a reduced rate on gravel is required to meet competition with motor truck transportation. We conclude also that there is evidence to sustain a finding that crushed rock is to some extent competitive with gravel, and to such extent, the lower rate on gravel discriminates against the use of crushed rock. Whether or not the granting of competitive rates on gravel to permit the railroads to continue in the transportation of gravel and to obtain needed revenue therefrom, or to compel a common rate on gravel and crushed rock to prevent economic preference in favor of gravel shippers to the extent shown, raises an issue which is peculiarly within the province of the commission to decide. Unless an unjust discrimination is shown, or the order of the commission is unreasonable and arbitrary in not being supported by evidence, the courts are without authority to interfere.
The fixing of rates for common carriers by the railway commission is legislative in character. At common law a common carrier was not permitted to charge a different rate to different persons for the identical service under the same conditions. Statutes providing for the fixing of rates to be charged by common carriers are in derogation of the common law. The power to fix rates to be charged by common carriers is therefore a legislative function which has been lodged in the State Railway Commission subject to the limitations of the Constitution and the statutes of the state. Thus a rate put into *335 effect by the railway commission has the force of a statute on the subject. Farmers Union Livestock Commission v. Union Pacific R. Co., 135 Neb. 689, 283 N.W. 498.
There is no contention advanced in this case that the established rates on crushed rock and gravel are unreasonable. The contention is that, unless the rates on these products are on a parity, they constitute a preference and unjust discrimination as defined in the statutes. Sections 75-501 and 75-502, R.R.S.1943.
Our statutes prohibit unjust discrimination and unreasonable preferences. But all discrimination is not unjust discrimination and all preferences are not unreasonable ones. Some discrimination cannot be avoided. Rates must be adjusted on other considerations than that merely of bringing about economic equality. When competitive conditions are different, different rate levels can often be justified. In the instant case the railway commission had authority to consider the necessity of a competitive rate on gravel to meet motor truck competition to obtain needed revenues for railroads. It also was required to eliminate unjust discrimination and unreasonable preferences. Where there is evidence supporting factors which are inconsistent or in conflict with other recognized factors the power to decide ordinarily rests with the railway commission and not the courts. The railway commission determined the necessity for a competitive rate on gravel and its allied products. It determined what it deemed should be a reasonable rate for crushed rock. It in effect held that any discrimination or preference arising therefrom was not unjust or unreasonable under all the circumstances and conditions shown by the evidence. The evidence sustains the findings of fact made by the commission. The difference in rates in the area where crushed stone and gravel are competitive amounts to an economic discrimination in that they provide a different rate to different persons for identical service. But we cannot say that the discrimination is an unjust one within the meaning of the statute because of differences in the circumstances and conditions surrounding the two products. It is contemplated that the railway commission should exercise its best judgment in resolving the conflicts between the various factors ordinarily followed in the fixing of rates for common carriers. In Chicago, B. & Q. R. Co. v. Herman Bros., Inc., 164 Neb. 247, 82 N.W.2d 395, 404, we recognized this rule by quoting the following with approval: "`Although a common carrier is bound to carry at equal rates for all customers in like condition, * * * mere discrimination does not render a rate illegal; only such rates as are unreasonably or unjustly discriminatory are inhibited. In other words, mere inequality of charge does not necessarily constitute undue or unreasonable preference or advantage, and cannot be held illegal unless it is shown that it is not justified by the cost of the respective services, by their values, or other transportation conditions. Further, any fact which produces an inequality of condition and a change of circumstances justifies an inequality of charge, since common carriers are only bound to give the same terms to all persons alike, under the same conditions and circumstances. Accordingly, no claim of illegality can be sustained if, in view of all the circumstances, the discrimination is fair and reasonable, and not inconsistent with the public interest, and, subject to the two leading prohibitions that their charges shall not be unjust or unreasonable, and that they shall not unjustly discriminate so as to give undue preference or disadvantage to persons or traffic similarly circumstanced, * * *.'"
The evidence shows that the rate on crushed rock is reasonable. It is in substantial accord with crushed rock rates for shippers in other states and avoids charges of discrimination against interstate rates. The evidence shows that a lower rate on gravel is necessary for railroads to compete with motor truck competition. It shows also that gravel is competitive with crushed rock only to a limited extent. Under the circumstances and conditions *336 shown, there is evidence to support the order of the commission.
It is the established rule in this state that, on appeal to the Supreme Court from an order of the railway commission fixing rates for common carriers, the only questions for determination are whether or not the railway commission acted within the scope of its authority, and whether or not the order made is reasonable and not arbitrarily made. Hooper Telephone Co. v. Nebraska Telephone Co., 96 Neb. 245, 147 N.W. 674; Furstenberg v. Omaha & Council Bluffs St. R. Co., 132 Neb. 562, 272 N.W. 756; Chicago, B. & Q. R. Co. v. Herman Bros., Inc., supra.
Since the record discloses competent and relevant evidence in support of the findings of the railway commission upon the questions of fact presented, and, the order made being within the scope of the powers of the commission and not shown to be arbitrary or unreasonable, this court may not properly substitute its views for that of the commission. An affirmance of the order of the commission is required.
Affirmed.

=== CASE 9741681 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:00:29.595606+00 ===

*41Kavanagh, J.
(for reversal). Plaintiff brought this action to recover from defendant railroad company for personal injuries suffered when defendant’s passenger train collided with plaintiff employer’s tractor and trailers loaded with 7,890 gallons of gasoline. This equipment was being driven by plaintiff in a westerly direction over an angle crossing known as Rex or White’s Crossing, about 8 miles east of Kalamazoo, where defendant’s railroad tracks intersect US-12A.
The accident occurred about 2 p.m., on a bright chilly day, on November 30,1951.
Plaintiff alleged in his declaration that the defendant’s employees were negligent in operating and causing to be operated its train at a high and reckless rate of speed; that defendant was negligent in maintaining a dangerous and hazardous crossing; that defendant’s employees negligently failed to warn plaintiff of the approach of defendant’s Mercury passenger train from the east although they were aware it was due; that defendant’s employees were negligent in that they placed a switch engine at the intersection which activated the warning signals at the crossing; that defendant negligently failed to station a guard at the intersection.
Plaintiff’s declaration further alleged that defendant’s engineer on the Mercury passenger train was negligent in releasing the brakes on the train at.a time when the engineer knew or should have known that in so doing a collision would result; that defendant’s train failed to avoid a collision with the vehicle operated by plaintiff when the same could have been done with the use of ordinary care. Plaintiff further averred that he had exercised reasonable and proper care; that he was not guilty of negligence contributing to the accident; and that defendant employees’ negligence was the proximate cause of the accident and his resulting injuries.
*42Defendant by answer denied negligence on the part of its employees and alleged that plaintiff was guilty of contributory negligence in that plaintiff had failed to make proper observation before attempting to cross the railroad tracks.
Defendant urges that plaintiff failed to comply with Michigan public service commission rule No 43, which provides as follows:
“No driver of any motor vehicle under certificate or permit from this commission, shall drive such vehicle across railroad tracks at grade without first bringing the vehicle to a full stop and shall not proceed until he shall have determined that it is safe to cross.” (1954 Administrative Code, No R 460.122, p 5631.)
Defendant further urges that plaintiff failed to comply with CLS 1956, § 257.669 (Stat Ann 1952 Rev § 9.2369), which provides as follows:
“(a) The driver of any motor vehicle carrying-passengers for hire, or of any school bus carrying any school child, or of any vehicle carrying explosive substances or flammable liquids as a cargo or part of a cargo, or any motor vehicle weighing over 10,000 pounds, including- the load thereon, before crossing at grade any track or tracks of a railroad, shall stop such vehicle within 50 feet but not less than 10 feet from the nearest rail of such railroad and while so stopped shall listen and look in both directions along such track for any approaching- train, and for signals indicating the approach of a train, except as hereinafter provided, and shall not proceed until he can do so safely. After stopping as required herein, and upon proceeding when it is safe to do so the driver of any said vehicle shall cross only in such gear of the vehicle that there will be no necessity for changing gears while traversing such crossing and the driver shall not shift gears while crossing the track or tracks.
*43“(b) No stop need be made at any sncb crossing where a police officer or a traffic-control signal directs traffic to proceed.”
Defendant contends that plaintiff violated this statute and public service commission rule and was, therefore, guilty of contributory negligence as a matter of law.
The case was tried before a jury for nearly 3 days. At the conclusion of plaintiff’s proofs defendant moved for a directed verdict on the grounds that: (1) no negligence on the part of defendant had been proved; (2) under the record as it then stood plaintiff was guilty of contributory negligence as a matter of law; (3) there was no evidence of any kind which would justify submitting the question of subsequent negligence to the jury.
The trial judge, apparently agreeing with all 3 reasons, directed a verdict of no cause for action and judgment was entered accordingly. Prom this judgment plaintiff makes his appeal to this Court on 3 grounds:
(1) Is there a question of fact for the jury as to whether the defendant was guilty of negligence on the following issues:
(a) Whether the passenger engineer of the defendant used due care and caution under the circumstances then and there existing;
(b) Whether the crew ' on the switching locomotive, which was standing near the crossing activating the flasher signal, used due care and caution under the circumstances then and there existing?
(2) Is there a question for the jury whether the passenger engineer was guilty of subsequent negligence under the circumstances then and there existing?.
*44(3) Is there a question for the jury whether plaintiff was guilty of contributory negligence under the circumstances then and there existing?
The law is well established that on an appeal from a directed verdict in favor of the defendant at the conclusion of plaintiff’s proofs the testimony must be viewed in a light most favorable to the plaintiff.
In Hammerbacher v. Babechenko, 348 Mich 139, 150, the Court said:
“Testimony and all legitimate inferences therefrom must be viewed in the light most favorable to plaintiff in determining whether denial of defendant’s motion for directed verdict was proper— Douglas v. Holcomb, 340 Mich 43.”
In Levesque v. LaFortune, 348 Mich 443, 445, the Court said:
“In appeal from judgment entered for defendants under the statute, as here, we are bound, however, to view the testimony in the light most favorable to plaintiff and to draw the reasonable inferences therefrom which are in his favor. Warwick v. Blackney, 272 Mich 231; Paw Paw Depositors Corp. v. John W. Free State Bank, 278 Mich 637; Poundstone v. Niles Creamery, 293 Mich 455; Longfellow v. City of Detroit, 302 Mich 542; Savas v. Beals, 304 Mich 84; Routhier v. City of Detroit, 338 Mich 449 (40 ALR2d 1114).”
In Wadsworth v. New York Life Insurance Company, 349 Mich 240, the syllabi read:
“1. The Supreme Court examines the record on appeal from directed verdict and judgment for defendant at close of plaintiff’s case to see whether there was competent evidence from which the jury could have found for plaintiff.
“2. A jury may draw reasonable inferences from the established facts and circumstances, in the absence of direct proofs.”
*45See, also, Lane v. B & J Theatres, Inc., 314 Mich 666; Michigan Fire & Marine Insurance Co. v. Pretty Lake Vacation Camp, Inc., 316 Mich 197; Cole v. Austin, 321 Mich 548; Greenberg v. Greenberg, 337 Mich 390; Hopkins v. Lake, 348 Mich 382; Stewart v. Eldred, 349 Mich 28; Indiana Lumbermens Mutual Insurance Co. v. Matthew Stores, Inc., 349 Mich 441; Shandor v. Lischer, 349 Mich 556.
In light of these decisions, it is necessary to relate at some length facts the proofs developed during the ■course of the trial in order to properly understand a disposition of the questions presented in this case.
At the time and place aforementioned plaintiff was driving his tractor and equipment over an angle railroad crossing. The equipment was loaded with 7,890 gallons of gasoline that was to be delivered in Kalamazoo. The over-all length of the equipment from the front bumper to the rear bumper of the 4-wheel trailer was about 50 feet, and the equipment was about 8 feet wide.
Plaintiff had left a plant at Jackson, Michigan, and followed US-12, branching off on US-12A near Comstock, and approached the railroad tracks on a highway which runs parallel to the tracks, crosses the tracks at an angle in a northwesterly direction, and then runs to the west again parallel to the tracks.
Plaintiff approached the crossing from the east. When about one block east of the crossing he noticed the crossing signal flashers blinking. He coasted up and stopped his equipment with the front end about 15 feet from the planking of the tracks. At this particular crossing there are 2 sets of rails and the distance from outer rail to outer rail is 41 feet. It is a distance of 58 feet on the angle from the most southerly rail to the most northerly rail. From the place where the truck stopped, it would have to travel a distance of about 128 feet (5 feet plus 15 feet plus 50 feet plus 58 feet equals 128 feet) *46before the rear would clear the northerly rail, and about 133 feet for it to clear the planking along the north edge of the rail. This distance is computed as follows: 5 feet of planking; 15 feet from place stopped in back of planking; length of equipment: 50 feet; crossing: 58 feet.
When plaintiff pulled up and stopped he noticed the flasher lights blinking and heard the bell ringing. While stopped he noticed a switch engine about 100 to 150 feet away on the south main track. He noticed traffic coming from the opposite direction, which would stop, observe the situation, and • then pull across the crossing. Pie sat there wondering which way the switch engine was going to go or how long it was going to be there. From the driver’s seat in the truck he could not see down the track to the right, or east, because of the angle in crossing. Finally he pulled the hand brake that sets the whole unit to keep it from rolling backwards or moving, moved over to the opposite side of the truck, stuck his head out the right window and looked all the way up the track. He could see east to the curve approximately 5/10 of a mile away and there was no train approaching in that distance. He then got back underneath the wheel, released the brake, put the truck in second gear, which is the fast accelerating gear from a standstill, and started. From the time he took his eyes away from the view to the east and started up, he estimated the time would be 3 to 5 seconds. Having looked to the east and having seen no train approaching, he reasoned the switch engine to his left was activating the bell and flasher lights. As he approached near the middle of the tracks, the switch engine started blowing its whistle and he watched the switch engine wondering what it was going to do. He knew it was evidently signaling to make a move one way or the other. He continued across the crossing, accelerating his speed *47as much as he could. His tractor and semitrailer were completely off the crossing when the train, approaching from the east on the north track, hit his 4-wheel trailer.
Two witnesses who were driving trucks in the opposite direction and approaching the crossing from the west saw the accident.
Witnesses Kelly and Northrup both saw plaintiff slide over in his truck, put his head out the window' and look east before starting. They testified they were both in a position to see up to the curve at that point and the Mercury train was not in sight.
Bernard Kelly testified that the left rear wheel of the 4-wheel trailer was on the north rail of the westbound track when struck by the train.
William Northrup stated the 4-wheel trailer was almost clear, just the back axle of the 4-wheel trailer was on the track.
When struck the truck gave a big lunge forward, the front axle of the 4-wheel trailer and the back axles of the semitrailer came off the ground and doubled up. The 4-wheel trailer then went over backwards and exploded.
Plaintiff had crossed the crossing 4 to 6 times during a 3-year period. He did not know the passenger train was due.
Witness Kelly testified that he had crossed the crossing many times before, approximately 500 to 1,000 times, and on numerous occasions had observed the switch engine working in that area and the flashers would be operating, and traffic, after making an observation, would make the crossing.
On the day of the accident the switch engine had been switching the Rex Paper Mill, which is located just west of the crossing 300 or 400 feet on a branch track. The switching engine had been on the main eastbound tracks switching for 10 or 15 *48minutes prior to the accident and during all that time the flashers were' working at the crossing.
The engineer and fireman of the switch engine, at the time they were sitting there, knew that the Mercury passenger train was due. The engineer of the switch engine called the attention of the fireman to the truck and said: “Watch out for 355.” The fireman testified that he first saw the truck when the front of the truck was just about on the eastbound tracks and the passenger train was about 800 feet away from the crossing. The switch engine engineer blew the switch engine whistle 6 or 8 times in short blasts and then called to the fireman to jump. The fireman remained in the cab until the impact.
The engine on the passenger train was a diesel. The switch engine fireman heard no horn on the diesel although he was sitting on the left of the switch engine with the left window down. Plaintiff, whose window was down on the right side, heard no horn blow on the diesel. He did hear the whistle on the switching steam locomotive and he would swear that the diesel wasn’t blowing.
Witnesses Kelly and Northrup both testified they did not hear the diesel horn as they approached the crossing.
Mr. Cole, the engineer of the passenger train, testified he blew the horn several times. He further testified that he had been traveling about 81 miles per hour; that before reaching Rex Crossing there are 2 curves, one through Comstock and one 2,200 feet east of the crossing. His first view of Rex Crossing was 2,200 feet east of the crossing. There was a slow board sign 638 feet east of the crossing. The rules require the train speed must be reduced to 65 miles per hour at the sign. He had applied the service application of the brakes about 3,500 feet before the crossing. It was testified that *49there is a time lag of 8 to 10 seconds between application of the service brakes and their taking effect.
The Mercury diesel engine contained a speed recorder tape, which records automatically as the locomotive moves along the tracks the speed of the locomotive, the miles per hour, any stops, and the point of application of the brakes.
Defendant’s employee Carlton S. Hulbert testified the recording tape disclosed that the service brakes became effective about 2,600 feet east of the crossing. The tape further disclosed that from 81 miles per hour at 2,600 feet from the crossing the train was going 79 miles per hour at 2,200 feet, 77 miles per hour at 2,000 feet, 73 miles per hour at 1,600 feet, 69 miles per hour at 1,200 feet, 65 miles per hour at 800 feet. During the space of travel from 2,000 feet to 750 feet east of the crossing there was only service application of the brakes of 15 pounds. The rate of deceleration during the entire time was 1 mile per hour in each 100 feet. The effect of the brakes was released 750 feet east of the crossing, and at that point the train began coasting and coasted while the engineer was changing from service application of the brakes to emergency application. During this distance the usual time lag between application of the emergency brakes and the taking effect took place.
The tape disclosed that when the engine reached 400 feet from the crossing the emergency application took place. The train thus coasted without effective brakes for a distance of over 300 feet.
The engineer on the passenger train testified he knew that the truck was loaded with inflammable liquids when he first saw it. He further testified "that he could have slowed up more if he had kept his brakes applied. The engineer further testified ■that if he had applied the brakes effectively at a *50point 2,200 feet away that he could have brought his train to a complete stop before it reached the intersection, or slowed down so that it would have been close to a stop if the brakes had been on emergency,
.Defendant’s engineer Cole further testified that as he came around the curve at about 2,200 feet east of the crossing he noticed plaintiff’s truck stopped some distance back from the south track and he did not expect it to start up and cross the tracks in front of him. He further testified that he did not make any move to apply the emergency brake power until after he realized the truck was going to cross; that he then frantically blew the diesel horn and switched to the emergency brakes, but that it was then too late to avoid the accident.
Defense counsel admits that, according to the speed tape which was in evidence, the train was in view from 2,600 feet or 25.4 seconds before arriving at the crossing.
It is the contention of defendant railroad company that plaintiff is guilty of contributory negligence as a matter of law for having violated both the statute and the public service commission rule by proceeding before he could safely do so, and because it is not affirmatively disclosed that plaintiff not only looked but listened in compliance with the statute and the rule.
The trial court in granting the directed verdict, and in holding plaintiff guilty of negligence for violation of the statute, said:
“Now, under such circumstances, with the ringing of the bell and the flashing signals, he had no right to assume or to take it for granted that the flashing of the signals or the ringing of the bell was occasioned by the switch engine. Also, in the testimony, there is some indication that he may have looked but he did not fully comply with the statute as far as the testimony is concerned as to listening; and I think, *51because of the very fact that this statute is on the books and is .made to cover a situation such as we have here, that his superficial approach to the problem in the light of the statute, in the light of his testimony taken in its most favorable light, warrants the court in finding that he violated the statute and was guilty of negligence in that regard as a matter of law.
“I also am of the opinion that there was sufficient distance between the crossing and the point where the train could be observed when the plaintiff approached the crossing that, by making a proper observation, by making the observation of an ordinarily prudent person, especially carrying the load of cargo that he was carrying and which he was well .aware that he was carrying, would require him to make a more careful observation and the train was there where he could have observed it and, by the proper approach to the crossing and by the proper observation of the ordinarily prudent person ■charged with the responsibility of the situation there at hand, the accident would not have happened; and, as a matter of fact, he should have seen what was there to be seen, and that he again must be found, because of such failure, guilty of negligence us a matter of law.”
We believe that, under the circumstances in this •case, a question of fact arose for the jury to decide whether or not a reasonably prudent person, under the circumstances in this case, would have reached the same conclusion reached by plaintiff.
The duty imposed by the public service commission rule and by the statute appears to be a restatement of the common-law rule with respect to negligence, that is, a person is required to use that degree of care which an ordinarily prudent person would use under the same or similar circumstances.
A much higher degree of care would be required of the plaintiff in this case since he -was driving a *52truck transporting 7,890 gallons of highly inflammable gasoline; a truck that because of its size was slow in acceleration; a crossing that was not only at an angle to 2 sets of tracks, but provided a poor view to the east. These were all circumstances-which must necessarily be taken into consideration in arriving at the question of whether a reasonably prudent person would have acted as plaintiff did under these circumstances. Neither the common-law rule nor the statute prohibits him from passing-over the crossing. In order to form an opinion that he may do so with safety, which is the statutory duty, he must take into consideration all of the facts we have just enumerated. If reasonable minds would differ as to whether he acted in a reasonable-manner in view of all of the circumstances, we believe, a jury question is raised.
There is a dispute in the testimony of engineer Cole, plaintiff, and witnesses Kelly and Northrup-as to whether the passenger train was in view when the truck started across the tracks. Engineer Cole-testified it was; the other 3 testified it was not. The-physical facts seem to support the plaintiff. After-looking east plaintiff spent 8 seconds before he began to move: 5 seconds looking at the switch engine and 3 seconds moving back under the wheel before getting under way.
There was testimony that the average speed of plaintiff’s vehicle during the crossing was about 3 miles per hour. At an average speed of 3 miles per hour, it would take plaintiff’s vehicle 28 seconds to travel 128 feet in order to clear the northbound rail. Since all of the testimony seems to indicate-the rear of the truck was about to leave the northbound rail, and since some 36 seconds had intervened since plaintiff, Kelly and Northrup were looking to the east, it is a reasonable deduction that the-*53train had not as yet come in sight. At least reasonable minds might differ as to whether or not the train was actually in sight at the time plaintiff made his observation.
A jury could reasonably infer that during the entire time in which defendant’s train was traveling 2,200 feet approaching the crossing plaintiff’s gasoline truck was already moving forward on the crossing. Under these facts and circumstances, it is at least a question of fact for the jury to decide whether plaintiff was guilty of contributory negligence. Defendant’s engineer did not apply his emergency brakes until approximately 640 feet east of the crossing when, as he stated, it became obvious to him that the truck was not going to stop, even though when he rounded the curve 2,200 feet east of the tracks he testified he saw plaintiff’s long gasoline truck. He also saw and knew the switch engine standing on the south main tracks was activating the flasher signals. He also knew that highway US-12A crossed the tracks on an angle in a northwesterly direction, making it difficult for the driver to see to the east. Despite all of this information, rather than applying the emergency brakes immediately, he simply applied the service brakes and then during the last few seconds switched to the emergency brakes. Since reasonable minds might differ as to whether his actions constituted reasonable care and caution under these circumstances, we feel a question of fact for the jury was created.
It is not necessary to restate the rule laid down in Davis v. New York Central R. Co., 348 Mich 262, or the authorities therein cited by Justices Carr and Black. References made in both opinions in the Davis Case are in support of our finding in this case.
Under the proofs in the case at bar, opinions may well differ, not merely as to the facts, but as to the inferences to be drawn from the facts.
*54. Whether plaintiff failed to exercise proper care for his own safety involves consideration of the circumstances attending the accident. The same situation is true with reference to the alleged negligence of defendant’s employees.
We conclude that the issues in this case should have been submitted to the jury.
The judgment should be reversed and the cause remanded for new trial. Appellant should have costs.
Dethmers, C.-J., and Carr and Voelker, JJ., concurred with Kavanagh, J.
Smith, J.
(for affirmance). Another intersection accident is before us, this time involving a fast railroad passenger train and a train of vehicles carrying gasoline. We need not restate the facts. Nor need we enter upon a lengthy discussion of the common-law standard of care or the degree of care necessary to be exercised thereunder. All of this we have discussed recently and at some length.
The key to this ease is the statute set out in full in the margin hereof.* It concerns a compounding of hazards, those of the railroad crossing with those of certain classes of cargoes. The hazard of the *55railroad is a matter of common knowledge. The trains travel at high speeds on fixed tracks. They cannot maneuver or dodge. Their momentum is such that their stop must he slow and gradual. Their force of impact is such that disaster inevitably follows collision, and may well involve the passengers on the train as well as those in the object struck. There is no need to belabor the obvious. All of this was established as early as Lake Shore & Michigan Southern R. Co. v. Miller, 25 Mich 274. And the dangers have worsened since that time, not bettered.
Since tragedy upon impact is almost inevitable, our people have required the protection of various devices, bells, lights, barriers, watchmen, and, more recently, the extensive use of underpasses and overpasses. In addition, with respect to the crossing of railroad tracks by certain classes of vehicles (those carrying school children, those carrying explosives, and those carrying flammable liquids) our statutory law commands the most extreme precautions. Whether the common law itself, without statute, would or would not be equally demanding, in view of the hazard, is not material. We have the statute. It requires that the drivers of such vehicles shall stop within so many feet of the track, while stopped shall listen and shall look (“in both directions”) not only for trains but for signals. Only then, having determined that it is “safe” to proceed, may the vehicles move and, so great was the legislative concern as to this particular situation, it is provided that the gear used in crossing shall be such that it need not be changed in crossing the tracks and the driver is commanded not to do so.
We have, thus, a statutory requirement of care the most exacting and diligence the most demanding.' Why? Because of the potentialities for holocaust. The collisions between private car . and pedestrian, *56or ear and car, tragic though they are, normally involve only the immediate principals, with occasional guests. But the gasoline-laden trains of vehicles traversing our highways with their explosive and vulnerable cargoes are an ever-present hazard to all who travel and nowhere is the danger more acute than at the railroad intersection. At such crossings, where collision is sought to be prevented by statute not only between trains and vehicles carrying gasoline or explosives, but between trains and school buses, there exist, constantly, possibilities of appalling disaster. Endangered are not only those in the vehicle but those on the train. The statute must be interpreted by us in the light of its evident intent and for the accomplishment of its obvious purpose, the prevention of mass incineration and slaughter.
In this situation, then, governed by the quoted statute, we rule upon the case of a driver of a train of vehicles carrying thousands of gallons of gasoline. He was about to cross what he knew was the main line of the New York Central railroad. Not only did he know and realize that passenger trains and freights might be expected at any time, but he also knew they might appear traveling at a high rate of speed around a curve only some 2,200 to 2,600 feet from the crossing. Knowing also that he could not see this curve from his driver’s seat (due to the angle at which he was crossing the tracks) he satisfied himself with one look from the right-hand window of his cab, resumed his seat “underneath the wheel of the truck and released the brake and started to cross the track.” All of this had taken “3 or 4 or 5 seconds. I really don’t know the exact amount of time it would take.” Armed, then, with this one observation he entered upon the main line tracks with his explosive cargo despite flashing red lights and warning bells which, he “assumed” *57(since his last observation of the curve had been several seconds prior thereto) were being- activated solely by a nearby switch engine. As he proceeded across the tracks he was relatively blind so far as trains from the east, and especially, this particular train was concerned, due to the angle of the intersection. He had, as he puts it, “not very much” of a view to the east, from which direction the train was approaching. The switching crew referred to observed the express when it was some 800 feet from the intersection. The switch engineer sounded warning- blasts from his whistle, then jumped. (He was only some 200 feet from the reasonably-to-be-expected explosion and fire.) The truck driver heard these blasts, not taking them as a signal, looked at the switch engine, and to the east (though in this direction his view was limited), and proceeded on across the tracks until he was struck. He had at no time seen the train which struck him.
It is our opinion that reasonable men could not differ upon the issue presented. The above described conduct on the part of the driver does not satisfy the statutory mandate that he proceed only under such conditions that he can do so with safety. In plain terms this driver gambled, consciously or not, upon no train’s arrival during the time his observations were elsewhere, and he lost. This conduct is proscribed by statute. In our view of the case the doctrine of subsequent negligence is not applicable. Nor is there a jury question before us.
Affirmed. Costs to appellee.
Kelly, Black, and Edwards, JJ., concurred with Smith, J.
“The driver of any motor vehicle carrying passengers for hire, or of any school bus carrying any school child, or of any vehicle carrying explosive substances or flammable liquids as a cargo or part of a cargo, or any motor vehicle weighing over 10,000 pounds, including the load thereon, before crossing at grade any track or tracks of a railroad, shall stop such vehicle within 50 feet but not less than 10 feet from the nearest rail of such railroad and while so stopped shall listen and look in both directions along such track for any approaching train, and for signals indicating the approach of a train, except as hereinafter provided, and shall not proceed until he can do so safely. After stopping as required herein, and upon proceeding when it is safe to do so the driver of any said vehicle shall cross only in such gear of the vehicle that there will be no necessity for changing gears while traversing such crossing and the driver shall not shift gears while crossing the track or tracks.” (CLS 1956, § 257.699 [Stat Ann 1952 Rev § 9.2369].)

=== CASE 9741682 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:00:29.600989+00 ===

Voelker, J.
(concurring in reversal). Boiled down to its essentials, the basic question in this case is whether the trial judge was warranted, under the *58rule of favorable view, in taking the questions of negligence and contributory negligence away from the jury. Under the circumstances of this case we think he was not. We have recently been at some pains to declare that the question of plaintiff’s contributory negligence should usually be judged not alone by what the plaintiff did or failed to do, but also by the conjoining facts of what in the way of legal duty the plaintiff reasonably had a right to expect from the defendant (Hoffman v. Burkhead, 353 Mich 47, 56, quoting approvingly from Weller v. Mancha, 351 Mich 50, 67).
Had the crew of the switch engine dismounted and waved the plaintiff across the tracks or, again, had some other railroad employee done so, erroneously telling the plaintiff that the flasher signals were out of order, could the defendant railroad have blandly wrapped the mantle of the statute around itself to avoid possible liability? We think not. While its conduct in this case was scarcely so blatant and'“invitational” we do think that reasonable men might well conclude under these circumstances that the defendant may have negligently lulled the plaintiff into a false sense of security and in effect have negligently lured him to his harm. At least we think a fair jury question was presented on that score. Moreover, that trained lawyers on this Court should in this case split over the question is perhaps some further indication that the disputed issues should more properly have been left to the jury under appropriate instructions.

=== CASE 9741683 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:00:30.756361+00 ===

*371Per Curiam.
This is an original proceeding commenced in this court for the purpose of investigating the professional conduct of Miles Lord, attorney general of the State of Minnesota, and the county attorneys of Hennepin, Ramsey, and Anoka Counties in connection with an alternative writ of prohibition issued out of this court on April 25, 1959, in State ex rel. Minnesota Amusement Co. v. County Board of Ramsey County Commrs. 255 Minn. 413, 96 N. W. (2d) 580.
The facts pertaining to the case in which the writ was issued are partially set forth in an opinion of this court in that case filed on May 8, 1959, in which we disposed of the legal questions involved, and an opinion filed May 13, 1959, in which we dismissed the action on the ground that the questions involved had become moot.
In order to continue our investigation and to ascertain whether statements made over radio and television and which appeared in the press were made by the attorney general or the county attorneys involved, we issued our citation for them to appear before us in order to afford an opportunity to admit or deny having made such statements or furnish information upon which they were based. The county attorneys for Hennepin, Ramsey, and Anoka Counties have appeared, and we are satisfied, after an examination of them, that, although their action was ill-advised, they acted in good faith and that any disregard of our restraining order was due to a mistake of judgment rather than to any intentional defiance of the order. As to them we find no unethical conduct that would warrant any censureship.
Acting on the advice of the governor, the attorney general has refused to appear before us. We must therefore hold that he is in default and that, by his voluntary failure to appear, he admits the truth of the statements which he was quoted to have made to the press and over the radio *372and television.
We cannot agree that, when the attorney general appears in a legal matter pending in this court, he is acting in an executive capacity. To hold that the attorney general, when he appears in court in a legal matter, is immune from the ethical standards prescribed for other attorneys and that the court is impotent to discipline him for misconduct would reduce the court to a tool of the executive. The power of a court to exact of an attorney who represents the state the same standards of fidelity and honesty as are required of attorneys who represent private clients furnishes the main distinction between independent courts in a free society and courts that are subservient to the executive in a dictatorial form' of government. In preserving the separation of powers of the three branches of government, the governor of this state has no power to clothe the attorney general with immunity from the disciplinary powers of the court when the attorney general appears in court as an attorney.
This investigation does not involve the acts of a member of the executive branch of government as such but involves only the conduct of an attorney in a strictly legal matter. To permit the executive to interfere with or control the disciplinary power of the court over the conduct of such attorney would destroy the separation of powers fundamental to our constitutional form of government. Admitting that the courts have no jurisdiction over the executive in the performance of executive functions, it is equally vital to our form of government that the executive shall have no power to interfere with the courts in the performance of judicial functions. The unethical or contumacious conduct of an attorney — whoever he may be — in a legal matter pending in court involves something resting entirely with the judicial branch of government. While the attorney general is a part of the executive branch of government, as an attorney he is also an officer of this court. When he appears in court in a legal matter, he is acting as an attorney. The fact that he may belong to the executive branch of the government makes it no less so. To follow the position taken by the governor and the attorney general in refusing to appear before us in this matter to its ultimate conclusion would mean that not only the attorney general but every member of his staff — whether they appear in a highway condemna*373tion matter or any other matter in which the state is interested — are equally immune from the disciplinary powers of the court. To so hold would subject the rights of every citizen of this state to the absolute power of the state — the very thing independent courts exist to prevent.
In this proceeding the attorney general is not even representing the state. He appears only as an assistant to the county attorneys in the matter in which the boards of county commissioners of the named counties, not the state, are parties. As such, he is no more acting in an executive capacity than are the county attorneys involved. Neither is he any more immune from adherence to ethical standards than they are while so acting.
It appears without dispute that on February 17, 1959, the attorney general issued an official opinion in which he stated that L. 1957, c. 501, which gave the boards of county commissioners of Hennepin and Ramsey Counties and some adjoining counties the authority to fix daylight saving time in their counties, had been suspended by the later enactment of c. 646 and that the county officials of the named counties had no authority to fix such time until July 1, 1959. Chapter 646 established daylight saving time throughout the state and imposed upon the governor the duty of fixing the time for the commencement and termination thereof. The county boards of Hennepin, Ramsey, and Anoka Counties adopted resolutions during the latter part of April 1959 fixing daylight saving time to commence on April 26, 1959. After we issued our alternative writ on April 25, which included an order to show cause why a permanent writ should not be issued and a restraining order commanding the counties involved to refrain and desist from adopting or promulgating any resolution or order establishing daylight saving time or from putting into effect any order, decree, resolution, or directive theretofore adopted or promulgated, the attorney general took it upon himself to appear publicly over the radio and television and urge upon the people of this state that the court had no right to issue its temporary order and that the counties involved could legally establish daylight saving time. In the oral argument before this court in support of a motion to quash our temporary writ and upon a hearing on the merits as to whether a permanent writ should issue, the attorney general contended that, inasmuch as the resolutions of the county boards had *374been adopted before we issued our restraining order, they need do nothing but could permit the resolutions to become effective and that such inaction would be a compliance with our order. It requires little understanding of law to see that the position so taken was directly contrary to the part of our order which provided that they must desist from permitting any resolution or order adopted from becoming effective.
In the opinion of the attorney general issued on February 17, 1959, he said (Opinion Attorney General, No. 83-F):
“It is our opinion that when Chap. 501 became effective (April 18, 1957), the county board of Ramsey and Hennepin counties and the county board or governing body of any municipality in a county contiguous to Ramsey and Hennepin counties, together with the City of Duluth, were authorized to adopt a time other than standard time prescribed by § 645.07, supra. However, such authority became inoperative and suspended upon the enactment of Chap. 646 and such disability will continue until after July 1, 1959.”
In a personal appearance made by Mr. Lord over KSTP on April 26, 1959, he said:
“It’s clear to me that the legislature has given the metropolitan area the power of self-determination in this area and I am going to ask the court to allow them to keep this self-determination.”
It is obvious by comparing the statement made in his opinion on February 17 that he took exactly the opposite position when he appeared before the public over the television on April 26.
As a result of the position taken by the attorney general, many of the state, county, and city offices began operating on daylight saving time on April 27. Business places did likewise. In his appearance over KSTP on April 26, which we have referred to above, Mr. Lord said:
“State capitol employees will report to work on daylight saving time in Ramsey County.”
Some of the public offices, including some of those in the state capitol, who were unwilling to defy the court’s order, remained on central standard time. It followed that much confusion resulted throughout the metropolitan area.
*375The illegal action of the counties involved has now become of little more than academic importance by virtue of the action of the governor in fixing the time for statewide daylight saving time, as he was required to do under L. 1957, c. 646. We are concerned here only with the propriety of the professional conduct of the attorneys who appeared in this proceeding. In order that there may be no repetition of conduct such as we have in this case, which is inconsistent with the duties and obligations of attorneys in their relationship toward the courts, this opinion is written.
It is elementary that one who is admitted to practice as an attorney at law is an officer of the courts, and, both by virtue of his oath of office and the customs and traditions of the legal profession, he owes to the courts the highest duty of fidelity. It is his duty to assist the court in the proper administration of justice. As such, he has no right whatsoever to defy an order of the court as long as that order stands. The attorney general gives lip service to this proposition, but his statements made over the radio and television and to the press make it apparent that he took it upon himself to decide, and so advise the public, that the court’s order could be ignored with impunity because he had determined that the court had no business issuing it. Nor can he be heard to say that he did not understand this court’s order.
That Mr. Lord determined it was his prerogative to decide whether the court’s order need be followed or not is apparent from his statements over the radio and television. Illustrative of the many indications thereof are the following. In a statement made by a commentator over station WCCO at 10 o’clock p. m. on April 25, we find the following:
“The state attorney general and various county officials have exploded just as quickly and in fact will ignore the court order. But these county commissioners don’t look upon it as ignoring the order, since their actions ordering daylight time took place under legal statutes some weeks ago and cannot be overturned. Here’s the way attorney general Miles Lord phrased his part of the surprising controversy.”
Thereafter in the script follows an indication of statements made by Mr. Lord but such statements have been deleted from the record and cannot now be obtained. In a news broadcast made over WCCO on *376April 26, the commentator said:
“The next step comes tomorrow. Attorney General Miles Lord and the others claim the supreme court writ can’t be used to deal with legislative matters.”
In another broadcast on the same date over the same station, the commentator said:
“A new move may be in the offing for fast time right today, however. Attorney General Miles Lord has called a news conference for 4:30 this afternoon. * * * He and several others claim the state supreme court cannot use a writ to deal with legislative matters — and that of course was the situation that led to the hodgepodge of fast and standard time zones in our northwest area.”
In a broadcast made over the same station at 7:15 p. m. on April 26, the commentator said:
“Minnesota Attorney General Miles Lord says there is nothing to prevent Hennepin, Ramsey and Anoka Counties from remaining on daylight saving time.”
In a broadcast made either on the late evening of April 25 or the early part of April 26, the commentator said:
“And today Attorney General Miles Lord, trying to bring order out of the chaos, said the counties acted correctly. Lord said that not only should daylight saving time be in effect in these counties — but it is fully legal too.”
That Mr. Lord must have known better is apparent from his opinion of February 17. It can hardly be assumed that an attorney in his position could not understand that part of c. 646, which, after establishing statewide daylight saving time, provides in clear and express language the following:
“* * * no department of the state government and no county, city, town, village, or borough shall employ any other time or adopt any ordinance or order providing for the use of any other time than the standard time.”
It is difficult for us to comprehend how any attorney could claim that *377he could not understand this clear and express language. If he did understand it, then the only conclusion that can follow is that he was deliberately trying to mislead the people by the statements he made over the radio and television.
But aside from that, it does not lie with an attorney to determine whether this court has the power to issue an order or not. A similar situation arose in United States v. Shipp, 203 U. S. 563, 27 S. Ct. 165, 51 L. ed. 319, 8 Ann. Cas. 265. In that case the Supreme Court of the United States issued a stay order to prevent the execution of an individual who had been condemned to death for the crime of rape. After the stay order was issued, the prisoner was taken from the jail and lynched. The sheriff having custody of the prisoner was charged with conspiring with others for the purpose of lynching Johnson with intent to show contempt for the order of the court. The sheriff denied the jurisdiction of the supreme court to punish for contempt on the ground that the stay order was issued pending an appeal over which the court had no jurisdiction, because the constitutional questions alleged were frivolous and only a pretense. In holding that, irrespective of whether the court had jurisdiction, it was the duty of everyone to obey it so long as it stood, the court said (203 U. S. 573, 27 S. Ct. 166, 51 L. ed. 323, 8 Ann. Cas. 266):
“We regard this argument as unsound. It has been held, it is true, that orders made by a court having no jurisdiction to make them may be disregarded without liability to process for contempt. * * * But even if the Circuit Court had no jurisdiction to entertain Johnson’s petition, and if this court had no jurisdiction of the appeal, this court, and this court alone, could decide that such was the law. It and it alone necessarily had jurisdiction to decide whether the case was properly before it. On that question, at least, it was its duty to permit argument and to take the time required for such consideration as it might need. * * * Until its judgment declining jurisdiction should be announced, it had authority from the necessity of the case to make orders to preserve the existing conditions and the subject of the petition, just as the state court was bound to refrain from further proceedings until the same time.”
The same is true in the case before us. Even if we had determined that *378the peremptory or final writ should not be issued on the ground that prohibition was an inappropriate remedy, this court had full authority to issue a preliminary order to show cause why such peremptory writ should not issue, and, in order to maintain the status quo until both sides of the controversy could be heard, to issue a restraining order to prevent any further action from being taken, either affirmatively or by inaction such as we have here. It was the duty of everyone to abide by that order as long as it stood, and the attorneys involved had no right to take it upon themselves to misconstrue the order and to inform the public that the court had no right to issue it; therefore that they could ignore it. That is exactly what was done here. While the attorneys involved in this proceeding give lip service to the proposition that they must abide by an order of this court, their actions were to the contrary. They now seek to justify such actions by contending that, inasmuch as the counties involved had adopted their resolutions prior to the issuance of our order, they need do nothing to prevent those resolutions from becoming effective. In other words, they take the position that inaction was a compliance with this court’s order. With this we cannot agree. We think it goes without saying that the least they should have done was to advise their constituents that they must not permit their resolutions previously adopted from taking effect as long as our order stood. A similar situation arose in In re Transamerica Corp. (9 Cir.) 184 F. (2d) 319. In rejecting contentions similar to those advanced here, the court said (184 F. [2d] 321):
“* * * by their answers and arguments respondents assert that this apparent contempt of the court’s order was in truth not such. They contend that the acts we sought to enjoin had been accomplished and completed when our restraining order was served * * *.
“* * * The prohibition runs against the corporation and its agents, or rather against the corporation acting by its agents. And obedience to such an injunction necessarily requires that the prior orders be countermanded —that the agents be instructed not to do that which they had previously been told to do. Such a countermand, or reversal of instructions, is in no true sense the taking of affirmative action to undo action previously *379taken. It is no more than an essential step in the process of obedience.”
The case of International Union, etc. v. United States, 85 App. D. C. 149, 177 F. (2d) 29, involved the issuance of an injunction to restrain a strike of coal miners. The union contended it was not in contempt of court because it had not done anything to order the strike. The court held that it was no answer to a contempt proceeding that it had remained inactive and that it was its duty to advise its members to cease and desist from striking. In so holding the court said (85 App. D. C. 156, 177 F. [2d] 36):
“Appellants were not convicted for causing the walk-out. They were convicted because they deliberately failed to comply with the court’s order of April 3d. That was a temporary order. It sought the resumption of mining, for the protection of the national health and safety, until the court could consider the contentions of the parties relative to a further injunction. * * *
“The very narrow question thus presented is whether people must obey a temporary order of court designed to secure the orderly processes of constitutional government in a dispute of great importance, or whether a person can defy such an order. The Supreme Court held, in the other case involving these same appellants, that he who fails to obey a court order of that nature is punishable for criminal contempt. That decision governs us here.
“* * * the Union was not convicted for causing the walk-out. It was convicted because it did not exercise, or attempt to exercise, whatever powers it had to cause its members to resume work temporarily pursuant to the court’s order. Quite apart from what the miners did, the Union made no attempt to direct, instruct or persuade them to return to work, and thereby it disobeyed the court’s order.”
In discussing this case in Land v. Dollar, 88 App. D. C. 311, 320, 190 F. (2d) 366, 375, the court said:
“* * * But we there held that, when upon the facts it was obvious that an authoritative word sincerely given by him and the Union would have been obeyed, they were guilty of contempt if the results showed that such word had not been given. The present case as thus far presented is even *380clearer than that. It would appear little less than absurd to say that, if the respondents presently before us had given authoritative instructions for the transfer, the transfer would not have occurred.”
In Gompers v. Bucks Stove & Range Co. 221 U. S. 418, 450, 31 S. Ct. 492, 501, 55 L. ed. 797, 809, the Supreme Court of the United States said:
“If a party can make himself a judge of the validity of orders which have been issued, and by his own act of disobedience set them aside, then are the courts impotent, and what the Constitution now fittingly calls the ‘judicial power of the United States’ would be a mere mockery.”
Under the circumstances involved in this case, inaction was as much a defiance of this court’s order as affirmative action to advise them that they could defy the order would have been. If the attorney general, in case his opinion was requested, had adhered to his original opinion written in February and the county attorneys had advised their boards of county commissioners that they could not put their resolutions into effect, it is doubtful that any difficulty would have arisen. But aside from that it was his clear duty to advise those whom he pretended to represent that it was their duty to abide by this court’s order. His claim now that by doing nothing they complied with our order carries little persuasion.
Aside from the question of defiance of our order, there are other acts of the attorney general involved in this proceeding that we think are improper and unethical. Generally speaking, it is improper and contrary to the code of ethics under which members of the legal profession live and practice law for any attorney to publicly discuss a case in which he is or may be interested while the case is pending in this court. It is always improper and unethical to do so when the full facts are not accurately given to the public and even more so when an attorney gives to the public opinions concerning facts and law which he knows are wrong. In that respect the attorney general of the state is under no less of an obligation than any other attorney. Attorneys owe the court the duty to permit it to consider and decide a pending case impassionately and without being subjected to public pressure engendered by statements made by attorneys in newspapers or over radio or television which *381are calculated to arouse public opinion in favor of a view such attorney may countenance.
By the very nature of things, the attorney general of this state, by virtue of his official position, stands in a favored position in obtaining the opportunity to appear over radio and television or by making statements to the press that are apt to mislead the public in its desire to procure a decision of the courts which they prefer. By the very nature of things, also, much of the public is apt to believe that such statements are true and accurate statements of both law and fact. This greater opportunity for publicity imposes upon such attorney a great obligation of self-restraint to refrain from doing anything which may cause the public to doubt the integrity of the courts or their intention to decide the case according to applicable law. It is particularly reprehensible if such public appearances are motivated by an inordinate desire for publicity or by a desire to gain political popularity by undermining confidence in the integrity and impartiality of our judicial system.
In addition to the above, there are other acts of the attorney general which we consider to have been highly improper. On Sunday, April 26, the attorney general sent a telegram to each member of this court requesting an early hearing of a motion to quash our temporary writ. At that time the motion had not been filed with us. On the same day he appeared over KSTP television and publicly stated the following:
“I have attempted to reach the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court by telephone and have faüed. I have, however, taken the liberty of sending a telegram to him and to the other members of the supreme court requesting that we be heard on this matter as early as possible Monday morning.”
The attorney general knew that this court would be in session early Monday morning and that the proper procedure would have been to appear before the court at that time and make his request. The conclusion is inescapable that he sent these telegrams to individual members of the court on Sunday for the sole purpose of laying a foundation for his television appearance and that he intended thereby to convey to the public the information that he otherwise could not obtain a prompt hearing. In his television appearance he also said:
*382“* * * It is my feeling that this order was issued by the court without the benefit of any briefs or arguments by the governmental units affected and I strongly feel that the court, when it hears both sides of the question will quash this writ.”
In other statements made over the radio and to the press he also indicated that the court had unfairly issued the temporary order without listening to arguments of the attorney general and the counties affected. While so doing he knew, or as an attorney should have known, that temporary writs of this kind are nearly always issued ex parte — that is, without hearing — and are intended to preserve the situation as it is until a hearing can be had. The order to show cause why a permanent writ should not be issued is an order for a hearing and is intended to give both sides an opportunity to prepare briefs and arguments on the issues involved. If we assume that he is familiar with these elementary principles of law, it is obvious that his public statements were intended to deliberately mislead the public and to again lead them to believe that this court had done something improper and to the detriment of the public, while he, as attorney general, was carrying on the battle against the court for the benefit of the public.
While the acts of the attorney general in this proceeding are of sufficient gravity to warrant formal disciplinary proceedings, we have concluded to limit our action at this time to a severe censure of what he has done. In doing so, we wish to have it understood that in no manner do we condone such action nor will we permit a repetition of it in the future. The attorney general, or any other attorney, must understand that he is subject to established rules of ethical conduct. In order to make sure that there is no repetition, we will retain jurisdiction of this matter for a period of three years, with assurance to all that any repetition of such conduct will bring prompt and effective corrective action.

=== CASE 9741684 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:00:30.761202+00 ===

Murphy, Justice
(concurring specially).
While I agree substantially with the statements contained in the majority opinion, I would have preferred if the court had in this instance followed Supreme Court Rule XXI (222 Minn, xxxix), which provides among other things:
“Any complaint concerning professional misconduct on the part of *383any member of the bar of the state of Minnesota, or any petition for reinstatement, shall be referred to the Practice of Law Committee of the Minnesota State Bar Association for investigation, disposition and report to this court, by such means and under such rules as said committee may from time to time' promulgate.”
Moreover, since this is a proceeding disciplinary in nature, I would have preferred that the usual practice in disciplinary proceedings be followed — namely, that the attorney general be furnished with a bill of complaint setting forth the asserted breaches of conduct and that he be given an opportunity for hearing thereon pursuant to the procedures outlined and approved in State ex rel. Russell v. Ives, 60 Minn. 478, 62 N. W. 831; Ex parte Bradley, 74 U. S. (7 Wall.) 364, 19 L. ed. 214; Savin, Petitioner, 131 U. S. 267, 9 S. Ct. 699, 33 L. ed. 150; Gompers v. Bucks Stove & Range Co. 221 U. S. 418, 31 S. Ct. 492, 55 L. ed. 797, 34 L.R.A. (N.S.) 874; Cooke v. United States, 267 U. S. 517, 45 S. Ct. 390, 69 L. ed. 767; Hovey v. Elliott, 167 U. S. 409, 17 S. Ct. 841, 42 L. ed. 215; In re Oliver, 333 U. S. 257, 68 S. Ct. 499, 92 L. ed. 682; Cammer v. United States, 350 U. S. 399, 76 S. Ct. 456, 100 L. ed. 474.
At the proceeding held May 27, 1959, which was investigatory in nature, the attorney general failed to appear. Robert Mattson, deputy attorney general, appeared in his behalf, and was not permitted to be heard. While I do not challenge the conclusions of my brethren on the court, it is my feeling that the interests of due process would have been better served had we heard whatever mitigating circumstances the attorney general wished to submit, which may have occurred under the emergencies and pressures of the crisis which gave rise to these proceedings.
I further concur with the statements of the majority opinion completely exonerating William B. Randall, George M. Scott, and Robert W. Johnson of any acts which might suggest unethical conduct.

=== CASE 2228414 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:00.794664+00 ===

357 Mich. 7 (1959)
97 N.W.2d 620
BALLENTINE
v.
BALLENTINE.
Docket No. 10, Calendar No. 47,759.
Supreme Court of Michigan.
Decided July 13, 1959.
Walsh, O'Sullivan, Stommel & Sharp, for plaintiff.
*8 VOELKER, J.
The appellant obtained a divorce from her husband on the grounds of extreme cruelty. The parties were married in 1944 while students at the University of Michigan and their only child, a daughter, was born in 1946. The proofs below also snowed that the wife devoted most of an inheritance from her grandfather to support the defendant and their daughter during the husband's medical studies and later during his internship and a rather extensive series of residencies for specialized medical training; and that following the separation of the parties in 1952 the plaintiff was obliged to go to work to support herself and the child.
In his decree below granting the plaintiff and appellant her divorce the chancellor made some provision for support of the child, the custody of which he awarded the mother. He did not, however, make any provision for alimony or reserve the question for possible future consideration, expressing the opinion that he felt both parties would be better off if they were forever freed from any possible future ties and obligations, one to the other.
We have frequently held that where an absolute divorce is granted and no provision is made for alimony or the question is not reserved, the court is powerless to grant any alimony in the future. See Moross v. Moross, 129 Mich. 27; Mack v. Mack, 283 Mich. 365 and Marrobie v. Marrobie, 334 Mich. 447 for typical cases.
Making all due allowance for the present financial situation of the defendant, and his present distaste for the loyal wife who supported him while he got his education, we think the chancellor might have reached a fairer result had he not under the circumstances permanently foreclosed the question of possible future alimony. The decree below may accordingly be modified and amended so as to require *9 that the defendant pay $10 per month alimony to the plaintiff until the further order of the court. Costs to plaintiff.
DETHMERS, C.J., and CARR, KELLY, SMITH, BLACK, EDWARDS, and KAVANAGH, JJ., concurred.

=== CASE 9741687 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:00:32.079544+00 ===

*620Broadfoot, J.
Mrs. Boughton will hereinafter be referred to as the plaintiff. Upon this appeal she contends that the evidence, as shown by the record, amply supports the jury’s award of damages; that a full and fair trial to an impartial, fair-minded jury properly instructed was had; that the trial court failed to consider vital medical evidence and that the order for a new trial is based solely on a conflict of human judgment between the trial judge and the jury. In effect the plaintiff maintains that the court merely substituted its own judgment for that of the jury. This argument is based upon an analysis of the memorandum decision filed herein. It is contended that the trial court did not indicate that the jury verdict showed passion and prejudice on the part of the jury, nor did it recite in what manner the verdict was contrary to the evidence.
The issue on this appeal is governed by the provisions of sec. 270.49, Stats., which provides that motions may be made to set aside a verdict and for a new trial and the trial court may grant such motions upon the following grounds: (1) Errors in the trial; (2) the verdict is contrary to law or the evidence; (3) excessive or inadequate damages; or (4) in the interest of justice. The order setting aside a jury verdict and granting a new trial must specify the statutory ground upon which it is based. Stating the statutory ground therein is sufficient unless the new trial is ordered in the interest of justice, in which case the reasons that prompted the court to make such order must be set forth in detail therein. Dittman v. Western Casualty & Surety Co. 267 Wis. 42, 64 N. W. (2d) 436. The statutory ground upon which the court based its order is that the damages were excessive. This was sufficient ground under the statute. Upon appeal such orders are not to be disturbed unless it clearly appears there has been an abuse of judicial discretion. Blong v. Ed. Schuster & Co. 274 Wis. 237, 79 N. W. (2d) 820; Flatley *621v. American Automobile Ins. Co. 262 Wis. 665, 56 N. W. (2d) 523.
The figure selected by the trial court in granting the option is, of course, low and should not be interpreted to mean that it approximates the amount of the actual damages. The record discloses that the plaintiff did sustain serious injuries as a result of the collision. She went to a hospital where X rays were taken that disclosed no fractures. However, her physician, as well as the plaintiff, testified that she received severe bruises to the left shoulder, left thigh, groin, and knee, and the left chest, and that she suffered shock, wryneck, and back strain which were severe and painful. The X rays showed an arthritic condition in the back and neck that existed prior to the date of the accident. The medical testimony indicated that the injuries she received as a result of the collision aggravated and hastened the onset of arthritis, and that because of the combination she had suffered pain to the time of the trial and will continue to suffer pain and discomfort in the future.
Prior to the date of the accident she had applied for a position as file clerk with the treasury department of the United States in its internal revenue service office in Milwaukee. On August 3, 1956, she was examined by a physician for the civil service commission. His examination was directed mainly to her vision and for the purpose of determining any functional disability that would prevent her from doing the work required of her. He determined that she was physicially qualified for the position and he did not note any functional disability, particularly of the hands and fingers. She was given the position and commenced work on August 27, 1956, and was still so engaged at the time of the trial.
However, the new trial could have been awarded without the option provision and, even though the amount of $1,500 *622was low, it was not prejudicial error requiring a reversal. Upon this appeal it is our duty to determine whether or not the trial court abused its judicial discretion in granting the new trial. The rule to be followed in reviewing the record is stated in the Blong Case, supra, as follows (p. 243) :
“The matter of a trial court granting a new trial for excessive damages involves an exercise of discretion. This court should not disturb such a determination unless there has been an abuse of discretion. As pointed out in Hale v. Schultz (1936), 223 Wis. 285, 286, 270 N. W. 46, ‘The judgment of the trial judge on the question of whether damages are excessive or not must be accorded considerable influence when the matter is presented to this court. Pie has seen the witnesses and heard the testimony.’ ”
Our review of the record with that rule in mind leads us to the conclusion that there has been no clear abuse of the discretion exercised by the trial court. Because of our decision to affirm the action of the trial court we have not attempted to recite in detail all of the evidence bearing on the question of the plaintiff’s damages for personal injuries. We do not deem it desirable to do so in cases where there is to be a new trial.
By the Court. — Order affirmed.
Martin, C. J., took no part.

=== CASE 2228419 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:00.94319+00 ===

356 Mich. 607 (1959)
97 N.W.2d 67
BUTLER
v.
BUTLER.
Docket Nos. 66, 67, 68, Calendar Nos. 47,717, 47,718, 47,719.
Supreme Court of Michigan.
Decided July 13, 1959.
Davidow & Davidow (Larry S. Davidow, of counsel), for plaintiff.
Hindes, Matheny & Schureman (Jeptha W. Schureman, of counsel), for defendant.
EDWARDS, J.
Plaintiff-appellant secured a divorce from defendant-appellee on October 25, 1954. The decree, signed by Circuit Judge Frank Ferguson, was based in large measure upon a property settlement agreement between the parties.
Among its other terms, defendant-appellee was ordered to pay $1,100 per month to his wife as alimony. There was no provision specifically reserving to the court power to amend this order. No appeal was taken from this decree.
Defendant-appellee filed a petition March 29, 1957, seeking a reduction of the alimony previously ordered, on the basis of a claimed marked change of his financial circumstances. Three petitions were then filed by plaintiff-appellant seeking various measures to enforce the previous alimony order. The circuit judge, after reference to the friend of the court and receipt of a careful report, and after full hearing, reduced the previous alimony order to $400 *609 per month and denied plaintiff-appellant's 3 petitions.
The facts are accurately set forth in the circuit judge's opinion:
"In this case we have several motions. A motion to sign an order vacating a restraining order which I had passed on on a previous hearing, which was not presented to the court for signature, but which is now being presented.
"A motion to modify this decree, to reduce the payments of alimony.
"Motion by C.H. Mayne & Associates, Inc., to pay $20,480.82 into court and dismiss that cause of action, file No. 567,808.
"And motion for the appointment of a receiver.
"This matter has been before the court from time to time since last July. We took testimony on October 24 and October 25, 1957. We made a reference to the friend of the court for further investigation at that time, which has been completed, and we came back into court on Tuesday of this week to complete the proceedings. Testimony was taken throughout the day yesterday.
"A review of the testimony that has been offered reveals that at the time of the entry of the decree. Mr. Butler was chairman of the board of Vinco Corporation, and his salary was $60,000 a year. It was upon that basis that a property settlement had been reached because at that time he did not anticipate either a reduction in salary or the loss of his job. He lost his position on April 29, 1957, and at that time he was earning $32,500. There had been reductions between the time of the granting of the decree and his final service with the company. He had received several cuts in salary up until the time that he lost his position.
"I think from the testimony in the case Mr. Butler has made an honest and sincere effort to find employment since be lost out at Vinco but he has been unable to find any kind of employment, and at the *610 present time and for the past 6 months he has been endeavoring to get into some kind of construction business in Florida in order to build, and create an income. He finds it impossible to find a position with other companies throughout the country at his age.
"This business of getting started in the construction building in Florida has been a rough one. He can only now get started if he can raise $800 to pay for plans which have been drafted by architects.
"In order to get started, he says that he is going to sign a note for a lot worth $12,500, and it will be indorsed by his brothers, and he is going to borrow money to finance the cost of building.
"At the present time it appears in the record that his total assets are $88,045, and that his liabilities are $35,947, leaving him a net worth of $52,098.
"Now, his assets consisted, primarily, of an account receivable in the amount of $40,887 from the 14765 Michigan Avenue Corporation, payable at the rate of $600 per month, on which there is a balance owing of $39,600, and an interest in the C.H. Mayne & Associates, Inc., which is to be liquidated in the amount of $21,480.82. One thousand dollars of this, by consent of the parties, has been withdrawn and given to one of the children, leaving $20,480.82 due from the C.H. Mayne & Associates, and they are ready now to distribute or pay Mr. Butler that amount.
"When it became known to Mrs. Butler and her counsel that this money was about to be paid to Mr. Butler, Mrs. Butler instituted a suit against Mr. Butler and C.H. Mayne & Associates, asking for an injunction restraining C.H. Mayne & Associates from paying this $20,480.82 to Mr. Butler and asking the court to appoint a receiver.
"Counsel could have come into this court before me in this case that is now pending, and have asked for a restraining order and for the appointment of a receiver. Instead of that, the matter was presented to another judge in this court, Judge Rashid, who *611 issued a restraining order, restraining the C.H. Mayne & Associates from paying this money to Mr. Butler; and also obtained an order to show cause, which was returnable before another judge in this circuit, Judge Weideman, asking Mr. Butler to show cause before Judge Weideman why an injunction should not be granted and why a receiver should not be appointed.
"By consent of counsel, this order to show cause was brought before me, and I agreed to hear all matters pertaining to this case and dispose of the same.
"Now, C.H. Mayne & Associates have come into this court, and on the record tendered to the court this $20,480.82 and asked that the suit against them and Mr. Butler be dismissed because they have no interest in this $20,480.82, and they desire to pay it into court. * * *
"Mr. Emery [attorney for C.H. Mayne & Associates] asks that this particular money be paid into court, and that the case be dismissed. There wasn't any objection to that on the part of counsel for Mrs. Butler, so an order may be presented discontinuing that cause, and paying this money in to the clerk of this court.
"In reviewing the facts in this case, we find that under the decree, Mrs. Butler received $70,000 cash within 1 year after the decree was signed, a 1954 Cadillac automobile; that Mr. Butler agreed and did discharge personal accounts of Mrs. Butler to the amount of not over $1.500.
"Also, it appears that the decree had called for the payment of $150 per month for each son that remained with Mrs. Butler, and that those payments have been made, and that there is nothing due now under the decree for the children in this case.
"In addition to that, it was agreed by the parties, and it was ordered by the court, that Mr. Butler pay Mrs. Butler $1,100 per month permanent alimony; and also that he pay, and he did pay $10,000 to Mr. *612 Davidow, attorney fees, for services rendered to Mrs. Butler.
"At the time that decree was entered, Mr. Butler had been earning $60,000 per year, and although his earnings had been reduced in April of 1957  April 29th, he continued to pay Mrs. Butler, and that the account now stands as being paid up to June 1, 1957, with the exception of a balance of $25. Now, I don't mean to say that it was paid up on April 29, 1957, because several payments were made from that time up until September, but it pays the account in full with the exception of this $25 up to June 1, 1957.
"During that time it appears that in addition to the amount of cash received, Mr. Butler has paid approximately $35,000 in alimony.
"At the present time, Mrs. Butler has invested her money in stocks, and the total investment, under the evidence in this case, is $69,770, as of December 31, 1957. And on margin she owes $3,206.08, or net holdings of $66,563.92.
"According to the testimony that was offered yesterday, she has received $5,045 per year in dividends; and according to exhibit F, which was offered today and received from her counsel who does her tax work, Mr. Surridge, she has received, in dividends, in 1957 $4,103.35.
"So, with a capital investment of $66,563.92, and a yearly income from said investments of $5,045, she maintains an apartment in the Whittier apartments, paying $275 a month rent, she entertains and pays food and restaurant bills for herself and her friends, $200 a month; she thinks that $300 a month, or $3,600 a year is sufficient for clothing. She pays out $125 a month for transportation, and $100 a month for incidents  a total of $1,000 per month. About $500 a year for insurance, doctor bills and club dues about $50 for each, and before moving into the Whittier, maintained maid service of $20 a week, which was included in the Whittier rental. So, her expenditures are $1,050.50 a month.
*613 "Now, what about Mr. Butler? Mr. Butler, at the time of the decree, had a piece of property in St. Louis, Missouri, valued at $41,666, which was sold. His share was $37,800, and he used this money to pay debts  1 of them was the Mercantile Commerce Bank & Trust Company of St. Louis, in the amount of $28,156.59. The rest of the money he used to pay personal debts, and he has detailed them on the record in this case, so that he had recovered nothing, that is, for his own personal use, from the sale of this property.
"He also had 1,100 shares of Vinco stock, which he was purchasing on a payment plan, and that the value was $5,500, and the amount he owed was $4,012, and that if he did receive anything, it was a very small amount.
"He has detailed his liabilities. To Mr. Osplack, a former associate of his, he owes $5,000. He claims he has no interest in the Butler Brothers Lumber Company in Palm Beach, Florida, and that he owes about $2,500 to them. He owes $15,000 to the National Bank of Detroit, which is secured by life insurance policies, on which, at the present time, the premiums have not been paid in full. He testified that he owes about $500 on these insurance premiums. Of course, they are not pressing him for the loan as long as he keeps the premiums paid up on these policies and the amount of the cash surrender value of the same would be able to retire the loan. He owes the Detroit Bank $1,200, and he has miscellaneous bills of $11.747  a total of $35,947.
"Now, on his Mayne Company account, he is entitled to receive $20.480.82 at the present time which is the payment of his interest in the C.H. Mayne & Associates, Inc., but he explains that he is obligated to pay an income tax of $5,000 on that portion that he already received and that he will be required to pay approximately $5,000 on the present balance which he is now receiving  a total of $10.000.
"It follows that out of this $20,480.82 he will have cash available $10,480.82. That seems to be the only *614 cash asset that Mr. Butler has, or the only asset that can be turned into cash.
"While it is true that it is the duty of a husband to maintain a wife who obtains a divorce for wrongs committed by him during the marriage, according to the station in life which she had been accustomed to, it follows, also, that some duties cannot be performed. At the time Mr. Butler undertook these duties, he was in a position to perform them, but he has suffered the loss of his job, and financial loss in the meantime that now he is no longer in a position to comply with the terms of that decree. He hasn't been in a position to comply with the terms of that decree since April 29, 1957, and prior thereto, because of various reductions in salary from $60,000 to $32,500.
"Now, his case must be reviewed as to his ability to pay on his present assets and earnings.
"If Mrs. Butler will live within her means, she has sufficient capital and income to support herself. If she insists on living as she is now living, she hasn't. It is only proper that this court supplement her present income by requiring Mr. Butler to pay what he can afford to pay. If Mr. Butler becomes established, and earns sufficiently to increase the payments in the future, he will be required to do so, but this amount that he will be required to pay at the present time is based upon his ability to pay.
"This motion was filed some time prior to June 1, 1957. I believe that it was back in April, March 29, 1957, petition to modify decree and reduce permanent alimony.
"It is the practice of the court to predate any order that it now makes to modify the decree, to the date that the motion was filed. In this case, however, payment has been made which brings this account up to June 1, 1957, with the exception of $25. I feel that as of that date, June 1, 1957, this decree should be modified and Mr. Butler should be required to pay $400 a month. He therefore owes as of this date, 8 *615 months at $400, a total of $3,200, plus $25, balance as of June 1, 1957, a total of $3,225.
"This order of $400 a month will continue until the further order of the court.
"I think that Mr. Butler ought to pay this $3,225 out of the moneys he is now receiving from the C.H. Mayne & Associates, and after this money is paid in to the clerk of the court, the court will order that the clerk of this court pay to the friend of the court $3,225, and the difference the court will order the clerk of this court to pay to Mr. Butler.
"I will not appoint a receiver in this case, and I will not require Mr. Butler to file a bond for performance of this order, even though he is now domiciled in Palm Beach, Florida. I don't think Mr. Butler is the man that will try to shirk his obligation if he is financially able to pay it. I don't think it is necessary for him to be required to post any bond for that purpose.
"Therefore, orders may be entered dismissing the suit of Gladys L. Butler v. C.H. Mayne & Associates, Inc., a Michigan corporation, and Edward E. Butler, file No. 567,808.
"An order may be presented vacating the restraining order heretofore issued by Judge Rashid. And an order may be entered requiring C.H. Mayne & Associates to pay $20,480.82 in to the clerk of this court. An order may be entered vacating a restraining order that this court heretofore ordered vacated in October of last year. An order may also be entered denying plaintiff's motion for a receiver and denying an injunction as prayed for in the motion that was entered in file No. 567,808.
"The decree will be modified requiring Mr. Butler to pay $400 per month beginning June 1, 1957, and continuing until the further order of the court. And orders are to be presented requiring the clerk of this court to pay to the friend of the court for the account of Mrs. Butler, $3,225, and the balance to Mr. Butler, whatever that amounts to.
*616 "I think that disposes of all motions that I have before me." * * *
"Mr. Schureman (attorney for defendant): I think also before your Honor was the order to show cause for contempt.
"The Court: That will be dismissed."
Appellant states her 3 questions for review thus:
"1. Was plaintiff wife entitled to enforcement of the alimony provision of the decree entered in pursuance of a settlement agreement?
"2. Should a receiver have been appointed to sequester assets of defendant husband in Michigan, who had left Michigan and established residence in Florida?
"3. Should an injunction restraining the defendant from removing his assets from Michigan have been issued?"
As to the first question, few legal questions have been as clearly answered as has the question of the power of a circuit judge to alter the terms of alimony specified in a prior decree, even where the preceding decree was based upon a property settlement between the parties and did not in terms provide for retention on the part of the court of the power to change it.
The Michigan statute dealing with divorce makes a specific grant of authority to the court to "revise and alter such decree, respecting the amount of such alimony."
"After a decree for alimony or other allowance, for the wife and children, or either of them, and also after a decree for the appointment of trustees, to receive and hold any property for the use of the wife or children as before provided the court may, from time to time, on the petition of either of the parties, revise and alter such decree, respecting the amount of such alimony or allowance and the payment thereof, and also respecting the appropriation and payment *617 of the principal and income of the property so held in trust, and may make any decree respecting any of the said matters which such court might have made in the original suit." CL 1948, § 522.28 (Stat Ann 1957 Rev § 25.106).
Generally, the existence of such a statutory provision has been held to write in a reservation of the power to modify such a decree.
"The effect of a statute which continues the jurisdiction of the trial court to modify the directions of the decree for the support of the wife is to write a reservation of power to modify into every divorce decree." 17 Am Jur, Divorce and Separation, § 730.
See, also, annotation 109 A.L.R. 1068.
And, in a well-considered and frequently-cited case where a divorce decree was squarely founded upon a property settlement and contained no specific reservation of power to modify, Justice WIEST and a unanimous Court held:
"It was not necessary to state reservation of the power of modification in the decree." Eddy v. Eddy, 264 Mich. 328, 330.
See, also, Havens v. Havens-Anthony, 335 Mich. 445; Gumbin v. Gumbin, 337 Mich. 283; Lamb v. Lamb, 348 Mich. 557.
We recognize, of course, that appellant contends the testimony does not show such change of circumstances in appellee's affairs as to warrant a reduction in alimony from $1,100 to $400. The basic change of circumstances involving appellee's loss of a $60,000 a year salary can, however, hardly be ignored. Nor can we find from appellant's argument as to implications to be drawn from appellee's associations and assets that the circuit judge was wrong in viewing appellee's financial situation as *618 materially changed. The reduction is a large one, and it may be that appellee could be forced to continue payments at the previous figure, at least for a time, by applying thereto substantially all of his assets. The circuit judge, however, apparently felt this relief was to some considerable degree related to restoration of his earning power, and indicated clearly a willingness to consider appellant's petition for increase should circumstances change for the better.
We do not deal in this instance with the customary divorce problem of dividing poverty between the now-separated members of a family. The appellant wife is not charged with any child support. And the terms of the decree gave her assets which apparently are approximately equal to those now possessed by appellee husband.
Although we hear such matters as this de novo. we give great weight to the view of the facts taken by the judge who heard and saw the witnesses. Donaldson v. Donaldson, 134 Mich. 289: Hartka v. Hartka, 346 Mich. 453. We cannot say with certainty, from this record, that the circuit judge abused the discretion vested in him. Austin v. Austin, 308 Mich. 139; Fischer v. Fischer, 320 Mich. 176.
We feel the same way concerning appellant's last 2 questions dealing with security for enforcement of the court's decree. This judge has basic responsibility for enforcement of his own decree and considerable discretion in the means to be employed. Krachun v. Krachun, 355 Mich. 167. He has had these parties before him for some years and has doubtless come to know much more as to what to expect from them than we could glean from this record. We do not feel justified in holding unfounded his expressed confidence in being able to secure compliance with *619 his own order without the injunction or receivership sought.
Affirmed. Costs to appellee.
DETHMERS, C.J., and CARR, KELLY, SMITH, BLACK, VOELKER, and KAVANAGH, JJ., concurred.

=== CASE 2228422 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:00.992118+00 ===

357 Mich. 134 (1959)
97 N.W.2d 719
LAWRENCE
v.
FOX.
Docket No. 25, Calendar No. 47,076.
Supreme Court of Michigan.
Decided July 14, 1959.
*135 Charles S. Toy, for plaintiff.
Lco W. Hoffman, for defendant MacGriff.
Floyd McGriff, in propria persona.
SMITH, J.
The plaintiff in the case before us, Kennedy Lawrence, was deputy superintendent of police in Detroit from 1947 to 1955. The action he brings is for libel. The libel consisted, according to the pretrial statement, "of a series of articles written by defendants Jack E. MacGriff and Floyd E. McGriff and published in the defendant newspapers, the Redford Record. The Brightmoor Journal and the Home Gazette, which publications were printed by defendant The Redford Printing Company."
We will not preserve for posterity in our printed reports the language employed. It was abusive and extreme, vitriolic in its terms. Suffice for our purposes to say that plaintiff was charged with fraud and corruption, with protection of criminals and manipulation of liquor licenses, with perjury, trickery, and deceit. Few offenses known to the litany of prostitution of public trust were omitted. The plaintiff asserted that these charges were false, that they were known to defendants to be false, and that they were published with malicious intent. In short, that, despite his exemplary record to which eminent *136 commissioners of police bore witness, and despite his reputation as "an honest cop," the defendants deliberately set out to ruin him personally and professionally from the most evil of motives. Defendants, on the other hand, asserted that they had acted in entire good faith, that their purpose in so writing was to bring to the people of the community the truth concerning corruption in government and that the public responsibilities of a newspaper in exposing wrongdoing in high places gives it a qualified privilege to print such articles in the public interest. The case went to the jury, which awarded plaintiff the sum of $20,000. Defendants-appellants are before us on a general appeal.
There are few areas of the law so obscure in detail as that of the law of defamation. The New Hampshire supreme court recently remarked that "For the most part any thoughtful consideration of the present state of the law of libel either begins or ends with a combined apology and lament." Blanchard v. Claremont Eagle, Inc., 95 NH 375, 377 (63 A2d 791). This is due in part to conflicting precedents, many of them having their roots in courts long forgotten, such as the seignorial courts, one of which heard, in the year 1275, a charge that Maud, wife of John, had "attacked the wife of the said Thomas with contumelious words calling her whore and sorceress."[1] At a later period the ecclesiastical courts contributed their doctrine and precedents, followed by that court of evil repute, the court of star chamber.[2] The controlling principles in modern law, however, are neither obscure nor unique. The ultimate problem in the law of defamation, the balancing of *137 one man's interests against another's acts, is common to all areas of the law of torts. In respect of negligence we find it in the concept of the reasonable man, in cases of assault and battery, and trespass, we speak of justification and excuse. In the law of defamation the term employed is "privilege."[3]
There is no need, at this date in our history, to urge that it is necessary to free institutions that the press itself be free. Today it is. The real issue before us is how free. Governmental interference is not the only threat to its freedom. On the contrary, a narrow or restrictive interpretation of the law of privilege in libel actions is equally dangerous. The publisher often faces a cruel dilemma: The more serious the charge of wrongdoing by a public official, more urgent the need for its airing. Yet, the more serious the charge, the greater the libel. It is in this uneasy and menacing situation that the law provides the publisher a sanctuary of sorts, the defense of privilege. It is no fortress, as we shall see. The defense interposed is that of privilege.
This defense rests upon considerations of public policy. "The great underlying principle upon which the doctrine of privileged communication stands," we held in Bacon v. Michigan Central R. Co., 66 Mich. 166, 169, 170, "is public policy. This is more especially the case with absolute privilege, where the interests and necessities of society require that the time and occasion of the publication or utterance, even though it be both false and malicious, shall protect the defamer from all liability to prosecution for the sake of the public good. It rests upon the same necessity that requires the individual to surrender his personal rights and to suffer loss for the benefit of the common welfare." The term privilege then, having such origins, relates to a situation or occasion *138 in which the importance of the criticism uttered by the defendant (for reasons to which we will in due course advert) justifies a modification, or, indeed, a withdrawal, of the protection normally afforded our citizens. See 1 Harper and James, Torts, § 5.25.
The privilege thus afforded is not, however, as the mathematicians would put it, a constant. It varies with the situation, with what is regarded as the importance of the social issues at stake. At one extreme we have loose gossip, thoughtless or malevolent. Here the damage to the individual's reputation is balanced only against the social desirability of the unbridled tongue, the frenetic lashings of the scorpion's tail. Under the statutes of Edgar and Canute the tongue itself was forfeited.[4] Modern law is more lenient. We class it simply as a case of "no privilege" and leave the parties to their proofs. At the other extreme are those occasions wherein the social interest involved in publication is so great as to immunize even deliberately malicious attacks upon one's character. Thus of judicial utterances, "A communication absolutely privileged  as, for instance, words spoken by a judge in his judicial capacity in a court of justice  is not actionable, even though spoken maliciously." Trimble v. Morrish, 152 Mich. 624, 627 (16 LRA NS 1017). So, also, of words spoken in the course of legislative debate.[5]
*139 Considerations of social policy similar in principle, but of lesser intensity, result in a privilege not absolute but conditional, or, as sometimes put, qualified, or defeasible. These situations are of a great variety, all of them responding more or less directly to Baron Parke's famous statement in Toogood v. Spyring (Ex 1834), 1 CM&R 181, 193 (149 Eng Rep 1044) that a publication is privileged when it is "fairly made by a person in the discharge of some public or private duty, whether legal or moral, or in the conduct of his own affairs, in matters where his interest is concerned." These are the occasions in which one has not an absolute but a limited immunity to speak or publish words in and of themselves defamatory. What circumstances, then, present this "occasion" of qualified privilege? Who decides whether or not the occasion presented is such? These are our initial questions.
They are not new to our Court. In Bowerman v. Detroit Free Press, 287 Mich. 443 (120 A.L.R. 1230) we described the term occasion as meaning "the extrinsic situation" presented. In that case, as the court pointed out (p 447), "The extrinsic circumstances in the instant case are that defendant's newspaper was reporting a judicial proceeding." Likewise in Westerhouse v. DeWitt, 215 Mich. 295, we approved an instruction defining the occasion as a meeting of the elders of a church, called to consider, investigate, and adjust the differences between its members. The term occasion, then, refers to time, place, and people. Was it a testimonial dinner or a gathering in a saloon? Was it a trial at law, legislative debate, or a brawl in the alley? At this point we are looking at the stage, not at the script.
As is true generally with respect to matters of privilege, it is for the court to determine whether or not the external circumstances surrounding the publication are such as to give rise to a privileged *140 occasion. In so doing, the court is exercising its normal exclusive function of determining what principles of substantive law are applicable to the situation presented. In making the determination as to the privilege of the occasion, the malice charged by the plaintiff is not considered. We so held (in accordance with the great weight of authority) in Westerhouse v. DeWitt, supra, 299, stating that "the question of privilege is to be determined by the occasion and not the language used." In Garn v. Lockard, 108 Mich. 196, quoting an earlier case, we had held similarly, stating (p 198) that "`The occasion determines the question of privilege. The language is only proper to be considered in connection with the question of malice.'" See, also, Fortney v. Stephan, 237 Mich. 603, where, as here, the publications charged a law-enforcement official with criminal acts. It was there insisted, on behalf of plaintiff, that there was no question of privilege in the case, since "the publications charge the plaintiff with criminal conduct, and an intentional neglect of his duties as sheriff." We held to the contrary. "Counsel is in error," we held (p 609), "because it is the occasion and not the language of the publication that creates the privilege." Of course, a question may be presented as to whether the extrinsic facts (as distinguished from the words themselves) are such as to justify the finding of an occasion of privilege in the first place. An issue may arise as to whether the defamatory words were spoken on the floor of a senate or the floor of a tavern. But lacking such factual issue as to the occasion, the matter of privilege is for the court.
3. Restatement of Torts, § 619, comment (a), phrases the matter thus:
"Whether a privilege exists at all is a question for the court. This requires the court to determine whether the circumstances under which the publication *141 was made were such as, under the rules stated in §§ 585-599, to make the occasion privileged. This is true whether the issue involves the existence of an absolutely privileged occasion or one that is only conditionally privileged. If the facts are in dispute, the jury is called upon to consider the evidence and pass upon the issues thus raised. It is for the court, however, to decide whether the facts found by the jury made the occasion privileged or to instruct the jury as to what facts they must find in order to hold the occasion privileged."
With respect, also, to this phase of the case, namely, the establishment of the privilege of the occasion, we will note that the burden is on the defendant. As Prosser puts it (Torts [2d ed], § 95 at p 629):
"The burden is upon the defendant in the first instance to establish the existence of a privileged occasion for the publication, by proof of a recognized public or private interest which would justify the utterance of the words."
To like effect is our decision in Day v. Backus, 31 Mich. 241, wherein it was held (syllabus 1) that:
"In an action of slander for words contained in a letter written by defendant * * * the burden of proof is on the defendant to show that it was thus privileged."
To be distinguished from the privilege of the occasion is the matter of the abuse thereof. The conditional privilege, asserted by defendants in the case before us, is, as the terminology suggests, a privilege subject to defeasance, subject to a condition, the condition being its exercise without abuse. Abuse may take place in many ways. It may arise from lack of good faith in making the publication, Mundy v. Hoard, 216 Mich. 478, the primary motive being the gratification of personal hostility, spite, or ill-will, *142 or, as sometimes put, Fortney v. Stephan, supra, publication "with actual malice." Abuse, also, may arise "if the extent of its publication be excessive," Smith v. Smith, 73 Mich. 445, 446 (3 LRA 52, 16 Am St Rep 594). In other words, the protection which the occasion gives is "conditioned upon the manner in which the privilege is exercised. The unreasonable exercise of privilege is an abuse of the occasion which defeats the protection otherwise afforded." 3 Restatement of Torts, § 599, comment (a). The case before us, in fact, involves allegations of precisely such abuse. Here it was asserted not only that the charges against plaintiff were false, but that "they were made maliciously and with spite," whereas in defense thereof it was asserted not only that the newspapers had a qualified privilege but that the statements made were said "in good faith and without malice."
The fact, then, that it is determined that the occasion is conditionally privileged does not mean that the publisher (whether newspaper or other) has carte blanche to deal recklessly with the most jealously guarded possession of a public official, or, indeed, of any citizen, his good reputation. Yet the conditional privilege does afford the publisher a degree of protection. He is not liable for absolute truth, it being required only, as we held in Powers v. Vaughan, 312 Mich. 297, 305, quoting McAllister v. Detroit Free Press, 76 Mich. 338, 356 (15 Am St Rep 318), that the statement made be "honestly believed to be true, and published in good faith." See, also, Howard v. Dickie, 120 Mich. 238, 241;[6] 15 MLP, *143 Libel and Slander, § 21. It was once held (Owen v. Dewey, 107 Mich. 67) that a publisher's reasonable belief in the truth of the publication made, or probable cause for belief in truth, or good faith belief in truth, would not relieve him of responsibility for libel, but this case was obviously overruled sub silentio in later cases noted herein and has not been cited to this point in the last 50 years.
Here we see the importance of the sources relied upon by the publisher. If the source of the publisher's information is a person or organization of probity and good repute the jury would have warrant to find that he honestly believed that what he published was the truth and, thus, that his qualified privilege was not abused. On the other hand, if his source were notably mendacious there might well be warrant to find otherwise. For this reason, evidence bearing upon the source of the publisher's information is not only relevant but crucial to the question of the protection of the qualified privilege.
The immunity of the conditional privilege, then, fragile though it may be, is not without value to the defendant charged with defamation. The newspaper (or any) publisher, commenting upon the performance of duties by a public official, stands before the jury initially (unlike the malevolently officious fishwife) wearing his vulnerable cloak of privilege. It is *144 the plaintiff's burden to destroy it, to prove such abuse that the privilege is lost. "Where it appears that the occasion is subject to a qualified privilege, the burden is upon the plaintiff to prove the untruth of the statements and actual malice." Van Vliet v. Vander Naald, 290 Mich. 365, 371; see, also, Timmis v. Bennett, 352 Mich. 355; Bostetter v. Kirsch Company, 319 Mich. 547.
In short, at this point 2 questions are presented. The first is whether or not the occasion upon which the words were spoken was a privileged occasion. This determination is for the court and the burden of proof is upon the defendant asserting the privilege. If, however, the privilege is qualified, a further question remains, whether or not the privilege of the occasion was abused. Here the problem is one for the jury, under proper instructions, and with respect to it the plaintiff carries the burden of proof. "The question whether the occasion is such as to rebut the inference of malice if the communication be bona fide is one of law for the court; but whether bona fides exist is one of fact for the jury." Timmis v. Bennett, supra 367, quoting Bacon v. Michigan Central R. Company, 66 Mich. 166, 173.[7]
Such are the controlling issues and such are the parties' burdens with respect thereto. It is just at this point that we find appellants' primary assertion of error. "Was it error," runs appellants' first question, "for the trial court to submit the question of qualified privilege to the jury and to refuse to charge the jury that defendants were protected by qualified privilege as a matter of law?" In more detail, the court, assert appellants, "after defining qualified privilege in general terms, left it to the jury to determine as a matter of fact whether or not defendants *145 were entitled to the defense of qualified privilege." The court's charge with respect hereto was in large and pertinent part as follows:
"Now, what is a qualified privilege as claimed by the defense? You are charged that by reason of the circumstances surrounding the publication of the articles and the position and business of the parties a qualified privilege may exist. A qualified privilege is a right to publish the articles if the publishers have reason to believe them to be true, publish them in good faith and without malice. In determining whether or not a qualified privilege did exist in this case, you are charged that the publishers of newspapers owe a duty to publish matters of public interest and are not required to determine the exact truth or falsity of what they publish, provided they believed what they published to be the truth and published them in good faith. You are also charged that facts and circumstances may give rise to a qualified privilege for the protection of the defendants, provided such facts and circumstances exist or are reasonably believed by defendants to exist which cast a duty upon them in the interest of society to write and publish concerning said facts and circumstances.
"Now, there are places in this law suit where without question a qualified privilege would exist, but the declaration is so long, with so many things in it, that it would take me hours to go over the specification, allegation by allegation. If there was an occasion such as I am going to define now to you that did exist in connection with any of these various claims of libel on the part of plaintiff, then the qualified privilege would arise and the burden would be upon the plaintiff, as I will tell you in a moment, to prove both falsity and actual malice."
In so charging, the court was in error. This question of privilege is one for the court itself, and it is not to be divided between court and jury, despite the length and complexity of the charges and counter-charges, *146 unless there are questions relating to the extrinsic circumstances of the occasion requiring the jury's resolution. Such are not pointed out to us and our examination of the record discloses none. The occasion was clear. A newspaper was commenting upon the performance of duty by a public official. In such circumstances the law does not leave it to a jury to say whether or not the occasion is one of qualified privilege. This question, as we have seen, and for the reasons we have seen, is one of law for the court. Here, as defendants correctly asserted, the circumstances were such as to invest the defendants with a qualified privilege and the jury should have been so informed. It then remains for the jury, under proper instructions, to pass upon the maintenance or the destruction of the privilege.
In view of our remand for new trial a caveat should be observed. With respect to unprivileged defamation, malice in law is implied. "The existence of ill will or the absence of honest belief remains important where the exercise of a qualified privilege is in question, and it may affect the measure of damages to be imposed, particularly as to punitive damages, but it is not at all essential to liability in the first instance."[8] Thus we have held, in a case not involving privilege, that the fact that defendant merely repeated defamatory matter, current in the community, that he believed to be true, went only to mitigation of damages. Darling v. Mansfield, 222 Mich. 278 (34 A.L.R. 1). Here, however, we are in the area of qualified privilege. The showing of malice required for the forfeiture of the privilege is not presumed but is a matter for proof by the plaintiff, and evidence of lack of malice (e.g., source and bases of information) may be introduced to sustain the privilege in the face of attack upon it, as well as in mitigation *147 of damages should the privilege fall. See Fortney v. Stephan, supra. Moreover, if evidence of what defendants published concerning others is to be received as evidence of their state of mind, and intent, and as bearing upon the presence or absence of actual malice, it follows from what has been held that they are not to be foreclosed from a showing of their sources of information with respect thereto and their grounds therefor.
Assignments of error not included within the foregoing are deemed unnecessary to decision in the case. There is no merit in the additional issue raised by joint defendant and appellant Floyd McGriff, in his appeal in propria persona, that the trial judge "erred in denying his personal bias, prejudice and interest against the defendant in favor of plaintiff and his attorney." The record does not sustain such allegations, either as a matter of fact or of law.
Reversed and remanded for new trial. Costs to abide the final determination of the case.
BLACK and VOELKER, JJ., concurred with SMITH, J.
DETHMERS, C.J., and CARR, and KELLY, JJ., concurred in result.
EDWARDS and KAVANAGH, JJ., did not sit.
NOTES
[1]  Sec 1 Select Pleas in Manorial Courts, 2 Selden Society, pp 143, 145, discussed in Donnelly, History of Defamation, 1949 Wisconsin L Rev 99.
[2]  See, generally, Veeder, The History and Theory of the Law of Defamation, 3 Col L Rev 546; 4 Col L Rev 33; 2 Pollock and Maitland, The History of English Law (2d ed), pp 536-538.
[3]  See Harper, Privileged Defamation, 22 Va L Rev 642, 643.
[4]  3 Edgar, 4 (c. 946); 2 Canute, 16 (c. 1027-c. 1034), translated in The Law of the Kings of England from Edmund to Henry I (Robertson ed 1925), pp 25, 183.
[5]  See Yankwich, The Immunity of Congressional Speech  Its Origin, Meaning and Scope, 99 U of Pa L Rev 960, 962, quoting from a petition addressed by Thomas Jefferson to the Virginia house of delegates:
"`that in order to give to the will of the people the influence it ought to have, and the information which may enable them to exercise it usefully, it was a part of the common law, adopted as the law of this land, that their representatives, in the discharge of their functions, should be free from the cognizance or coercion of the coordinate branches, judiciary and executive.'" (7 Writings of Thomas Jefferson [Ford ed 1896] 158.)
[6]  "The case, then, must turn upon the question whether malice was made out by proof that the charges made were not true in fact, without additional evidence that they were known by the defendant to be true. If the privilege is to prove of actual value to the defendant, it would seem that it is quite unsafe to say that evidence that the statements made are untrue in fact establishes malice. The truth of the words may always constitute a defense. To remove privilege by evidence of the untruth of the words spoken would therefore leave one acting under a qualified privilege in practically no better attitude than one who can plead no such privilege. This question was before the court of queen's bench in Fountain v. Boodle, 3 QB (Adolph & E NS) 5 (114 Eng Rep 408). It was said by Patteson, J. (p 10), `Falsehood in fact is no proof of malice, unless the proof involves knowledge of the truth.' In Sommerville v. Hawkins, 10 CB 583 (138 Eng Rep 231), it was said that the supposition that defendant believed the charge is always to be made when the question is whether a communication is privileged or not. In Harris v. Thompson, 13 CB 333, 352 (138 Eng Rep 1228), it was said by Williams, J., citing Fountain v. Boodle: `The mere circumstance of the statement being false will not suffice to show malice, unless there is some evidence to show that the defendant knew it to be false.'"
[7]  A recent review of the problems presented in comment upon public officers and candidates for office is found in Catalfo v. Skenton (1959), 102 NH 47 (149 A2d 871).
[8]  Prosser, Torts (2d ed), § 94, p 602.

=== CASE 9741689 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:00:35.024193+00 ===

Messmore, J.
This is an appeal by Aneita F. Ruehle from a judgment rendered by the district court for Lancaster County on a mandate issued out of this court.
Numerous pleadings were filed in the trial court which, for the purpose of a determination of this appeal, need not be considered.
In determining this appeal, we first set forth the following: The plaintiff, Aneita F. Ruehle, moved the trial court to enter judgment on the mandate of the *25Supreme Court of Nebraska. The case in which the mandate was issued out of the Supreme Court of Nebraska is Ruehle v. Ruehle, reported in 161 Neb. 691, 74 N. W. 2d 689.
The defendant, Edward W. Ruehle, filed objections to the motion for judgment on the mandate on the ground that it would be necessary for the trial court to take evidence in compliance with the opinion of the Supreme Court, relative to what amount of money the defendant had paid out for the support of the minor child of the parties, Jo Ann Ruehle. The defendant further alleged that in addition to payments made to the clerk of the district court for Lancaster County he had paid the aggregate sum of $2,275, between 1940 and 1948,.to the plaintiff for support of their daughter, or directly to the daughter, Jo Ann. The defendant prayed the court to dismiss the motion of the plaintiff for judgment on the mandate, and petitioned the court for a hearing to ascertain the amount of child support, if any, due the plaintiff.
The plaintiff filed an answer and reply to the objections of the defendant in which she alleged that if the defendant made any payments directly to the minor child of the parties between 1940 and 1948, such payments were made voluntarily, and were not made in satisfaction of any accord arrived at by the parties; that the obligation of the defendant to make payments for the support of the minor child of the parties was never suspended during the temporary absence of the minor child of the parties from the home of the plaintiff; and that there was due the plaintiff from the defendant, on account of the judgment in the plaintiff’s favor for the support of the minor child of the parties, the sum of $3,397.05 with interest at 6 percent per annum on the principal sum of $2,389.28 from June 13, 1956. The prayer was for dismissal of the objections of the defendant, and that the plaintiff recover judgment against the defendant for the sum of $3,397.05, plus in*26terest at 6 percent per annum on the principal sum of $2,389.28 from June 13, 1956, costs, and attorneys’ fees.
For some reason not apparent in the record, each of the trial judges of the third judicial district disqualified himself. As a consequence, a judge of another judicial district was called in to hear the case. Trial was had and evidence taken. Judgment was rendered by the trial court as follows: “This court has reviewed the record and evidence and finds that, from February, 1942, to October, 1948, the defendant actually paid into court the sum of $30.00 per month, when, under the order of the Supreme Court, he should have paid $50.00 per month.
“In Addition to the aforesaid thirty dollar monthly payments the court finds that the defendant has actually paid to the plaintiff or to the daughter of the parties hereto for her support and maintenance, the sum of $2,313.71, and that said amount is in excess of the amount actually owing by defendant for child support herein.
“The court further finds that there is nothing due from defendant to plaintiff at this' time.”
The plaintiff filed a motion for new trial, which motion was overruled, and plaintiff perfected appeal to this court.
The plaintiff assigns as error that the trial court erred in allowing credit to the defendant to apply on a child support judgment requiring monthly cash payments to the clerk of the district court for Lancaster County, where the defendant had made payments of cash and had given gifts of other property to the minor child of the parties, none of which was requested or acquiesced in by, or even reached, the plaintiff, who was the owner of the judgment.
In the case of Asbra v. Dean, 160 Neb. 6, 68 N. W. 2d 696, this court said: “We have held where a mandate incorporates the opinion of the court by reference, they shall be construed together in determining the meaning of the mandate.” See, also, State ex rel. Johnson v. *27Hash, 145 Neb. 405, 16 N. W. 2d 734; Master Laboratories, Inc. v. Chesnut, 157 Neb. 317, 59 N. W. 2d 571; Elliott v. Gooch Feed Mill Co., 147 Neb. 612, 24 N. W. 2d 561; Glissmann v. Bauermeister, 146 Neb. 197, 19 N. W. 2d 43.
We make reference to the opinion in the case of Ruehle v. Ruehle, supra, as follows: “This is an action brought in the district court for Lancaster County by Edward W. Ruehle, the defendant in a divorce action brought by Aneita F. Ruehle, plaintiff therein, for the purpose of obtaining a judgment for child support rendered against him in the divorce action adjudged satisfied and released of record. The plaintiff in the divorce action, by cross-petition in the instant case, prayed for an accounting * * * for amounts payable as child support.”
It appears that Aneita F. Ruehle obtained a decree of divorce from Edward W. Ruehle on May 18, 1939, and was awarded custody of their daughter Jo Ann, a minor child, Until further order of the court and, in addition, the sum of $40 a month for child support to be paid to the clerk of the district court for Lancaster County on the first day of each month, to be delivered to Aneita F. Ruehle upon her receipt therefor. On November 29, 1939, Edward W. Ruehle filed a supplemental petition for modification of the original decree of divorce with reference to child support. To this petition Aneita F. Ruehle filed an answer and cross-petition requesting an increase in child support to $75 a month. A decree was entered by the trial court on February 15, 1940, finding that Edward W. Ruehle should pay child support in the amount of $50 a month commencing March 1, 1940, payable to the clerk of the district court until further order of the court.
The parties agreed that certain language in the opinion in Ruehle v. Ruehle, supra, contained on pages 693 and 696 thereof, constitutes the background for the present action. We quote therefrom: “By stipulation of the parties filed November 30, 1940, it appears that there were delinquent child support payments in the amount *28of $229.84 for which Aneita F. Ruehle agreed to accept $104.92 in full payment. In addition, the defendant was to pay costs in the amount of $38.79 and attorney’s fees in the amount of $63, and the amount of $15 on the first day of December 1940 and on the 15th day of December 1940, and on the same dates each month thereafter. In consideration of such payments, Aneita F. Ruehle was not to issue execution, garnishment, or other process against the defendant Edward W. Ruehle as long as the payments continued. On March 1, 1941, if all the payments had been promptly paid, Aneita F. Ruehle was to release her judgment for child support for the amounts accrued, and in the event payments were continued then at the expiration of each 3 months thereafter. The stipulation provided further that in the event Edward W. Ruehle failed to make any payments as therein provided, the plaintiff Aneita F. Ruehle, at her election, might terminate the agreement forthwith and take such steps as she desired to collect child support in the amount of $50 a month for such period of time as she had last receipted for in full. The stipulation provided further: ‘It is not the intention of the parties to modify the decree of this court as it noro stands, hut that said decree shall remain in full force and effect, subject, however to this agreement between the parties.’ The stipulation was dated November 28, 1940.” (Emphasis supplied.)
Further quoting from the opinion: “Edward W. Ruehle testified that he made payments to the clerk of the district court which approximated $15 each 2 weeks from December 1, 1940, to June 1949; that the daughter Jo Ann lived with her mother; that in the fall of 1948 Jo Ann changed her residence by entering Wesleyan University and moving onto the campus in Johnson Hall, girls’ dormitory at University Place, on November 17, 1948, and from that time on did not live with her mother; that on October 12, 1948, prior to the time Jo Ann entered Wesleyan University, he had a conversation with Jo Ann and her mother relative to Jo Ann *29moving from the mother’s home to the school; that school had started at that time; that in the conversation had with Aneita F. Ruehle he asked her if Jo Ann had talked to her about going to Wesleyan to live in Johnson Hall, to which she replied that Jo Ann had; that he then asked her if it was agreeable for Jo Ann to move out, and received a reply that if it was Jo Ann’s wish it was agreeable; and that he then asked her if Jo Ann had discussed the release of child support payments since he could not afford to pay child support in addition to paying all the expenses while Jo Ann attended the university and she replied that Jo Ann had. He further testified that he paid all of Jo Ann’s expenses, tuition, board, room, sorority dues, and other items of expense, and the agreement was that he was to continue to pay child support payments into the district court until such time as it was determined whether or not Jo Ann would continue in school and be successful in her endeavors; that he paid the expenses of Jo Ann at the university and also $30 a month to the clerk of the district court until June 1949, with the understanding that Aneita F. Ruehle was to return the money paid into the clerk’s office during such period of time that Jo Ann attended the university; and that Aneita F. Ruehle returned the payments in cash by giving the same to Jo Arm with instructions to return the money to her father. Fie further testified that in 1949 he stopped this method of making the payments upon the suggestion of Aneita F. Ruehle that it was a nuisance. During the summer of 1947 and 1948 Jo Ann worked at the Lincoln General Hospital as a nurses aid. In the fall of 1949 she entered Bryan Memorial Hospital to become a registered nurse. She continued hér employment there until August 17, 1952. She was graduated from Wesleyan University in 1953. During the time she was taking training at Bryan Memorial Hospital he paid her expenses. Jo Ann subsequently married and 'moved to Los Angeles.”
*30The following also appears in the opinion: “The stipulation, as appears in the instant case, in no sense modified the decree with reference to the child support, and it was so agreed by the parties as the stipulation discloses.”
We went on to say in the opinion: “We are in accord that there is a complete accord and satisfaction of the child support that would have accrued or become due from and after October 12, 1948, by reason of an agreement that was far more beneficial to the interests of the daughter Jo Ann. * * *
“We conclude that there should be an accounting as to the child support payments which had accrued and were due up to October 12, 1948, with interest thereon at the legal rate, and that all credits should be given to the appellee for payments made by him for child support. The cause is remanded to the trial court for determination of the amount of child support due on this phase of the case. * * *
“For the reasons given in this opinion, the judgment of the district court is reversed and the cause remanded with directions to modify the decree in accordance with the opinion.”
The mandate in Ruehle v. Ruehle, supra, commanded the district court, without delay, to proceed in conformity with the judgment and opinion of this court.
In the case of Ruehle v. Ruehle now appealed to this court, Edward W. Ruehle testified as to the amounts he was required to pay for the support of Jo Ann, the minor child of the parties, and the manner in which he was required to make such payments. He further testified that in addition to the payments of $30 a month to the clerk of the district court starting December 1, 1940, he made other payments in cash to Aneita F. Ruehle, or to his daughter Jo Ann; and that he kept a record of all payments made direct to Aneita F. Ruehle and to Jo Ann. There was introduced in evidence an account of these payments, outside of the *31money paid in to the office of the clerk of the district court for child support. A compilation of these figures was made by Edward W. Ruehle and received in evidence.
On cross-examination he testified that he did not ascertain how Jo Ann spent the money he gave her for Christmas shopping or on other occasions; and that there was a policy of insurance for $2,000 written by him in a company he represented, upon which he paid the premiums and in which he was designated the beneficiary. This policy was on the life of Jo Ann. He further testified to the purchase of clothes for Jo Ann, and amounts given to her at different times to spend and for entertainment.
Aneita F. Ruehle testified that Jo Ann did not bring home to her any of the amounts given to her by Edward W. Ruehle. She knew nothing about the policy of insurance on the life of Jo Ann. She did not regard the money spent by Jo Ann while shopping with Ruehle’s second wife, or attendance at entertainments, as contributions for child support. She further testified that at all times between December 1, 1940, and October 12, 1948, she had maintained a home where Jo Ann either lived or could come to visit.
The following are applicable to a determination of this appeal.
Section 42-312, R. R. S. 1943, specifically provides that the court in a divorce action retains jursidiction of the subject matter and the parties for the enforcement or modification of a judgment for maintenance of children, and prescribes the method by which a decree for child support may be modified.
Where a divorce decree provides for the payment of stipulated sums monthly for the support of a minor child or children, contingent only upon a subsequent order of the court, such payments become vested in the payee as they accrue. The courts are without' authority to reduce the amounts of such accrued payments, and the party obligated to pay such ¿mounts cannot *32satisfy the sum in whole or in part by voluntarily furnishing such things as clothes, entertainment, spending money, etc., direct to the minor or minors. See Ruehle v. Ruehle, supra. See, also, § 42-318, R. R. S. 1943.
In Wassung v. Wassung, 136 Neb. 440, 286 N. W. 340, this court said: “The general rule is stated in 19 C. J. 359, as follows: ‘Payments exacted by the original decree of divorce become vested in the payee as they accrue, and the court, on application to modify such decree, is without authority to reduce the amounts or modify the decree with reference thereto retrospectively; the modifying decree relates to the future only and from the time of its entry.’ * * *
“Where a divorce decree provides for the payment of stipulated sums monthly for the support of a minor child or children, contingent only upon a subsequent order of the court, marriage, or the reaching of majority, such payments become vested in the payee as they accrue. The courts of this state are without authority to reduce the amounts of such accrued payments.
“This rule is consistent with the holdings of this court with reference to alimony and child support, down to and including the case of McIlwain v. McIlwain, 135 Neb. 705, 283 N. W. 845, and Graham v. Graham, 135 Neb. 761, 284 N. W. 280.” See, also, Clark v. Clark, 139 Neb. 446, 297 N. W. 661; Schrader v. Schrader, 148 Neb. 162, 26 N. W. 2d 617; Sullivan v. Sullivan, 141 Neb. 779, 4 N. W. 2d 919.
Ruehle v. Ruehle, supra, contains some of the above-cited authorities which were likewise applicable to the appeal lodged in this court in that case.
In the case of Finnern v. Bruner, 167 Neb. 281, 92 N. W. 2d 785, this court said: “In Sullivan v. Sullivan, 141 Neb. 779, 4 N. W. 2d 919, this court held that:" ‘In a decree granting a wife a divorce and the custody of minor children, monthly installments of alimony' and support-become vested as they accrue, and unpaid, past^ due -portions thereof- are ■ final -judgments beyond -the *33power of the court to reduce by modification of the original decree.’ ” Schrader v. Schrader, supra, is cited, also.
In Finnern v. Bruner, supra, the court concluded that the judgment of the trial court should be reversed and the cause remanded with directions to dismiss the plaintiff’s petition and render judgment in favor of the personal representative of the estate of the deceased mother for the amount of the judgment for child support which remained unpaid, with interest at 6 percent upon unpaid weekly installments thereof as they accrued prior to September 15, 1935, and upon the principal amount thereof remaining unpaid from September 15, 1935, to date, bearing in mind that interest should not be compounded in any event.
The above is the kind of judgment which should have been entered on the mandate in the case of Ruehle v. Ruehle, supra.
The plaintiff in the instant case assigns as error the failure of the trial court to rule upon the plaintiff’s motion for allowance of attorneys’ fees. It is apparent from the record that attorneys’ fees were not allowed in the district court. We conclude that there should be no allowance of attorneys’ fees.
We conclude that the judgment of the trial court should be reversed and the cause remanded with directions to render judgment in favor of the plaintiff for the amount of child support which remains unpaid, with interest at 6 percent per annum upon the unpaid installments thereof as they accrued prior to October 12, 1948, and upon the principal amount thereof remaining unpaid from such date, bearing in mind that interest shall not be compounded in any event, defendant Edward W. Ruehle to pay all costs.
For the reasons given herein, we affirm the judgment of the district court in not allowing the attorneys’ fees as costs in favor of the plaintiff; and we reverse the judgment of the district court as the same relates *34to child support and remand the cause with directions to render judgment in conformity with this opinion.
Affirmed in part, and in part reversed
AND REMANDED WITH DIRECTIONS.

=== CASE 9741690 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:00:35.028757+00 ===

Chappell, J.,
concurring.
As far as important here, the mandate of this court in Ruehle v. Ruehle, 161 Neb. 691, 74 N. W. 2d 689, provided as follows: “* * * upon a trial of which cause in said Supreme Court during the January Term, A. D. 1956, a certified copy of the opinion of the Court being attached hereto and made a part hereof, the following judgment was rendered:
“ ‘This cause coming on to be heard upon appeal from the district court of Lancaster County, was argued by counsel and submitted to the court; upon due consideration whereof, the court finds error apparent in the record of the proceedings and judgment of said district court. It is, therefore, considered, ordered and adjudged that said judgment of the district court be, and it hereby is, reversed and the cause remanded with directions to modify the decree in accordance with the opinion of this court this day filed herein. It is further considered, ordered and adjudged that appellant pay all costs incurred herein by her taxed at $20.00; and that appellees pay all costs incurred herein by them, taxed at $5.00; for all of which execution is hereby awarded, and that a mandate issue accordingly.’
“NOW, THEREFORE, You are commanded, without delay, to proceed in conformity with the judgment and opinion of this Court.
“WITNESS, The Honorable Robert G. Simmons, Chief Justice and the Seal of said Court, this nineteenth day of March, 1956. George H. Turner, Clerk. By Gerald S. Vitamvas, Deputy.” (Italics supplied.)
As I view the matter, decision in this second appeal is controlled entirely by rules of law under which we are required to determine whether or not the trial court complied with the mandate in the rendition of its *35judgment. I agree that the trial court did not do so.
In Asbra v. Dean, 160 Neb. 6, 68 N. W. 2d 696, citing authorities, we held: “The provisions of a mandate of this court should be considered as a whole in determining what was decided on appeal.
“When a mandate of the Supreme Court makes the opinion of the court a part thereof by reference, the opinion should be examined in conjunction with the mandate to determine the nature and terms of the judgment to be entered or the action to be taken thereon.
“When a mandate is in the same general language of the opinion in its directions to the lower court, reference may be made solely to the opinion to determine whether the lower court’s decree is in accordance with the mandate.”
Also, in Jurgensen v. Ainscow, 160 Neb. 208, 69 N. W. 2d 856, we held that: “When a mandate of the Supreme Court makes the opinion of the court a part thereof by reference, the opinion should be examined in conjunction with the mandate to determine the nature and terms of the judgment to be entered or the action to be taken thereon.
“When this court reverses a decree as to a matter finally determined thereby, and remands the cause with directions to enter a specific judgment or decree, the mandate of this court is final and conclusive upon all parties, as to all matters so directed, and no new defenses can be entertained or heard in opposition thereto.
“Public interest requires that there shall be an end to litigation, and when a cause has received the consideration of this court, has had its merits determined, and has been remanded with specific directions, the court to which such mandate is directed has no power to do anything other than to enter judgment in accordance with such mandate.”
In Noble v. City of Lincoln, 158 Neb. 457, 63 N. W. 2d 475, we reaffirmed the general rules that: “The decision of questions presented to this court in reviewing the *36proceedings of the district court becomes the law of the case and for purposes of the litigation settles conclusively the matters adjudicated expressly or by necessary implication.
“The law of the case applies to not only questions actually and formally presented but to all questions existing in the record and necessarily involved in the decision.”
We have adhered to these general rules in many cases. See Nebraska Digest, Vol. 2, Appeal and Error, Key No. 1195. ■
Further, in County of Madison v. School District No. 2, 148 Neb. 218, 27 N. W. 2d 172, quoting from International Harvester Co. v. County of Douglas, 146 Neb. 555, 20 N. W. 2d 620, we said: “The rule is: * * the controlling effect of a decision must relate to the factual condition as stated in the opinion. To go behind facts so stated and materially to change the fact basis is to remove the decision as an authority.’ ” I believe that the case at bar is no exception to the foregoing rules.
The substance of the stipulation here involved, which was filed November 30, 1940, is set forth in the original opinion. As far as important here, that stipulation agreed that defendant was then delinquent in payments of child support to plaintiff in the amount of $229.84, for which plaintiff agreed to accept from defendant $104.92 in full payment, and defendant agreed to thereafter pay $30 a month, payable on the first and fifteenth of each month, beginning December 1, 1940, but that in the event ’defendant failed to make any such payments plaintiff at her election might terminate the agreement forthwith and take such steps as she desired to collect child support in the amount of $50 a month as ordered by the trial court in its modification of the original decree effective March 1, 1940.
In that connection,' the stipulation, as quoted in the original opinion, specifically provided that: “ Tt is not the intention of the parties to modify the decree of *37this court as it now stands, but that the decree shall remain in full force and effect, subject, however to this agreement between the parties.’ ”
With regard thereto, after citing authorities, we specifically concluded in the original opinion that: “The stipulation, as appears in the instant case, in no sense modified the decree with reference to the child support, and it was so agreed by the parties as the stipulation discloses.”
The opinion then went on to say: “The appellee contends that an accord and satisfaction prevailed in the instant case when the oral agreement between the appellant and the appellee was made on October 12, 1948, and that according to this agreement the appellant agreed to release the judgment against the appellee for all child support that might have accrued and become due under the decree. We are not in accord with the appellee’s contention in this respect. We are in accord that there is a complete accord and satisfaction of the child support that would have accrued or become due from and after October 12, 1948, by reason of an agreement that was far more beneficial to the interests of the daughter Jo Ann. She had the benefit of an education and nurses training, and acquitted herself with honor, all through the efforts of the appellee by agreement with the appellant.
“We conclude that there should be an accounting as to the child support payments which had accrued and were due up to October 12, 1948, with interest thereon at the legal rate, and that all credits should be given to the appellee for payments made by him for child support. The cause is remanded to the trial court for determination of the amount of child support due on this phase of the case.” (Italics supplied.)
Black’s Law Dictionary (3d Ed.), p. 28, citing authorities, defines “Accounting” as: “The making up and rendition of an account, either voluntarily or by order of a court. * * * In the latter case, it imports a rendi*38tion of a judgment for the balance ascertained to be due. * * * The term may include payment of the amount due.” See, also, Words and Phrases (Perm. Ed.), Accounting, Vol. 1, p. 543.
An examination of the mandate and all of our original opinion discloses, as I view it, that by such accounting for and determination of child support payments which had accrued and were due from defendant under the decree prior to October 12, 1948, as claimed by plaintiff in her cross-petition and denied by the trial court, this court meant an accounting and determination of the difference between $229.84, the amount of child support which was admittedly delinquent and unpaid on December 1, 1940, under the decree effective March 1, 1940, and $104.92 paid by defendant thereon, and the difference between $30 a month paid as child support by defendant between December 1, 1940, and October 12, 1948, and the $50 a month for child support during the same period, as had been ordered by the trial court in its modification of the original decree, which order at all times, as the original opinion concluded, had remained in full force and effect. When such an accounting or determination is made, plaintiff would be entitled to a judgment for the total of such differences, including interest at the legal rate upon delinquent child support installments, as they had accrued and vested under the decree prior to October 12, 1948, and on the principal amount remaining unpaid from such date, with “no allowance of attorney’s fees to be taxed as costs in behalf of” plaintiff, and that plaintiff should “be required to pay her own costs and attorney’s fees.”
In that connection, our original opinion finally said: “For the reasons given in this opinion, the judgment of the district court is reversed and the cause remanded with directions to modify the decree in accordance with the opinion.”
Viewed entirely as a question of law, as aforesaid, I agree that the opinion of Messmore, J., which has been *39submitted and adopted in the present second appeal, disposes of the case in the manner required by applicable and controlling rules of law.

=== CASE 9741691 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:00:35.0327+00 ===

Simmons, C. J.,
dissenting.
The court’s opinion in this case does not touch the issue which is here for determination. We are not called upon nor do we have the right to redetermine the questions decided in Ruehle v. Ruehle, 161 Neb. 691, 74 N. W. 2d 689.
That decision became final. The trial court was bound by it. We are bound by it.
I have no disagreement with the rules of law as stated by the court which are: “Where a mandate of the Supreme Court makes the opinion of the court a part thereof by reference, the opinion should be examined in conjunction with the mandate to determine the nature and terms of the judgment to be entered or the action to be taken thereon.” “Section 42-312, R. R. S. 1943, specifically provides that the court in a divorce action retains jurisdiction of the subject matter and the parties for the enforcement or modification of a judgment for maintenance of children, and prescribes the method by which a decree for child support may be modified.” “Where a divorce decree provides for the payment of stipulated sums monthly for the support of a minor child or children, contingent only upon a subsequent order of the court, such payments become vested in the payee as they accrue. The courts are without authority to reduce the amounts of such accrued payments.” “In a decree granting a wife a divorce and the custody of minor children, monthly installments of alimony and support become vested as they accrue, and unpaid, past-due portions thereof are final judgments beyond the power of the court to reduce by modification of the original decree.”
For- reasons stated later herein there is no proposal to change, alter, or reduce accrued and unpaid child support payments. They are fully recognized.
*40I agree with the rules of law stated in the concurring opinion, as follows: “When this court reverses; a decree as to a matter finally determined thereby, and remands the cause with directions to* enter a specific judgment or decree, the mandate of this court is final and conclusive upon all parties, as to all matters so directed, and no new defenses can be entertained or heard in opposition thereto.” “The decision of questions presented to this court in reviewing the proceedings of the district court becomes the law of the case and for purposes of the litigation settles conclusively the matters adjudicated expressly or by necessary implication.”
I hold that the law of the case rule requires an affirmance of the judgment of the trial court.
The opinion in Ruehle v. Ruehle, swpra, discussed first the pleadings and evidence and then announced this conclusion: “We conclude that there should be an accounting as to the child support payments which had accrued and were due up to October 12, 1948, with interest thereon at the legal rate, and that all credits should be given to the appellee for payments made by him for child support.” It then remanded the cause “to the trial court for determination of the amount of child support due on this phase of the case.”
Neither by the conclusion above quoted nor by the directions of the remand was the trial court limited to a determination of the “amount of the judgment for child support which remains unpaid.” This last quote is taken from Finnern v. Bruner, 167 Neb. 281, 92 N. W. 2d 785, which the court now says is “the kind of judgment which should have been entered on the mandate” in this case. But the Finnern judgment is not the judgment which the court ordered in the first opinion of this case.
The conclusion of the court in the first opinion above quoted is in two parts. - First it directs an accounting as to the child support payments which had accrued and were due to October 12, 1948, with interest thereon at the legal rate. Had the court stopped there in its conclu*41sion, and had it remanded the cause for determination on that basis there would be no disagreement between us now.
The rules of law relied on by the court would then be applicable, and are applicable to a determination of the accrued unpaid amount of the decree. The Finnern opinion would then be applicable.
But the court did not stop there. It further directed “that all credits should be given to the appellee for payments made by him for child support.”
Obviously that involves subtracting the “payments made” by Mr. Ruehle “for child support” from the amount accrued, due and unpaid on the judgment. The difference, if any, would be the amount of the judgment to be entered against Mr. Ruehle. I point out that the amount of those payments was an issue in the first case which was determined here for the opinion recites that Mr. Ruehle “alleged that the child support payments were made directly to- Aneita F. Ruehle or to the clerk of the district court until September 1948, * * (Emphasis supplied.)
It is obvious that the trial court accepted the conclusion of this court in the first opinion in this case and complied with the directions of the remand. Its decision is now reversed by ignoring that part of the conclusion which directs that “all credits should be given” Mr. Ruehle “for payments made by him for child support.”
The first part of the conclusion required but a simple computation of the amount due on the decree, the second part of the conclusion required an accounting of payments made for child support to Mrs. Ruehle and giving Mr. Ruehle credit for those payments.
The court’s opinion ignores the second provision of the remand order and in effect reads it out of the remand order. We are not here concerned with the correctness of the remand order. We are concerned with the fact of the remand order. It became the law of the case.
What, then, is the law of the case rule referred to, but *42not stated, in the concurring opinion. It is: As early as 1899 in an opinion by Norval, J., in Farmers & Merchants Bank v. German Nat. Bank, 59 Neb. 229, 80 N. W. 820, this court held: “When a cause is remanded by this court with directions as to further proceedings, the court below has no power to do anything but carry out the directions thus given it.”
In Story v. Robertson, 5 Neb. (Unoff.) 404, 98 N. W. 825, in an opinion by Fawcett, C., it was held: “When the district court received the mandate of this court it was its duty to do just what it did in this case, literally obey the mandate.”
In Regouby v. Dawson County Irr. Co., 128 Neb. 531, 259 N. W. 365, in an opinion by Chappell, District Judge, we reversed the judgment and remanded the cause with directions to “compute the damages in accordance with the opinion of this court * * We held: “* * * when a case is sent back by the supreme court to the trial court with specific directions, the trial court has no alternative except to follow the directions given in the manner set forth therein.”
In Elliott v. Gooch Feed Mill Co., 147 Neb. 612, 24 N. W. 2d 561, in an opinion by Messmore, J., we held: “ ‘When a judgment of the district court is reversed and a cause remanded with specific directions, it is the duty of the district court to follow the mandate.’ ”
In De Lair v. De Lair, 148 Neb. 393, 27 N. W. 2d 540, in an opinion by Wenke, J., we held: “When a case is sent back by the Supreme Court to the trial court with specific directions, the trial court has no alternative except to follow the directions given in the manner set forth therein.”
In Rhoades v. State Real Estate Commission, 153 Neb. 625, 45 N. W. 2d 628, in an opinion by Boslaugh, J., we held: “When a case is remanded by this court to the district court with directions for its disposition, the district court must obey and perform the mandate of this court.”
*43In Stocker v. Wells, 155 Neb. 472, 52 N. W. 2d 284, in an opinion by Chappell, J., we held: “When a case is sent back by the Supreme Court to the trial court with specific directions, the trial court has no alternative except to follow the directions given in the manner set forth therein.”
In Jurgensen v. Ainscow, 160 Neb. 208, 69 N. W. 2d 856, in an opinion by Carter, J., we held: “When this court reverses a decree as to a matter finally determined thereby, and remands the cause with directions to enter a specific judgment or decree, the mandate of this court is final and conclusive upon all parties, as to all matters so directed, and no new defenses can be entertained or heard in opposition thereto.”
I submit that the trial court here literally followed the mandate of the former opinion and its judgment in doing so should be affirmed.
There are two other matters that I deem should be mentioned. The court in its opinion, and the concurring opinion, holds Mr. Ruehle to the stipulation of facts which is set out in full in the dissenting opinion of Carter, J., in the first decision here. It, however, refuses to hold Mrs. Ruehle bound by the same stipulation. That need not be further discussed. The mere statement of the fact is sufficient.
The court denies Mrs. Ruehle an allowance of attorneys’ fees. I agree. However, the reason given is: “Attorneys’ fees in divorce proceedings will ordinarily be denied where there appears no reasonable justification for the position taken by the party claiming them.”
The court, then, holds that there is “no reasonable justification for the position taken” by Mrs. Ruehle and at the same time grants her all relief she requests, save attorneys’ fees.
I am authorized to say that Carter, J., and Boslaugh, J., concur in this dissent.

=== CASE 2228428 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:01.186955+00 ===

256 Minn. 33 (1959)
97 N.W. (2d) 279
MARGUERITE B. JOHNSON
v.
CHESTER W. JOHNSON.
VAN VALKENBURG, BLAISDELL & MOSS AND GISLASON, REIM & MINIUM, PETITIONERS.
No. 37,685.
Supreme Court of Minnesota.
June 5, 1959.
Leo J. Lauerman and Lindmeyer & Lindmeyer, for appellant.
Gallagher, Farrish, Sheran & Zimmerman, for respondents.
*34 KNUTSON, JUSTICE.
This is an appeal from an order of the trial court denying defendant's blended motion for amended findings of fact, conclusions of law, and order for judgment or for a new trial and from the judgment entered.
The facts essential to a determination of the issues involved in this appeal may be briefly stated as follows: In January 1955 plaintiff consulted petitioner Horace Van Valkenburg, an attorney at law practicing his profession in the city of Minneapolis, relative to the commencement of an action for divorce from her husband. The action actually was started in November of that year. At the commencement thereof, plaintiff moved for temporary alimony and for an allowance of attorneys' fees and suit money to enable her to carry on the action during the pendency thereof. The court allowed her temporary alimony of $435 per month and temporary attorneys' fees of $750, plus suit money of $100. Attorneys' fees and suit money allowed were paid by defendant. Shortly prior to the trial of the case the parties became reconciled, whereupon the attorneys for the parties executed a stipulation of dismissal reading as follows:
"IT IS HEREBY STIPULATED by and between the above named parties, through their respective attorneys, being the undersigned, that the above entitled action is hereby dismissed, provided, however, that the Court shall retain jurisdiction of this matter for the purpose of determining and adjudicating the amount of attorneys' fees for the attorneys for the plaintiff herein, and that the clerk of said Court may so indicate the same upon his files.
"IT IS FURTHER STIPULATED by and between the above named parties, through their respective attorneys, that said parties hereby join in petitioning the Court to make its appropriate order sealing the file in the above entitled matter from the public for all purposes other than those definitely provided by statute."
Pursuant thereto, the court issued an order for dismissal which read as follows:
"Pursuant to the attached Stipulation of Dismissal, and upon the joint motion of the parties in the above entitled case, through their respective attorneys,
*35 "IT IS HEREBY ORDERED, that the above entitled matter be and the same is hereby dismissed, provided, however, that the Court retains jurisdiction for the purpose of adjudicating and determining the amount of attorneys' fees for the attorneys for the plaintiff herein."
Thereafter in September 1958, petitioners asked the court for an award of attorneys' fees and expenses pursuant to M.S.A. 518.14. The matter came on for trial before the court and an advisory jury. The jury returned verdicts in favor of petitioners, finding that Van Valkenburg, Blaisdell & Moss were entitled to recover $3,000 in addition to what they had already been paid and that Gislason, Reim & Minium were entitled to recover $350. Based on this verdict, the trial court made findings of fact and conclusions of law in which it found that Van Valkenburg, Blaisdell & Moss had performed services for plaintiff of the reasonable value of $3,205.79 and had necessarily paid out costs and disbursements in the preparation of the action for trial of $644.21. After crediting thereon the sum of $850 paid pursuant to the court's order at the commencement of the action, the court found that said attorneys were entitled to recover $3,000 consistent with the jury's verdict. The court found that Gislason, Reim & Minium had performed legal services for plaintiff of the reasonable value of $316.20 and had paid out and advanced necessary disbursements and costs in the sum of $33.80 and that said attorneys were entitled to recover judgment against defendant for $350, which likewise was the amount awarded by the jury. Judgment was ordered pursuant to these findings.
The questions presented for our determination are: (1) Does the trial court have jurisdiction to entertain a motion for the allowance of attorneys' fees for services rendered for a wife in an action brought against her husband for divorce in the original divorce action after such action has been dismissed pursuant to a reconciliation of the parties? (2) Did the court commit reversible error in the admission of evidence?
1. Defendant contends that the trial court lacked jurisdiction to entertain petitioners' motion for a determination of attorneys' fees in the original divorce action after a dismissal thereof. There can be no doubt that defendant's position was unanswerable under our statute (§ 518.14) as it existed prior to the amendment thereof by L. 1955, *36 c. 687. We had so held in Wagner v. Wagner, 34 Minn. 441, 26 N.W. 450; Johnson v. Johnson, 217 Minn. 436, 14 N.W. (2d) 617, 28 Minn. L. Rev. 488 (involving the same parties as are involved in this case); Rhein v. Rhein, 244 Minn. 260, 69 N.W. (2d) 657. Elsewhere there is a division of authority on this subject, but our prior decisions undoubtedly followed the majority view.[1] However, our statute was amended by L. 1955, c. 687, to read as follows:
"In any action brought either for divorce or separate maintenance, the court, in its discretion, may require one party to pay a reasonable amount, necessary to enable the other spouse to carry on, or to defend the action, and to support such spouse and the children during its pendency. The court may adjudge costs and disbursements against either party. The court may authorize the collection of any money so awarded by execution, or out of any property sequestered, or in any other manner within the power of the court. An award of attorney's fees made by the court during the pendency of the action or in the final judgment survives the action and if not paid by the party directed to pay the same may be enforced as above provided or by a separate civil action brought by the attorney in his own name. If the action is dismissed or abandoned prior to determination and award of attorney's fees the court may nevertheless award attorney's fees upon the attorney's motion and such award shall also survive the action and may be enforced in the same manner as last above provided." (Italics supplied.)
As a result of this amendment, our decisions under our former statute are no longer authority for the proposal asserted by defendant nor are the decisions from other jurisdictions having statutes dissimilar to ours.
It is argued that the statute as amended deals only with alimony and attorneys' fees pending the suit. The title of the statutory provision as codified by the revisor of statutes might lead to that conclusion, *37 but reference to the title in the amending act clearly indicates that the legislature intended to go much farther than that. The title in the act reads as follows:
"An act relating to actions for divorce or separate maintenance, providing for temporary alimony or support money during the pendency thereof, and the payment of costs, disbursements, and attorney fees therein; amending Minnesota Statutes 1953, Section 518.14." (Italics supplied.)
It is apparent that the provisions of the amending act dealing with allowance of attorneys' fees are not limited to temporary fees allowed during the pendency of the action as are the provisions relating to payment of support money. The provisions dealing with the allowance of attorneys' fees separately provide for survival of the action as to fees allowed during pendency of the action and those allowed if the action is dismissed or abandoned prior to a determination thereof. There could have been no purpose in adding such sentence to the amending act if defendant's contention were tenable. It must follow that under § 518.14, as amended, a divorce case now survives a voluntary dismissal or abandonment thereof for the purpose of permitting the trial court to fix and allow attorneys' fees for services rendered up to the time of the dismissal. Such fees must be limited to compensation for services rendered up to the time of the dismissal.
It is argued that to allow a divorce action to continue after a voluntary dismissal as a result of the reconciliation of the parties for the purpose of allowing attorneys' fees is contrary to public policy and contravenes our constitution. A determination of public policy in divorce matters lies largely with the legislature. We see no constitutional barrier to the enactment of a survival statute such as we have here.[2]
We need not determine the question whether the attorneys for a wife suing for divorce may recover from the husband in an independent action after a voluntary dismissal or abandonment of the divorce case since that question is not involved in the present action.[3]
*38 Defendant also contends that, even if the statute permits the court to fix and allow attorneys' fees after a dismissal of the action, the statute does not permit the allowance of disbursements. It is true that the statute does not specifically mention disbursements. However, the title of L. 1955, c. 687, deals with payment of "costs, disbursements, and attorney fees." Inasmuch as the court is permitted to retain jurisdiction of the divorce action after a dismissal, we think that the court, while so retaining jurisdiction, may determine the disbursements and expenses incurred prior to dismissal and allow them as an incident of the power so conferred upon it. It would be absurd to hold that the legislature intended to confer on the court authority to retain jurisdiction of the suit for the purpose of allowing attorneys' fees but not the expenses actually paid or incurred in the action prior to dismissal. It would have been better if the statute had expressly included disbursements as it does in the title of the amending act, but, in ascertaining the intention of the legislature, we believe that the allowance of disbursements is an incident of the legislative grant of power inherent in the survival jurisdiction.
2. It is also argued that inasmuch as the trial court had allowed temporary alimony and expenses, including attorneys' fees, prior to the dismissal of the case the allowance of attorneys' fees is res judicata and the court lacked jurisdiction to allow any further fees to the attorneys. This argument is not tenable. Temporary attorneys' fees, the same as temporary support money, are allowed pending a divorce action only as a stopgap to enable a wife to carry on the suit or to survive, as the case may be, until there can be a final determination of the action on the merits. In neither case is such allowance a final adjudication of the rights of the parties and, as such, it is not res judicata.
3. The balance of defendant's assignments of error deal with the trial court's admission of evidence. Defendant's argument is based largely upon the proposition that it is against public policy to permit the attorney for a wife in a divorce action to air in public the charges and countercharges of the parties after there has been a reconciliation.
At the outset, it must be kept in mind that the trial of the issue involved here ordinarily would be heard by the court without a jury. *39 By order of the trial court dated October 23, 1956, the case was placed upon the calendar for trial "with the right of defendant to a jury trial of the issues involved." (Italics supplied.) At least three times during the trial of the case, petitioners offered to try the case to the court without a jury and requested that the jury be discharged. Defendant would not consent to do so. Apparently he thought that his chances of winning the lawsuit were better before a jury than before the court. If any harm has resulted from "washing dirty linen" in the presence of a jury, it must be chargeable to defendant's insistence upon a jury trial. Furthermore, the jury acted in an advisory capacity only, and the court was free to accept or reject the verdict as it saw fit. In the light of these facts, the case should be viewed the same as if it had been tried by the court without a jury.
Much of the evidence which defendant contends was improperly received consists of statements of people who might have been called as witnesses if the divorce case had proceeded to trial. It is claimed that some of these statements are hearsay and that others are privileged.
An examination of the original file in the divorce case, as well as the exhibits received in this case, demonstrates without any doubt that the charges and countercharges of the parties were about as far reaching and vituperative as charges in a divorce case can be. In response to a bill of particulars by plaintiff, defendant served on her attorneys a document consisting of 19 typewritten pages in which plaintiff was accused of a great many and varied acts of misconduct. Even a cursory examination of the affidavits and counteraffidavits of the parties to be found in the file would lead to no other conclusion than that the parties were pointing toward a "bare-knuckled" fight, in which each was prepared to go the limit without any consideration for the personal feelings of the other or the harm which might be done to their reputations. Under these circumstances, it was not only prudent but essential that plaintiff's attorneys be prepared not only to establish the charges she made against her husband but to rebut the charges that he made against her. While the statements which defendant claims were erroneously admitted do consist for the most part of hearsay of third parties, they were not admitted to prove the truth of the statements *40 but only to substantiate petitioners' claim for services and to establish that such services were reasonably necessary in preparing for trial. In view of the reconciliation of the parties, it would do neither of them any good to relate in this opinion the nature of these statements. It is enough to say that for the purpose of showing the amount of work done, the value of such services, and the practical necessity of doing it they were properly admitted. If the case had been tried to the court, as it probably should have been, it is doubtful whether the admission of these documents would be reversible error even if erroneously admitted on the state of this record.[4]
Something might be said about one item of evidence that was admitted and upon which defendant relies for reversal. Throughout the trial and in the argument to the jury, defendant strenuously urged that petitioners' services were not worth what they claimed them to be and that defendant's income was rather moderate. His income tax statements showed a very moderate income. In order to counteract these claims, petitioners offered a part of the record before this court in Baskerville v. Baskerville, 246 Minn. 496, 75 N.W. (2d) 762. In that case defendant was the attorney for defendant wife. He testified in that case as follows:
"In stating the fair and reasonable value [of his services], I think I should explain this to the Court. I have set the fair and reasonable value at $200 per day. That is averaging all the days out the same. If I were to segregate the trial days from the other days, I might very well raise that amount, but I might say it this way, that for a long time prior to the time that I entered in this case, and up to the present time, I have averaged over $200 a day for every day that I have worked except as to the time applied in this case, and I have put the fees at the very minimum, based upon what I made before, and up to the present time, of every day that I worked, whether in or out of court."
Defendant does not deny so testifying in the Baskerville case. Under the circumstances of this case, we think that the evidence was properly admitted. If defendant had not challenged the value of petitioners' services, the offered evidence might well have been inadmissible. In *41 any event, we do not think that it was so prejudicial that its admission would constitute reversible error.
There are some discrepancies between the testimony of petitioners and their records, but these matters involve purely questions of credibility of the witnesses and the weight to be given to their testimony. That was a matter that rested with the jury and the trial court. Having thoroughly examined the record herein, we are convinced that the evidence sustains the findings of the court and that the case should be affirmed. Other claims of defendant do not merit any discussion.
Affirmed.
MR. JUSTICE FRANK T. GALLAGHER took no part in the consideration or decision of this case.
NOTES
[1]  See, 17 Am. Jur., Divorce and Separation, § 650; Annotations, Ann. Cas. 1913A, 798, and 45 A.L.R. 941. For a discussion of many of the cases pro and con, see Kiddle v. Kiddle, 90 Neb. 248, 133 N.W. 181, 36 L.R.A. (N.S.) 1001, Ann. Cas. 1913A, 796; Bell v. Bell, 214 Ala. 573, 108 So. 375, 45 A.L.R. 935.
[2]  See, Bell v. Bell, 214 Ala. 573, 108 So. 375, 45 A.L.R. 935.
[3]  For annotations on this subject, see Annotations, 25 A.L.R. 354 and 42 A.L.R. 315.
[4]  See, Mankato Mills Co. v. Willard, 94 Minn. 160, 102 N.W. 202.

=== CASE 2228429 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:01.234265+00 ===

97 N.W.2d 583 (1959)
168 Neb. 803
STATE of Nebraska ex rel. Clarence S. BECK, Attorney General, and the Department of Banking of the State of Nebraska, Appellants,
v.
ASSOCIATES DISCOUNT CORPORATION, a foreign corporation and Jack F. Kemnitz, Appellees, and
Theodore L. Richling, Receiver-Appellant.
No. 34398.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
July 3, 1959.
*584 Clarence S. Beck, Atty. Gen., Robert A. Nelson, Lincoln, for the State.
Shotwell, Vance & Marchetti, Omaha, for Richling.
John W. Delehant, Jr., Omaha, for appellees.
Heard before SIMMONS, C. J., and CARTER, MESSMORE, YEAGER, WENKE, and BOSLAUGH, JJ.
WENKE, Justice.
In view of the motions for rehearing filed herein by the appellees Associates Discount Corporation and John F. Kemnitz and the appellant Theodore L. Richling, receiver, we find a supplemental opinion to be necessary.
*585 In our original opinion we allowed the receiver fees of $12,000 for all ordinary services performed, and to be performed by him in connection with the receivership from November 12, 1957, up until it is closed and also allowed fees for his counsel of $4,380 during this same period of time providing, however, that: "If extraordinary and unusual services are required in connection therewith the receiver may apply to the district court for additional compensation to cover such services." State ex rel. Beck v. Associates Discount Corp., 168 Neb. 298, 96 N.W.2d 55, 82.
We have now come to the conclusion that in doing so we were premature and therefore set aside and vacate that part of our opinion so holding. The amount of fees which should be allowed the receiver and his counsel for services rendered in connection therewith subsequent to November 12, 1957, should be fixed by the trial court at a hearing provided for that purpose by it after the purposes for which the receivership was created have been fully carried out. At this hearing all interested parties, including the receiver, should be given an opportunity to present any relevant evidence relating to the services actually renderd by the receiver and his counsel subsequent to November 12, 1957, that will be of assistance to the trial court in determining what the amount of the fees should be. However, when determined, they should be taxed to the appellee Associates Discount Corporation as part of the costs of this proceeding.
Appellees now contend that the Installment Loan Act governs only loans of money and that we judicially broadened the scope of the language thereof to include renewals, which they contend are not loans within the meaning of the act. While we think the renewals, as handled by appellees, resulted in each case in a new debt or loan we think the language of the act is broad enough to cover an installment loan when the consideration therefor is the unpaid balance of a preexisting debt. See particularly sections 45-137, R.R.S.1943, 45-138, R.S.Supp.1955, 45-155, R.R.S.1943. It will be noted that the effect of any "violation" of the act relates to "any indebtedness, however acquired."
Appellees now contend the civil penalties and forfeitures provided for by the act cannot be imposed without Associates or any of its officers or employees having been charged with, tried for, and convicted of violating the act as provided for in section 45-128, R.R.S.1943. We do not think such is a prerequisite to the state or any interested persons enforcing the provisions of the act as they relate to the civil penalties and provisions therein provided for because of violations thereof. As stated in section 45-155, R.R.S.1943: "Violation of sections 45-114 to 45-155 in connection with any indebtedness, however acquired, shall render such indebtedness void and uncollectible." (Emphasis ours.) See, also, sections 45-137, R.R.S.1943, 45-138, R.S. Supp.1955 and 45-157, R.R.S.1943; State ex rel. Beck v. Associates Discount Corp., 162 Neb. 683, 77 N.W.2d 215; Powell v. Edwards, 162 Neb. 11, 75 N.W.2d 122.
In view of the foregoing both motions for rehearing hereinbefore referred to are overruled.
Former opinion modified.
Motions for rehearing overruled.

=== CASE 9741692 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:00:37.603367+00 ===

Smith, J.
Plaintiff is a contractor specializing in highways and highway bridges, presently engaged in construction of US-12 within Calhoun and Jackson counties, Michigan, and in construction of the junction of US-12 and M-78. The total value of the services being performed by plaintiff under contract with the Michigan State highway department exceeds $7,000,000. US-12 is the principal route connecting Detroit, Michigan, and Chicago, Illinois, and has. *559been designated a part of the national system of interstate and defense highways. It is stipulated and agreed that plaintiff’s operations “affect commerce within the meaning of section 7* of the labor-management relations act of 1947, 29 ITSCA, § 152(7).” (“Clearly the construction of State highways and bridges, which themselves constitute essential links in channels of interstate commerce, affects commerce within the meaning of the act. We so find.” Madison County Construction Co., 115 NLRB 701.)
In connection with the said construction, plaintiff employs 14 carpenters, members of defendant Michigan State Carpenters Council, United Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners of America, Local 871, AFL-CIO. On February 19, 1959, defendant Lewis Scarborough, business agent of local 871, placed a sign at plaintiff’s yard office and another at the junction of US-12 and M-78, each bearing the legend: “Michigan Carpenters Council on strike against L. A. Davidson Construction Company.” Members of local 871 established a picket line around plaintiff’s construction site in Calhoun county, which, allegedly, has led to a refusal of all employees, whether members of local 871 or not, to continue work of any sort.
On February 20,1959, plaintiff filed his bill of complaint in the court below. After identifying the parties and the project it made the following allegations :
“6. This plaintiff is informed, and believes the fact to be, that for some weeks last past, defendant Michigan Carpenters Council, United Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners of America has been engaged with negotiations with the Michigan Koad Builders’ Association in behalf of various contractors engaged in work similar to that undertaken by the plaintiff, *560in an effort to negotiate a contract between the parties governing relationship between the employees and the members of said defendant Michigan State Carpenters Council, United Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners of America. This plaintiff, however, avers that he is not a member of Michigan Road Builders’ Association and has no personal knowledge of the results of these negotiations or anything that may have transpired with respect to them.
“7. Plaintiff is informed, and believes the fact to be, that no agreement has been reached as a result of the negotiations recited in paragraph 6. And that he is informed, and believes the fact to be, that defendant Michigan State Carpenters Council, United Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners of America has called a strike against all of the contractors who are members of the Michigan Road Builders’ Association.
“8. Plaintiff, however, avers that at no time has he received notice required by PA 1939, No 176, as amended, specifically by PA 1949, No 230, being CLS 1956, § 423.9 (Stat Ann 1950 Rev § 17.454[9]), and that all of his information with respect to such dispute and progress concerning it has come from such information as he has been able to get from conversation with various persons involved.”
It then described the strike action taken, the displaying of the described placards, and the picketing, which is nowhere alleged to be other than peaceful, concluding with respect thereto:
“11. That, such strike and picketing by the defendants herein is illegal and contrary to the laws of the State of Michigan as hereinabove set forth.”
An ex parte order was thereupon entered restraining defendants “from engaging in a strike, at or near the project herein described; and further from engaging in any unlawful activity, on the premises or elsewhere, which by their nature are intended, or' which in fact do hinder the progress of said work,¡ *561or interfere with those who may be lawfully engaged therewith.”
Motion to dismiss the hill of complaint and the temporary restraining order was filed, denying the applicability of the notice requirement (of the Michigan law) to plaintiff’s activities which, it was asserted, were governed by the Taft-Hartley act, and denying, in addition, the jurisdiction of the State court in the premises upon the ground that “the labor relations of plaintiff and the activities of the defendants alleged in the bill of complaint are under the exclusive jurisdiction of the national labor relations board and regulated by the labor-management relations act, supra.”
The motion to dismiss, having come on for hearing, was denied and a preliminary injunction granted on terms substantially identical with those of the temporary restraining order. The reasons therefor do not appear in the appendix, save for the words, “It appearing to the court said motion to dismiss be denied.” Appellants are before us upon leave granted.
There is no need to more than summarize what was held in Town & Country Motors, Inc., v. Local Union No. 328, 355 Mich 26. We there pointed out (p 30) that “The national labor relations act grants to the NLRB power over labor relations matters ‘affecting commerce.’ ” (In the case before us, as observed, the parties stipulate that plaintiff’s operations “affect commerce.”) We also pointed out (p 45) that the legislative history of the Taft-Hartley act  made it clear that the Congress had rejected “the theory that employers should be permitted to do precisely what was here done, namely, to apply directly to the courts for injunctive relief against strikes and peaceful picketing for objectives which the act denominated unfair labor practices.” . (This *562does not, of course, imply a holding on our part in the case before us that the acts complained of constituted unfair labor practices within the meaning of the Taft-Hartley act.) We concluded (p 45) that “we are without power or jurisdiction to deal with unfair labor charges within the jurisdiction of the NLRB,” citing Guss v. Utah Labor Relations Board, 353 US 1 (77 S Ct 598, 1 L ed 2d 601); San Diego Building Trades Council v. Garmon, 353 US 26 (77 S Ct 607, 1 L ed 2d 618); and Amalgamated Meat Cutters v. Fairlawn Meat, Inc., 353 US 20 (77 S Ct 604, 1 L ed 2d 613).
The appellee does not distinguish this case, or, indeed, argue for reversal thereof. “It simply does not apply to the admitted facts before the court,” we are told. In support thereof he cites a generalization from Weber v. Anheuser-Busch, Inc., 348 US 468, 480 (75 S Ct 480, 99 L ed 546), preceding the cases above cited, in which it is said that “the labor management relations act ‘leaves much to the States, though Congress has refrained from telling us how much.’ ” Having so said, the United States Supreme Court then held the State court to be without jurisdiction to enjoin the conduct of the union.* In addition, as justifying jurisdiction in our courts in the matter before us, plaintiff cites Automobile Workers v. Russell, 356 US 634 (78 S Ct 932, 2 L ed 2d 1030), and Allen-Bradley Local No. 1111 v. Wisconsin Employment Relations Board, 315 US 740 (62 S Ct 820, 86 L ed 1154), both cases involving violence, both cases involving the exception to lack of State jurisdiction recognized by us in Town Country Motors, supra. We need not discuss the rationale of the exception, since violence is not even alleged in the matter before us.
*563These, then, are the authorities presented as grounds for the argument that Town & Country Motors, supra, “simply does not apply” to the case at bar. The first is a case denying State court jurisdiction, the remainder involving an admitted exception not here factually presented. Comment is unnecessary.
Appellants urge, also, that the bill of complaint does not state a cause of action in the State courts. In such bill the appellee relies exclusively upon the notice provision of the Michigan statutes, as above set forth in detail, concluding that by reason thereof the strike is illegal and unlawful. Yet in Automobile Workers v. O’Brien, 339 US 454 (70 S Ct 781, 94 L ed 978), the States were held to be without power to qualify the right of employees, in an industry affecting commerce, to strike, the Cotigress having occupied this field and closed it to the States, and if there remained any doubt as to whether a State might require, in such industries, a strike notice (see Faribault Daily News, Inc., v. International Typographical Union, 236 Minn 303 [53 NW2d 36]), such doubts were resolved in the leading case of Garner v. Teamsters Union, 346 US 485 (74 S Ct 161, 98 L ed 228), discussed in authorities cited in Town & Country Motors, supra. There it was held not enough to justify State action, that the conduct sought to be enjoined was violative of State law if such conduct were also the subject of Federal regulation. Here the conduct sought to be enjoined is neither violent nor peripheral to the field of Federal regulation, the “sole allegation * * * of appellants’ misconduct [being] failure of appellants to give” the Michigan statutory notice, and this with respect to operations of appellee which “affect commerce within the meaning of section 7 of the labor management relations act of 1947, 29 USCA, § 152(7).” (The clauses last quoted with respect to misconduct, and commerce, *564are quoted from the stipulation entered into between the parties hereto.) It is clear that no cause of action within the jurisdiction of our State courts has been stated.
There is little need to add more, in view of our recent decision in Town & Country Motors, Inc., supra. We are constrained again to point out, however, that the issuance of this injunction forbidding peaceful picketing and the display of placards involves denial by equity of the exercise of a basic constitutional freedom, the exercise of free speech. We there held (pp 51, 52):
“Prominent among the abuses was the common inclusion of injunctive language construed to forbid labor’s publicizing what it regarded as the essential facts concerning the controversy by means of the placards of the picket line and the dissemination of leaflets therefrom. Constitutional difficulties of the most serious nature (cf., Thornhill v. Alabama, 310 US 88 [60 S Ct 736, 84 L ed 1093]) cluster around the employment of a court’s injunctive process in derogation of our basic freedoms. The denial to labor, in the pursuit of its legitimate objectives, of freedom to acquaint the public at large of its side of the controversy is no less a denial of free speech because the notification may, as well, exert an economic compulsion upon the listener. To say that a ‘temporary’ order restraining the exercise of a basic constitutional right is harmless to the existence and exercise of the right because the interference is only temporary is to substitute a shabby formula for a basic freedom. With obedience to the ‘temporary’ injunction, under pain of contempt, the basic right is lost. It is the utterance of the protest of oppression that is intended to quicken the conscience of the community. If we still the tongue at the moment of need we may as well tear it out. The word that is heeded is the word wrung out of the very crisis itself, not the murmurings of reproach after the battle is lost. The *565essence of the freedom to speak is the freedom to speak while speech may yet be effective.”
The fact that such an injunction is issued ex parte means, in simplest terms, that the court employs its awesome process at the behest of only one of the parties to a controversy in such a way as to make the final decision, for all practical purposes, a nullity. Its employment in the strike cases involves the distortion of a simple judicial tool of great antiquity, the injunction, to a perverted use as an instrument of economic policy affecting the lives of thousands. The policy so enunciated is that of a single judge, based upon little or no showing as to the economic and social factors involved. The edict thus enunciated is interpreted, then, by him alone, and enforced through the process of civil and criminal contempt, without the interposition of the traditional safeguards of a jury. Our people have a very limited degree of tolerance for such agglutinations of power, whether wielded by the wearer of crown or robe. The esteem in which courts are held, and our people’s respect for the law as an instrument of government were placed in jeopardy by such judicial acts, economically ill-considered, and, in respect of the injunction ex parte, both precipitate and one-sided.
The congressional treatment for this open sore in the body politic was the passage of the national act before us. With respect to it the United States Supreme Court held in Garner v. Teamsters Union, 346 US 485, 490, 491 (74 S Ct 161, 98 L ed 228), that:
“Congress did not merely lay down a substantive rule of law to be enforced by any tribunal competent to apply law generally to the parties. It went on to confide primary interpretation and application of its rules to a specific and specially constituted tribunal and prescribed a particular procedure for investigation, complaint and notice, and hearing and decision, including judicial relief pending a final administra*566tive order. Congress evidently considered that centralized administration of specially designed procedures was necessary to obtain uniform application of its substantive rules and to avoid these diversities and conflicts likely to result from a variety of local procedures and attitudes toward labor controversies. * * * A multiplicity of tribunals and a diversity of .procedures are quite as apt. to produce incompatible or conflicting adjudications as are different rules of substantive law.”
Such policy is not to be frustrated by a continuation of the very practices that led to its enactment.
The orders below are vacated and the cause remanded for entry of an order dismissing the bill of complaint.
Black, Edwards, Yoelker, and Kavanagh, JJ. concurred with Smith, J.
The section 7 here referred to is actually sub section 7 of section 2 of the act, but will, where herein and hereinafter quoted from the agreement of the parties, retain the subsection number as employed by them.
The Weber Case involved the reliance by the State court, for injunctive purposes, of a general restraint of trade statute.

=== CASE 2228436 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:01.411981+00 ===

93 N.Y.2d 942 (1999)
715 N.E.2d 98
693 N.Y.S.2d 70
In the Matter of LAND OF THE FREE, INC., Doing Business as SEAFORD PALACE DINER, et al., Appellants,
v.
UNIQUE SANITATION, INC., et al., Respondents.
Court of Appeals of the State of New York.
Argued April 29, 1999.
Decided June 3, 1999.
*943 Hession & Bekoff, Mineola (Andrew Paul Cooper of counsel), for appellants.
Bee, Eisman & Ready, Mineola (Peter A. Bee, Richard P. Ready and Catherine V. Battle of counsel), for respondents.
Before: Chief Judge KAYE and Judges BELLACOSA, SMITH, LEVINE, CIPARICK, WESLEY and ROSENBLATT concur.
OPINION OF THE COURT
MEMORANDUM.
The order of the Appellate Division should be affirmed, with costs.
CPLR 7503 (c) requires that an application to stay arbitration be made within 20 days after service of a demand for arbitration. An untimely application to stay arbitration may, however, be granted if the agreement for which arbitration is sought is facially illegal or if upon facial examination of the agreement, a court may conclude that it would be against public policy to permit arbitration of the issue sought to be arbitrated (see, Matter of Sprinzen [Nomberg], 46 NY2d 623, 631; Matter of Aimcee Wholesale Corp. [Tomar Prods.], 21 NY2d 621).
Here, the trash removal contract between the parties is not facially illegal nor may it be concluded from the face of the contract that it would be against public policy to arbitrate the issue for which arbitration was sought. Accordingly, the Appellate Division correctly determined that the arbitration should proceed, inasmuch as the petitioner-appellant's application to stay arbitration was made after expiration of the 20-day time limit set forth in CPLR 7503.
Order affirmed, with costs, in a memorandum.

=== CASE 9741694 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:00:40.507895+00 ===

JUSTICE RARICK delivered the opinion of the court: Claimant, Leonard Contreras, sought benefits pursuant to the Workers’ Compensation Act (Act) (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 48, par. 138.1 et seq.) for injuries sustained while employed by City Foods as a laborer. City Foods is a meat packing house. On August 8, 1989, Contreras was cleaning a refrigeration unit when he fell from a ladder onto a concrete floor. He was seen by Dr. Robert Sawchyn, who prescribed physical therapy. He returned to work on October 24, 1989, under light duty restrictions. After several days, Contreras returned to Dr. Sawchyn, who prescribed more physical therapy and took him off work until December 18, 1989, at which time he was released for light duty work. When he returned to work he was assigned a job that he could not perform. He was again taken off work from December 15, 1989, through September 15, 1990. During this time he underwent a pain treatment program. An MRI of the lumbar spine, performed on February 22, 1990, revealed degenerative changes from L3-L4 through L5-S1. Contreras filed two claims alleging injuries to his back (90WC447) and both hands (90WC446). He returned to work on October 1, 1990. On January 17, 1992, Contreras was injured when a stack of pails filled with meat, weighing between 400 and 500 pounds, fell on him, striking him in the back and pinning him between a table- and the floor. When he got up, he noticed pain in his back and legs. He attempted to work, but was unable to and went home. Contreras filed a third claim alleging injuries to his lower back and both legs (92WC22710). All three claims were consolidated for hearing purposes. A hearing was held on September 20, 1993. Mary Ellen Nelson, a court reporter for the Industrial Commission (Commission), transcribed the proceedings (Nelson transcript). Contreras testified and the cause was continued. A second hearing was held on December 15, 1993, this one transcribed by Donna Marie Bishop, also a court reporter for the Commission (Bishop transcript). As a result of his accidents, the arbitrator awarded Contreras 10 weeks of temporary total disability (TTD) benefits in 90WC446, 476/? weeks of TTD benefits in 90WC447, and 161/? weeks of TTD benefits in 92WC22710. The arbitrator also found him to be permanently and totally disabled. The arbitrator filed his decisions on January 27, 1994. Contreras received them on February 7, 1994, and City Foods received them on February 14, 1994. On March 16, 1994, City Foods filed a petition for review in which it requested the Commission to furnish an original and one copy of the proceedings on arbitration. In late April or early May 1994, Nelson left the Chicago area and moved to Boston, Massachusetts. On October 19, 1995, 19 months after City Foods filed its petition for review, Contreras filed a motion to dismiss City Foods’ petition for review, arguing that City Foods had not yet authenticated or tendered to him the transcript of the arbitration proceedings. Contreras also filed a petition seeking attorney fees and penalties. The Bishop transcript was filed on July 28, 1995. The Nelson transcript was filed on October 30, 1995. On November 22, 1995, Contreras filed an amended motion to dismiss, arguing that City Foods failed to exercise due diligence in prosecuting its review, resulting in extreme financial harm. An evidentiary hearing on Contreras’ amended motion to dismiss was held on December 5, 1995. At the hearing, Contreras introduced the expert testimony of Jeanmarie Calcagno, an attorney who practices primarily in the area of workers’ compensation cases. Calcagno testified that she had a professional relationship with Mary Ellen Nelson contemporaneous with the Contreras case. In one instance, she sought a transcript and was informed that Nelson had moved to Massachusetts. She obtained Nelson’s address through the official court reporter’s office and subsequently contacted Nelson about the transcript. Within four to eight weeks Calcagno received a copy of the transcript in question. In another case, Calcagno had arranged for Nelson to fly to Chicago and testify before the Commission regarding her preparation of a transcript. Ultimately, her testimony was not needed. Calcagno testified that if she did not have a copy of the requested transcript of proceedings two weeks prior to the return date on the request for review, she would contact the reporter and file a motion to extend time for filing an authenticated transcript. Calcagno stated that it would be inconsistent with an attorney’s duty of due diligence merely to rely on the Commission to obtain the transcript without personally contacting the court reporter. City Foods introduced the testimony of Marvin Goins. Goins was the supervisor-court reporter for the Commission. Goins periodically spoke with City Foods’ attorney, Geraldine Balow, about the status of the Contreras transcript, but those conversations did not take place until May or June 1995, and Goins characterized them as “informal” and “in passing.” Goins could not recall any conversation with City Foods’ attorney prior to that time. Attorney Balow stipulated that she came on the case in May 1995. The only written request by City Foods regarding the Contreras transcript was dated September 15, 1995. On March 28, 1996, the Commission denied Contreras’ motion, finding: “1. That any delay in the completion of the transcript was the responsibility of the Commission; 2. That the Commission was aware of the problem occasioned by the out-of-state move by the former Commission court reporter prior to the completion of ordered transcripts and was further advised by respondent; 3. That both the Commission and respondent acted in a manor [sic] reasonably expected to promote rapid completion of the transcript, but the direct control over the former state employee had been lost and the remaining influence was limited; 4. That respondent demonstrated due diligence in its ordering and subsequent pursuit of the transcript; and 5. There is no credible evidence of intentional delay by the respondent.” The Commission also denied Contreras’ petition for attorney fees and penalties. In its August 30, 1996, decisions, the Commission modified the TTD awards in all three cases and found that Contreras failed to prove that he was permanently and totally disabled. With respect to permanent disability, the Commission determined that Contreras failed to show that he fell into the “odd-lot” category. The Commission found Contreras to be permanently and partially disabled to the extent of 40% of the person as a whole. Contreras thereafter filed a timely petition for judicial review. On review, City Foods argued that the Commission’s March 28, 1996, order was a final and appealable order and that pursuant to section 19(f)(1) Contreras had 20 days in which to seek judicial review. Because he failed to do so, City Foods argued, the circuit court did not have subject matter jurisdiction. The circuit court ruled that the Commission’s March 28, 1996, order was not a final and appealable order because it did not dispose of the merits of the case, and that it had jurisdiction to review the Commission’s August 30, 1996, decision. The circuit court also ruled that the Commission correctly denied Contreras’ October 19, 1995, motion to dismiss. The circuit court found that the filing period set forth in section 19(b) was rendered inapplicable by the following stenographic stipulation contained in the request for hearing: “Both parties agree that if either party files a Petition to Review the award and orders a transcript of evidence pursuant to the law and the rules of the Industrial Commission and the reporter provided by the Industrial Commission does not complete or furnish a transcript of evidence within the time fixed by law, the opposite party will not raise the question of jurisdiction of the Industrial Commission to review said award of the Arbitrator upon the ground that said transcript of evidence was not timely filed.” The circuit court also ruled that the Commission’s determination that City Foods had exercised due diligence was not contrary to the manifest weight of the evidence. The circuit court further found that the Commission decisions denying Contreras’ petition for fees and penalties was not contrary to the manifest weight of the evidence, nor was its decision reducing his permanent and total disability award to permanent partial disability to the extent of 40% of the person as a whole. On appeal, Contreras argues first that the Commission abused its discretion when it denied his October 19, 1995, motion to dismiss. He contends that the stenographic stipulation into which the parties entered relates only to jurisdiction, and neither relieves a party of its obligation to exercise due diligence in the prosecution of its case nor prevents a party from raising the issue of due diligence in a motion to dismiss. Contreras further contends that City Foods did not, in fact, exercise due diligence and that the reasons the Commission gave for denying his motion to dismiss are not factually supported by the record. In response to Contreras’ arguments, City Foods contends that the stenographic stipulation was not a waiver of jurisdiction but an agreement by both parties and the Commission to accept substantial compliance with the filing requirements of section 19(b). City Foods maintains that the Commission has the discretion to allow a delay in the filing of the transcript for good cause and that the question of whether a litigant has demonstrated good cause is a question of fact for the Commission.  Section 19(b) of the Act provides in pertinent part: “Unless a petition for review is filed by either party within 30 days after the receipt by such party of the copy of the decision and notification of time when filed, and unless such party petitioning for a review shall within 35 days after the receipt by him of the copy of the decision, file with the Commission either an agreed statement of the facts appearing upon the hearing before the Arbitrator, or if such party shall so elect a correct transcript of evidence of the proceedings at such hearings, then the decision shall become the decision of the Commission and in the absence of fraud shall be conclusive.” 820 ILCS 305/19(b) (West 1994). The right to have an award reviewed by the Commission is lost by a failure to file an agreed statement of facts or a transcript of the evidence within the time period specified in section 19(b). Corn Belt Motor Co. v. Industrial Comm’n, 389 Ill. 320, 59 N.E.2d 652 (1945). The timely filing of such statement of facts or transcript is a prerequisite to the Commission’s obtaining jurisdiction. See Gould Construction Co. v. Industrial Comm’n, 311 Ill. 472, 143 N.E. 73 (1924). However, the stenographic stipulation contained in the preprinted request for hearing form specifically provides that if either party files a petition for review of the arbitrator’s decision, the opposite party will not raise the question of jurisdiction on the ground that the transcript was not timely filed.  Contreras does not argue that the Commission lacked jurisdiction, however. Instead, he argues that City Foods failed to exercise due diligence in the prosecution of its review and that the stipulation cannot be read to excuse a party’s obligation to exercise due diligence. We agree. The stipulation clearly states that in the event either party fails to timely file a transcript, the other party will not challenge jurisdiction. The Commission’s jurisdiction is not at issue. What is at issue is City Foods’ diligence in prosecuting the review. Just as a petitioner may lose his right to proceed before the Commission by failing to file a timely petition for review, he may also lose his right to be heard by failing to exercise due diligence in pursuing his cause before the Commission. See Bromberg v. Industrial Comm’n, 97 Ill. 2d 395, 454 N.E.2d 661 (1983). Nothing in the language of the stipulation excuses a party from exercising due diligence. Further, to read it as eliminating any deadline for the filing of a transcript would permit and even encourage delay tactics on the part of a petitioner. The Act is a humane law of a remedial nature, whose fundamental purpose is to protect employees by providing efficient remedies and prompt and equitable compensation for their injuries. Kelsay v. Motorola, Inc., 74 Ill. 2d 172, 384 N.E.2d 353 (1978). By its very nature, the Act mandates a duty of due diligence. To excuse parties from the duty of due diligence would undermine this purpose.  With respect to the question of whether City Foods exercised due diligence, we conclude that it did not. City Foods provides no reasonable explanation for taking so long to obtain the transcript. Although the petition for review was filed on March 19, 1994, Nelson did not move out of the Chicago area until late April or early May 1994. Attorney Calcagno, testifying as an expert witness on the handling of workers’ compensation cases, opined that City Foods did not demonstrate due diligence. The testimony of Marvin Goins, called as a witness by City Foods, demonstrates that City Foods did nothing until June 1995, and then only made casual inquiries “in passing.” The Bishop transcript was filed on July 28, 1995, 16 months after City Foods filed its petition for review. City Foods made no written inquiry regarding the Nelson transcript until September 15, 1995, and that transcript was not filed until October 30, 1995. We also note that pursuant to section 19 of the Act: “If a reporter does not for any reason furnish a transcript of the proceedings before the Arbitrator in any case for use on a hearing for review before the Commission, within the limitations of time as fixed in this Section, the Commission may, in its discretion, order a trial de novo before the Commission in such case upon application of either party.” (Emphasis added.) 820 ILCS 305/19(e) (West 1994). Notwithstanding a delay of some 16 months, City Foods did not avail itself of that remedy. Ironically, Contreras did file a motion seeking de novo review, but the Commission denied it. The Commission gave no evidentiary basis for its conclusion that City Foods exercised due diligence. It made no mention of Goins’ testimony and completely ignored the uncontradicted and unrebutted testimony of Contreras’ expert, Calcagno. Although the Commission is not compelled to accept testimony simply because it is not rebutted, neither can it simply ignore it. See Sorenson v. Industrial Comm’n, 281 Ill. App. 3d 373, 666 N.E.2d 713 (1996). In addition, the circuit court specifically stated that Calcagno’s testimony would not be considered. By so doing, the circuit court compounded the Commission’s error. The record demonstrates that City Foods failed to exercise due diligence in the prosecution of its review before the Commission, and the Commission’s decision to the contrary was an abuse of discretion, as was its denial of the motion seeking de novo review. The decision of the circuit court and the Industrial Commission are reversed, and the decision of the arbitrator is reinstated.  Generally, judicial decisions are given retroactive as well as prospective application. Brown v. Metzger, 104 Ill. 2d 30, 470 N.E.2d 302 (1984). This court has the inherent authority to give a decision prospective application only. See Aleckson v. Village of Round Lake Park, 176 Ill. 2d 82, 679 N.E.2d 1224 (1997). This court has never explicitly acknowledged that a party has an affirmative duty under the Act to proceed with diligence in fulfilling requirements necessary to perfect and prosecute a review before the Commission, although such can be implied from Bromberg. Under such circumstances, we believe it appropriate to limit our holding to prospective application only. Circuit Court and Industrial Commission reversed; arbitrator’s award reinstated. HOLDRIDGE and COLWELL, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9741695 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:00:40.51253+00 ===

JUSTICE RAKOWSKI, dissenting: The majority opinion holds that a party or his attorney has a duty to exercise due diligence to insure that the transcript is prepared in a reasonable time even though the obligation to prepare and furnish the transcript rests with the Commission. The opinion does not specify exactly what the employer should have done, only that whatever it did do was insufficient. Presumably, the employer should have made phone calls and/or sent letters to the Commission and the court reporter. The opinion also relies on the testimony of Jeanmarie Calcagno, an attorney specializing in workers’ compensation law, who testified that she had a professional relationship and contact with Mary Ellen Nelson prior to and contemporaneous with the events of the instant case. She testified that she had obtained Mary Ellen Nelson’s address through the official reporter’s office. She then contacted Nelson and was able to obtain a transcript within 60 days. Presumably, the majority opinion requires that employer’s counsel should have done the same. I respectfully disagree. The standard “Petition For Review of Decision of Arbitrator and Order For Transcript” requests the Commission to furnish an original copy of proceedings on arbitration. By signing the petition, the party or attorney also guarantees payment for the cost of the preparation of the transcript. Also, in accordance with section 19(b) the petition requests that the Commission enter an order extending the time for the filing of this transcript for 30 days in addition to the 35 days allowed by statute and the stipulation of the parties. See 820 ILCS 305/ 19(b) (West 1996). As such, the requirement for the filing of a transcript is 65 days. In this case, and in many cases, however, the parties entered into a stipulation waiving the time requirement. The law is clear that the responsibility to furnish a transcript lies solely with the Industrial Commission. Section 16 states: “The Commission at its expense shall provide an official court reporter to take the testimony and record of proceedings at the hearings before an Arbitrator or the Commission, who shall furnish a transcript of such testimony or proceedings to either party requesting it, upon payment therefor at the rate of $1.00 per page for the original and 35 cents per page for each copy of such transcript. Payment for photostatic copies of exhibits shall be extra.” 820 ILCS 305/16 (West 1996). Section 7040.10 of the Administrative Code provides in part: “b. Order of Arbitration Transcript 1) Stenographic reports of proceedings before the Industrial Commission shall be furnished the parties only upon written order filed with the Commission. 2) For purposes of perfecting a review, an arbitration transcript must be ordered within the time fixed by statute. The estimated cost of the transcript of proceedings may be obtained from the Industrial Commission, and the party requesting such transcript shall deposit a sum of money covering the estimated cost before the reporter shall be required to complete the transcript. An order entered pursuant to Section 20 of the Workers’ Compensation Act (the Act) (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 48, par. 138.20) may be submitted for said monetary deposits.” (Emphasis added.) 50 Ill. Adm. Code § 7040.10 (eff. August 1, 1990). In accordance with the above, any request for transcript must be initiated by filing a request with the Industrial Commission. It is also clear that the responsibility for furnishing a transcript lies solely with the Commission. In the instant case, rather than being an abuse of discretion, the Commission’s decision is perfectly reasonable. The decision states that any delay in the completion of the transcript was its responsibility, that it was aware of the problem occasioned by the out-of-state move of the former court reporter, and that it was further advised of this fact by the respondent. The decision goes on to state that because of a lack of control over the former employee, it was unable to secure the transcript until October of 1995. The order concludes that respondent did not demonstrate a lack of diligence and there is no credible evidence of intentional delay by the respondent. Although it is true that attorney Calcagno was able to secure a transcript by Mary Ellen Nelson in a much shorter time than the employer’s counsel in the instant case, in no way should this be the standard that all parties and attorneys are required to follow. More importantly, somebody has to be first and somebody has to be last. Possibly if the transcript requests from Calcagno and other regular workers’ compensation attorneys were not put ahead of the instant employer’s request, the transcript would have been finished earlier. Many claimants before the Commission are pro se. Many are represented by counsel who only handle a few workers’ compensation cases in a year. Unlike attorney Calcagno, who specializes in workers’ compensation law, these people do not have a working professional relationship with the 26 court reporters employed by the Industrial Commission. I see no reason to impose a heretofore unknown burden on counsel. No Illinois case has ever held that a party has an obligation to exercise due diligence to ensure a prompt transcript. The reason of course is axiomatic: the obligation to furnish the transcript rests solely with the Commission. Moreover, the ability to spur a recalcitrant court reporter is better handled by the employer (or ex-employer in this case) as opposed to a party or party’s attorney. The only case cited by the majority, Bromberg v. Industrial Comm’n, 97 Ill. 2d 395, 454 N.E.2d 661 (1983), is inapposite. There the Commission dismissed' claimant’s petition for review following his continuous failure to appear on four occasions. Unlike the instant case, the obligation for Bromberg to appear was his own obligation. Here the obligation to produce a transcript belongs to the Commission. I respectfully suggest that the Commission’s decision in the instant case makes sense. In accordance with section 16, the Commission admits that the transcript is its obligation and that a party’s right to review an arbitrator’s decision will not be cut off because the Commission is temporarily unable to furnish a transcript. Rather, in accordance with the parties’ jurisdictional stipulation, the Commission will preserve the parties’ right to review until a transcript can be obtained. In the event that it is determined that a transcript cannot be obtained “the Commission may, in its discretion, order a trial de novo before the Commission in such case upon application of either party.” 820 ILCS 305/19(e) (West 1996). Although the majority holds that it was an abuse of discretion to deny Contreras’ motion for de novo review, I respectfully disagree. I suggest that a de novo hearing before the Commission should only be held in those instances where a transcript cannot be obtained. In this case, apparently the Commission thought it would be able to secure a transcript and eventually it did. For all these reasons, I would affirm the judgment of the circuit court. McCULLOUGH, EJ., joins in this dissent.

=== CASE 9741744 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:01:15.620289+00 ===

ROBB, Judge,
concurring in result with separate opinion.
I concur in result.
While I agree that generally, time is not of the essence in proving a criminal offense, it “becomes of the essence after the invocation of the alibi statute.” Quillen v. State, 271 Ind. 251, 391 N.E.2d 817, 819 (1979); see also Baggett v. State, 514 N.E.2d 1244 (Ind.1987); Evans v. State, 224 Ind. 428, 68 N.E.2d 546 (1946).
As the majority indicates, the State’s answer alleged that the offenses occurred between February 9 and 11. “[T]he filing of an alibi defense does make the time of the alleged offense of the essence, ... [and] the effect of the State’s answer to the notice of alibi is to restrict the State to proof of the date in the answer.” Jennings v. State, 514 N.E.2d 836, 837 (Ind.1987) (citations omitted). Thus, the State had the burden to prove that the offenses occurred on or between the dates specified. “Where the State at trial restricts its proof to the time frame within the information or within its answer to the notice of alibi, it has met its obligation under Ind.Code Sec. 35-36^4-2.” Stewart v. State, 521 N.E.2d 675, 676-77 (Ind.1988).
Here, the State did not restrict its proof to the time frame within its answer, February 9 to February 11. However, in order for the State to meet its burden, it is not a requirement that all the evidence presented indicates the offenses occurred within these dates. The question here is simply the sufficiency of the evidence: Was there sufficient evidence presented to prove that Sangsland committed the offenses between February 9 and 11? On this question, I agree with the majority that the evidence was sufficient. Therefore, while I believe that time was of the essence of the offenses, the State met its burden of proof in convicting Sangsland.

=== CASE 9741696 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:00:40.516+00 ===

FRESIDING JUSTICE McCULLOUGH, dissenting: I join in Justice Rakowski’s dissent. I write separately only to stress the importance of our opinion. This decision, as pointed out, will have strong ramifications important to all involved in workers’ compensation, especially pro se claimants. By this decision, the Commission will be permitted to ignore its responsibility mandatorily required by section 16 of the Act and section 7040.10 of the Administrative Code. We are introducing a new stumbling block, and as suggested by the dissent, transferring the statutory responsibility from the Commission to the parties. Further support for the Commission’s order denying the motion to dismiss is found in the trial court’s finding that the section 19(b) time structures were inapplicable because of the parties’ stipulation forgoing any objection based upon the reporter’s failure to “complete or finish a transcript within the time fixed by law.” The majority refers to Gould. In Gould, the supreme court, in discussing the obligations with respect to report of proceedings, made the statement: “The requirement that the report should be filed within fifty days of the date of the award was left in the statute and governs as to all cases except where the failure to file the report of the proceedings has been caused by the failure of the reporter to furnish such report, and not the neglect of the party seeking the review.” Gould, 311 Ill. at 477-78. We are reweighing the evidence presented to the Commission. The disposition discusses the diligence issue on the part of the appellant. There was a timely request for review and transcript. The Commission had the responsibility to furnish the transcript. The court reporter was an employee of the Commission per section 16 of the Act. The Commission in a specific order denied the motion to dismiss. Its order was not against the manifest weight of the evidence or an abuse of discretion. Our decision will be adding a new requirement by judicial edict. One other matter needs to be addressed. The majority states that “The timely filing of such statement of facts or transcript is a prerequisite to the Commission’s obtaining jurisdiction” (306 Ill. App. 3d at 1075), and in the next paragraph, “Contreras does not argue that the Commission lacked jurisdiction ***” (306 Ill. App. 3d at 1076). Can we ignore a question of jurisdiction even if not argued by the parties? The answer is no. Apparently the effect of this decision is that there is no issue pertaining to jurisdiction.

=== CASE 9741697 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:00:40.776885+00 ===

*515Dethmers, C. J.
On Jane 20, 1947, plaintiff suffered an accidental injury necessitating amputation of his left leg. On March 15, 1948, the workmen’s compensation commission  awarded him compensation for 200 weeks for specific loss of his left leg, payments ending April 20, 1951.
On November 12, 1954, plaintiff filed application for hearing and adjustment of claim for injuries to his right leg sustained in that same accident on June 20, 1947. On June 4, 1957, the workmen’s compensation appeal board made a further award to him for total disability based on its finding that, “The record clearly indicates that the plaintiff has been totally-disabled from performing the work of a pumper since his injury, not only because of the amputation of his left leg but also by reason of the unstable condition of his right leg independent of his left leg.” They awarded compensation from May 11, 1951, to December 31, 1952.
Defendants appeal and rely on CL 1948, § 413.14 (Stat Ann 1950 Rev § 17.188), which provides:
“If payment of compensation is made (other than medical expenses) and an application for further compensation is later filed with the commission, no compensation shall be awarded by the commission for any period which is more than 1 year prior to the date of the filing of such application.”
Defendants urge as controlling Lynch v. Briggs Manufacturing Co., 329 Mich 168, which applied the quoted statutory 1-year limitation on the retroactive effect of an order for further compensation. On this authority, defendants contend that, it was not competent for the appeal board to allow compensation *516for any period before November 12, 1953, that being 1 year prior to plaintiff’s filing of his application, and that because the award, as made, is for a period antedating that date it is void and should be reversed.
Plaintiff relies on Morgan v. Lloyds Builders Inc., 344 Mich 524. There the plaintiff had suffered an accidental eye injury on January 14, 1948, a piece of metal having entered his eye, which, after a course of treatment, was surgically removed from his eye. In that connection he had been paid compensation from January 15 to January 31, 1948, and from December 13, 1948, to January 11, 1949. In 1951 further difficulty developed in his eye, for which he was treated by doctors, which resulted in loss of vision in the eye on May 9, 1951. On July 28, 1953, plaintiff filed an application for hearing and adjustment of claim. This Court held him entitled to compensation for loss of the eye as from May 9, 1951, the date of its loss, which was over 2 years prior to the filing of the application. This Court held the mentioned 1-year statutory limitation inapplicable because the application filed on July 28, 1953, was not, in the language of the statute, “an application for further compensation,” but, rather, “a petition for loss of vision,” which amounted to a “further development” occurring after the original disability for which compensation already had been paid. Thus, Morgan was distinguishable from Lynch, in which the 1-year limitation was applied, because in Lynch the application was for “further compensation” inasmuch as plaintiff there was held to be “still totally disabled in his skilled employment because of his occupational injury of 1946” (date of original injury) and there was no finding of subsequent development as in Morgan.
In the instant case, plaintiff speaks of a further development, after loss of the left leg, in that the “increased weight-bearing due to the loss of Louck’s left leg directly contributed to and aggravated the *517unstable condition of his right leg.” The appeal board made no such finding of fact that the disability of the right leg was a further development, and there is no testimony to support such theory in the appendix. On the contrary, the appeal board expressly found that plaintiff’s total disability resulted from both the amputation of the left leg and the unstable condition of the right leg which had existed since the date of his accidental injury on June 20, 1947. This is, then, according to the finding of fact of the appeal board, not a case of a further development, resulting in a disability which did not exist when compensation-was allowed for the loss of the left leg, but, rather, an application for further compensation for a disability existing from the date of injury, on which an award of compensation may not, under the quoted language of the statute, be made for any period more than 1 year prior to filing the application on November 12, 1954.
The award of the hearing referee found that plaintiff had a disability resulting from an injury which, arose out of and in the course of his employment, but that he had suffered no wage loss since November 9, 1953, that being 1 year prior to the date appearing on the application for further compensation, and that, therefore, he was not entitled to compensation benefits. The referee thus having applied the mentioned 1-year limitation of the statute and denied plaintiff compensation benefits, there was no occasion for defendant, on appeal to the workmen’s compensation appeal board from the referee’s finding of disability arising out of and in the course of employment, to urge the bar of the statute to compensation for any time antedating the 1-year period. Necessity therefor arose only on appeal here, after the appeal board granted compensation in violation of that statutory bar. The provision of the statute in question does not impose a limitation of actions, fixing a time *518limit within which actions may be brought, which may be deemed waived by defendant’s failure to assert it in defense, but, on the contrary, it places a limitation on the power of the appeal board which cannot be waived by parties. We allowed appeal expressly limited to the sole question of the effect and applicability of this statutory limitation or bar. Plaintiff has briefed that question only in this Court, as has defendant, and has not raised the point that defendant failed to raise or argue the statutory bar before the appeal board. It is properly before us on this appeal.
The award is reversed and set aside insofar as it provides for compensation prior to November 12, 1953.
Carr and Kelly, JJ., concurred with Dethmers, C. J.
Black, J.
(for dismissal of writ). Lawyers and judges are wont to say that hard cases make bad law. Yet the contemplative student of appellate decisions knows that the antithetic soft case- — the one of apparent insignificance and indifferent presentation— has always been our greatest breeder of regrettable precedent. This, depending on the swing of majority vote, may become such a case.
Our special order granting certiorari in this case was entered November 26, 1957. It reads as follows:
“In this cause an application is filed by defendants for leave to appeal from an order of the workmen’s compensation appeal board and an answer in opposition thereto having been filed by plaintiff and due consideration thereof having been had by the court, it is ordered that the application be and the same is hereby granted, limited to the single question of appellants’ claim that CL 1948 § 413.14 (Stat Ann 1950 *519Rev § 17.188) bars or limits the award currently under consideration.”
Two of our Brothers, assigning separate reasons, allege that the limited “single question” above is properly before us. One says that section 413.14 “places a limitation on the power of the appeal board which cannot be waived by parties.” This I shall discuss later. Another says “The appeal board did apparently have the issue (of application to the case of section 413.14) before it, since its order makes, reference to the 1-year limitation date applied by the referee.”*
First: When this Court grants certiorari, pursuant to section 12 of part 3 of the workmen’s compensation act (CL 1948, § 413.12 [Stat Ann 1950 Rev §17.186]), do we review any question the hearing referee may have decided (we say “may”) absent due presentation of the same question to the appeal board? Until now, the answer has been one of repose.
De Witt v. Grand Rapids Fuel Co., 346 Mich 209, 218: “The question so posed was not brought to the attention of the commission and it is not open to eon-*520sideration here (McLean v. Eaton Manfg. Co., 286 Mich 285).”*
McLean v. Eaton Manfg. Co., 286 Mich 285, 290: “The opinion of the department is silent on the question of the sufficiency of the evidence as to Dr. Foust’s bill. We do not consider questions raised in a claim of appeal from a decision of the department of labor and industry unless it affirmatively appears that the point was specifically urged before the department. See Aske v. W. E. Wood Co., 248 Mich 327, where the Court said:
“ ‘The rules of the department of labor and industry require an employer, if denying liability, to set forth with reasonable detail and certainty the grounds of defense relied upon. Review here is limited to points made and presented there. We will consider such points only as the record affirmatively shows were presented to the commission for decision. This record does not show that the point of loaned employee was submitted to the commission. It is not enough that the point could have been presented under the notice of contest and the evidence.’
“See, also, Wheat v. Clark & Hulse, 227 Mich 556, where the Court held that the question of applicability of the general statute of limitations was not stated with sufficient particularity in the application for review by the department, to be considered on appeal to the Supreme Court.”
Moore v. Fleischman Yeast Co., 268 Mich 668, 672: “The department of labor and industry adopted rules of practice and procedure for carrying out the provisions of the workmen’s compensation act. Rule No 15 provides that if the employer or insurer deny liability, they must file an answer setting forth with reasonable details and certainty all the essential *521grounds of defense, to which they will be limited both on the hearing before the deputy and on review before the commission, unless in exceptional cases and for good cause shown an amendment is permitted to he filed. Appellants based their defense almost exclusively on the ground that there was no employment. Appellants gave no notice of this additional ground of defense and plaintiff was not hound to meet it. Roach v. Kelsey Wheel Co., 200 Mich 299.”
Raykov v. Crittall Casement Window Co., 256 Mich 28, 29, 30: “At the hearing before the deputy commissioner, defendants raised the point that plaintiff had not answered their petition to stop compensation, and cited Rule No 20 of the rules of the department. The record does not show this question to have been urged before the commission on review. Therefore it will not be considered here. Aske v. W. E. Wood Co., 248 Mich 327.”
Reno v. Holmes, 238 Mich 572, 573, 574: “Defendants here urge that the agreement for compensation for the loss of a foot is res judicata and cite the holdings of this Court to the effect that the commission may not grant rehearings. But no such claim was made in denying liability. In Roach v. Kelsey Wheel Co., 200 Mich 299, we considered the power of the (then) board to make rules, quoted Buie No 5 adopted by it which limited the defenses to such as are stated in the denial of liability, and said (p 305):
“ ‘The rule in question was within the power of the hoard to adopt. It is reasonable and valid; it not only binds the board, and litigants before it, but it binds this Court. Being reasonable and within the power of the board, this Court must follow it and recognize it in cases coming here for review.’
“The defense of res judicata, not having been made in defendants’ denial of liability, can not he here urged.”
Doherty v. Township of Grosse Isle, 205 Mich 592 599: “The claim that Doherty was a casual employee *522was concededly not properly raised before the accident board nor passed upon by it. Defendant’s written grounds of defense in denial of liability filed with, the board under its Rule No 5, to which defendant is limited, contains no notice of such claim. In that particular the situation is substantially as in Roach v. Kelsey Wheel Co., 200 Mich 299, where the subject is amply discussed.”
Phrasing it from McLean’s quotation of Ashe, this first question is whether the record “affirmatively shows’^ that the “single question” of limitation (alleged in this Court under said section 413.14) was presented to the appeal board for decision. Better than Ashe’s record, this one gives forth an especially forceful answer. It “affirmatively shows” that the mentioned “single question” was not submitted to the appeal board for decision and that the parties carefully confined themselves, before the referee as well as the board, to 2 specific defensive questions, neither of which is before us on account of the curtailing-scope of our said order of November 26, 1957. What is more, defendants’ unamended and detailed answer, filed below November 24, 1954, makes no claim or remote hint that Mr. Loucks’ present application is “an application for further compensation” to which said CL 1948, § 413.14 (Stat Ann 1950 Rev § 17.188) should be applied.* By what authority, then, do my Brothers assume to decide that which the parties studiously avoided below?
The Chief Justice, without reasoning or authority, answers as stated above, viz., that said section 413.14 “places a limitation on the power of the appeal board which cannot be waived by parties.” At this point, foregoing unanimous authorities considered, we come to major disagreement. The undersigned will not be enticed into decision of such meritorious *523question until, in this or some future case, the appeal hoard is ashed to determine the pivot premise thereof, namely, that an application for compensation for wage loss arising from disability, such disability having ultimately arisen from injury to a member caused by the same industrial accident in which another and specifically-compensable member is lost, becomes (when filed after payment of compensation for the specific loss) an application for further compensation within said section 413.14.
For the reverse of this situation (disability award first and specific loss award second) see Morgan v. Lloyds Builders Inc., 344 Mich 524. There this Court expressly distinguished — for the purposes of said section 413.14 — an award of compensation for disability-caused wage loss from an award for specific loss. And Morgan does not stand alone in such regard. See opinion of Mr. Justice Smith in Jones v. Cutler Oil Co., 356 Mich 487, where the same distinction is made with irrefutable interpretive reasoning.
The 2 specific defensive questions mentioned above were made the basis of a motion to dismiss before the referee. They were the only questions defendants urged before the referee. They were the only questions defendants briefed for and submitted to the appeal board. They are the 2 questions the appeal board did consider and decide as shown in its unanimous and excellently-reasoned opinion on review. Later, such 2 questions were included (along with the new “single question” posed under said section 413.14) in defendants’ application for leave to appeal. Such 2 questions will be found in defendants’ brief to the appeal board.*
*524Now then: Careful reading of the complete transcript of testimony and proceedings before the referee leads to conclusion that defendants, quite understandably, were solely and exclusively interested — in both forums below — in obtaining a favorable answer to either of the 2 raised questions. Such answer or answers if given would have the effect of wiping out, by adjudication and once for all, every claim for compensation against defendants Mr. Loucks — having-lost one leg and having injured the other by the accident of 1947 — might have presented or might hereafter present following payment of the 1947 award for specific loss (of the one leg). In our view this explains the complete absence — in pleadings, transcripts, briefs and entire record as brought here —of any address by any party to said section 413.14. It proves also that the hearing referee (if the notation upon the printed form of award* shows that his purpose was that of avoiding the presented questions by applying said section 413.14) proceeded solely on his own motion and that defendants did not care to review, before the appeal board, any question aside from those actually presented. Too, it explains view of the undersigned that this Court should undertake no determination of applicability to any case of section 413.14 unless and until the appeal board has done so or has refused to do so.
Second: It is said that the gratuitous and enigmatic notation of the hearing referee, as written by him into the award (quoted at margin), constitutes evidence that the “single question” brought here was raised before as well as decided by the referee. *525There being no direct or indirect reference to said section 413.14 — anywhere in the voluminous record of testimony and proceedings as certified to ns — and no suggestion below that Mr. Loucks’ 1947 and 1954 application were related under the section so that the latter constituted “an application for further compensation,” it would appear that our Brothers at this point strain themselves. And, as they heave in mighty unison, we note that the Brothers receive no support.from defendants’ counsel. The latter have not the temerity to suggest that either the referee or the appeal board was asked to decide any question under section 413.14.
Even the date (November 9,1953) specified by the hearing referee cannot be fitted — as a matter of intention on his part — to the statute, since the date of filing of plaintiff’s application was November 12, 1954. Surely, if the referee on his own motion and without advising counsel was intent on application to the case of said section 413.14, it is fair to assume that, having identified the intended statutory provision, he would have ruled in some explicit form that defendants’ application, as filed November 12, 1954, was (in the light of previous payment to plaintiff of an award for specific loss) a 1-year-limited application for “further compensation.” Whatever the referee may have had in mind, it was not the appeal board’s job to decode his quoted cryptogram short of request by either party. In turn, such is no function of this Court on review by certiorari. Better indeed that we stick to our known appellate last.
But it is said that plaintiff has briefed the “single question” above and has failed to “raise the point that defendant(s) failed to raise or argue the statutory bar before the appeal board.” To this our answer is short. The action or inaction of counsel— indeed, their agreeable stipulation if any — cannot serve- to make reviewable by this Court questions *526not brought to attention of the appeal board. Our jurisdiction, on statutory review by certiorari of decisions of the appeal board, is appellate only. We do not hear and determine compensation cases-de novo.
To recapitulate: We have erred once in this case. What turns out to be a legally groundless application for certiorari was erroneously, if inadvertently, granted by our special order quoted infra. Misled— unintentionally to be sure — by briefs supporting and opposing defendants’ application, this Court unanimously resolved to issue its writ for the sole and limited purpose of reviewing a question which, as; we now discover on review of the complete record,, is not reviewable according to consistent declarations appearing in our reports. This first error is understandable. Likewise it is easily repaired.
Now, by separately-submitted opinions, it is proposed that we err again. This second error, which if it receive majority support will be infinitely worse-than the first* because it will have been committed with contemplated knowledge of decisive facts, impels observation that confession of the first is better than an awkwardly reasoned effort to justify it. The 2 mistakes, if one be added to the other, make up a compound of pedantic bitters this Court will have to swallow in some future case.
The statute (CL 1948, § 413.16 [Stat Ann 1950 Rev § 17.190]) expressly commands that “All questions arising under this act shall be determined by the compensation commission [now appeal board].” Since the question of applicability of section 413.14 has originated here, without previous submission thereof to the appeal board, it appears to the undersigned that some of our Brethren would proceed to ignore the statute as well as the fixed rules by which *527our function on review (by certiorari) is expressly limited. Furthermore, standing as we now do in this particular field of interpretation of an involved and labyrinthian statute — a statute the appeal board is steadily required to interpret and apply in a perfect maze of perplexing cases, — we think it wise to observe that the specialized experience and training of the members of the appeal board relevantly transcend our more general learning and that this Court should, whenever possible, just for the sake of ever-needful certainty and accuracy in writing the bench law of this State, insist on the benefit of the board’s views before it undertakes on certiorari to interpret and apply a specific section or sections of such statute.
We would dismiss the writ as having been improvidently issued.
Smith and Voelkee, JJ., concurred with Black, J.
APPENDIX
(Defendant’s complete brief to the appeal board, commencing with heading “Argument.”)
AKGÜMENT
1. Did the hearing on January 4, 1956, constitute a rehearing as to the injuries plaintiff sustained on June 20, 1947, where the workmen’s compensation commission made a prior finding and order as to such injuries on March 15, 1948?
It has been repeatedly held by the Supreme Court that the workmen’s compensation department may not grant a rehearing. McLean v. Eaton Manfg. Co., 286 Mich 285 and Boyich v. J. A. Utley Co., 306 Mich 625. The defendants objected to the hearing in the instant case, and asked that the application be *528dismissed. It was said in the McLean Case, supra, 294:
“A rehearing involves a reopening of the case for a redemption of basic facts. * * * This the department may not permit.”
Certainly the injuries incurred at the time of the accident on June 20, 1947 were basic facts which were determined in the findings of the workmen’s-compensation commission on March 15, 1948. No-mention was made of an injury to the right leg in the commission’s opinion. As a matter of fact, it could be said that the findings and order of the-commission were res judicata as to the injuries-sustained at the time of the accident. Boyich Case, supra.
2. Did the plaintiff give notice to his employers of an injury to the right leg and make claim for compensation benefits within the statutory period as a result of the alleged injury?
In any event, there is nothing in the record of this case to indicate that the plaintiff gave notice-to the employer of an injury to the right leg as a result of the accident of June 20, 1947, nor is there-anything to indicate that the defendant employers had notice or knowledge of such an injury as now claimed by the plaintiff. No claim for such an injury was made until the plaintiff filed his application for hearing on November 12, 1954. See the letter of Attorney R. L. Miles, dated October 29, 1954, attached to the application. The plaintiff failed to comply with the statute as to notice and claim of injury.
RELIEN
Defendants contend that their motion to dismiss-should have been granted by the hearing referee] for the reasons stated, and again repeat that motion,¡ *529and ask further that the award of the hearing referee be set aside and reversed;
That the reader may appraise this “reference,” the appeal board’s complete order (not its opinion on review which is carefully confined to the questions counsel presented before it) is margin-quoted as follows:
“This cause having come before the workmen’s compensation appeal board on appeal of the defendants from the award of Hearing Referee Nolan finding that plaintiff had a disability in his right leg as a result of the injury of June 20, 1947, but that he had suffered no wage loss since November 9, 1953, and therefore denying compensation; after due consideration of the evidence taken and the arguments and briefs of counsel (the appeal board having made a finding of facts and law) and it appearing to this appeal board that the award made, as aforesaid, should be modified.
“Therefore, it is ordered that the award of the hearing referee be and it is hereby modified and plaintiff is entitled to receive and recover compensation from the defendants at the rate of $21 per week from May 11, 1951, to December 31, 1951, inclusive, and at the rate of $8.68 per week from January 1, 1952, to December 31, 1952, inclusive.”
By PA 1955, No 62, the “appellate functions, powers and duties” formerly vested in the workmen’s compensation commission were transferred generally to the newly-created workmen’s compensation appeal board. See section 10 thereof, CLS 1956, § 408.10 (Stat Ann 1957 Cum Supp § 17.6 [16]).
Indeed, in their brief to the appeal board, defendants characterize it as an “application for hearing.” See appendix.
This ease was submitted to the appeal board on briefs, pursuant to Rule No 10 of the departmental rules. Defendants’ brief to the board, under the heading “Argument,” states and argues the desired reviewable questions. It will be found annexed hereto as an appendix.
The printed form of “award,” signed under date of April 28, 1956, by the hearing referee, consists simply of filled in blanks plus the following finding only:
“Plaintiff has a disability in his right leg as a result of the injury of June 20, 1947. However, he has suffered no wage loss since November 9, 1953, and is therefore not entitled to compensation benefits.”
“So the last error shall be worse than the first.” Matthew 27:64.