=== CASE 9738827 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:03:51.687467+00 ===

ROBERTS, J.
Plaintiff brought this action against Kenco Enterprises, Inc., owner and publisher of the Sioux Falls Argus Leader, a daily newspaper, to recover damages claimed to have been sustained by reason of the unauthorized publication and circulation of his photograph in the Sunday, October 23, 1960, issue of the Argus Leader. He alleged that the use of his photograph in connection with an article dealing with the "State's Elderly Citizens" violated his right of privacy and he was thereby subjected to ridicule and suffered mental distress and injury to his feelings. Trial to a jury resulted in a verdict for $3500. Defendant moved for judgment notwithstanding the verdict or in the alternative for a new trial. Motion was denied and defendant has appealed.
The photograph in controversy and the accompanying article occupied the top half of a page of defendant's newspaper. The headlines "Aging: Adversity or Fortune" and "State's Elderly Citizens Plagued By Financial Hardship" in large type appeared at the top of the page. Below the photograph of plaintiff standing in front of a case containing small compartments and sorting mail was the following caption: "GOVERNMENT SETS PACE — The federal government, unlike most industries, maintains a retirement age of 70 instead of the usual 65. 'Many men are in their prime at 65/ says a government official. Sioux Falls Postal employe Guy Truxes, 69, will retire Jan. 1 when reaching retirement age." Plaintiff was not mentioned in the text and the photograph was not necessary to the article.
Plaintiff's testimony was to the effect that he objected to having his picture taken; that he did not know for what purpose is was to be used; that he was not consulted regarding its use or compensated; that as a result of the publication he felt hurt and upset; and that for some time he did not associate with friends because they "razzed" and "kidded" him about the publication. The author of the article testified that publication of the photograph was with knowledge and consent of the plaintiff. But plaintiff is entitled to have the evidence viewed in the light most favorable to him and to have all conflicts in evidence resolved in favor of the verdict.
*107The first and principal question presented is whether an action may be maintained for an invasion of the right of privacy. The question is one of first impression in this state.
The right of privacy has been defined as the right of an individual to be let alone, to live a life of seclusion, to be free from unwarranted publicity. 77 C.J.S. Right of Privacy § 1; see also Davis, What Do We Mean By the "Right of Privacy", 4 South Dakota Law Rev. 1. The author of an annotation in 138 A.L.R. 22 offers the following as a definition of what constitutes an actionable violation of such a right: "The unwarranted appropriation or exploitation of one's personality, the publicizing of one's private affairs with which the public has no legitimate concern, or the wrongful intrusion into one's private activities, in such manner as to outrage or cause mental suffering, shame, or humiliation to a person of ordinary sensibilities."
The defendant points out that no right of action for invasion of privacy is recognized by statute in this state or decision of this court. It is contended that the provisions of SDC 65.-0103 providing that rules of the common law not in conflict with the constitution and statutes of this state shall be in force must be construed as referring to the common law as it existed at the time of the original enactment of the provisions of this section by Chapter 105, Laws 1890, and hence the modern doctrine of privacy as a development of the common law is not adopted and declared to be the law within South Dakota. The decisions of this court hold to the contrary. The common law of this state is not so limited, but is flexible and susceptible of adaptation to the needs and demands of changing times. Moberg v. Scott, 38 S.D. 422, 161 N.W. 998, L.R.A. 1917D, 732; Holmstrom v. Wall, 64 S.D. 467, 268 N.W. 423.
The courts had not prior to 1890 granted relief expressly for invasion of right of privacy although a right "to be let alone" had been recognized "on the basis of defamation, or the invasion of some property right, or a breach of confidence or an implied contract". Prosser, Privacy, 48 Cal.L.Rev. 383. It was not until the publication in that year of an article by Samuel D. Warren and Louis D. Brandéis (later Justice Brandéis) in 4 Harv. Law Rev. 193 was the term the "right of privacy" introduced and defined as a legal concept. The authors after thorough discussion of the *108question concluded that there is a common law right of privacy which had in some instances been protected under the guise of property rights, and that violation of the right itself is actionable. The right of privacy is generally recognized and a preponderance of authority supports the conclusion that, independently of the common rights of property, contract, reputation, and physical integrity, the right exists and an invasion of the right gives rise to a cause of action. The numerous decisions .supporting these propositions are cited in the following annotations: 138 A.L.R. 22, 168 A.L.R. 446 and 14 A.L.R.2d 750.
Arguments in support of the right of privacy are summarized in 41 Am.Jur., Privacy, § 9: “One of the principal arguments advanced in support of the doctrine of privacy by its original exponents is that the increased complexity and intensity of modern civilization and the development of man's spiritual sensibilities have rendered man more sensitive to publicity and have increased his need of privacy, while the great technological improvements in the means of communication have more and more subjected the intimacies of his private life to exploitation by those who pander to commercialism and to prurient and idle curiosity. A legally enforceable right of privacy is deemed to be a proper protection against this type of encroachment upon the personality of the individual. While the early law gave redress only for physical interference with life and property, it is now recognized that man's spiritual nature also needs protection, and that his feelings as well as his limbs should be inviolate. In the formative period of the common law, before the day of newspapers, radio, and photography, when life was simpler and human relations more direct, the individual could himself adequately protect his privacy. Today this would be impossible, and to cast the individual upon his own resources in this regard would only result in a relapse into a system of private vengeance and violence which our civilization has outgrown. Freedom of speech and freedom of the press have been urged as a ground for denying the existence of the right of privacy. The right of privacy does undoubtedly infringe upon absolute freedom of speech and of the press, and it also clashes with the interest of the public in having a free dissemination of news and information. These paramount public interests must be taken into account in placing the necessary limitations *109upon the right of privacy. But if this right of the individual is not without qualifications, neither is freedom of speech and of the press unlimited. The latter privilege is subject to the qualification that it shall not be so exercised as to abuse the rights of individuals. Accordingly, it is held by courts recognizing the right of privacy that the constitutional guaranties of freedom of speech and of the press do not warrant the publication of matter constituting an invasion of the right of privacy any more than they give the right to defame a person."
Restatement, Torts, § 867, recognizes the existence of the right: "A person who unreasonably and seriously interferes with another's interest in not having his affairs known to others or his likeness exhibited to the public is liable to the other."
Concluding that the right of privacy has a foundation in the present day common law and is supported by the weight of authority, we hold that an action in this jurisdiction may be maintained for invasion of such right.
A consideration of the limits of the right of privacy requires a weighing of such right "to be let alone" as against the public right to news and information. In the article by Samuel D. Warren and Louis D. Brandéis (4 Harv.L.Rev. 193, 214 et seq.), this limitation was thus recognized: "The right to privacy does not prohibit any publication of matter which is of public or general interest. * * * The design of the law must be to protect those persons with whose affairs the community has no legitimate concern from being dragged into an undesirable and undesired publicity, and to protect all persons, whatsoever their position or station, from having matters which they may properly prefer to keep private, made public against their will." In Carlisle v. Fawcett Publications, Inc., 20 Cal. Rptr. 405, 414, the court' considering the right of recovery for publication of plaintiff's photograph and accompanying article said: "It is clear that as current news occurs those involved in the happening may be named and discussed in newspapers * * * even though the process actually invades the privacy of the individual. If a householder is burglarized, or a pedestrian is held up and robbed in the street, or two automobiles collide at an intersection, news media may *110properly give an account of what happened even though the individual objects. The freedom of the press is constitutionally guaranteed, and the publication of daily news is an acceptable and necessary function in the life of the community." If use of a name or photograph, within bounds of propriety and decency, is in connection with disseminating of news and information of public concern, the right of privacy cannot be invoked. Moreover, the right of privacy is determined by the norm of the ordinary man; that is to say, liability exists only if the publisher of a photograph should have known that publication would be offensive to a person of ordinary sensibilities. Restatement, Torts, § 867, comments c and d. It is said in Davis v. General Finance & Thrift Corporation, 80 Ga.App. 708, 57 S.E. 2d 225,227: "There are some shocks, inconveniences and annoyancies which members of society in the nature of things must absorb without the right of redress." Whether there is an offensive invasion of privacy is "to some extent, one of law". Schuyler v. Curtis, 147 N.Y. 434, 42 N.E. 22, 31 L.R.A. 286; Cason v. Baskin, 155 Fla. 198, 20 So.2d 243. 168 A.L.R. 430; Reed v. Real Detective Pub. Co., 63 Ariz. 294, 162 P.2d 133; Gill v. Hearst Pub. Co., 40 Cal.2d 224, 253 P.2d 441; Pound, 28 Harv.L.Rev. 343.
Plaintiff concedes that the right of privacy would have accorded him no protection if defendant had used a photograph of him in connection with an article dealing for instance with the operation of the post office wherein he was employed. He asserts that defendant used the photograph of him "in a false light in an offensive publication wherein the plaintiff was portrayed as one of the state's elderly citizens plagued by financial hardship"; that plaintiff is depicted in this light by the headlines of the publication and the general tenor of the article as reflected in the’ first paragraph reading "South Dakota is increasingly becoming a state that shuns its aged population, forcing near poverty for many”; and that since there was no clarification in the publication to the effect that plaintiff was not one of the persons plagued by financial hardship he was by innuendo held up to contempt and ridicule which injured his feelings and reputation. Plaintiff maintains that the question of invasion of privacy was for the triers of fact and that the evidence was sufficient to justify submission of the case to the jury. The evolution of a common law *111jury trial has departed from early doctrine and has developed as observed in Jerke v. Delmont State Bank, 54 S.D. 446, 223 N.W. 585, 72 A.L.R. 7, to a point requiring the determination by a jury in a civil case only of the existence or nonexistence of those facts in issue as to which the minds of reasonable men might differ in the application of mental processes to the evidence. The courts have had great difficulty in fixing proper limitations on the right of privacy. They must necessarily proceed as we have indicated cautiously in these cases involving a conflict between the rights of an individual and those of society. The courts on the one hand are urged to uphold the right of freedom of speech and of the press and the interests of the public in the free dissemination of news and information including reproduction of past news and surveys of social conditions. On the other hand the courts are urged to protect the sensibilities of the individual from brash and unwarranted publicity and against the exploiting advances of commercial interests. The case of Sidis v. F-R Publishing Corp., 2 Cir., 113 F.2d 806, 138 A.L.R. 15, is illustrative of the balancing of conflicting interests. Plaintiff who had been a child prodigy brought action against the publisher of a magazine article containing a truthful sketch of his subsequent life history. The court decided as a matter of law that he could not recover for invasion of right of privacy even though he had since childhood sought a life of obscurity and loathed public attention. The court held that his "subsequent history, containing as it did the answer to the question of whether or not he had fulfilled his early promise, was still a matter of public concern." Barber v. Time, Inc., 348 Mo. 1199, 159 S.W.2d 291, 295, states: "The determination of what is a matter of public concern is similar in principle to qualified privilege in libel. It is for the court to say first whether the occasion or incident is one of proper public interest. (As it must say whether an occasion is one to which qualified privilege extends in libel.) Warren v. Pulitzer Pub. Co., 336 Mo. 184, 78 S.W.2d 404. If the court decides that the matter is outside the scope of proper public interest and that there is substantial evidence tending to show a serious, unreasonable, unwarranted and offensive interference with another's private affairs, then the case is one to be submitted to the jury." The court in Buzinski v. Doall Company, 31 Ill. App.2d 191, 175 N.E.2d 577, considering *112the extent of the authority of the court in relation to the jury in determining public interest limitations on the right of privacy, points out that summary judgment in these cases is a frequent occurrence. Clearly then, the questions of public interest limitations on the right of privacy and of whether reasonable minds can arrive by reasoning processes at more than one conclusion are for the court, and not for the jury, to decide.
Turning again to the record before us, we think it significant that the photograph of the plaintiff was not surreptitiously snapped at his home or on private premises, but was taken in the post office after arrangements had been made for a photograph with the postmaster under whose supervision plaintiff worked. The taking of the photograph under these circumstances of a public employee while engaged in the discharge of his duties was not an infringement on his right of privacy. Barber v. Time, Inc., supra, where a published photograph showed plaintiff in a hospital bed, exemplifies a difference. The court there held that whatever may be the right of the press to take and use a picture of an individual in a public place, the right did not exist under the circumstances to take and publish a picture of an individual in a home or hospital, in connection with an article concerning an unusual ailment. It may be conceded that plaintiff in the instant case was not a public figure concerning whom the public interest became dominant over desire for privacy, yet his status was not that of a person engaged in private business or employment. It may fairly be said that the photograph in question was illustrative of the caption below it referring to the policy of the federal government retiring its employees at the age of 70 instead of the usual age of 65, and legitimately informed readers about a matter of public interest and did not embody anything of a private nature. It thus appears that the photograph was reasonably related to the point made by the author in the caption. It is not contended that the photograph depicted plaintiff in any other than a natural pose. Nor does it appear that there was anything discredible in the photograph itself. As stated earlier in this opinion, the publiction of a person's picture in connection with news or information of legitimate public interest does not constitute actionable invasion of the right of privacy unless the publisher "should have realized that it would *113be offensive to persons of ordinary sensibilities." Restatement of Torts, Vol. 4, § 867, comment d. We conclude with respect to the picture and the caption beneath it that as a matter of law there was no invasion of the right of privacy. See Samuel v. Curtis Pub. Co., D.C., 122 F.Supp. 327; Berg v. Minneapolis Star & Tribune Co., D.C., 79 F.Supp. 957; Bremmer v. Journal-Tribune Publishing Co., 247 Iowa 817, 76 N.W.2d 762; Gill v. Hearst Pub. Co., 40 Cal.2d 224, 253 P.2d 441; Buzinski v. Doall Co., supra; Sarat Lahiri v. Daily Mirror, 162 Misc. 776, 295 N.Y.S. 382; Cason v. Baskin, 155 Fla. 198, 20 So.2d 243, 168 A.L.R. 430.
The plaintiff ascribes to the article and accompanying photograph a meaning that he was one of the elderly citizens plagued by financial hardship. We do not consider it necessary on this appeal to determine whether the publication so construed would give rise to a cause of action. If the photograph and caption did not add anything that was offensive to a person of ordinary sensibilities, no actionable invasion of the right of privacy occurred. The printed article makes no mention of plaintiff. When a publication is not actionable per se it .is the duty of the court as in an action for libel to determine whether the publication can have the meaning ascribed by an asserted innuendo and if in its natural meaning it is incapable of such interpretation, the court should withhold the case from the jury. Brodsky v. The Journal Publishing Co., 73 S.D. 343, 42 N.W.2d 855; 33 Am.Jur., Libel and Slander, § 294. The test in the instant case is what effect the publication construed in its setting and as a whole would have on the mind of the ordinary reader. The photograph was used as stated to illustrate the point made by the author in the caption beneath it that employees of the federal government enjoyed the good fortune of being able to work to a more advanced retirement age. Considering the publication herein by the effect that it would have upon the mind of the ordinary reader, we do not think it had the meaning imputed to it by plaintiff. There was no material issue of fact for the jury. The judgment is, therefore, reversed and cause remanded for further proceedings not inconsistent with this opinion.
HANSON, P. J„ and RENTTO, J„ concur.
BIEGELMEIER and HOMEYER, JJ., concur 'specially.

=== CASE 9739758 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:20:27.790426+00 ===

OPINION
DARDEN, Judge.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
Timothy C. Reeves appeals the jury verdict finding him 100% at fault for his collision with a Boyd & Sons, Inc. tractor-trailer and holding him liable for damages to it. We affirm.
ISSUES
1. Whether admission of medical records disclosing results of Reeves' blood alcohol test was reversible error.
2. Whether allowing inquiry into Reeves' previous driving under the influence conviction was reversible error.
3. Whether failure to submit to the jury an instruction tendered by Reeves was reversible error.
4. Whether the court's refusal to allow Reeves to depose an individual originally listed as a witness for the defense, but later removed from that list and who did not testify, was reversible error.
FACTS
(On October 28, 1990, Timothy C. Reeves left work at his construction job site and joined some fellow workers at a nearby bar and grill between 4:00 and 4:80 p.m. During his approximately one hour stay, he consumed two long-neck bottles of beer. Reeves and some of his companions decided to continue their evening at Dancers, a strip club on West Washington Street in Indianapolis.
Reeves left the bar, stopped at a fast food restaurant for a burger, fries and cola, and then arrived at Dancers sometime before 7:00. Reeves ordered and drank a glass of *866beer. He then ordered a pitcher of beer. Reeves' expected companions never arrived.
Departing Dancers after 1:00 a.m., Reeves traveled east on Washington Street. As he drove, Reeves saw a gas station and checked his fuel gauge to see whether he needed gas. Because his dashboard light was not working he could not read the gauge. He turned on his dome light. After he turned the dome light off, he saw a semi-tractor-trailer in front of him. The tractor-trailer was angled across Washington Street in the process of backing into a drive across from 84 Lumber Company, which was the destination of the truck's load of lumber. Reeves tried to apply his brakes but missed. Reeves drove into the side of the tractor-trailer.
The 1989 Peterbilt tractor had its headlights on; flashers were activated on the cab and along the, side of the 1990 Wilson trailer. On the side of the tractor's "sleeper" were four lights with two bulbs each; under the door of the cab were another four lights with two bulbs each; and there were five lights on top of the cab. The trailer itself had a "light in the center ... which would flash on each side, and then a light at the very front of the trailer and the very rear and then two (2) other ones centered in between the center ones and the far end ones." (R. 707). There were also reflectors on the side of the trailer, and a "pole light" was attached to the side of the front bumper.
A driver traveling behind Reeves on Washington Street realized there was "something blocking the road" and saw the silhouette of the tractor-trailer from a distance of slightly less than a quarter mile away. The driver estimated his distance behind Reeves at "between an eighth and a quarter of a mile." (R. 951).
After the collision, reported as occurring at 1:88 am. on October 24th, sheriff's department and ambulance personnel arrived on the seene. Several of these people testified that Reeves was intoxicated. Reeves was transported to Methodist Hospital, arriving at 2:40 a.m., and was treated by trauma service resident Dr. Douglas Carr. In the course of Dr. Carr's evaluation of Reeves' condition for the purpose of treating him, blood tests were performed. Reeves' blood was drawn at 3:00 a.m. and tested at 8:18 am. According to one of the tests conducted, Reeves' blood alcohol content level was 179.
On June 23, 1992, Reeves brought a personal injury lawsuit against Boyd & Sons, Inc. (hereafter, "Boyd"), the owner of the tractor-trailer. Boyd counterclaimed 1 for damages to its tractor-trailer. The case was tried to a jury over a period of four days. The jury returned a verdict in favor of Boyd on both Reeves' complaint and Boyd's counterclaim, finding 100% of fault in the incident attributable to Reeves and Reeves lable to Boyd for the damage therefrom.
DISCUSSION AND DECISION
1. Blood Alcohol Test Result
Reeves claims that "the trial court committed reversible error by admitting medical records containing a blood alcohol test result, allegedly obtained utilizing a sample of blood from the plaintiff Timothy C. Reeves, without a proper foundation showing the chain of custody of the sample." Reeves' Brief at 10.
The admission of evidence "is a determination entrusted to the discretion of the trial court." Eversole v. Consolidated Rail Corp. (1990), Ind.App., 551 N.E.2d 846, 854, reh'g denied, trams. denied (citation omitted). On appellate review, we consider whether the trial court has abused its discretion in admitting evidence, i.e., whether "the court's action is clearly erroneous and against the logic and effect of the facts and cireumstances before it or the reasonable inferences to be drawn therefrom." Id. (citation omitted). To constitute reversible error, the evidence erroneously admitted cannot be "merely cumulative." Jordan v. Talaga (1989), Ind.App. 532 N.E.2d 1174, 1191, reh'g denied, trans. denied.2
*867Dr. Carr, the physician who treated Reeves upon his admission to the hospital after the collision, was deposed pretrial. During the deposition, Reeves challenged the foundation for the doctor's testimony as to the blood alcohol test result. According to the trial record, the court stated that Dr. Carr's deposition had been "heard in chambers last night without a court reporter present and with both counsel present. And the Court ruled on the objections contained in said deposition...." (R. 384). Before the jury was present the next day, the court discussed with the parties the form of the deposition to be included in the record. When the court asked whether Boyd was "going to introduce the original, ... as part of the official record," Boyd's counsel answered "Yes, sir." (R. 887). Boyd's counsel elaborated that "you want the original in there to preserve [Reeves'] objections." (R. 388). A further colloquy explored Reeves' objection to admission of some of the content of Dr. Carr's deposition:
THE COURT: Any other preliminary matters outside the presence that we need to consider?
[BOYD'S COUNSEL]: Not that I know of.
[REEVES COUNSEL]: Do we have to object on the record now at the time they move their admission?
THE COURT: Technically, yes. I have no objection if you want to make your record now.
[REEVES COUNSEL]: I don't have any problem with doing it now either as long as the Court of Appeals doesn't have a problem with it.
THE COURT: No, I don't think that presents a problem as to when.
[REEVES' COUNSEL]: We can all agree that we can-
[BOYD'S COUNSEL]: Yeah, I don't have a problem-
[REEVES COUNSEL]:-if we all stipulate to it, I think it will probably be all right.
[BOYDS COUNSEL]: Okay.
THE COURT: All right, that you do object and-
[REEVES COUNSEL]: We'll just make it right now.
THE COURT: All right.
[REEVES COUNSEL]: And that is the stipulation, right, Ms. Wehling [Boyd's counsel]?
[BOYD'S COUNSEL]: Pardon me?
[REEVES COUNSEL]: We're all stipulating we can object now rather than at the time you admit the records?
[BOYDS COUNSEL]: Yes, I'l stipulate to that.
[REEVES COUNSEL]: Okay.
THE COURT: Go ahead.
(R. 890-92). record: Reeves then objected, for the
to the admission of the deposition of Dr. Carr for the reason that an inadequate foundation has been laid for admission of the hearsay information that's included within the deposition, including all exhibits to the deposition. There has been no proper chain of custody for the reliability of the information that's contained in Dr. Carr's testimony or the exhibits. There has been an inadequate foundation laid pursuant to any exception to the hearsay rule, including 803, subpart (6), of the new Indiana Rules of Evidence under the business record exception. Uh, there's been no exception laid for the multiple hearsay that's included within the exhibits to the deposition, and the information-some of the information contained in the deposition, including the blood alcohol content, the BAC, is irrelevant and highly prejudicial in this case.
*868For those reasons the Plaintiff objects to the admission of Dr. Carr's deposition.
(R. 392-98). Boyd argues that Reeves "waived any objection to [the blood aleohol test result in the] records by failing to make a specific objection to this evidence when it was offered at trial." (Boyd's Brief at 3). Boyd, the proponent of Dr. Carr's testimony with its accompanying exhibits, offered for the record the unredacted deposition which contained Reeves' objections in order "to preserve your [Reeves'] objections." (R. 388). Further, Boyd agreed to stipulate that the timing of Reeves' objection be adequate for purpose of appeal. For Boyd to argue in his brief that Reeves had waived the admission of evidence issue is without merit, and we find such argument unfair and proper. We also find Reeves' mention in his courtroom objection to admission of "all exhibits" to be sufficiently specific to preserve the matter3
As quoted above, Reeves' claim of error asserts Boyd failed to show the chain of custody of the sample of blood. Reeves argues that a chain of custody foundation has four requirements: 1) integrity of the blood sample; 2) continuous identity of the sample; 3) qualification of the testing analyst; and 4) accuracy of the test. According to Reeves, the "proponent must meet each one of these four foundational requirements." Reeves' Brief at 14. Reeves derives his requirements from two cases.
From Orr v. State (1984), Ind.App., 472 N.E.2d 627, reh'g denied, trans. denied, Reeves finds the need to establish the integrity or purity of the blood sample and the continuing identity of the sample throughout the process. Orr was a criminal prosecution on two counts of operating a motor vehicle while intoxicated resulting in the death of another person. On appeal, Orr argued the failure to identify the individual who transported the blood from the emergency room to the laboratory and that the blood sample tested might have been drawn from another patient. We found a lapse of "at most, fit-teen minutes" between the taking of the sample in the emergency room and the receipt of the sample in the chemistry lab allowed the reasonable conclusion that the specimen was not contaminated. Id. at 682. Moreover, the patient's identification on one form without a first name was overcome by other evidence of Orr's identity as the patient. Reeves' third requirement, qualifications of the analyst who performed the blood test, he attributes to Pollard v. State (1982), Ind.App., 439 N.E.2d 177. Like Orr, Pollard was convicted of driving while intoxicated resulting in the death of another person. Pollard discusses the evidence presented concerning the laboratory technician's qualifications, because the technician testified at trial; however, we find therein no statement mandating a certain showing of the qualifications of the technician. For his fourth requirement, the accuracy of the test conducted, Reeves returns to Orr, supra. Orr challenged the method of testing his blood by presenting an expert witness who propounded an alternative analysis. We found that "mere contradiction of a recognized expert's method of conducting a scientifically acceptable test is not fatal to admissibility." Orr, 472 N.E.2d at 633. However, again, we do not find Orr to con*869tain the per se foundational requirement for which Reeves cites it. Because this is not a criminal prosecution but a civil personal injury claim,4 we do not find Reeves' argument for a four-pronged foundation requirement persuasive on the facts before us.
Boyd contends the medical records, including the report of the blood aleohol test results, were admissible under the business records exception5 of Ind.Evidence Rule 803(6), providing that the hearsay rule does not exelude a "record" of one's condition "made at or near the time" where "kept in the course of a regularly conducted business activity, and if it was the regular practice of that business activity to make" such a record. Evid.R. 803(6). The rule also includes the procedure for ascertaining the authenticity of such a record, but in this case, Reeves' counsel stipulated to the authenticity of the hospital records. "Trustworthiness and necessity were the parents" of the business records exception. Baker v. Wagers (1984), Ind.App., 472 N.E.2d 218, 220. Thus, to exclude from evidence a business record, the opponent must demonstrate that "the source of information or the method or cireumstances of preparation indicate a lack of trustworthiness." Evid.R. 803(6). Reeves asserts that "liln the rush and confusion of a busy emer-geney room, mistakes can easily be made in the drawing, identifying and transporting of a blood sample." Reeves' Brief at 16. In considering his assertion, we review the exhibits introduced during the course of Dr. Carr's deposition and linked by his testimony.
Exhibit 1 is a standard history and physical report prepared by Dr. Carr as part of his duties in the Methodist trauma room. The report was dictated by him on the day of Reeves' admission, October 24th, and transcribed the next day. He described the report as showing "a history and physical examination, laboratory studies, x-ray studies and then our assessment and plan." Id. Dr. Carr stated that he relied on information provided to him by others, such as medical students in the emergency room and emer-geney medical personnel, for some of the information contained in the report. Information about a patient's condition and behavior at the scene and on arrival at the emer-geney room, before the doctor sees him, is "absolutely required" and typically relied upon by trauma physicians. (R. 409). Some information was provided to Dr. Carr by Reeves. Some observations were firsthand, by Dr. Carr. On the first page of the report, Dr. Carr noted Reeves' behavior as "loud and somewhat inappropriate;" he explained that "why his behavior was inappropriate is at the point of initial evaluation subjective." (R. 420).
Exhibit 2 is a Methodist Hospital Emer-geney Room "trauma flow sheet" dated October 24th for patient Timothy Reeves. Dr. Carr is shown as the trauma resident, and he stated he was present when the document was filled out in the emergency room. He described the record as routine and required in the course of a patient's admission to the hospital's emergency room. The flow sheet shows blood was drawn from Reeves and sent to the lab at 8:00 a.m. According to Dr. Carr., Methodist Hospital has a procedure for triage trauma patients in the emergency room: "a basic set of labs is always ordered for purposes of our evaluation of that patient." (R. 421). Blood tests enable the physician to treat the patient by serving "as a base line." (R. 424). A blood aleohol test is performed:
because it's very important to know whether or not a person's behavior is related to their intoxication from other substances or if it could be related to a head injury. For example, if a patient comes into the ER and is loud and boisterous and inappropriate and their blood alcohol level is normal, that person more than likely has a head *870injury and we are very concerned that he may be even at that very moment bleeding into his brain.
(R. 426). Thus, blood alcohol testing is a diagnostic tool. Blood test results are immediately communicated to the doctor because "we have to know those values right away." (R. 427).
Exhibit 8 is a discharge summary report from the hospital laboratory for patient Timothy Reeves, admitted October 24, 1990. According to Dr. Carr, the information is like that which was conveyed to him reporting the results of the blood tests on the morning of October 24th. He further testified that such test results are necessarily relied upon by a trauma resident in the emergency room and that he did in fact rely upon this test result to treat Reeves. The report shows Reeves' blood was tested at 3:18 a.m. and shows a blood alcohol level of .179. Dr. Carr said the results he received were consistent with Reeves' behavior. Dr. Carr testified that Reeves' "loud and inappropriate behavior ... could [have been] due to a head injury" sustained in the collision. (R. 446). He had seen patients "behave in this [same] manner" because of a head injury, but they then have negative results on an alcohol test. (R. 447). Dr. Carr ordered a CAT sean, which can "substantiate other observed abnormalities," and Reeves' results were "completely normal." (R. 445, 444).
Exhibit 4 is the initial patient care record of the emergency room at Methodist Hospital for patient Reeves, deseribed by Dr. Carr as the record "filled out when a patient first comes into the emergency room by the ER physician." (R. 447). The information is relied upon by trauma surgeons, such as Dr. Carr, who are often "in surgery" when a patient arrives and "therefore, we have to rely on these other doctors to convey the initial information to us when we get there." (R. 448). The ER doctor who prepared the record indicated Reeves had alcohol on his breath. Dr. Carr found that observation to be consistent with the blood aleohol test result.
Finally, Exhibit 5 is described by Dr. Carr as the "sign-off note from the trauma service," reporting Reeve's care and treatment in the trauma department. (R. 455). The information contained would be relied upon for Reeves' subsequent treatment and if any neurological problems developed. The injuries reported in the history and physical report (Exhibit 1) match those described in the sign-off note. Dr. Carr's review of the sign-off note, as well as "[Reeves'] initial behavior, the laboratory tests, the CAT sean of the head and the notations that the patient had no neurological deficits and none developed throughout the hospitalization" led to Dr. Carr's conclusion in the deposition "that the patient was drunk at the time of his admission to Methodist Hospital ER." (R. 466). «
Dr. Carr's testimony and his explanation of the medical records do not suggest that the report of the blood alcohol test should be found not to be trustworthy and, thus, inadmissible pursuant to Evid.R. 808(6).
In addition, we note that Dr. Carr's initial testimony as to his training and medical experience qualify him as an expert witness. As Judge Miller posits in his discussion of expert witness testimony:
One seeking treatment from a physician would hardly demand that the physician exclude from consideration radiologists' reports concerning X-rays, records of past hospital admissions and treatment by other physicians, or nurses' reports concerning blood pressure and vital statistics. Indeed, the physician is expected to assimilate and evaluate every available source of information in arriving at a diagnosis or prescription for treatment.
13 Robert Lowell Miller, Jr., Indiana Practice § 708.106 at 423 (1995). Thus, Ind.Evidence Rule 7086 recognizes "this reality of life" by allowing "an expert witness to base an opinion on information received from others before trial, if the information is of a sort *871that other experts in the field reasonably" rely upon. Id. Dr. Carr's conclusion that Reeves was intoxicated took into account a series of indications, not simply the blood alcohol test result. A conclusion that Reeves was intoxicated could be reached by Dr. Carr, as an expert witness, based upon records which are inadmissible so long as other experts in the field would reasonably rely on such records. Evid.R. 708. Hence, Dr. Carr's conclusion that Reeves was intoxicated does not require that a chain of custody have been established for the admission of the blood test result record.
Further, as Boyd correctly asserts, the jury heard more evidence of Reeves' intoxication than just the blood aleohol test result. The ambulance paramedic stated Reeves "looked like he was intoxicated to me" and elaborated that Reeves' behavior at the scene was consistent with "being drunk." (R. 892). A Marion County Sheriffs Deputy, who reported to the seene to conduct an accident investigation, testified that Reeves "appeared to be intoxicated." A lay witness may give an opinion of another's intoxication. Mehidal v. State (1998), Ind.App., 623 N.E.2d 428. And, the blood alcohol test result was only one of several factors leading to Dr. Carr's conclusion of intoxication. The blood aleohol test result indicating intoxication is cumulative to other evidence of intoxication.
Thus, under the facts and circumstances before us in the present case, error-if any-in the admission of the medical record containing the blood alcohol content test result was harmless. Indianapolis Street Ry. Co. v. Schmidt, (1904), 163 Ind. 360, 71 N.E. 201 (Because the jury verdict was sustained by other sufficient evidence, the admission of improper evidence was harmless.); see also Parker v. State ex rel. Town, (1846), Ind., 8 Blackf. 292. Consequently, there can be no reversible error. Jordan, supra.
2. Inquiry into Reeves' Previous Conviction
Reeves next claims reversible error occurred when the trial court permitted Boyd to inquire into Reeves' previous conviction for driving while under the influence of alcohol. Reeves argues that this questioning led to testimony about his conviction, in contravention of Ind.Evidence Rule 404(b).7
The inquiries occurred during cross-examination. The scope of eross-examination is "limited to the subject matter of the direct examination and matters affecting the eredi-bility of the witness." Ind.Evidence Rule 611(b). Judge Miller summarizes the scope of cross examination under other state and federal versions of Evid.R. 611(b) as including "all matters reasonably related to the issues put in dispute by the direct examination and all inferences and implications arising from the testimony on direct examination." 18 Robert Lowell Miller, Jr., Indiana Practice § 611.201 at 197 (1995). "Cross examination is permissible as to the subject matter covered on direct examination, including any matter which tends to elucidate, modify, explain, contradict, or rebut direct testimony." Hicks v. State (1987), Ind., 510 N.E.2d 676, 679. The trial court "is allowed to control the conduct of eross-examination." Jones v. State (1986), Ind., 500 N.E.2d 1166, 1170. Only a clear abuse of discretion warrants reversal. City of Indianapolis v. Swanson (1983), Ind., 448 N.E.2d 668, 671.
Reeves had filed a motion in limine to preclude Boyd's making any reference to his 1987 conviction for driving under the influence of alcohol. The motion was granted. However, during Reeves case in chief, Reeves called Naney Kay Reeves, his mother, as a witness on his behalf. Reeves' questioning of Mrs. Reeves included the following queries:
Before the collision and before June of 1990, did you ever see Tim drinking around the house?
Did you ever know him to go out drinking with the guys in the evening?
Did he ever come home in the evening when he was living at home drunk?
*872(R. Mrs. Reeves answered "No" to each. After the answer to the last question, Reeves' counsel commented, "Okay. You raised your eyes a little bit on that." To which Mrs. Reeves responded, "That's a no-no." Id.
On cross examination of Mrs. Reeves, Boyd asked, "Were you aware that Tim was convicted of a driving while intoxicated charge ...?" (R. 8305). Reeves objected, citing Evid.R. 404, and the court responded that "during the break, the Court's indicated that it was lifting the requirement required by the Motion in Limine and the Order in Limine. I think the issue has been raised by Plaintiff's counsel through this witness." (R. 308). The court overruled the objection and allowed Mrs. Reeves to answer the question. She said she did not know about the convietion.
When Reeves testified in his own behalf, Boyd asked him whether he had a prior conviction for "operating under the influence." (R. 360). Again Reeves objected, citing Evid.R. 404, and the court overruled the objection. Reeves admitted the convietion.
Boyd argues that Reeves "opened the door" to inquiry regarding the prior conviction by not only the direct examination questions of Reeves' mother cited above but also Reeves' questioning on direct examination of a former, occasional employer of Reeves. The former employer was asked whether he ever saw Reeves "drinking on the job," or ever heard Reeves "talking about going out in the evening with the other workers, with the guys, to go drinking." (R. 882). The employer answered both questions negatively.8
Evid.R. 611(b) allows Boyd to inquire about a previous conviction for driving under the influence because the testimony of the former employer and Reeves' mother gave rise to the inference that Reeves did not partake of alcoholic beverages and, therefore, would not have been intoxicated at the time of the collision. The inquiry sought to "con-tradiet or rebut," Hicks, supra, the implication of Reeves' abstention. Further, if a subject is "touched upon in direct examination" in a manner leaving the "trier of fact with a false or misleading impression of the facts related, the direct examiner may be held to have 'opened the door' to the cross examiner to explore the subject fully, even if the matters so brought out on cross examination otherwise would have been inadmissible." 18 Indiana Practice § 611.204 at 201. Because the employer's and Mrs. Reeves' testimony could leave the jury with the false impression that Reeves would not drive while intoxicated, that testimony by Reeves' witnesses on direct examination "opened the door" to an inquiry leading to evidence that Reeves had in fact driven while under the influence of alcohol.
The trial court did not abuse its discretion in allowing the inquiry.
3. Instruction
Reeves claims the trial court committed reversible error when it refused his tendered instruction number 8:
Duty Lookout-Extraordinary Hazards
The mere fact a collision has occurred does not mean Timothy Reeves was at fault in any manner. I instruct you that no motorist is required to anticipate extraordinary road hazards nor to constantly expect or search for unusual dangers. Motorists have the right to assume that other motorists will exercise reasonable care and no motorist is required to be constantly prepared for every conceivable cireumstance or to insure against every collision, particularly where the dangerous condition was created by the fault of the Defendant. A motorist like Timothy Reeves had the right to assume that any *873vehicle approaching from the opposite direction would use reasonable care and yield the right-of-way to preferential traffic and that such other vehicle would not block the roadway or violate a law or rule of the road. Therefore, if you find that Timothy Reeves was operating his vehicle with reasonable care at the time of the collision, he had a right to assume that the Defendant would obey all traffic laws and would exercise reasonable care at all times while on a public highway and Timothy Reeves cannot be found negligent for relying upon that assumption.
We summarized the standard applied on appellate review to a claim of trial court error for not having given a tendered instruction in Underly v. Advance Mach. Co. (1993), Ind.App., 605 N.E.2d 1186, reh'g denied, trans. denied.
A party is normally entitled to have a tendered instruction read to the jury, and we will reverse the trial court for failure to give a tendered instruction if: (1) the instruction is a correct statement of law; (2) it is supported by the evidence; (8) it does not repeat material adequately covered by other instructions; and (4) the substantial rights of the tendering party would be prejudiced by the failure to give the instruction. However, a party is not entitled to a repetitive instruction, or one that does not correctly state the law. We will not reverse the trial court for failing to give the best possible instructions; we will affirm as long as the trial court gave instructions which adequately and correctly stated the law.
Id. at 1191 (citation omitted).
Reeves argues that his instruction is a correct statement of the law, that evidence warrants the instruction, that the "substance" of his instruction was not covered by the court's instructions to the jury, and that this instruction "would have enabled the jury to find [Boyd] negligent." Reeves' Brief at 25. Presumably, the last matter leads to Reeves' conclusion that his rights were substantially affected.
We note Boyd's arguments that the instruction is neither a correct statement of the law nor warranted by the evidence. However, we focus our attention on the third and fourth considerations. The court provided the jury with a comprehensive instruction on comparative fault. Additionally, instructions provided by the court, which cover what Boyd describes as "every conceivable theory of negligence" attributable to Boyd, Boyd's Brief at 89, included:
-the standard of care owed by Boyd to Reeves;
-general instructions regarding negligence;
-that if the jury found Boyd had failed to provide its driver sufficient training in maneuvering the tractor-trailer or failed to provide its driver sufficient training and equipment as to safety and the use of warning devices, they could consider that as evidence of negligence;
-that Boyd had a legal duty to exercise reasonable care to give adequate warning to Reeves of the dangerous and hazardous condition created by their flatbed trailer, and the jury could consider failure to do so as evidence of negligence;
-that a statute provided "no person shall recklessly, knowingly or intentionally obstruct vehicular traffic," and the jury could consider violation of this statute without legal justification or excuse as evidence of negligence.
(R. 116). We believe the court's instructions covered the points which Reeves sought to convey in his tendered instruction.
As to the fourth consideration, Boyd contends, and we agree, that the proposed instruction focuses solely on factors which the jury could consider in determining whether Reeves was negligent; it "does not instruct the jury on any duty Boyd [ ] may have owed Reeves" and "does not provide any guidance in determining whether Boyd [] was negligent." Boyd's Brief at 39-40. Because the instruction Reeves tendered does not provide any basis upon which fault could be assigned to Boyd and other instructions do, failure to give the instruction cannot be found to have substantially affected Reeves' rights so as to require reversal.
*8744. Deposing Alan McDonald
The trial court has "broad discretion in ruling on issues of discovery and we will interfere only where an abuse of discretion is apparent." Lucas v. Dorsey Corp. (1993), Ind.App., 609 N.E.2d 1191, 1195, trans. denied.
A witness list filed by Boyd included Allan T. McDonald, Ph.D. Reeves served a notice of deposition and subpoena duces tecum for McDonald.9 Boyd amended its witness list, eliminating several of the names earlier listed as witnesses, including MeDonald, and moved to quash the notice of deposition and subpoena. The court granted the motion and issued a protective order.10 Reeves claims that he "had the right to depose Alan McDonald as he was listed on" the witness list, and the trial court "abused its discretion when it refused to permit [Reeves] to depose Alan MeDonald, despite the clear language of TR. 26(B)(4)." Reeves directs us to the language of Ind.T'rial Rule 26(B)(4), which states: Reeves' Brief at 27-28.
Trial Preparation: Experts. Discovery of facts known and opinions held by experts, otherwise discoverable under the provisions of subdivision (B)(1) of this rule and acquired or developed in anticipation of litigation or for trial, may be obtained as follows:
(a)) A party may through interrogatories require any other party to identify each person whom the other party expects to call as an expert witness at trial, to state the subject matter on which the expert is expected to testify, and to state the substance of the facts and opinions to which the expert is expected to testify and a summary of the grounds for each opinion.
(i) Upon motion, the court may order further discovery by other means, subject to such restrictions as to scope and such provisions, pursuant to subdivision (B)(d)(c) of this rule, concerning fees and expenses as the court may deem appropriate.
Reeves claims that when Boyd withdrew their expert before trial, they denied Reeves his right to depose him. Reeves cites no authority other than the above-quoted seetion of TR. 26.
As Boyd correctly responds, the next provision of the rule provides a mechanism for the situation which occurred:
A party may discover facts known or opinions held by an expert who has been retained or specially employed by another party in anticipation of litigation or preparation for trial and who is not expected to be called as a witness at trial, only as provided in Rule 85(B) or upon a showing of exceptional cireumstances under which it is impracticable for the party seeking discovery to obtain facts or opinions on the same subject by other means.
T.R. 26(B)(4)(b). Ind.Trial Rule 35(B) deals with the report of a physician who has conducted an independent medical examination and is inapplicable here. Therefore, according to TR. 26(B)(4)(b), Reeves had to make a showing as to the exceptional circumstances warranting his access to information from McDonald.
As the parties have referred us to no Indiana cases directly on point, we consult practice under the parallel provision of the federal rules, Fed.R.Civ.P. 26(b)(4)(B), adopted in 1970, wherein:
facts known or opinions held by an expert specially retained by a party in anticipation of litigation or preparation for trial, but not expected to be called as a witness, may be discovered only as provided in Rule 35(b), or on a "showing of exceptional circumstances under which it is impracticable for the party seeking discovery to obtain facts or opinions on the same subject by other means."
4 Moore's Federal Practice §26.17[8]. The Tenth Cireuit traced the development of this *875rule by referring to the advisory committee notes, indicating:
the structure of Rule 26 was largely developed around the doctrine of unfairness-designed to prevent a party from building his own case by means of his opponent's financial resources, superior diligence and more aggressive preparation.
Ager v. Jane C. Stormont Hospital & Training, Etc. (10th Cir.1980), 622 F.2d 496, 502. Brown v. Ringstad (S.D.Iowa 1992), 142 F.R.D. 461, cited the Tenth Circuit's use of this historical grounding and further found that:
the advisory committee notes accompanying the 1970 amendments made clear [that] the drafters of that subparagraph wanted it to reinforce each litigant's motivation to aggressively develop his own side of any given case by retaining and relying on his own expert. The flip side of that objective was to discourage lazy or unserupulous lawyers from trying to cut case-preparation corners by leaching basic information or valuable opinions from experts retained by their opponents.
Id. at 465. Therefore, Brown held that a plaintiff was not entitled to depose the defendant's expert medical witness who conducted a TR. 35 physical exam on the plaintiff since the defendant had decided not to call the expert as a witness and no exceptional circumstances had been asserted.
In Ross v. Burlington Northern R.R. Co. (N.D.Ill.1991), 136 F.R.D. 638, a witness originally designated by the plaintiff as a testifying expert witness was later labelled a consulting expert witness. The defendant claimed "it should be permitted to take the deposition of this witness because he was once named as a testifying expert witness." Id. The court disagreed.
Although plaintiff may have originally designed the witness as a testifying expert, plaintiff has the prerogative of changing his mind. Since plaintiff changed his mind before any expert testimony was given in this case, the witness never actually acted as a testifying expert witness. The court cannot find, then, that the shift in designation affects the witness's current status as a non-testifying expert witness and denies him the protection afforded such a witness.
Id. at 639. Thus, because the individual in question was "a nontestifying expert, facts or opinions held by him may only be discovered if defendant shows exceptional cireum-stances." Id.
We presume that our supreme court was familiar with the rationale underlying the drafting of the federal rule which governs discovery directed toward expert witnesses when adopting our very similar T.R. 26(B)(4) and, in so doing, distinguishing between discovery as to a testifying expert and a non-testifying expert. In the case of an expert "who is not expected to be called as a witness at trial," a "showing of exceptional cireum-stances" is required in order to go forward with discovery. T.R. 26(B)(4)(b). The record before us discloses no such showing by Reeves. The trial court did not abuse its discretion in granting the motion to quash and protective order.
We affirm.
BAKER, J., concurs.
RILEY, J., dissents in part and concurs in part with separate opinion.
. Reeves does not mention the counterclaim, nor is it part of the record submitted by Reeves. According to the court docket, a counterclaim was filed April 30, 1993. (R. 5). Boyd's brief also tells us that Boyd counterclaimed.
. We note the implications of this second step of reversible error analysis. Where, as here, appel*867lant limits his submission for review to a partial transcript, the record before the appellate court may be insufficient to allow for the necessary harmless error review. Accordingly, we could decline to perform the initial analysis as to whether there was an admissibility error when the record provided precludes completion of the second step. Appellant has the burden to provide the court with a record sufficient for appellate review of the error claimed. Ind.Appellate Rule 7.2; Stypezynski v. Kaiser Jeep Corp. (1973), 156 Ind.App. 78, 294 N.E.2d 830. An appellee is not required to supplement the partial transcript submitted by an appellant. However, because Boyd has done so in this instance, we believe the record is sufficient to proceed on the merits.
. Within Reeves' claim of error as to the admission of the blood alcohol test result, Reeves also argues that the "extremely prejudicial" testimony of another witness, toxicologist Mark E. Carfag-na, Ph.D., was "based solely on" that test result. Reeves' Brief at 5. As noted by Boyd, Reeves failed to object to Carfagna's testimony about the blood alcohol content level. Reeves responds that State v. Monninger (1962), 243 Ind. 174, 182 N.E.2d 426, provides that "[to preserve error, it is not necessary to make repeated objections on the same grounds after an objection has been overruled," Reeves' Reply Brief at 10, and his earlier objection sufficed. However, as a result of Reeves' failire to object, Reeves' concerns about Dr. Carfagna's reference to a blood alcohol test result which Reeves believed to have been admitted without sufficient foundation were not brought to the attention of the trial court. When a party "does not properly bring [his] objection to the trial court's attention so that the trial court may rule on it at the appropriate time, he is deemed to have waived that possible error." Ingram v. State (1989), Ind., 547 N.E.2d 823, 829. Because a party must object to the admission of evidence at the time it is offered, a party who fails to make a timely objection not only waives the right to have the evidence excluded at trial but also the right on appeal to assert the admission of evidence as erroneous. Reed v. Dillon (1991), Ind.App., 566 N.E.2d 585. "In failing to make a timely objection or motion [to strike], the party is, in effect, acquiescing in the admission of the evidence." Id.
. Reeves also refers us to Fendley v. Ford (1984), Ind.App., 458 N.E.2d 1167, for the necessity of a chain of custody to admit a hospital record containing the result of a blood alcohol test. In Fendley, the question was whether the trial court erred in not admitting the record. Therefore, our perspective focused on whether the exclusion could be supported. We do not read Fendley as establishing a chain of custody requirement.
. The derivation of the exception before the adoption of the Indiana Rules of Evidence is carefully traced in Baker v. Wagers (1984), Ind.App., 472 N.E.2d 218.
. Evid.R. 703 provides:
The facts or data in the particular case upon which an expert bases an opinion or inference may be those perceived by or made known to the expert at or before the hearing. Experts may testify to opinions based on inadmissible evidence, provided that it is of the type reasonably relied upon by experts in the field.
. Evid.R. 404(b) provides:
Other Crimes, Wrongs, or Acts. Evidence of other crimes, wrongs, or acts is not admissible to prove the character of a person in order to show action in conformity therewith.....
. We note that the testimony of this witness was not provided in the record submitted by Reeves. The testimony is included in a supplementary record compiled by Boyd. According to Boyd, the employer testified before Mrs. Reeves did and was the first witness to be questioned about Reeves' drinking. The two partial transcripts we have do not allow us to determine the order in which witnesses testified, as only the date of each witness' testimony is reported. We caution appellants that omitting the testimony of select witnesses might foster the perception that the record presented is a mischaracterization of what took place at trial.
. According to Reeves' brief, McDonald was requested to "produce his entire file regarding this matter"" The record does not contain the notice of deposition or subpoena.
. At oral argument before this court on June 28, 1995, counsel for Reeves asserted "strenuous arguments" had been made to the trial court with respect to the motion to quash and the protective order. However, Reeves provided us with no record in this regard.

=== CASE 2217334 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:25.589238+00 ===

98 Wis.2d 443 (1980)
297 N.W.2d 28
IN the MATTER OF DISCIPLINARY PROCEEDINGS AGAINST Bernard BERK, attorney at law.
No. 80-234-D.
Supreme Court of Wisconsin.
Decided September 30, 1980.
PER CURIAM.
Attorney disciplinary proceeding; attorney publicly reprimanded.
On February 5, 1980, the Board of Attorneys Professional Responsibility filed with the court a complaint alleging that in May of 1977 Bernard Berk, an attorney admitted to practice in this state since 1939 and who practices in Green Bay, requested a conference with the presiding judge in a criminal case pending in United States District Court to discuss "a personal matter," that the conference was held in the absence of counsel representing *444 the parties in the matter, that during the course of that conference Berk sought to obtain an adjournment of the trial in the matter and that Berk stated to the judge that in the event the trial resulted in a conviction of the defendant, the corporation of which Berk was then president would suffer adverse effects. As a result of the conference, the judge recused himself from the pending matter.
The court referred this matter to the Hon. William C. Sachtjen as referee pursuant to SCR 21.09 (1980). A hearing on the complaint was held on June 2 and 3, 1980. On July 31, 1980, the referee filed his findings of fact, conclusions and recommendation for discipline. In addition to the allegations contained in the complaint, the referee found that during the conference with the judge, Berk spoke of his belief of the innocence of the defendant in the pending matter. The referee concluded that Berk's communication with the judge violated SCR 20.44(2).
In view of the fact that Berk is held in high regard in his community for his professional competence, moral fitness, honesty and integrity, as attested to by character witnesses who appeared at the hearing, the referee recommended imposition of discipline consisting of a public reprimand and that Berk pay the costs of the disciplinary proceeding. We hereby adopt the findings, conclusions and recommendation of the referee.
It is ordered that Bernard Berk is publicly reprimanded for unprofessional conduct.
It is further ordered that Bernard Berk pay the costs of this proceeding in the amount of $4,013.67 to the Board of Attorneys Professional Responsibility within 60 days of the date of this order, provided that if the costs are not paid within the time specified, the license of Bernard Berk to practice law in Wisconsin shall be forthwith suspended.

=== CASE 9738688 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:00:54.229823+00 ===

R. M. Maher, J.
The defendant appeals as of right from his plea-based conviction for armed *374robbery, MCL 750.529; MSA 28.797. The defendant was sentenced to a term of 8 to 13 years in prison.
On appeal, the defendant contends that the trial court failed to comply with the requirement of GCR 1963, 785.7. More specifically, defendant alleges that the trial court did not advise the defendant that the offense to which he was entering a plea was nonprobationable, as required by GCR 1963, 785.7(l)(f). The transcript of the guilty plea reveals that defendant was told that the maximum sentence for armed robbery was life, but he was not advised that the offense was not probationable nor that he would definitely go to prison.
In People v Freeman, 73 Mich App 568; 252 NW2d 518 (1977), this Court said that it was error not to advise defendant of his ineligibility for probation. However, because of the sentence bargain in that case, the defendant knew before he pleaded that he would go to prison, and so the Court concluded that the error was harmless. In his concurring opinion in Freeman, Judge T. M. Burns indicated that had there been no sentencing agreement, reversal would have been mandated by Guilty Plea Cases, 395 Mich 96, 118; 235 NW2d 132 (1975).
In People v Lendzian, 80 Mich App 323; 263 NW2d 360 (1977), the defendant pleaded guilty to armed robbery and was not informed that he could not be placed on probation. He was told the maximum sentence but not the minimum. There was no sentence agreement. Although the Court cited People v Freeman, supra, it concluded with little reasoning that despite the absence of a sentencing agreement, there was no reversible error. In a. more recent case, People v Earl Jones, 94 Mich App 232; 288 NW2d 385 (1979), the defendant entered a plea of second-degree murder and was *375not told that this was a nonprobationary offense. Defendant was informed of a possible maximum life sentence. The Court declined to reverse the conviction, citing People v Lendzian, supra, and said the error was harmless for the following reasons: the defendant was told and understood that there was a maximum life sentence; as a previous felony offender, he was familiar with the criminal justice system; defendant was in violation of his parole and was apprised of the possible consequences therefor; and finally, defendant was charged with a grievous crime and had no expectation of being placed on probation.
We are forced to conclude that both Lendzian and Jones, supra, were wrongly decided. The clear import of GCR 1963, 785.7(l)(f) is that a defendant must be told that he will serve some time in prison if he chooses to enter a plea. Under Freeman, that requirement is excused where there has been a sentence bargain, for defendant then knows of his prison term prior to entering his plea. Despite the gravity of a defendant’s crime or his prior experience with the judicial system, we cannot infer from a silent record that defendant knew he would serve time in jail and thus render the court rule nugatory.
Reversed and remanded to the trial court.
D. E. Holbrook, Jr., P.J., concurred.

=== CASE 9738689 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:00:54.233591+00 ===

Cynar, J.
(concurring in result only). Although I concur in the result reached by the majority, I feel compelled to comment further on People v Earl Jones, 94 Mich App 232; 288 NW2d 385 (1979), lv den 409 Mich 854 (1980). Defendant Jones had been charged in a three-count information: count I, first-degree murder; count II, assault with intent to commit murder; and count III, possession of a *376firearm at the time of the commission of a felony. The plea bargain in that case involved dismissal of counts I, II, and III in exchange for defendant’s plea of guilty to an added count of second-degree murder. On August 21, 1978, the date defendant tendered his plea, he was advised that he was pleading guilty to a felony with a maximum penalty of life imprisonment. He was further advised that the prosecution would forbear from filing a habitual offender information and that by pleading guilty to second-degree murder defendant would be admitting to being in violation of the terms of his parole on a previous armed robbery conviction and could be punished therefor. Just prior to accepting defendant’s plea, the court stated:
"For this record, the court has not agreed upon the possibility of a plea, but as [sic] indicated to the defense counsel prior to this date that the possible sentence would be life imprisonment.”
Subsequently, defendant was sentenced to life imprisonment. It is my conviction that People v Earl Jones, supra, was correctly decided.

=== CASE 2217348 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:25.853865+00 ===

136 Ind. App. 174 (1964)
198 N.E.2d 873
KEN SCHAEFER AUTO AUCTION, INC.
v.
TUSTISON.
No. 20,096.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
Filed June 4, 1964.
*175 Ralph B. Gregg, Richard P. Watson and Gregg, Fillion, Hughes & Northrup, of counsel, all of Indianapolis, for appellant.
Joe L. Tipton, of Indianapolis, for appellee.
PFAFF, J.
This is an appeal from an award of the Full Industrial Board of Indiana granting compensation to appellee for injuries allegedly sustained in an accident arising out of and in the course of his employment by the appellant.
The petition for compensation was heard by a single member of the Board who found that on April 21, 1962, appellee was an employee of appellant at an average *176 weekly wage of $10.00; that on said date appellee received personal injuries by reason of an accident arising out of and in the course of his employment with the appellant, of which the appellant had knowledge but did not furnish statutory medical attention; that appellee's injury was to his back requiring an operation and resulted in temporary total disability to November 15, 1962; that appellee's injury has reached a permanent and quiescent state and has resulted in 15 per cent permanent partial impairment to the man as a whole; and that appellee incurred the following medical and hospital expenses for the treatment of said injury for which appellant is liable; Methodist Hospital, $1051.41; Indiana Brace Shop, Inc., $85.00; and Dr. A.R. Lasich, $150.00.
Based upon such findings the hearing member ordered and adjudged that appellee have and recover of and from the appellant compensation for 26 weeks for temporary total disability at the rate of $10.00 per week commencing April 21, 1962, and in addition thereto, compensation for a specific period of 75 weeks at the rate of $10.00 per week for 15 per cent permanent partial impairment to the man as a whole. It was further ordered that appellant pay the medical expenses incurred by appellee.
Thereafter, appellant filed its application for a review of such award by the Full Board. Said Board affirmed the findings and award of its hearing member except for increasing the amount of compensation from $10.00 per week to $21.00 per week for a period of 26 weeks and from $10.00 per week to $21.00 per week for a period of 75 weeks. The total amount of the award amounted to $3,407.41.
*177 Error assigned for reversal is that the award of the Full Industrial Board of Indiana is contrary to law. Appellant's assignment of error questions the findings and award of the Board and alleges that appellee's disability was not the result of an accidental injury arising out of and in the course of his employment by appellant.
Thus, the primary question presented by this appeal is the correctness of the finding of the Industrial Board as to whether the appellee was injured in an accident which arose out of and in the course of his employment by the appellant.
This court is committed to the rule that it will not weigh the evidence; and if there is any evidence of probative value to sustain the award of the Industrial Board, the same will be sustained considering only the evidence most favorable to appellee. Kariger Motors, Inc. v. Kariger et al. (1961), 132 Ind. App. 85, 88, 173 N.E.2d 916, and cases therein cited.
The evidence in the case before us is in conflict but that which is most favorable to appellee is as follows:
Appellee, a man of 39 years of age, since about November 15, 1962, has been employed by the Indianapolis and Midwest Auto Auctions driving cars to other cities, at approximately $45.00 to $50.00 per week. From some time during the summer of 1961 until April 21, 1962, the date on which the alleged accident occurred, he had been employed two to four days a week by appellant herein, Ken Schaefer Auto Auction, Inc., doing general labor, odd jobs and driving cars at an average weekly wage of $35.00. Appellee testified these wages were paid to him each day in cash, except on *178 Thursdays when he was paid by check. Appellee further testified that prior to April 21, 1962, he had done some painting for the appellant herein and that he was paid by cash.
Appellee testified, and the record so discloses, that on the day of the accident in question appellee started working for the appellant herein at about nine o'clock in the morning at the request of a Mr. Robinson, another employee of appellant. Mr. Robinson and appellee painted all day, using appellant's ladders and paint, with the exception of about half an hour off for lunch. At about six o'clock appellee fell approximately 15 feet from the ladder on which he was standing to paint the rafters in the ceiling of appellant's place of business, to the cement floor of said establishment. He was taken to the hospital where he stayed until May 23, 1962, incurring the medical bills herein complained of.
Upon direct examination Dr. Anthony Robert Lasich testified that he first saw the appellee on April 21, 1962, in the emergency room of Methodist Hospital; that he (appellee) was lying on a cart in considerable distress at that time and, after examination and X-ray studies the diagnosis of compression fracture of the second lumbar vertebra was made and appellee was admitted to the hospital for care; that while in the hospital appellee developed a marked paralytic ileus immediately following his injury which required intensive care; that he also suffered considerable emotional distress and was a behavioral problem in the initial phases of his hospitalization for which the services of a psychiatrist were required; that his condition was stabilized, he was placed in an extension body plaster which broke and a second plaster was applied. On May 23, 1962, appellee was dismissed from the hospital. On *179 dismissal he was seen in the doctor's office and was unable to tolerate the cast and the cast was accordingly removed and he was placed in a hyperextension brace. Appellee was next seen in the doctor's office on June 5, 1962, at which time X-rays were taken and the fracture appeared to be healing. He was seen again in the doctor's office on the 8th of June for brace adjustment but no more X-rays were taken. Asked whether at the time the X-rays were taken Dr. Lasich had an opinion based upon reasonable medical certainty of the percentage of permanent partial impairment, the doctor stated that at that time appellee's residual impairment would range between ten and twenty per cent of the man as a whole.
The appellant specifically alleges four propositions in support of its argument. The first proposition is that the finding of the majority of the Industrial Board is contrary to law in that there is no probative evidence in the record that appellee has permanent partial impairment of 15 percent of the man as a whole. Appellant cites cases in support of the rule that an award of workmen's compensation must be based upon something more than mere guess, surmise, conjecture or possibility. We fully agree with this statement of the law, but are of the opinion that the Board had sufficient facts before it on which to base the award. The evidence presented to the Board was that the appellee had ten to twenty percent permanent partial impairment. The existence of permanent partial impairment is a question of fact and this court must accept the facts so found unless there be evidence of such a conclusive character as to force a contrary conclusion. In order to reach a contrary conclusion, we may not weigh the evidence nor may we disregard any reasonable inference which the Industrial *180 Board may have drawn from the facts which the evidence tends to establish. George v. Interstate Metal Products, Inc. (1955), 125 Ind. App. 406, 413, 126 N.E.2d 258; Jenkins v. Pullman Standard Car Mfg. Co. (1957), 127 Ind. App. 173, 175, 139 N.E.2d 566; Bundy v. Concrete Ready-Mix Co. (1960), 130 Ind. App. 542, 545, 167 N.E.2d 477.
The uncontradicted evidence in the instant case was that the appellee has between 10 to 20 per cent permanent partial impairment to the man as a whole, and it is our opinion that the Industrial Board acted within its province in arriving at the conclusion that appellee has a 15 per cent permanent partial impairment of the man as a whole and that such conclusion of fact is based upon probative evidence and not upon a mere guess, conjecture, surmise or possibility.
Appellant next contends that the finding of an employment relationship by the Board was contrary to law because the evidence of the appellee was untrustworthy and that the evidence rebutting appellee's claim was of such a conclusive character as to force a contrary conclusion.
An examination of the record discloses that the evidence presented to the Board was sharply conflicting. It has been held many times by this court and the Supreme Court that if the evidence is conflicting or is susceptible to different conclusions the award of the Board must be affirmed. Teter v. Mid-State Poultry and Egg Company (1962), 134 Ind. App. 452, 184 N.E.2d 824, 826, and cases therein cited. Further, it was stated in Square D Company v. O'Neal (1946), 117 Ind. App. 92, 96, 66 N.E.2d 898:
*181 "... it was the exclusive province of the Industrial Board, as the trier of the facts, to weigh the evidence, determine the credibility of the witnesses and decide with whom the truth lay, and its finding upon the questions of fact cannot be disturbed on appeal, or our judgment as to the weight of the evidence substituted for that of the Industrial Board." (Our emphasis).
Appellant further claims that the appellee had witnesses available to testify as to the employment relationship but did not call them to the stand. It is well settled that the number of witnesses is not to be counted by the trier of the case, but the evidence given by them is to be weighed, and the preponderance thereof does not depend on the greater number of the witnesses in the particular case. This rule is well stated by our Supreme Court in the case of Indianapolis St. R. Co. v. Johnson (1904), 163 Ind. 518, 525, 72 N.E. 571, as follows:
"... As a general rule, the preponderance of the evidence in a case does not depend upon or mean the greater number of witnesses testifying upon the matter or matters in issue. Counsel mistake the law in their contention that where the witnesses in a case are equally credible in respect to their character, then, in such case, the preponderance of the evidence depends upon the number of witnesses testifying. This certainly is not the true test in any case. Any number of witnesses may be of equal credibility and possess equal information, and still differ greatly in the amount or weight of their evidence. The authorities generally affirm that the number of witnesses are not to be counted by the jury or court trying the case in order to determine upon which side is the preponderance, but the evidence given by them is to be weighed, and the preponderance thereof does not depend on the greater number of the witnesses in the particular case."
*182 It is apparent that both sides presented testimony to the Board concerning the matter of employment. It was for the Board to determine the weight and relevancy of the testimony presented regardless of the number of witnesses called by either the appellant or appellee.
Appellant's third proposition is that the finding of the majority of the Industrial Board is contrary to law in that it found appellee was in the employ of appellant "at an average weekly wage of $35.00 as a painter," whereas there is no such evidence in the record. However, an examination of the record discloses the Board found appellee was in the employ of appellant "at an average weekly wage of $35.00" and not "at an average weekly wage of $35.00 as a painter" as appellant states. In view of the fact that the Board found appellee was in the employ of the appellant, it is immaterial whether he was in its employ as a painter or was employed to do sweeping, general labor or driving cars.
Finally appellant states that the award of the Industrial Board is contrary to law in that the decision does not rest upon a substantial factual foundation and must be reversed if it appears the evidence was devoid of probative value or the quantum of legitimate evidence was so proportionately meager as to show that the finding does not rest upon a rational basis. In support of this contention, appellant cites among other cases, the case of Pollock v. Studebaker Corporation (1952), 230 Ind. 622, 105 N.E.2d 513. An examination of this case discloses the following language by Judge Gilkison, speaking for the Supreme Court:
"The Industrial Board is the sole fact-finding body in a proceeding of this kind provided for by the Workmen's Compensation Law, §§ 40-1509 to 40-1513 inclusive, Burns' 1952 Replacement. Blue *183 Ribbon Pie Kitchens, Inc. v. Long et al. (1952), 230 Ind. 257, 103 N.E.2d 205, and cases there cited. "On appeal this court cannot weigh the evidence heard by the Industrial Board and determine for whom it preponderates. Blue Ribbon Pie Kitchens, Inc. v. Long et al. supra; Vonnegut Hardware Co. v. Rose (1918), 68 Ind. App. 385, 120 N.E. 608; Warren v. Indiana Telephone Co. (1940), 217 Ind. 93, 118, 119, 26 N.E.2d 399.
"Our jurisdiction on appeal is limited only to an examination of the evidence to ascertain whether the finding of the Industrial Board does not rest upon a substantial factual foundation. We may reverse the award only if this negative situation appears from the evidence. We have heretofore held that this situation would be shown only: (1) If it should appear that the evidence upon which the Industrial Board acted was devoid of probative value; (2) That the quantum of legitimate evidence was so proportionately meagre as to show that the finding does not rest upon a rational basis or; (3) That the result must have been substantially influenced by improper considerations. Blue Ribbon Pie Kitchens, Inc. v. Long et al., supra; Warren v. Indiana Telephone Co., supra, pp. 118, 119.
"This court frequently has said that the Workmen's Compensation Law is grounded in justice and should be liberally construed to accomplish the end for which it was enacted. Blue Ribbon Pie Kitchens, Inc. v. Long et al., supra and cases there cited. This is a rule and guide for all authorities charged with the administration of the Workmen's Compensation Law, with special application to the considerations of the Industrial Board in making its findings of facts in cases which it tries. When it has been governed by this rule of liberal construction of the evidence, the courts of appeal generally have approved findings so based.... We cannot say that the evidence upon which the board acted was without probative value; that the quantum of evidence was so meagre as to show that the finding does not rest upon a rational basis; or that the finding was influenced by improper considerations."
*184 Examination of the record in the case before us fails to show that the Board acted other than in a regular and proper manner. Suffice it to say that a rather careful study does not compel us to reverse such award, since the evidence was in conflict and there is competent evidence, in our opinion, to support such award.
The award of the Board is therefore affirmed.
Hunter, C.J., Kelley and Mote, JJ., concur.
NOTE.  Reported in 198 N.E.2d 873.

=== CASE 9738692 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:01:02.135847+00 ===

Arterburn, J.
The petitioner was convicted of “ACCESSORY AFTER THE FACT TO INFLICTING PHYSICAL INJURY DURING A ROBBERY” on October 5, 1954, and is a prisoner in the Indiana State Prison serving sentence under such conviction. This is the third time his matters have been before this court. He had private counsel during his first trial but claims, however:
1. That counsel failed to procure a jury trial for him.
2. That a confession that was used in the trial was forged by a detective of the police.
3. That his attorney failed to file a motion for a new trial.
4. And finally, this time before us he claims that the legislature of this state, which passed the law fixing his crime in 1941, was improperly apportioned and unconstitutional.
Our record shows in Lee v. State, No. 0-474, that beginning in March, 1957, four separate extensions of time were granted by this court for the filing of a transcript and record herein for an appeal, and that on November 7, 1957 the record was filed; that in a per curiam in December, 1957, a petition for certiorari *9was denied on the ground that it was not a proper method for an appeal from a proceeding for a writ of error coram nobis. Lee v. Allen Circuit Court (1957), 237 Ind. 704, 146 N. E. 2d 551.
In September, 1960, the appellant again petitioned for extension of time to file a transcript in the case of Lee v. Dowd, No. 0-612. A transcript from a judgment against him in the lower court for a writ of habeas corpus was filed, and after a number of extensions of time for the filing of briefs, the judgment of the trial court was affirmed on the ground that habeas corpus could not be used or substituted for an appeal or to collaterally attack a judgment of the trial court. Lee v. Lane (1961), Cert. Den. (1961), 368 U. S. 858, 82 S. Ct. 98, 7 L. Ed. 2d 55.
The petitioner now asks that we cite the Public Defender of this state to show cause why he should not represent him in an appeal to this court.
We can not assume, upon the failure of counsel to file a motion for a new trial in a case, that a defendant against whom judgment has been rendered is prejudiced, and that error occurred in the trial court. The fact of the matter is that presumption is to the contrary, that no error occurs in the trial court unless shown. It is also assumed that counsel, being competent, would file a motion for a new trial if meritorious grounds existed therefor in his opinion. As a matter of fact, for counsel to file a motion for a new trial or any other pleading in this court in which there is no merit and he knows it, and which is frivolous and not done in good faith, would be grounds for disciplining such an attorney. Likewise in this state, a client is bound by the acts or non-acts of his attorney, whether he be rich or poor, and he can not accept the benefits thereof and reject the undesirable acts or non-acts of his attorney. There are *10no allegations nor proof that the attorney in this case was incompetent.
We have, however, in this state recently adopted new rules, (Rule 2-40, et seq.) in an attempt to comply with the decisions of the United States Supreme Court, modeled to a large extent after the procedure of the United States Supreme Court in writs of certiorari.
Most of the contentions made by the petitioner in this case are such as should have normally been presented at the trial, and thereafter presented in a motion for a new trial, unless good cause is shown for the delay, which would give rise to a belated motion for a new trial.
We therefore refer this matter to the Public Defender of the State of Indiana, with directions to make an investigation, and if he finds merit exists for the filing of a belated motion for a new trial under the rules of this court, that he proceed accordingly to represent the petitioner and file and present such a petition to the trial court, and that if he fails to find any meritorious grounds therefor, that he make his report to this court, showing cause for not representing the petitioner.
Landis, C.J. and Achor and Myers, JJ., concur.
Jackson, J., concurs in result.

=== CASE 9738693 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:01:02.139837+00 ===

On Petition for Rehearing.
Arterburn, J.
This is a pauper appeal and in our original opinion we directed the Public Defender to show cause why he. should not represent the petitioner.
The petitioner (although he asks us to cite the Public Defender to show cause why he should not represent him) now claims he does not want the Public Defender, and further claims that his original counsel was incompetent, although originally he made *11no such charge. All these things come too late. This is the fourth time he has been in this court.1
Alleged grounds for appeal cannot be strung out, one at a time, endlessly. Neither can petitioners endlessly request appointment of counsel where they have had counsel and the original counsel found no grounds for appeal. Speers v. Gladden (March 25, 1964), 237 Ore. 100, 390 P. 2d 635.
The petition for rehearing is denied.
Achor, C.J. and Jackson, Myers and Landis, JJ., concur.
Note. — Reported in 198 N. E 2d 231. Rehearing denied 201 N. E. 2d 696.
. See reference to previous instances in: In Re Lee (1964), 0-715. 246 Ind. 7, 198 N. E. 2d 231.

=== CASE 2217359 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:26.071102+00 ===

297 N.W.2d 297 (1980)
STATE of Minnesota, Respondent,
v.
Teresa Francis OLSON and Julie Marie Johnson, Petitioners-Appellants.
No. 50719.
Supreme Court of Minnesota.
September 5, 1980.
Nancy Olkon, Mark V. Lofstrom, Minneapolis, for petitioners-appellants.
Warren Spannaus, Atty. Gen., St. Paul, Gary Gandrud, City Atty., and Gordon G. Mohr, Asst. City Atty., Bloomington, for respondent.
Considered and decided by the court en banc without oral argument.
SCOTT, Justice.
This is an appeal, with leave of this court, from a decision of a three-judge panel of the district court affirming defendants' convictions for prostitution, in violation of Bloomington Code of Ordinance, § 12.06(a)(1).[1] Defendants contend that their prosecutions should have been dismissed because (a) the policy of the Bloomington Police Department in enforcing this ordinance discriminates against women and in favor of men, and (b) the ordinance is unconstitutionally vague. We affirm.
Under City of Minneapolis v. Buschette, 307 Minn. 60, 240 N.W.2d 500 (1976), a defendant charged with prostitution is entitled to a dismissal if he or she can *298 prove, at a pretrial hearing and by a clear preponderance of the evidence, intentional and purposeful discrimination in enforcement of the law. Defendants in this case proved, through use of comparative arrest statistics, that there was "selective enforcement," but failed to prove a conscious, intentional purpose to discriminate. The disparity in the number of arrests of men as opposed to women is accounted for by a neutral departmental policy of giving a low priority to enforcement of prostitution laws and responding only to complaints. Since the complaints were almost all from hotels and only concerned the activity of female prostitutes who were soliciting, the department's policy was to send male officers to the complaining hotels to act as decoys and arrest the prostitutes working there. The record indicates that if the department were to receive complaints concerning male customers, it would send female decoys to the hotel, but that no such complaints had been received. Under the circumstances, and since the department had no conscious or purposeful intent to discriminate, the municipal court and the district court both held that defendants had not proved discriminatory enforcement. We agree.
There is no merit to defendants' contention that the prostitution ordinance is unconstitutionally vague. As stated by both the municipal court and the district court, "prostitution" is a word with a commonly understood objective meaning about which intelligent people do not differ.
Affirmed.
NOTES
[1]  This ordinance provides that "No person in the City of Bloomington shall: (1) Commit or offer or agree to commit a lewd act or an act of prostitution or moral perversion."

=== CASE 2217360 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:26.078892+00 ===

245 Ind. 289 (1964)
198 N.E.2d 219
WHITE, ET AL.
v.
SLOSS.
No. 30,589.
Supreme Court of Indiana.
Filed May 7, 1964.
*290 Sanford Trippet, and Arthur S. Wilson, both of Princeton, for appellant.
Weyerbacher, Lacey & Rideout, of Boonville, and McDonald & McDonald, of Princeton, for appellee.
ACHOR, J.
This case comes to us on petition to transfer from the Appellate Court under Rule 2-23 of this court. See White v. Sloss (1963), 192 N.E.2d 482.
The facts in this case are as follows: Appellee filed a claim for personal services against the estate of John J. White, deceased, in the Gibson Circuit Court on March 22, 1958. On July 22, 1958, claimant filed a request for trial by jury and a motion for change of venue from the county. The action was thereupon ordered venued to the Warrick Circuit Court. The latter court received and docketed the cause on August 15, 1958. On September 18, 1958, the appellants filed a *291 motion to make the claim more specific. The motion was overruled on October 13, 1958, and the court, at the same time, entered its order that "the defendant is ruled to answer on November 3, 1958."
Subsequently, on November 1, 1958, the appellants filed a demurrer to the claim, on the ground that the claim failed to state facts sufficient to constitute a cause of action. On the same day the appellants filed their motion for change of judge. Appellee filed her objections to the motion, on the ground that the issues in the cause had been closed by operation of law, as provided in Rule 1-12B of this court, more than 10 days prior to the filing of said motion. The court did not rule upon the demurrer but denied said motion for change of judge. Thereafter the cause was submitted to trial by jury and resulted in a verdict for appellee. Appellants' motion for new trial, which was overruled by the court, specified, among other grounds, error in the denial of the motion for change of judge.
A decision upon this issue necessarily involves, and is made to rest upon the construction of Rule 1-12B, supra, and Acts of 1953, ch. 112, § 1412, p. 295, being § 7-812, Burns' 1953 Repl., as applied to the facts in this case. The pertinent part of Rule 1-12B is as follows:
"In any action except criminal no change of judge .. . shall be granted within the time herein provided. Any such application for change of judge ... shall be filed not later than ten (10) days after the issues are first closed on the merits, or if the issues are closed without answer by operation of law, ... not later than ten (10) days after the party has knowledge the cause is ready to be set for trial...." [Emphasis added.] The pertinent part of § 7-812, supra, is as follows:
"When any claim is transferred for trial, it shall not be necessary for the personal representative *292 to plead any matter by way of answer, except a set-off or counter-claim, ... may be tested by demurrer, ..." [Emphasis added.]
Because of the intemperate, vituperous and scurrilous language which appears in appellants' brief,[1] without apparent justification thereof,[2] we would be warranted in striking the briefs from the files. Pittsburgh, etc., R. Co. v. Muncie, etc., Traction Co. (1906), 166 Ind. 466, 77 N.E. 941; Shirk v. Hupp (1906), 167 Ind. 509, 79 N.E. 490; Vivian Collieries Co. v. Cahall (1916), 184 Ind. 473, 110 N.E. 672.
However, because of the uncertainty which exists as to the construction of Rule 1-12B, supra, particularly as to the closing of issues by operation of law, the basis upon which the trial court denied the appellants' motion for change of judge, we have decided to consider this appeal solely upon that issue.
Appellant asserts that the trial court erred in overruling his motion for change of judge for the reason that although § 7-812, supra, expressly provides that, after transfer of a claim to the issue and trial docket, "it shall not be necessary for the personal representative *293 to plead any matter by way of answer," the issues in such cases cannot be considered "closed without answer by operation of law," under Rule 1-12B, until the right, expressly given by § 7-812, to the personal representative to challenge the sufficiency of the claim by demurrer has been, in some way, concluded.
The above statement necessarily implies that, under the circumstances here present, the issues are not closed "by operation of law," until some record has been made in the case with regard to the right of the personal representative to challenge the sufficiency of the claim by demurrer. In the light of the prior decisions of this court, we feel we must take a contrary position upon this issue. State ex rel. Harper v. Wheatley (1963), 244 Ind. 245, 191 N.E.2d 708; State, ex rel. Kielpikowski v. Murray, Judge (1959), 240 Ind. 222, 163 N.E.2d 597; State, ex rel. Boger v. Daviess Circuit Court (1959), 240 Ind. 198, 163 N.E.2d 250; State ex rel. Blood et al. v. Gibson Circuit Ct. (1958), 239 Ind. 394, 157 N.E.2d 475; State, ex rel. Janelle v. Lake Sup. Ct., et al. (1957), 237 Ind. 3, 143 N.E.2d 288.
We judicially know that one of the primary purposes for the enactment of the Probate Code [§§ 6-101  8-218, Burns' 1953 Repl. (1963 Supp., amendments)] was to expedite the procedure in the administration of estates. The fact that the legislature specifically intended to expedite the procedure relative to the disposition of claims against estates is apparent from the fact that the pertinent section act provides:
"... [I]t shall not be necessary for the personal representative to plead any matter by way of answer...." § 7-812, supra.
And, although the statute also provides that other pleadings may be filed and the claim "may be tested *294 by demurrer," it would seem necessarily to follow that the legislature intended that such pleadings, if file, be filed expeditiously. See State ex rel. Crawford v. Howard Circuit Court (1962), 242 Ind. 593, 181 N.E.2d 18.
Rule 1-12B, supra, was amended to contain the above referred to provisions on May 15, 1958, and became effective September 1, 1958. In this case the claim was filed on March 22, 1958, and was entered upon the issue and trial docket on or before July 22, 1958. Thus appellants had five months after the filing, and 40 days after the cause was transferred to the issue and trial docket before the effective date of Rule 1-12B on September 1, 1958, to examine the claim and determine whether or not it was sufficiently specific and whether it stated facts sufficient to state a cause of action upon which to go to trial. Yet appellants took no action with respect to the claim until 18 days thereafter, making a total period of 58 days during which no pleadings were addressed to the claim which had been transferred to the issue and trial docket.
Under the above circumstances, the trial court could have concluded with propriety, on or before September 8, 1958, that said personal representative did not intend to file any pleadings to such claims, and that the same could be set for trial solely upon the issues raised by the claim as filed. Under such circumstances it may be said that the issues were then closed "by operation of law." Rule 1-12B, supra.
The issues having been first closed by operation of law more than ten days prior to the filing of the motion for change of venue, which motion was filed on September 18, 1958, the motion was properly overruled.
*295 The fact that the trial court at a later date permitted the personal representative to file a motion to make the claim more specific and a demurrer thereto, did not negate the fact that the issues had previously been closed by operation of law. State ex rel. Blood et al. v. Gibson Circuit Ct., supra [239 Ind. 394].
Judgment affirmed.[3]
Landis, C.J., Arterburn and Myers, JJ., concur.
Jackson, J., dissents (without opinion).
NOTE.  Reported in 198 N.E.2d 219.
NOTES
[1]  "(The Judge left the Court Room in an angry display of emotion)"
"... [T]he revealing conduct of both counsel for claimant and the Trial Judge showed a concerted and united course of prejudice and misconduct that deeply affected the jury and the results of their verdict...."
"... It would be very difficult for any Judge with such a bent and warped mind to see that the inflammatory and inexcusable remarks of counsel for claimants had caused the appellants and their cause any damage...." [Emphasis added.]
[2]  Matters and events occurring during the trial in the presence of the court and claimed to be indiscretions and misconduct of the judge may be brought to the attention of this court only by objection made to the trial court at the time and then made a part of the record by a special bill of exceptions. Todd v. State (1948), 226 Ind. 496, 502, 81 N.E.2d 530.
[3]  Rule 1-12B 4, adopted April 3, 1964, and effective July 1, 1964, provides:
"Provided further, in those cases of claims in probate and receivership proceedings and remonstrances and similar matters, the parties thereto shall have thirty (30) days from the date the same is placed and entered on the issue and trial docket of the court."

=== CASE 9739759 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:20:27.796736+00 ===

RILEY, Judge,
dissenting in part and concurring in part.
I respectfully dissent as to Issue I and concur on Issues II, III and IV.
It is my opinion that the admission of Reeves' blood alcohol test was not admissible under the business records exception of Ind.Evidence Rule 803(6) and the admission was reversible error. The hearsay exception for business records is based on a presumption that people preparing reports in the course of their employment will do so with accuracy and honesty. Evaluative reports, however, are of particular concern because they contain opinions and conclusions which may strongly influence a jury. Evid.R. 803(6) provides a valuable safeguard to the admission of business records in the form of evaluative reports. The Rule provides that the following are not excluded by the hearsay rule:
*876. opinions or diagnoses made at or near the time by, or from information transmitted by, a person with knowledge if kept in the course of a regularly conducted business activity, and if it was the regular practice of that business activity to make the ... report ..., usless the source of information or the method or circumstances of preparation indicate a lack of trustworthiness. (emphasis added).
To merit judicial reliance on the contents of records, it is necessary that the proponent of particular records establish the trustworthiness of those records. United States v. Rich, 580 F.2d 929, 938 (9th Cir.1978), cert. denied, 439 U.S. 935, 99 S.Ct. 330, 58 L.Ed.2d 331 (1978). Dr. Carr, by admitting the blood test results, is offering the results to prove the truth of the assertion that Reeves was driving with a blood alcohol level of .179. Offering the blood test results, for that purpose, creates the need to cross-examine the declarant about the test and if that test is trustworthy. In this case, Dr. Carr did not perform the test, was not familiar with the testing protocol, could not testify as to the training and experience of the analyst, was not able to testify if that blood tested was the blood of Reeves, was not able to verify the accuracy of the equipment used to test the blood, or even if standard operating procedures were followed. Cobb v. State (1992), Ind.App., 585 N.E.2d 40, 43 (The key requirement is that the witness through which a business record is to be admitted must have personal knowledge of the various elements of the foundation).
The mere fact that Reeves' medical ree-ords qualify as an exception to the hearsay rule, does not mean that everything contained in those records is then admissible. The blood alcohol test contains "double hearsay" and a second exception to the hearsay rule must be established for each hearsay statement. Statements of third persons are only admissible when contained in a business record where they satisfy the multiple hearsay requirements of Rule 805. Under Rule 805, the third party statement must have an independent basis of admissibility pursuant to "an exception to the hearsay rule provided in these rules" as identified in Rule 802. In Burp v. State (1993), Ind.App., 612 N.E.2d 169, this Court reaffirmed the need for more than simply a business records foundation to permit the admission of a blood aleohol test.
It is true that the blood aleohol test result was one of several factors leading Dr. Carr to the conclusion that Reeves was intoxicated. I agree that Dr. Carr, in his testimony as an expert witness, could rely on the blood test results in his conclusion that Reeves was intoxicated, however, this does not mean that the test result itself is admissible into evidence. This conclusion only leads us to the second layer of hearsay and a second exception to the hearsay rule must be established to admit the results themselves. Dr. Carr's testimony alone is inadequate to establish that the sample was taken in a medically accepted manner. Burp v. State, 612 N.E.2d at 173.
Rule 805 does not limit admissibility to double, i.e., two level, hearsay. However, each level of the out of court statements must satisfy an exception to the hearsay rule. It stands to reason that with each layer of multiple hearsay the accuracy of the statements are diminished. In this context, Rule 403 may operate to authorize the court to exclude multiple hearsay where the court determines the reliability of the evidence has been diminished to an unacceptable extent. Rule 408 provides that the trial judge may exclude evidence:
... if its probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury, or by considerations of undue delay, or needless presentation of cumulative evidence.
Accordingly, if the evidence arouses the jury's sense of outrage or appeals to an instinet to punish, the evidence may be unfairly prejudicial under Rule 408. Stone v. State (1989), Ind.App., 536 N.E.2d 534 (trial court has the discretion to exclude relevant evidence that is cumulative where the potential prejudice outweighs the probative value).
Rule 808(6) merely provides that documents described in the rule, which may include opinions, are not excluded by the hearsay rule. Nothing in Rule 808 says that opinions may not be excluded by some other *877rule. In fact, Rule 705. Disclosure of Facts or Data Underlying Expert Opinion provides that:
(t)he expert may testify in terms of opinion or inference and given reasons therefor without first testifying to the underlying facts or data, unless the court requires otherwise. The expert may in any event be required to disclose the underlying facts or data on cross-examination.
The fact that a report is generally admissible does not require that everything contained in that report be admitted into evidence. A business record often contain multiple levels of hearsay. Thus, a blood alcohol test result of what a lab technician found could be competent evidence on which to form an opinion of intoxication or the course of treatment of the patient. However, the results themselves should only be admitted by a person qualified as an expert witness under Evid.R. 702 and 705.
In other words, unless Rule 808(6) is deemed to override the opinion rules, it should not be construed to allow the introduction of expert opinions without an opportunity to ascertain the "trustworthiness" of the test. Without such opportunity to cross-examine, anyone who works in a hospital could report the blood alcohol test results upon a mere showing that she worked for the hospital and the report was made in the regular course of business.
It is my conclusion that opinions referred to in Rule 808(6) are those which are incident to or part of factual reports of contemporaneous events or transactions. Business reports which are prepared to state or support expert opinions are not admissible without the preparer being present in court to testify as to her qualifications as an expert and to be cross-examined on the substance, pursuant to Rules 702 and 705.
The majority holds that the blood alcohol test indicating intoxication was cumulative to other evidence of intoxication. I take exception to the broad statement that the blood alcohol test indicates intoxication "only". In today's atmosphere of "zero tolerance" to "drinking and driving" the mere mention of blood aleohol test results may become a conclusion of fact to the jury. The jury may adopt without examination the opinion in the report without assessing the facts themselves. The report will then have usurped the function of the fact finder. The test result was hearsay and does not qualify as an exception to the hearsay rule as a business record. The trial court erred by admitting the test and under Rule 408 its prejudicial impact far outweighed its probative value.

=== CASE 2217364 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:26.146616+00 ===

99 Mich. App. 90 (1980)
297 N.W.2d 622
STATE OF MAINE
v.
HORTON
Docket No. 48007.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided July 23, 1980.
James J. Gregart, Prosecuting Attorney, and Michael H. Dzialowski, Assistant Prosecuting Attorney, for plaintiff.
Dennis S. McCune, for defendant.
Before: R.B. BURNS, P.J., and MacKENZIE and J.T. KALLMAN,[*] JJ.
R.B. BURNS, P.J.
This is an appeal by the defendant, Edward M. Horton, from an order of the circuit court directing him to pay child support to plaintiff. We affirm.
The circuit court action was initiated by plaintiff under the Uniform Reciprocal Enforcement of Support Act (URESA), pursuant to MCL 780.159; MSA 25.225(9). By affidavit of Anna Horton, the plaintiff established that Mrs. Horton had received public assistance from plaintiff for the support of her minor child, Susan Darlene Horton, who had been born to her and defendant on December 1, 1963. Plaintiff claims that defendant has a duty to support the minor child and that he must reimburse plaintiff for the support it is providing to the child.
Defendant denies that he has a duty to support his minor child. Defendant claims that the judgment *92 of divorce provided that Mrs. Horton was not to remove the child from the State of Michigan without the approval of the court. Mrs. Horton had taken the child to Maine without court approval and on November 4, 1971, the court terminated defendant's obligation to support the minor child "until further order of this Court".
As framed by the trial court the sole issue presented is whether the November 4, 1971, order terminating support precludes the entry of a support order under URESA.
Pursuant to § 14 of URESA, defendant may be ordered to reimburse plaintiff for support furnished to his minor child if the trial court determines that defendant has a "duty of support". MCL 780.164; MSA 25.225(14). "Duty of support" is defined by the act to include:
"any duty of support imposed or imposable by law, or by any court order, decree or judgment, whether interlocutory or final, whether incidental to a proceeding for divorce, judicial (legal) separation, separate maintenance or otherwise". MCL 780.153(6); MSA 25.225(3)(6). (Emphasis added.)
The trial court correctly determined that a "duty of support" was "imposable" upon defendant. Under the language of the order terminating defendant's support duty and pursuant to MCL 552.17; MSA 25.97 the trial court has continuing jurisdiction to modify this provision of its previously issued judgment of divorce. Accordingly, as the trial court had the power to impose a duty of support upon defendant, defendant had a "duty of support" within the meaning of the act.
We further agree with the trial court's decision to exercise its power to impose upon defendant a duty of support (from the date of the entry of the *93 new order of support) notwithstanding that Mrs. Horton may be in contempt of court. Issues ancillary to a duty of support should not be considered in this URESA action.
Affirmed. No costs, a public question being involved.
NOTES
[*]  Circuit judge, sitting on the Court of Appeals by assignment.

=== CASE 9738696 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:01:05.817171+00 ===

MR. JUSTICE DEMPSEY delivered the opinion of the court. This is an appeal from a summary judgment against the defendant as guarantor of the performance of lessees of the covenants of a lease. The judgment comprises defaults in the payment of rent, taxes and interest. The principal issue is whether the alleged defense of a surrender of the premises by the lessees and the acceptance thereof by the plaintiffs-lessors, thereby discharging the lessees from the performance of the obligations of the lease, is a genuine defense. Other issues involve the liability of the defendant for real estate taxes and interest, and the duty of the lessors to use the lessees’ security deposit of $7500.00 to offset the defaulted rent. On March 15, 1960, the plaintiffs as lessors entered into a lease with the Craft House Plastics Corporation and Dorothy Flicek Industries, Inc., for ten years, commencing June 1, 1960, at a monthly rental of $2500. At the same time the defendant executed an instrument of guaranty in which he unconditionally guaranteed payment of the rental and the performance of all the covenants of the lease. The liability of the guarantor was limited to the first year of the lease term and, in any event, to $30,000. The lessees took possession and remained in such possession until sometime in April 1961, when, as it is charged in the complaint, they abandoned the premises and went into bankruptcy after all their personal property had been repossessed by a chattel mortgagee. Thereafter a new lease was made with the International Assemblix Corporation for a five-year term, commencing May 1,1961, and ending April 30,1966. The complaint alleged defaults in the payment of rentals for March and April 1961 and in the payment of real estate taxes and interest. The defendant filed an answer denying abandonment of the premises by the lessees, setting up the defense of surrender and possession and that the defaults in rent were cured by the fact that the plaintiffs had negotiable securities in excess of $7500 (the security deposit of the lessees), which was more than sufficient to pay the installments of rent due for March and April 1961. Defendant also filed an “Affirmative Defense in Equity,” in which he again alleges the defense of surrender of possession by lessees and the acceptance thereof by the plaintiffs, and further avers that the property had been relet to the International Assemblix Corporation for a period of five years, commencing May 1, 1961, and ending April 30, 1966; that at the time of this reletting, the plaintiffs knew that the lessees were in bankruptcy; that the lessees’ only obligation to the plaintiffs was for the rent for March and April 1961, and that the securities in the plaintiffs’ possession were adequate to cover that default. It further averred that no payments were due the plaintiffs for general taxes because of the surrender of the premises and the acceptance thereof in April 1961; that at the time of surrender the general taxes for 1960 were not due and payable, and did not become so until June 1, 1961, when the first installment became due, and until September 1, 1961, when the second installment was due for payment. The defendant sought an affirmative decree, discharging him from any obligation under the guaranty, and ordering that the securities hereinbefore mentioned be sold and the first $5000 of the proceeds thereof applied to the rent for the months of March and April 1961, and the balance turned over to the bankruptcy trustee or the receiver of the lessees. The plaintiffs moved to strike the answer of the defendant as presenting no defense at law, and moved that a summary judgment be entered and in support thereof filed the affidavits of the plaintiff Charles P. Peirce and his attorney John T. Moore, for the purpose of showing there was no genuine issue as to any material fact. The affidavit of Peirce alleged, insofar as it is pertinent to the present issues, that on April 20, 1961, involuntary petitions in bankruptcy were filed against the lessees; that about that time Robert D. Deutsch, the president of Dorothy Flieek Industries, Inc., one of the lessees, approached Peirce and suggested a new tenant for the premises; that Peirce informed him that a new lease would be considered only on the basis of mitigating damages, without terminating the liability of the original lessees or guarantors; that Deutsch was also a guarantor for a maximum liability of $30,000, but his obligation was not limited to any particular year; that Deutsch on March 23,1962, filed a voluntary petition in bankruptcy in the District Court of the United States and was adjudged a bankrupt; that Peirce referred the inquiry about a new lease to attorney Moore; that a five year lease was made with the applicant, International Assemblix Corporation, beginning May 1, 1961; that the security deposit is applicable at the election of the plaintiffs to any defaults during the entire ten year term and is not returnable until termination of the lease on May 31, 1970. The affiant then asked for a summary judgment for rents, taxes, interest and other items. The material portions of the affidavit of Moore are to the effect that early in March 1961, the attorney for Deutsch and the lessees in the preparation of the lease, approached him about making a new lease to International Assemblix Corporation. In the negotiations for the lease to that corporation, Moore said he was making it clear that execution of the new lease would not and should not terminate the original lease and the obligation of the lessees thereunder; that at no time did the lessees surrender possession to the plaintiffs or to him as their attorney; that the lease to International was made only in mitigation of damages. In opposition to the motion for summary judgment, Deutsch made an affidavit in which he admitted the financial difficulties of the original lessees and stated that in April 1961 at a meeting between himself and Peirce, he asked Peirce whether he would be willing to relet the premises if they were vacated by the tenant; that Peirce said he believed it would be necessary to get a new tenant on the premises if the tenant became bankrupt; that he realized the premises were going to be vacant; that he was going to have to take some action to relet the premises. Peirce further said he hoped he would be able to save a broker’s commission and that if there were any parties interested in obtaining a lease, they should take up the terms of the lease with his attorney; that Peirce never said to him that a new tenant would be considered only on the basis of mitigating damages, and that he specifically did not make the statement that a new lease would be considered only on the basis of mitigating damages without terminating the obligations of the original lessees or guarantors. The affidavit of Kalman S. Lieberman, an attorney, was also submitted by the defendant in opposition to the motion for summary judgment. This affidavit stated that the affiant took the oral deposition of Peirce; that the deposition was taken prior to the time the answer to the complaint was filed and prior to the time the plaintiff and the plaintiff’s attorney knew what defense was going to be made by the defendant; that at this deposition Peirce said he had a conversation with Deutsch with respect to the forming of the new Company, substantially as hereinbefore stated, except as to the following facts: that he did not remember Deutsch’s asking whether he would agree to a ten-year term; that Deutsch “was trying to sell me on the idea of going along with him with all this new capital he was going to bring into the company and reorganize the whole thing”; and that was all that was said. The crucial part of the testimony is set forth at page 44 of the abstract, where attorney Lieberman asked the following questions: “Mr. Lieberman: Q. Mr. Peirce, you accepted the fact, did you not, that Dorothy Plicek and Craft House were in bankruptcy and that there was a surrender of the premises, and that it was necessary to get a new tenant? A. Yes, I would say that. Q. When you were advised of the surrender of the premises, was this by Mr. Deutsch telling you at that meeting in April, 1961, at your office, or had you gone past and seen some notice on the outside? A. I had gone past and seen notice.” The purpose of this was to impeach Peirce’s statement in his affidavit that there was no surrender of the premises and acceptance thereof by him.  Section 57 of the Civil Practice Act (Ill Rev Stats 1961, c 110, § 57) provides that a summary judgment should be rendered if the pleading and affidavits “show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to a judgment or decree as a matter of law.” In determining if there is a genuine issue, inferences may be drawn from the facts which are not in dispute. If fair minded persons could draw different inferences from the facts, a triable issue exists. Tezak v. Cooper, 24 Ill App2d 356, 164 NE2d 493. It is only when the undisputed facts are susceptible of but a single inference does the issue become one of law. Halloran v. Belt Ry. Co. of Chicago, 25 Ill App2d 114, 166 NE2d 98. The defendant argues that there exist genuine issues of material fact which require the summary judgment to be reversed. He points to the denial by Deutsch of the statement in Peirce’s affidavit that Peirce informed him a new tenant or a new lease would be considered only on the basis of mitigation of damages and without termination of the obligation of the original lessees or guarantors. The defendant also points to the affidavit of Lieberman hereinbefore mentioned, in which, as defendant claims, Peirce acknowledged the surrender of the premises and the acceptance thereof. He also argues that the whole nature of the conversation regarding the old lease and the signing of the new one with International Assemblix Corporation cries out for an interpretation that lessors had accepted the surrender of the two original corporate leases and looked solely to International Assemblix Corporation.  Whether a surrender and acceptance actually occurred depends upon the intention of the parties. Alschuler v. Schiff, 164 Ill 298, 45 NE 424; Langdendorf v. Ritter, 225 Ill App 466. Surrender is the yielding up of an estate so that the leasehold interest becomes extinct by mutual agreement. Johnson v. Northern Trust Co., 265 Ill 263, 106 NE 814. The precedents with respect to surrender and acceptance cited by both parties involve quite different sets of fact and are of value to a solution of the issue before us only as they point up the extent to which courts have sustained such a defense. Here, the facts presented by the defendant’s pleadings and the supporting affidavits can be construed as consistent with the plaintiff’s theory of mitigation of damages, but the affidavit of Deutseh and the answer of Peirce, hereinbefore quoted, to the question asked him about surrender, and the whole series of negotiations and transactions, while by no means conclusive, taken together with the inferences favorable to the defendant which may be drawn therefrom, create an issue which cannot be resolved on a motion for summary judgment and should go to trial. Upon remand the issue of the lessees’ surrender and the lessors’ acceptance will be more fully developed through direct testimony and cross-examination. We, of course, express no opinion as to whether there was an actual surrender or acceptance. However, as the trial court may determine that there has been no surrender and acceptance, we feel that we should state our conclusions with respect to two other points raised by the defendant — the proper allocation of the security deposit by tbe lessors to tbe defaults of lessee, and tbe liability of tbe defendant for tbe real estate taxes and interest tbereon.  The lessees deposited marketable securities of tbe value of $7500 as security for tbe payment of tbe rental and tbe performance of tbe other terms, conditions and provisions of tbe lease. Tbe defendant contends that these should be applied to cure tbe defaults by lessees in tbe payment of rents. Tbe lease provides that at tbe date fixed for tbe termination thereof, or if the lease is terminated prior to tbe expiration of tbe term and tbe lessees should have no further liability thereunder, tbe deposit shall be returned to tbe lessees. It is tbe contention of tbe lessors that tbe guarantor has no interest or right to have this deposit applied to a curing of tbe defaults for which be is liable and that during tbe term of tbe lease it is in tbe sole discretion of tbe lessors to apply or not to apply tbe deposit to cure tbe lessees’ defaults which have then occurred. It is tbe lessors’ contention that tbe lease has not been terminated and does not expire until May 31, 1970. Tb.e lease with tbe International Assemblix Corporation runs until April 30,1966. Thus there is a four-year period left before tbe expiration of tbe original lease. If, in tbe ultimate determination of tbe issues involved with respect to surrender and acceptance, it is decided that this lease does continue to exist, tbe security deposit remains with tbe lessors, to be applied on subsequent defaults. Tbe total lease indebtedness exceeds $400,000, including taxes, and it is not unreasonable that tbe deposit of $7500 should be so construed. In any event, the language of tbe lease is clear in this respect.  The defendant’s point concerning bis liability as guarantor for tbe unpaid real estate taxes poses a more difficult question. Tbe total judgment was for $14,969.33. $5,000 of this amount represents tbe unpaid rent for March and April 1961, at $2,500 per month, which the defendant acknowledges must be paid by him if it should be decided that the lease was not surrendered and accepted. The balance of the judgment is for real estate taxes from June 1, 1960, to April 30, 1961 (the period the lessees occupied the premises) and interest on the unpaid taxes to the date of the judgment. The defendant challenges this portion of the judgment. The lease provides that: “Lessee will pay, in addition to the rent above specified, all water rents, driveway fees, gas, electric light, power and other utility bills, and all other charges, taxes or special assessments levied or assessed against the demised premises during the term of this Lease. . . .” The lease further provides: “Lessee shall, promptly upon the issuance of bills therefor, pay all general real estate taxes and all special assessments and other levies and charges upon said premises during the entire term hereof. General real estate taxes for the first fractional calendar year of the term shall be prorated between the parties as of the date of the commencement of this Lease, on the basis of the actual taxes. General taxes for the last full calendar year of the term shall be paid when said taxes are ascertainable and general taxes for the last fractional year of the term shall be prorated on the basis of the amount ascertainable for the last full calendar year.” Because the guaranty states that the defendant “. „ . unconditionally guarantees the payment of rental and the performance ... of all the covenants, conditions, provisions and terms contained in that certain Lease . . . ,” the plaintiffs argue that he must assume every obligation of the lessees’ which accrued during the period of his guaranty. The defendant, on the other hand, points out that his guaranty was qualified by the following provision: “It is expressly agreed that the liability of the undersigned under this Guaranty of Lease shall be limited to the first year of the Lease term and, in any event, to Thirty Thousand Dollars ($30,000).” The defendant argues that the one year limitation expired on May 31, 1961, and, therefore, he is under no duty to pay the taxes in dispute, the first part of which did not become due until June 1, 1961, the day after the expiration of his guaranty. His position is that the lessees had until June 1, 1961, to pay their proportionate share of the first installment of 1960 taxes, until September 1, 1961, to pay the second installment and until May 1, 1962, to pay the 1961 taxes; that they were not in default until they failed to make these payments and hence no obligation arose under his guaranty because no default occurred during the year of its existence. Support is lent to the defendant’s position that he was under no duty to pay until a default actually occurred, by another provision of the guaranty which states that the lessors “upon Lessee’s default” may proceed to enforce the guaranty by confessing judgment. Although the lease provides that tax bills shall be paid promptly upon being issued, real estate tax bills differ from many other bills in that they need not be paid when issued or received. Taxpayers do not become in default for nonpayment until a future date set by the County for payment. The lease did not provide that the bills were to be paid to the lessors; they were to be paid to the County Collector and were not overdue until the dates set for their payment passed. The date set for payment controls the default and not the date of issuance. A good case can he made for the positions of both parties, as the guaranty and the lease, considered together, are susceptible of two constructions. Extrinsic evidence, if available, might he of assistance in ascertaining the real intent of the parties, since this intent cannot be determined positively from the instruments themselves. In the absence of such evidence, we must resolve the conflict by invoking the often repeated rules that a guarantor is to he accorded the benefit of any doubt which may arise from the language of the contract; that his undertaking is to be strictly construed; that his liability is not to he varied or extended beyond its precise terms by construction or implication, and that he is hound only to the extent and in the manner and under the circumstances pointed out in his obligation and no further. Bruner v. Wolford, 356 Ill 514, 191 NE 70; Castle v. Powell, 261 Ill App 132; Michaelsen v. Doonan, 259 Ill App 337; Schiff v. Continental Nat. Bank & Trust Co., 255 Ill App 333; Heberling Medicine & Extract Co. v. Smith, 201 Ill App 126. Under these rules of law we conclude that the guaranty was a limited guaranty, that no obligation devolved upon the defendant until the lessees defaulted in their own obligations, and that they did not default in the payment of taxes until the defendant’s guaranty had expired. The judgment is reversed and the cause is remanded with directions to vacate the judgment, and for such other and further proceedings as are consistent with the views herein expressed. Judgment reversed and cause remanded with directions. McCORMICK, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9738697 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:01:05.822306+00 ===

SCHWARTZ, P. J., specially concurring: I cannot agree with that portion of the court’s opinion which deals with the liability of the defendant-guarantor for taxes. No genuine issue of fact is raised in that respect. The court upheld defendant’s contention on what appears to me to be a highly technical construction of the instrument; that is, that the guaranty was against default on the part of the lessees and that there was no default in respect to taxes on May 31, 1961 because the bill for taxes for the prior year was not issued until the following day, June 1, 1961. The guarantee is that the defendant will pay the rent and perform all the other covenants, conditions, provisions and terms contained in the lease. His obligation is thus coextensive with that of the lessees for the first year of the term and to the limit of $30,000. In addition to taxes, the lease provides that lessees will be liable for all water rents, driveway fees, gas, electric light, power and other utility charges. Indeed, lessees were obligated to pay all charges accruing against the premises (other than repairs to roof and exterior walls). It was designed to be a net lease and it explicitly provided as follows: “it being the intention of the parties that this shall be a net lease, entitling Lessor to full rentals without any expenses or deductions therefrom arising either out of Lessor’s ownership, or of Lessee’s use, of the demised premises.” If, in the payment of the various charges aforementioned, let us say, for water, gas or light, the lessees were given credit on a thirty or sixty day basis and that extended the time for payment beyond May 31, 1961, it would certainly be an unreasonable and unacceptable argument to contend that the cost of such commodities and services did not become tbe obligation of the lessees within the year they were received or rendered. Taxes are, in substance, the charge which the state and its political subdivisions — county, city and others, make for the costs of government, including police and fire protection, care of streets and alleys, sewage disposal, and a host of other facilities, all available to and, of course, in greater or lesser degree used by lessees during the period of guaranty. Real estate taxes are distinguishable to some extent from the cost of water, gas, light or other facilities furnished and necessary to the operation of a building, in that taxes for one year are not determined until some time the following year. Bills for these taxes are therefore not issued until after expiration of the year. The taxes in question, while for the prior year, were billed on June 1, 1961, that is, on the day following the expiration of the one year to which the guaranty was limited. The parties obviously understood the procedure with respect to taxes and provided in the lease that the general real estate taxes for the first fractional calendar year of the term were to be prorated between the parties as of the date of the commencement of the lease “on the basis of the actual taxes,” and that general taxes for the last full calendar year of the term were to be paid when the taxes were ascertainable, and that “general taxes for the last fractional year of the term shall be prorated on the basis of the amount ascertainable for the last full calendar year.” They thus recognized that not the date of billing, but the period in which the taxes accrued, determined the extent of liability. If the interpretation of the lease as now made by the court should ultimately become a final judgment, the lessors could not collect taxes for the last year of the term because such taxes would not be due and payable until after expiration of the entire term. The language used in the lease is that the lessees will pay the taxes which are levied or assessed against the demised premises. “Levied” is defined as the formal and official action of a legislative body determining that a tax of a certain amount shall be imposed. People v. Pittsburgh, C. C. & St. L. R. Co., 316 Ill 410, 147 NE 492; 31 ILP, Revenue, Par 102. It is apparent that taxes are levied or assessed some time before the issuance of the tax bill. Statutory provisions governing the many local governmental bodies and municipal corporations which levy taxes against property in Cook County provide for the levying of each tax before a specific date in each year. That date is prior to March 31st. Ill Rev Stats, c 24, § 8-3-1, and c 120, § 637 (1963). Thus, even giving the instrument of guaranty a technical construction, the guarantor was liable as of that date.

=== CASE 9738698 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:01:06.497266+00 ===

Per Curiam.
The defendant was convicted of three counts of first-degree criminal sexual conduct, MCL 750.520b; MSA 28.788(2), and was sentenced to three concurrent terms of from 6 to 15 years imprisonment. He appeals as of right from the trial court’s order denying his motion for a new trial.
The defendant first claims that the trial court erred in determining that there was sufficient evidence set forth at trial to sustain the jury’s finding of guilty on all three counts. Specifically, the defendant claims that there was insufficient evidence set forth at trial for a rational trier of fact to conclude that he sexually assaulted the complainant, as five witnesses testified that they were either with or saw defendant during the time period in which the complainant alleged she was sexually assaulted. However, the complainant described her assailant to police within an hour of *456being assaulted. Upon hearing the complainant’s description, an acquaintance of the defendant was able to tell the authorities that the description matched the defendant’s. The complainant immediately picked the defendant out of a photographic show-up, and a raffle ticket from the same sequence of tickets as was found in the defendant’s pocket was found at the scene of the crime. In People v Smalls, 61 Mich App 53, 58; 232 NW2d 298 (1975), and in People v Flippo, 70 Mich App 652, 660; 247 NW2d 321 (1976), the defendants claimed error on similar grounds: that, because of their alibi defenses, there was insufficient evidence presented at trial to support the jury’s verdicts of guilty. Quoting from Smalls, supra, this Court in Flippo, supra, 660 held as follows:
"In People v Smalls, 61 Mich App 53, 57; 232 NW2d 298 (1975), this Court clearly stated that a question of this kind is one for the jury:
" 'On appeal defendant first contends that the evidence produced at trial was insufficient to support a finding of guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. Defendant argues that the identification by the teller and the assistant manager of the bank should not have been believed and that, in light of the testimony of his alibi witness, the evidence was insufficient. Claims of mistaken identification by a witness and alibi are matters which deal with the credibility of witnesses and such questions are generally to be decided by the jury. People v Boynton, 46 Mich App 748; 208 NW2d 523 (1973); People v Hughes, 26 Mich App 355; 182 NW2d 631 (1970). After listening to the testimony and observing the demeanor of the witnesses, the jury chose to disbelieve defendant. We shall not substitute our judgment for theirs.’ ”
Similarly, we believe the issue in this case to be one of credibility which was properly left to the jury. Based upon the complainant’s testimony and *457the circumstantial evidence supporting such testimony, we find that there was sufficient evidence for a rational jury to conclude that defendant was guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. Therefore, the trial court did not abuse its discretion in denying the defendant’s motion for a new trial on such grounds.
The defendant also claims his limited ability to cross-examine complainant as to her past sexual conduct denied him his constitutional right to confrontation. MCL 750.520j; MSA 28.788(10) allows a defendant charged with criminal sexual conduct to cross-examine a complainant about her prior sexual conduct in order to establish the source of semen so long as such cross-examination is material to a fact at issue. Inasmuch as a criminologist testified as to finding semen stains on the complainant’s underwear, which could have been up to three months old, the trial court did not abuse its discretion in allowing defense counsel to question complainant only as to the last time she had had sexual intercourse within a three-month period. In People v Thompson, 76 Mich App 705; 257 NW2d 268 (1977), and in People v Khan, 80 Mich App 605; 264 NW2d 360 (1978), this Court held that such a procedure does not deny a defendant his right of confrontation, as the state’s interest in prosecuting sex crimes outweighs the importance of allowing irrelevant and immaterial cross-examination regarding a victim’s prior sexual conduct. Such reasoning applies here. The limitation as to the questioning of complainant was proper.
The defendant’s third claim of error is that the trial court erred in admitting the complainant’s semen-stained clothing into evidence as exhibits. Since defense counsel failed to make a proper objection, claiming the introduction of such to be *458inordinately prejudicial to his client, the issue has not been properly preserved for review. MRE 103(a)(1). Defense counsel did, however, object to the admission of defendant’s semen-stained clothing and a kitchen knife found by police officers who were investigating the case as being more prejudicial than probative. Because the criminologist had already testified that she had found semen stains on defendant’s clothing, the introduction of such an exhibit served only to illuminate her unobjected-to testimony. It cannot be said that the clothing was so irrelevant or prejudicial that the trial court clearly erred in allowing such to be admitted. People v McKinney, 88 Mich App 715; 278 NW2d 728 (1979).
The defendant claims the knife should not have been admitted as an exhibit because it had not been positively identified by the complainant and because the complainant had testified that she guessed that the defendant had laid the knife on the ground while forcing her to engage in fellatio, vaginal intercourse and anal intercourse. Complainant testified that defendant held a knife to her neck and chest to get her to the location of the alleged rape. She identified the knife as being similar to the one used by defendant. In People v Stanley Mitchell, 37 Mich App 351, 357; 194 NW2d 514 (1971), this Court, quoting from 22A CJS, Criminal Law, § 709, pp 949-951, stated:
" 'To justify their admission, a proper foundation must be laid, and such articles must be identified as the articles they are purported to be, and shown to be connected with the crime of with accused; however, such identification is not required to be positive, absolute, certain, or wholly unqualified, and where there is some evidence for this purpose, objections to its suffi*459ciency go to the weight rather than to the admissibility of the articles in question.’ ”
Similarly, the fact that defendant may have laid down the knife during the commission of the criminal sexual acts and the fact that the complainant did not positively identify the knife go to the weight of the evidence rather than its admissibility. Khan, supra, 609-610.
Defendant’s final predication of error, that the prosecutor’s closing statement unduly prejudiced defendant, was not properly preserved for appellate review as it was not objected to at trial. As defense counsel made no objection to the prosecutor’s remark, appellate review is precluded unless the prejudicial effect was so great that it could not have been cured by a timely cautionary instruction. People v Tenbrink, 93 Mich App 326, 332; 287 NW2d 223 (1979), People v Blassingame, 59 Mich App 327, 335; 229 NW2d 438 (1975). We do not find that such degree of prejudice resulted from the prosecutor’s statement in the instant case.
Affirmed.

=== CASE 2217371 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:26.274699+00 ===

99 Mich. App. 330 (1980)
297 N.W.2d 915
PEOPLE
v.
SOLOMON WASHINGTON
Docket No. 45439.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided August 12, 1980.
Frank J. Kelley, Attorney General, Robert A. Derengoski, Solicitor General, William L. Cahalan, Prosecuting Attorney, Edward Reilly Wilson, Principal *332 Attorney, Appeals, and Andrea L. Solak, Assistant Prosecuting Attorney, for the people.
John C. Mouradian, for defendant on appeal.
Before: T.M. BURNS, P.J., and R.M. MAHER and M.E. CLEMENTS,[*] JJ.
M.E. CLEMENTS, J.
The defendant, Solomon Washington, was arrested on October 3, 1977. A preliminary examination was held on October 12, 1977, and the defendant was bound over for trial on a charge of felony murder. Motions were subsequently filed to quash the information and to suppress statements made by the defendant after his allegedly illegal arrest. Following an evidentiary hearing, the trial judge issued opinions and orders denying the defendant's motions even though he found that the defendant's arrest was illegal. The defendant was then granted a stay of proceedings and he filed a delayed application for leave to appeal which was denied by this Court on August 21, 1978, because there was no showing of a need for immediate appellate review. On May 3, 1979, the Supreme Court vacated this Court's order and remanded to this Court as on leave granted. People v Washington, 406 Mich 952 (1979).
On September 29, 1977, the corpse of Leon Vicinski was discovered in the deceased's apartment by his nephew, Norbert Wierszewski. The death was caused by three gunshot wounds. Homicide detectives called to investigate learned from another nephew, Michael Dwormick, the last person to see the deceased alive on September 26, 1977, that the deceased's television set was in the apartment on September 26, but not on September *333 29. The police learned from one John Epps that the defendant and another man, known as "Money", had approached Epps with a television set they were trying to sell which matched the description of the set missing from Vicinski's apartment. However, Epps stated that he was approached on September 24 or 25, which was prior to the time when the set in Vicinski's apartment was taken and when the murder occurred. Based on this information, the defendant was arrested on October 3, 1977, at about 4 p.m.
Police Sergeant Richard Davies first questioned the defendant around 6 p.m., two hours after his arrest. According to Davies' preliminary examination testimony, the defendant, after being informed of his Miranda rights, Miranda v Arizona, 384 US 436; 86 S Ct 1602; 16 L Ed 2d 694; 10 ALR3d 974 (1966), made an exculpatory statement to the effect that he had met Money on the street and that Money had a television he was trying to sell. The defendant stated that he had only tried to help Money sell the television set to John Epps.
Disbelieving the defendant's denial of culpability, Davies had the defendant's sister, Sharon Washington, brought to the police station for questioning. Ms. Washington gave Davies a statement indicating that her brother had confessed to her his complicity in the murder of Vicinski. Within a few minutes after acquiring this information, Davies had the defendant brought into the interrogation room where another officer and Sharon Washington were already waiting. The defendant was again provided with the appropriate Miranda warnings and was then confronted with his sister's allegation. At this point the defendant made a statement in which he admitted that he and Money had planned to steal Vicinski's money. The *334 defendant admitted to being in the house when Vicinski was killed. This admission occurred at approximately 9:50 p.m.
The prosecution does not contest on appeal the fact that the defendant's arrest was illegal. Our review of the evidence available to Sgt. Davies, who ordered the defendant's arrest, convinces us that the trial judge did not err in finding that probable cause for the arrest was lacking. At the evidentiary hearing Davies acknowledged that he did not seek to obtain an arrest warrant because he knew he did not have enough information to secure one. Davies ordered the defendant arrested because he wanted to question him and take his fingerprints.
The issue in this case is whether the lower court erred in failing to suppress the defendant's confession made some six hours after his illegal arrest. The trial judge denied the motion to suppress, finding that the illegal detention did not negate the voluntary character of the defendant's confession. The Court will not overturn a trial court's ruling at a suppression hearing unless that ruling is found to be clearly erroneous. People v Erskin, 92 Mich App 630; 285 NW2d 396 (1979).
The mere fact that a defendant is arrested illegally does not per se require the suppression of a subsequent confession. In People v Emanuel, 98 Mich App 163, 176; 295 NW2d 875 (1980), this Court discussed the applicability of the "fruit of the poisonous tree" doctrine under Brown v Illinois, 422 US 590; 95 S Ct 2254; 45 L Ed 2d 416 (1975), and Dunaway v New York, 442 US 200; 99 S Ct 2248; 60 L Ed 2d 824 (1979):
"Under Fourth Amendment rubric, the confession must be excluded from evidence only if it was obtained by exploitation of the illegal arrest, i.e., if it was the *335 product of the illegal arrest. Brown v Illinois, supra, 603, Dunaway v New York, supra, 216-218. The focus is on the causal nexus between the illegality and the confession, or, to put it another way, the question is whether the connection was sufficiently attenuated to permit the use at trial of the evidence obtained during the period of illegal detention: whether the statement was purged of its primary taint. Brown, supra, 602-604, Dunaway, supra, 217-218, and the cases cited therein.
"Brown sets out a number of factors which are relevant in determining the admissibility of a confession obtained while a defendant is illegally detained:
"`The question whether a confession is the product of a free will under Wong Sun [v United States, 371 US 471; 83 S Ct 407; 9 L Ed 2d 441 (1963)], must be answered on the facts of each case. No single fact is dispositive. The workings of the human mind are too complex, and the possibilities of misconduct too diverse, to permit protection of the Fourth Amendment to turn on such a talismanic test. The Miranda warnings are an important factor, to be sure, in determining whether the confession is obtained by exploitation of an illegal arrest. But they are not the only factor to be considered. The temporal proximity of the arrest and the confession, the presence of intervening circumstances, and, particularly, the purpose and flagrancy of the official misconduct are all relevant. The voluntariness of the statement is a threshold requirement. And the burden of showing admissibility rests, of course, on the prosecution.' (Footnotes and citations omitted.) Brown, supra, 603-604."
Weighing against admissibility in this case is the police conduct in arresting the defendant for the acknowledged purpose of aiding their investigation of the crime. The Brown Court condemned this type of investigatory detention and we add our emphatic disapproval of the police conduct in this case. However, we find that intervening circumstances sufficiently attenuated any causal connection between the illegal arrest and the defendant's *336 subsequent inculpatory statement so that there was no error in denying the motion to suppress.[1]
After the defendant's arrest, the defendant's sister informed the police that the defendant had admitted his complicity in the murder to her. After the defendant's sister gave her statement, there was sufficient probable cause to justify the defendant's arrest. It was not until the defendant had been confronted with his sister's statement that he confessed. Up until this point, the defendant had made one statement in which he had denied any wrongdoing. It is not improper for the police, in questioning a suspect, to confront him with the evidence against him. People v Emanuel, supra. Under these circumstances, the primary taint of the unlawful arrest was sufficiently attenuated by the subsequent evidence establishing probable cause so that the defendant's confession is properly admissible.
It was the influence of the defendant's sister's statement that precipitated the defendant's confession and not his illegal arrest.[2] We therefore find no error in the denial of the defendant's motions to quash the information and to suppress his confession.[3]
*337 The trial court's rulings are affirmed.
NOTES
[*]  Circuit judge, sitting on the Court of Appeals by assignment.
[1]  We are constrained to add that not every confession obtained following an illegal arrest will be saved by the presence of intervening circumstances. E.g., People v Martin, 94 Mich App 649; 290 NW2d 48 (1980).
[2]  In Brown, the defendant also did not give an inculpatory statement until after the police confronted him with certain evidence, yet the Supreme Court found the defendant's statement to be the product of his illegal arrest. However, unlike the present case, the evidence Brown was confronted with did not establish probable cause. See Johnson v Louisiana, 406 US 356, 365; 92 S Ct 1620; 32 L Ed 2d 152 (1972), cited by the Brown Court as a case involving the presence of intervening circumstances, in which the Supreme Court found that a lineup identification was not the fruit of an arguably illegal warrantless arrest when the lineup identification occurred after the defendant had been properly brought before the committing magistrate.
[3]  Certain language in the trial court's opinion indicates that the trial court was of the view that the "causal connection" test established in Brown was no different from the traditional test for voluntariness under the Fifth Amendment. That interpretation is incorrect. Even if a confession is voluntary under the Fifth Amendment, that confession must be suppressed if it is the product of an unlawful arrest or detention. See Dunaway v New York, 442 US 200, 216-218. However, this Court will not reverse a lower court ruling when the correct result is reached for the wrong reason. People v Perryman, 89 Mich App 516; 280 NW2d 579 (1979). See also People v Erskin, 92 Mich App 630; 285 NW2d 396 (1979).

=== CASE 9738700 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:01:09.899687+00 ===

Landis, C. J.
— This is an original action for disbarment of Metro Holovachka, a practicing attorney of Gary, Indiana, and a former prosecuting attorney of the 31st Judicial Circuit, Lake County, Indiana. The action was brought pursuant to Rules 3-21 and 3-22 of this Court and was instituted by the Northwest Indiana Crime Commission, Inc., after obtaining leave of Court,1 and prosecuted by the attorney general of *486Indiana pursuant to the directive of this Court. The defendant Holovachka by way of response filed a pleading in substance denying the material allegations of the information.
The Hon. Newell A. Lamb, Judge of the Newton Circuit Court, was appointed as Commissioner to hear the evidence and report his findings of fact and recommendation. The hearing was held and the Commissioner has filed his findings of fact and recommendation, finding that the said Holovachka has violated his oath as an attorney and as a member of the bar of this state as to charges 1, 2, 5 and 6 preferred against him, and recommending that Holovachka’s name be forever stricken from the roll of attorneys licensed to practice law in the State of Indiana.
As the defendant’s counsel has questioned the sufficiency of the evidence to sustain the first two (2) specific charges preferred against him in this cause, in the interest of brevity those two (2) charges and *487the evidence bearing thereon will be considered together.
The first specific charge against Holovaehka with the Commissioner’s finding is as follows:
“I. . . . That Metro Holovaehka was prosecuted by the United States of America upon three (8) separate counts of indictment returned by a Federal Grand Jury charging Metro Holovaehka with wilfully evading his federal income tax for the years 1955, 1956 and 1957 by filing false and fradulent [sic] tax returns.
“Said charge is contained in rhetorical paragraphs 5, 6, 7 and 8 of the Original Verified Information.
“The Commissioner finds that Metro Holovachka was indicted and convicted by a jury on each of the three counts of the indictment and sentenced by the United States District Court, Northern District, Hammond Division, for a term of three years and assessed a fine thereon in the sum of $10,000.00. That said conviction remains in force and effect and has not been reversed or modified although having been appealed to the United States Supreme Court.
“That said conviction is based upon evidence tending to and which did show that said defendant, during his tenure as prosecuting attorney for the 31st Judicial Circuit of the State of Indiana, more particularly during the years 1955 through 1957, did fail to report and pay to the United States Government taxes upon the income he received, which aggregate income was $179,543.00 over and above the amount of income that said defendant actually reported to the United States Government.
“The above stated sums of money came to the defendant by way of cash transactions for which no explanation was given, and the Commissioner finds that said sums of money came to the said defendant by way of ‘pay-offs,’ ‘protection,’ ‘kickbacks’ and ‘bribes’ to Metro Holovaehka in return for the use of his office to support and protect gambling and vice interests in Lake County, Indi*488ana, which County comprises the 31st Judicial Circuit of the State of Indiana.
“The Commissioner finds in this regard that Metro Holovachka was convicted of a felony and that he has violated his oath as an officer of the Courts of the State of Indiana and also his oath and duties as a prosecuting attorney in and for the 31st Judicial Circuit of the State of Indiana.
“As a part of said conviction for income tax evasion the Commissioner has tendered to the Supreme Court of Indiana a document showing that Metro Holovachka has been ordered to surrender himself to the United States Marshal at Hammond, Indiana on Monay, June 24, 1963, for the hearing of sentence on said conviction. Moreover, your Commissioner finds that said conviction is final in every respect and has tendered to the Court certified copies of the Order of the Supreme Court of the United States dated June 10, 1963 denying Mr. Holovachka’s Petition for a Writ of Certiorari and an Order of said Court dated June 17, 1963 denying Mr. Holovachka’s Petition for Rehearing in said Court.”
The defendant argues that his conviction for income tax violation does not involve moral turpitude and that there is not a scintilla of evidence or one word of testimony in the record to support the Commissioner’s finding that the defendant took “pay-offs”, “protection”, “kick-backs”, and “bribes”.
Defendant’s argument is apparently based upon his contention there is a lack of direct evidence of “payoffs”, “bribes”, etc., received by him and that in the absence of such direct evidence there is no causal connection between Holovachka’s position as prosecutor for the 31st Judicial Circuit (Lake County), and his accumulation of vast sums of money, viz: $327,724.27 during the same period and the quantity of vice and gambling in the county.
*489The second specific charge against Holovachka with the Commissioner’s finding is as follows:
“II. . . . That Metro Holovachka, during his tenure as prosecuting attorney for the 31st Judicial Circuit of Indiana, failed and refused to prosecute those persons guilty of violating the laws of the State of Indiana as those laws relate to vice and gambling in said state and particularly with respect to Lake County, Indiana, all of which is contrary to his sworn oath to uphold the laws of the State of Indiana.
“Said charges are contained in rhetorical paragraphs 8, 9, 10, 11, 15 and 18 of the Original Verified Information.
“The Commissioner finds that Metro Holovachka did, by a conscious and deliberate course of conduct, during his tenure as prosecuting attorney as hereinbefore stated, use the influence and power of his office to further spread the gambling and vice operations in Lake County, Indiana.
“It is further found that violations of the law were known to him and that by a designed course of conduct he actually aided and abetted the establishment of a syndicated gambling operation in Lake County, Indiana, enabling those violating the law to reap substantial profits in the gambling type pin-ball operations and in the operation of so-called policy wheels.
“The Commissioner further finds that by the use of the defendant’s office he destroyed the organization of Local No. 1 of the Automatic Equipment and Coin Machine Operators’ Service and Repairmen’s Union.
“Your Commissioner further finds that during the defendant’s tenure as said prosecuting attorney, prostitution was permitted to operate openly and notoriously in Lake County, Indiana, that one John Formusa, owning and operating the M & J Motel and personally known to said defendant, reported net income to the Federal Government amounting to $144,000.00 for the years 1955 through 1957, all of which income came exclusively from the operation of the house of prostitution *490known as the M & J Motel in Lake County, Indiana.
“It is further found that Metro Holovachka consorted with and used the influence of his office and position to assist gambling interests in securing favors from other departments of local government; that he attempted to intimidate and pressure a member of the Lake County Planning Commission and Board of Zoning Appeals into voting favorably on a zoning variance request by such gambling interests, and upon failure to receive a favorable ruling or to prevent such member from inspecting and investigating the operation of such gambling business, the said Metro Holovachka attempted to solicit a bribe from said official; that in failing to solicit such bribe from such official, the said Holovachka brought about the indictment and ultimate prosecution and conviction of the said public official.
“The Commissioner further finds that Metro Holovachka used the power of his office to nolle prosque [sic] indictments against public officials who had been indicted by a grand jury prior to said defendant’s election to office and that said indictments charged said officials with misconduct and malfeasance in office in that they permitted gambling to operate openly and notoriously in the communities in Lake County, Indiana. All of said indictments were returned prior to the commencement of Metro Holovachka’s term of office as prosecuting attorney and said indictments were dismissed the day following the day said defendant took said office, said dismissals being dated January 2,1953.
“Your Commissioner finds that Charge II is amply sustained by the testimony of Mr. Richard Sinclair, Mr. Gilbert Sellers, Mr. George Lindberg, Mr. Delbert P. Hopkins, Mr. Harold Swain, Mr. John Testo, Mr. Louis Lindinger, Mr. Joe Petrunich and Mr. Frank Witecki.”
The defendant’s counsel argues the evidence in no way substantiates the findings of the Commissioner as to this charge, for the reason that the mere fact there *491was vice and gambling in Lake County does not necessarily connect the defendant-prosecuting attorney with the same, nor mean that the defendant used his office to aid or abet such criminal activity.
We shall now proceed to a consideration of the evidence introduced in support of charges 1 and 2.
At the outset it is to be noted that it is unquestioned as found by the Commissioner that Holovachka was convicted by the United States District Court of wilfully evading his federal income tax for three (3) years, to wit: 1955, 1956 and 1957 by filing false and fraudulent returns.
The witness Richard Sinclair, an employee of the federal government in the General Accounting Office, Washington, D. C., and assigned to the United States Senate Rackets Committee in 1958, 1959 and 1960, testified as to having conversations with Holovachka and as to such Committee's findings that the syndicate operation of coin-operated pinball machines, of the gambling type, was supported by Holovachka while he was prosecutor of Lake County. The witness had made a check of Holovachka’s income tax returns for the years 1945 through 1958, and testified the examination revealed the following:
1945 _ $ 4,649.38
1946 _ 4,085.80
1947 _ 4,903.90
1948 _ 2,733.14
1949 _ 2,456.61
1950 _ 3,389.20
1951 — 8,521.10
1952 — $ 10,244.56
1953 — 32,402.39
1954 — 33,786.70
1955 — 38,967.67
1956 — 38,798.50
1957 — 50,817.36
1958 — 53,852.60
During the process of securing Holovachka’s files and records, Holovachka interfered with the service of process by John Thiede, an employee of the General *492Accounting Office, and took out from under the subpoena the records which were in the office of his (Holovachka’s) accountant and refused to cooperate in any way with the Committee and refused to honor the subpoena of the Senate Committee.
The evidence was that Holovaehka was appointed controller of the city of Gary, Indiana, on January 1, 1952, and served until December 31, 1952, when he took office as prosecuting attorney until December 31, 1958, which was the end of his second term of office.
It further appeared that the Sunset Supply Company of Gary, Indiana, and associated companies, controlled the pinball operations in Lake County and that their collections from pinball machines for the years from 1954 to 1958 were $6,354,285.05. This figure represented only one-half of the total income from the machines because the location owner, where the pinball machine was placed, received the other one-half of the overall total after pay-offs were made from the collections.
The witness Sinclair testified that the pinball income of Steven Sohacki and George Welbourn, the principal owners and operators of the Sunset Supply Company, was as follows:
MR. SOHACKI MR. WELBOURN
1954 _ $ 160,228.56 $ 160,228.56
1955 _ 424,077.00 424,077.00
1956 — 259,071.37 259,071.37
1957 — 100,000.00 100,000.00
1958 — 115,000.00 115,000.00
During the course of the Senate Committee investigation all of these matters were discussed with Holovachka, but he was not helpful to the Committee in any respect.
*493The witness Sinclair further testified he contacted a John Formusa who operated the M & J Motel in the Gary area, and that Mr. Formusa told him the motel was a house of prostitution of national prominence. An examination of the books and records of the M & J Motel revealed that on an investment of $16,000.00 the net reported income for tax purposes for the year 1955 was $11,193.54; for the year 1956 it was $46,669.56; for the year 1957 it was $56,603.64; and for the year 1958 it was $63,524.40, the gross figure for such year being $112,548.00.
An examination of the records of the Lakeside Specialty Company of East Chicago, Indiana, revealed that presents had been sent to Holovachka from the group owning and operating such pinball machine company.
The banking transactions of Holovachka for the years 1951 through 1958 showed that approximately $327,000.00 in cash transactions primarily in denominations of $20.00 or less, went through Holovachka’s bank account, and it appeared that when he was confronted with this information, he refused to offer or make any explanation of the source of this money. This figure represented only cash transactions and did not reflect money deposited to Holovachka’s account as the result of checks or similar type transactions.
The witness Gilbert Sellers, a former Indiana State Police Officer, was assigned to the Dunes Park Post No. 1 of the Indiana State Police in 1957 and 1958, and worked extensively in Lake County in an effort to quell gambling and vice alleged to be operating there. He testified he personally knew bookmaking establishments operated there openly and notoriously, that prostitution was open and notorious, there were eight (8) or ten (10) such operations in the central Gary area, and there also was an extensive policy-wheel opera*494tion in Lake County. He further testified he had personally observed gambling type pinball machines in a number of the restaurants and taverns of Lake County, and that most of the arrests by the State police were on view without affidavits and warrants having been issued so as to remove the likelihood of tip-offs that otherwise might occur.
Witness George Lindberg was a newspaper reporter in Gary, and his work required him to examine daily the police records as to arrests and charges. He had played pinball machines in restaurants and taverns and had received pay-offs in money for his winnings. He testified that prostitutes worked their trade in most of the taverns, on the streets, and in the bar rooms, and he was frequently solicited by them. From his personal observation practically every restaurant and tavern in Lake County had gambling-type pinball machines and bookmaking and policy-wheel operations operated openly. He had written several articles on these matters in the Gary Post Tribune, and the defendant Holovaehka was a subscriber to the paper.
Witness Delbert Hopkins was the Acting Chief of the Collection Division of The Bureau of Internal Revenue for Indiana. He testified that gambling stamps issued to individuals in Lake County increased from 229 for the year 1955-1956, to 862 in the year 1957-1958. One gambling operator, a Hutchins Upshaw, paid to the federal government in wagering tax in excess of $100,000.00 for two (2) successive years. Since this payment was based on ten percent (10%) of the gross receipts from gambling, such an amount would indicate this one (1) operator collected over $1,000,000.00 each of such years in his gambling operation in Gary, Indiana.
*495Witness Harold Swain was a former policeman, employed by the Northwest Indiana Crime Commission. He was a police captain when Peter Mandich was mayor of Gary and Holovachka was city controller in 1952. He testified during his tenure as captain, that Holovachka made a newspaper statement that there were too many men assigned to vice and gambling enforcement. He also was requested by Holovachka to go easy on an after-hours tavern operator as such person was a friend of his. Swain continued his efforts to clean up gambling and vice but was removed from his position by a new police chief appointed by Holovachka as acting mayor when mayor Mandich was out of town.
Swain also testified he served Holovachka with a subpoena to appear at the hearing before the Commissioner in this cause, but Holovachka in a fit of temper told him to “ . . . get the hell out of here,” and ordered him from the property. Holovachka stated to Swain he had no intentions of honoring the subpoena and being present at the hearing.
Witness John Testo was a president of local 101 for the marble tile and terrazzo workers’ union and had formed a union for the coin-operated machine servicemen in 1952. He received a charter for the union local No. 1, which is no longer in operation.
Testo testified he had conversations and meetings with Holovachka when the latter was prosecuting attorney of Lake County, and was told by Holovachka to get “straightened out” or he’d have trouble. Testo, on learning the pinball machines of his union affiliates were to be removed from the prosecutor’s office, complained to Holovachka. In return for his complaints he received only threats and harrassment and was required to take the union books and records into Holovachka’s office in response to an alleged probe of un*496ion activities, but he never appeared before any duly appointed grand jury. After the removal of the pinball machines belonging to members of Testo’s union, other machines belonging to the syndicate were moved into the same places and remained there without interference from the prosecutor’s office. This procedure brought about the demise of local No. 1 because its members could not function after the removal of their pinball machines, and the union collapsed with the loss of business locations.
Witness Frank Witecki was also a member of local No. 1 and the owner of coin-operated equipment consisting of pinball machines. Witecki had established business places for his machines but was forced to remove the machines by the actions of the prosecutor’s office during the time that Holovachka was prosecutor. He stated he knew of his own knowledge that other machines were moved into the same places where his machines had been and that the new machines were not removed later by the prosecutor’s office.
This witness further stated these occurrences were matters of common knowledge.
Louis Lindinger was a former member of the East Chicago Police Department and was for the past few years the owner-operator of a tavern in Gary. He also worked in a steel plant and was involved in local Gary politics.
. This witness stated that sometime in 1954 or 1955 during the pre-election season Holovachka came to his tavern and talked with him. Holovachka was then prosecutor and told the witness Lindinger to move the pinball machines from the front of the tavern to the rear thereof. The machines belonged to the syndicate group.
*497At a later time, in approximately 1958, Holovaehka came back to the tavern and asked Lindinger to sign a slip of paper withdrawing from the race for precinct committeeman in that precinct. Mr. Lindinger asked for time to consider this withdrawal and was told he would have to come to a decision in the intervening time between Friday and Monday. He was told by the prosecutor that the latter didn’t want any monkeying around and if he, Lindinger, did not withdraw from the race for committeeman, that Holovaehka would take him before the grand jury and have him indicted for perjury and false registration. On another occasion Holovachka requested Lindinger to come to the prosecutor’s office. Lindinger obeyed the request from Holovaehka.
Holovaehka invited Lindinger to a special meeting in the Gary Hotel and while Lindinger was there he saw Holovaehka in the crowd with John Formusa and Steve Sohacki. Lindinger was acquainted with both men, knew who they were, and that Formusa ran a house of ill-fame, and subsequently the M & J Motel, another house of ill-fame, and some similar business operations in the Gary area, and that Sohacki was the head of the pinball syndicate in the Lake County region. He stated that the prosecutor, Holovaehka, seemed to be well acquainted with the people in the room and that the discussion at the meeting related to local precinct politics.
Mr. Joe Petrunich stated he had lived in Lake County for a long time and at an earlier time he had become active in Boy Scout work in the Cedar Lake area. Many of the residents in the area had asked him to become active in politics and as a result he had been appointed to the Lake County Plan Commission and the board of zoning appeals. He had served as president of one of the boards. The witness stated that he had received a *498call from Metro Holovachka, the prosecutor of the area, about a rezoning application pending on behalf of the Sunset Supply Company. The company was located in Gary and Mr. Holovachka wanted the company to receive favorable treatment on the application. Mr. Petrunich, who drove a truck as a means of livelihood, was charged by the board and commission with the duty of personally examining into the locations asking for rezoning and variances. He had visited the Sunset Supply Company location after a remonstrator at a hearing had complained of savage dogs, and that she was met at the door of the Sunset Supply building by a man carrying a sawed-off shotgun.
Mr. Holovachka warned Petrunich, after the latter stated he would make these inspections, that maybe he (Petrunich) “ . . . wouldn’t be a member so long . . The application was not approved and Joe Petrunich was indicted for accepting a bribe as a public official in connection with his duties as a board member. The case was set for trial soon after the indictment and Petrunich stated he had difficulty securing a lawyer to represent him in the short time allowed. He went to see the prosecutor, Holovachka, and explained the problem and stated that a lawyer had offered to take his case for $2,000.00, which he stated was more than he could afford. Holovachka then told him that he should give Holovachka the $2,000.00 and the case would be dropped. Petrunich told Holovachka he wasn’t guilty and that he didn’t feel he ought to give anybody $2,000.00. After his failure to give Holovachka the money, he was convicted of the charge.
*499*498To summarize with reference to charge 1, the evidence in the record which is referred to in the Com*499missioner’s finding, is to the effect that the defendant Holovachka was convicted on each of three (3) counts of the indictment against him charging that during his tenure as prosecuting attorney, and more particularly during the years 1955 through 1957, he failed to report and pay to the United States government taxes upon the income he received, which aggregate income was $179,543.00 over and above the amount of income that said defendant actually reported to the United States government. The Commissioner specifically found that said sum of money came to the defendant Holovachka by way of cash transactions for which no explanation was given and that the money came to Holovachka by way of “pay-offs”, “protection”, “kick-backs” and “bribes” in return for the use of his office to support and protect gambling and vice interests in Lake County, Indiana. We know judicially that the salary of the prosecuting attorney as fixed by statute for the years 1953 through 1958 was not less than $10,500 nor more than $12,000. However, Holovachka’s average annual reported income for the years he was prosecutor (1953-1958) was considerably in excess of this amount, viz: $41,437, although his previous average reported annual income as an attorney for the eight (8) years prior to his becoming prosecutor had been only $5,123.
Defendant does not deny the probative effect of his judgment of conviction for failing to report the additional sum of $179,543.00 in federal income taxes for the years 1955 through 1957 when he was prosecuting attorney, but contends his conviction for income tax violation does not show moral turpitude. Bearing upon the issue of moral turpitude, there is direct evidence in the record that Holovachka was the recipient over a seven (7) year period (1951-1958) of the sum of *500$827,000.00 in cash transactions of $20.00 or less, over and above all checks received by him, and that he refused to cooperate with the Senate Rackets Committee investigation in giving any information as to the gambling, prostitution and vice conditions which were prevalent in Lake County, Indiana. There is further direct evidence as to the fabulous profit derived by the gambling and prostitution syndicates in Lake County, Indiana, under the very nose of the prosecutor Holovachka, and regarding the investigation of which he offered no cooperation whatever. Holovachka himself seized out from under a subpoena copies of his books and records held by his accountant when they were being procured by the Senate Committee. The harrassment and vindictiveness he employed toward any persons standing.in his way appears in the evidence heretofore discussed. It was properly concluded by the Commissioner from all of this evidence as found by the Commissioner that Holovachka received- this vast amount of money by way of pay-offs, protection, kickbacks, and bribes in order that his office would permit vice and gambling to operate without interference. It is difficult to conceive of a clearer example of illicit or depraved conduct than that here exhibited by Holovachka, who in his lust for wealth and power increased his income from a paltry $5,123 average a year as a lawyer to amounts far exceeding the maximum salary of $12,000.00 provided by statute for the prosecutor of Lake County. His receipt in his bank account of $327,000.00, in small cash denominations which was unexplained by him, obviously was from vice and gambling activities which owed to Holovachka every cent of that money for their continued and successful operation in defiance of the law which it was Holovachka’s sworn duty to uphold and enforce. This was utter *501depravity and moral turpitude of the rankest sort, and distinguishes this case entirely from Baker et al., etc. v. Miller (1956), 236 Ind. 20, 138 N. E. 2d 145; and In re Baugh (1954), 233 Ind. 424, 120 N. E. 2d 262. We must agree with the Commissioner’s finding that Holovachka’s conviction on three (3) counts of felony in filing false and fraudulent income tax returns which failed to report illicit earnings it appears he received therefrom for the years 1955, 1956 and 1957, constituted a violation of his oath as an attorney,2 and also his oath as a prosecuting attorney3 of the 31st Judicial Circuit of the State of Indiana.
With regard to charge 2, to summarize, it was charged that Holovachka during his tenure as prosecuting attorney failed and refused to prosecute per*502sons guilty of violating the vice and gambling laws of the state, contrary to his sworn oath to uphold the laws of the state. The Commissioner’s findings that Holovachka consciously and deliberately used the influence and power of his office to further the spread of vice and gambling operations in Lake County, Indiana, and more specifically that violations of the law were known to him and that by a designed course of conduct he aided and abetted the establishment of syndicated gambling and permitted prostitution to operate openly and notoriously, enabling those violating the law to reap enormous profits, are amply supported by the foregoing evidence heretofore recited in this opinion. Similarly are the findings that Holovachka by the use of his office destroyed the organization of a labor union and secured favors for gambling interests from local government; that he attempted to solicit a bribe from a local official and when he failed in such attempt, brought about the indictment and conviction of such public official; that he further used the power of his said office immediately on assuming office, to nolle prosequi indictments against public officials which had charged such officials with permitting gambling to operate notoriously in Lake County, Indiana.
The contention of defendant’s counsel that there was no necessary relationship between the existence of vice and gambling in Lake County, Indiana, and Holovachka’s conduct of his office so as to connect him with the same is completely and entirely unfounded. On the contrary, the facts and circumstances heretofore related are so inconsistent with any suggestion by his counsel that Holovachka was not connected with the vast river of crime and vice in Lake County, that such contention appears ridiculous. The argument that Holovachka was innocent of any wrongdoing has the impact of an empty *503shell when viewed in the light of the unchallenged facts appearing throughout the record of this case.
However, were we to assume for the purpose of defendant’s argument that contrary to the strong case made by the evidence, Holovachka did not use his office to foster vice and corruption, but merely was oblivious of the repeated violations of the law which occurred uninterruptedly in his view in Lake County when he was prosecuting attorney, what would be the result? We would still be forced to conclude that this type of moral decay and general depravity is not compatible with the duty owed to the courts and the citizens of a judicial district by one who is himself an officer of the court as well as a prosecuting attorney and an attorney at law. Such conduct cannot exist side by side with the high degree of honesty and integrity required of members of the bar, and is contrary to the oath each must have assumed before the bar of this Court and the law. See: Wilbur v. Howard (1947), 70 F. Supp. 930, (Reversed on other grounds.); State ex inf. McKittrick v. Graves, Pros. Atty. (1940), 346 Mo. 990, 144 S. W. 2d 91; The People v. Anglim (1904), 33 Colo. 40, 78 P. 687; In re Simpson (1920), 79 Okla. 305; 192 P. 1097.
We must conclude the Commissioner’s finding under specification 2 was proper and correct and that this specification under any proper consideration of the same has been fully established by the evidence.
The third and fourth charges preferred against the defendant were found by the Commissioner not to be established by sufficient evidence and in view of the result we have reached in this opinion it is not necessary that we discuss such specifications.
*504The fifth specific charge is that defendant Holovachka did, during the year 1952, while serving as the duly appointed controller of the city of Gary, Indiana, engage in the purchase and sale of Barrett Bonds issued by the city of Gary and that in engaging in said transactions while serving as an official of said unit of government, he violated the provisions of Burns’ §48-1247 (1963 Repl.),4 and Burns’ §10-3713 (1956 Repl.),5 relating to contracts by and between public officials and the units of government which they serve.
The Commissioner found that the defendant was controller of the city of Gary from January 1, 1952, to December 31, 1952, and during that time served as a member of the board of public works of said city and had authority to approve improvement contracts for said city and that he did approve certain Barrett Bonds improvement projects hereafter named. It was further found as follows:
That the defendant Holovachka committed perjury in making three (3) affidavits on June 8, 1955, with respect to district sewer 87, and local sewers 225 and 226, wherein he stated the assignment of the improvement contract from the contractor to Holovachka took place after the work had been accepted by the city of Gary when in truth the assignments took place respectively 22, 91 and 58 days prior to the date the work was accepted by the city of Gary.
That the defendant Holovachka committed perjury in making an affidavit on June 8, 1955, with respect to a sewer project of the city of Gary, wherein he stated *505there was no agreement between him and any of the contractors pertaining to the assignment prior to the date of said assignment; whereas in truth, the defendant did in fact prior to said assignment, make an agreement with all contractors that he would buy all contracts they had if they would bid on the public improvements.
That the defendant Holovachka committed perjury in testimony before the securities commissioner of the State of Indiana in which the said Holovachka stated H & M Realty and the H & M Construction Company were companies which he owned and that they were not a partnership or corporation, when in truth and in fact the said H & M Realty Company and the H & M Construction Company were a partnership for purchasing Barrett Bonds, and this partnership was owned by Holovachka and Peter Mandich.
The Commissioner’s findings appear to us to be amply sustained by the evidence. Defendant’s counsel has argued as to the first three (3) affidavits that the assignments to Holovachka did not take place until after the work was accepted by the city. This contention is completely unfounded as it is diametrically opposed to the testimony of the city engineer Farquharson and the assistant city engineer Reiner, who were the sole witnesses to testify on such point. Similarly, defendant’s arguments are unfounded as to the insufficiency of'the evidence to support the Commissioner’s findings as- to the false statements in the fourth and fifth affidavits. The Commissioner’s findings are supported by ' clear testimony in the record on the subject.
*506*505It therefore appears from the record evidence and the Commissioner’s findings that the defendant com*506mitted the felony of perjury6 in five (5) different respects, and it further appears that he violated two (2) other statutes7 of the state of Indiana prohibiting contracts between public officials and the units of government they serve, the violation of which also constitute felonies.
The sixth and last charge preferred against the defendant is that said defendant Holovachka was guilty *507of offensive personality in his dealings with the U. S. Senate Select Committee on Improper Activites in the Labor or Management Field.
The oath of admission of an attorney in the State of Indiana (heretofore set forth in this opinion) contains, among other duties and obligations imposed upon him, the specific undertaking that he will abstain from offensive personality.
The Commissioner found that Holovaehka failed and refused to cooperate with said Committee at its hearings, and that he obstructed the course of investigation by interferring with the lawful subpoena of his tax records. It was further found that Holovaehka failed and refused to obey the subpoena of the State of Indiana ordering his appearance at the trial on March 12, 1963, in violation of Burns’ Indiana Statutes, §10-1010 (1956 Repl.).8
Defendant’s counsel has argued as to the authority of the U. S. Senate Committee to investigate Holovachka. However, it is not disputed that the Committee was authorized to make investigations in the labor and management field.
The evidence is clear that the union (local No. 1) commenced by John Testo and adhered to by many small coin-operated machine businessmen had suffered greatly at the hands of a despotic prosecutor and a giant syndicated operation in Lake County, Indiana. The power wielded by the defendant as prosecutor in behalf of the huge syndicate could brook no interference from this struggling new labor union in Lake County, Indiana. The inquiry was indeed within the subject matter of its proper sphere and legitimate, and if Holovaehka had nothing to hide from *508the law and the light of day, he would have had no understandable reason for refusing to cooperate in the seeking out of unlawful activities toward labor forces in that area. He was under a duty to cooperate with a lawful investigation, and his defiant seizure in the presence of investigators of his tax records from an accountant when they were under lawful subpoena by the investigating Committee, and his subsequent abusive refusal to honor the subpoena of the Commissioner in this case under the circumstances disclosed by the evidence, were a violation of his oath as a member of the bar of this state. His own words, spoken in a rage, to the officer serving the legal process of the Commissioner appointed by this Court, were that he had no intention of honoring the subpoena to appear at the hearing. It is further uncontradicted that Holovachka ordered the officer serving the process off the premises. It would be hard to envision a more flagrant case of offensive personality than that here exhibited in utter defiance of legal process and authority of this Court. The subsequent uncorroborated affidavit for continuance by Holovachka’s attorney, suggesting that in such counsel’s opinion Holovachka was ill at the time of the hearing, makes no reference to Holovachka’s unquestioned previous belligerent and defiant conduct, and has little if any probative effect with relation to this charge.
We must consider this charge and the Commissioner’s findings to be proved.
Defendant has also contended that the Commissioner erroneously denied his attorney’s motion for a continuance in this cause.
Defendant’s basis for a continuance was predicated upon the above-mentioned affidavit of his trial counsel, Albert Gavit, who alleged that in his opinion the de*509fendant Holovachka was not in condition to attend the hearing or to prepare for the hearing of the cause. The affidavit was not supported by the statement or testimony of any medical witness as to the physical condition of Holovachka. The attorney general, nevertheless, filed a counter-affidavit in opposition thereto.
Defendant’s motion for continuance does not proceed under Burns’ §2-1301 (1946 Repl.),9 which makes provision for the granting of continuances on account of the absence of evidence or the absence of a witness where, among other things, the materiality of the evidence is shown. No such showing was here made.
No statutory provision is made for the granting of continuances because of illness, but this area of the law has been covered in this state by judicial decision. The general rule enunciated has been that it is a matter to be determined within the sound discretion of the trial court.
Defendant has cited the cases of Pierce v. Merchants Heat, etc., Co. (1920), 189 Ind. 571, 127 N. E. 765, 128 N. E. 598; House v. Cardinal (1919), 69 Ind. App. 428, 122 N. E. 11; and Deacon v. Rasch (1907), 40 Ind. App. 77, 81 N. E. 84, as supporting his contention that the Commissioner abused his discretion in overruling his motion for continuance, but none of those cases appear to be in point as in each of such cases a statement from a physician was furnished to support the party’s contention of illness. In the case before us the mere naked statement of defendant’s trial counsel that defendant was not in condition to attend the hearing or prepare for the hearing of the cause did not describe the nature of defendant’s alleged condition nor furnish any medical evidence in *510support thereof. It was therefore of little if any probative value, especially in view of the counter-affidavit by the attorney general, and in our judgment there was no error committed by the Commissioner in denying the requested continuance.
Defendant has argued that it was a violation of due process for the Commissioner to proceed with defendant’s hearing although defendant did not show good cause, as we have been compelled to conclude, for the granting of a continuance. This argument is not well taken as the following treatment will demonstrate.
The defendant’s license to practice law is a privilege rather than a natural or vested right, and is contingent upon the faithful performance of the duties imposed upon the attorney by the society which grants him the privilege. In re Harrison, etc., (1953), 231 Ind. 665, 667, 668, 109 N. E. 2d 722, 723. And as we said in Baker et al. v. Keisker (1957), 236 Ind. 617, 620, 142 N. E. 2d 432, 434:
“ . . . The first and continuing requirement of an attorney is that he be of good moral character. Rule 3-12. Being of good moral character necessarily implies that he will conform to the moral standards of his profession as provided (1) by law, (2) by his oath of office and (3) by the code of ethics of the legal profession.”
Rule 3-24 of this Court provides the defendant has a right to attend his disbarment proceeding in person or with counsel. This is a fundamental right in all cases involving the revocation of a license to follow a given business or profession. It is comparable to, but no greater than, the right of a defendant in any civil proceeding to be present in person or with counsel if he chooses. And if he decides not to be present in such a case, his attendance cannot ordinarily be *511compelled unless he has been subpoened as a witness. See: In re Lucas (1952), 230 Ind. 254, 102 N. E. 2d 909.
The defendant in the present case was served with due and proper notice of the hearing and he retained able counsel to represent his interests in the case. He failed to furnish any proper or legal basis for the granting of a continuance of the hearing. He certainly cannot ignore and thwart the progress of the orderly procedure of courts of justice by acting in defiance of their lawful processes. If he determines not to appear, that is a decision he may make; but he certainly cannot use his defiance of lawful process as a vehicle to enable him to assert at a later time that his constitutional rights to a hearing were impaired. That Holovachka actually intended in this case to defy the summons and subpoena of the Commissioner is not refuted, but it unequivocally appears from the record as heretofore stated that Holovachka told the officer serving the process that he would not honor the same, and in anger rudely ordered the officer off his premises. Holovachka’s conduct in this case, if anything, indicates he was more interested in a state of anarchy than in the observance of law under the Constitution.
The cases cited by defendant are no authority for his right to a continuance on the sole basis of the naked and unsupported allegation and conclusion of his attorney as to his medical condition. Moreover, the facts in the record above referred to are clearly sufficient to rebut the contention of defendant’s attorney that defendant’s non-attendance was due to alleged illness. The Commissioner did not abuse his discretion in denying the continuance, and defendant is in no position to contend his constitutional rights to a hearing were violated.
*512Defendant has next contended that his constitutional rights to due process were violated by the bringing of these disbarment proceedings by The Northwest Indiana Crime Commission, Inc., by information against the defendant, after being granted leave by this Court to file such verified information.
Defendant’s contention in substance is that the proceeding was in part based upon hearsay evidence, although it is conceded Holovachka’s income tax conviction was not hearsay as it was a matter of public record. Nevertheless, we know of no reason why this proceeding could not be instituted on the basis of hearsay evidence.10
Defendant has also argued this case should have been referred to the Disciplinary Commission. Although the rules of this Court do not require the same,11 we desire to point out that contrary to defendant’s contention, as set forth in note one (1) to this opinion, supra, the information of the Northwest Indiana Crime Commission, Inc., was in fact referred by this Court to the Disciplinary Commission which recommended that the information be filed and a Commissioner be appointed to hear the evidence. This Court thereupon granted leave to file the information which was then filed and said Commissioner appointed. Defendant’s argument is completely untenable.
It further appears the defendant has cited no legal authorities in support of the various arguments he has made under this contention, and under our rules the same is thereby waived. 2 I. L. E., Appeals, §387, p. 262.
*513Defendant has also contended that error was committed by this Court in previously denying defendant’s application for a change of venue from the Commissioner.
In reply to defendant’s verified application for a change of venue, the attorney general on behalf of petitioner filed a memorandum in opposition thereto.
Defendant offered no evidence in support of his contention that a change of venue should be granted because of bias and prejudice of the Commissioner, but contends he has an absolute right thereto pursuant to Burns’ §2-1401 (1946 Repl.).12
We know of no reason or basis under which the right to a change of venue prescribed by statute and rule of this Court should be extended to hearings of an administrative nature as the instant proceeding before the Commissioner in this case. The case of In re Griffin (1904), 33 Ind. App. 153, 69 N. E. 192, is entirely distinguishable from this case in such respect. No error was therefore committed in denying defendant’s application for change of venue.
To conclude, we refer again to the Commissioner’s findings of fact, which as heretofore indicated in this opinion, are amply and sufficiently supported by the evidence showing that the defendant, Metro Holovachka, has violated his oath of admission to the bar of this State with respect to four serious specific charges preferred against him, viz: charges 1, 2, 5 and 6, heretofore discussed. In accordance with the recommendations of the Commissioner based thereon, it is now therefore ordered by this Court that the name of Metro Holovachka be forever stricken *514from the roll of attorneys licensed to practice law in the State of Indiana.
Achor and Arterburn, JJ., concur. Myers, J., concurs in result. Jackson, J., concurs with opinion.
. In opposition to the gratuitous statements of Judge Jackson in his concurring opinion, it should be noted under Rule 3-21 original actions for disbarment in this Court may be brought by persons other than the attorney general or the Disciplinary Commission appointed by this Court, in the.event leave is granted therefor by this Court. Here it appears that the Northwest Indiana Crime Commission, Inc., filed with the *486Court on May 15, 1962, petition for such leave, and on said date offered for filing a verified information for disbarment, and further offered on May 28, 1962, a supplement to said information. We referred the matter to the Disciplinary Commission of this Court which on June 18, 1962, after a meeting of the full Disciplinary Commission recommended that an information for disbarment be permitted to be filed by said Northwest Indiana Crime Commission, Inc., in this Court, and that a Commissioner be appointed to conduct an investigation, hearing, and to make report and recommendation to this Court.
On June 25, 1962, this Court after being duly advised in the premises, unanimously and without dissent approved said recommendation of the Disciplinary Commission and granted the Northwest Indiana Crime Commission, Inc., permission to file an information for disbarment pursuant to the rules of this Court, which was thereupon filed.
It is clear, therefore, that petitioner having thus brought the instant disbarment action in complete compliance with our rules and after this Court had granted petitioner leave to proceed with such filing in view of the favorable recommendation of the Disciplinary Commission, no proper objection can now be made to the authority of petitioner to institute the proceedings in this case.
. “Upon being admitted to practice law in the State _ of Indiana, each applicant shall take and subscribe to the following oath or affirmation:
“ ‘I do solemnly swear or affirm that: I will support the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of Indiana; I will maintain the respect due to_ courts of justice and judicial officers; I will not counsel or maintain any action, proceeding, or defense which shall appear to me to be unj'ust, but this obligation shall not prevent me from defending a person charged with crime in any case; I will employ for the purpose of maintaining the causes confided to me, such means only as are consistent with truth, and never seek to mislead the court or jury by any artifice or false statement of fact or law; I will maintain the confidence and preserve inviolate the secrets of my client at every peril to myself; I will abstain from offensive personality and advance no fact prejudicial to the honor or reputation of a party or witness, unless required by the justice of the cause with which I am charged; I will not encourage either the commencement or the continuance of any action or proceeding from any motive of passion or interest; I will never reject, from any consideration personal to myself, the cause of the defenseless or oppressed; I will abstain from direct or indirect solicitation of employment, to institute, prosecute, or defend against any claim, action or cause of action; so help me God.’ ” Rule 3-20 of the Indiana Supreme Court.
. “Every person elected or appointed to any office under this constitution, shall, before entering on the duties thereof, take an oath or affirmation, to support the Constitution of this State, and of the United States, and also an oath of office.” Art. 15, §4, Constitution of Indiana. See also: 22 I. L. E. Officers, §32.
. Acts 1905, ch. 129, §46, p. 219; 1907, ch. 254, §1, p. 538.
. Acts 1905, ch. 169, §517, p. 584.
. Burns’ §10-3801 (1956 Repl.), Acts 1905, ch. 169, §474, p. 584; 1927, ch. 203, §7, p. 580. Burns’ §10-3802 (1956 Repl.), Acts 1905, ch. 169, §475, p. 584; 1927, ch. 203, §8, p. 580.
. Burns’ §10-3713 (1956 Repl.), supra, is as follows:
“Any state officer, county commissioner, township or town trustee, mayor or a common councilman of any city, school trustee of any town or city, or their appointees or agents, or any person holding any appointive power, ... of this state, who shall, during the time he may occupy such office or hold such appointing power and discharge the duties thereof, be interested, directly or indirectly, in any contract for the construction of any state house, court house, school house, bridge, public building or work of any kind, erected or built for the use of the state, or any county, township, town or city in the state, in which he exercises any official jurisdiction, or who shall bargain for or receive any percentage, drawback, premium or profit or money whatever, on any contract, or for the letting of any contract, or making any appointment wherein the state, or any county, township, town or city is concerned, on conviction, shall be fined not less than three hundred dollars [$300] nor more than five thousand dollars [$5,000], and be imprisoned in the state prison not less than two [2] years nor more than fourteen [14] years, and disfranchised and rendered incapable of holding any office of trust or profit for any determinate period.” Acts 1905, eh. 169, §517, p. 584. Burns’ §48-1247 (1963 Repl.), supra, is as follows:
“No member of the common council or board of trustees, nor any officer, clerk, or deputy of such officer, or other employee of any city or incorporated town of this state, shall either directly or indirectly, be a party to, or in any manner interested in, any contract or agreement, either with such city or incorporated town, or with any officer, board, clerk, deputy or employee of such city or incorporated town, for any matter, cause or thing by which . . . any member thereof, or by any officer, board, clerk, deputy or employee of such city or incorporated town. Any contract in contravention of the foregoing provisions shall be absolutely void; and any person violating any of such provisions shall be fined not more than one thousand dollars '$1,000] and imprisoned in the state prison not less than one [1] year nor more than ten [10] years. . . .” Acts 1905, ch. 129, §46, p. 219; 1907, ch. 254, §1, p. 538, supra.
. Acts 1905, ch. 169, §504, p. 584.
. Acts 1881 (Spec. Sess.), ch. 38, §374, p. 240.
. See: Maddox v. State (1938), 213 Ind. 537, 541, 12 N. E. 2d 947, 948; 14 I. L. E., Grand Jury, §10, p. 561; 38 C. J. S., Grand Juries, §42(1), Notes 81-83.
. Rules 3-21, supra, to 3-25 of Supreme Court of Indiana.
. Acts 1881 (Spec. Sess.), ch. 38, §255, p. 240.

=== CASE 9738701 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:01:09.907242+00 ===

Concurring Opinion.
Jackson, J.
— I concur in the result only of the majority opinion.
This action was instituted by one Francis E. Lynch, Operating Director of the Northwest Indiana Crime Commission, Inc., an alleged Indiana not-for-profit corporation, filing a “Verified Petition for Leave to File an Information ...” with this Court. Leave was granted to file such information on June 25, 1962, and the same had been offered for filing by said Lynch on May 15, 1962. On May 28, 1962, informant offered to file what he or it designates as “Supplement To Information Tendered To Court May 15,1962.”
The alleged supplement is open to the charge made by defendant that it is shot through with hearsay, innuendo and opinion and was motivated by command from a political group of which informant was a member.
It is apparent that in the future, in order to avoid the complications present in the case at bar, actions in disbarment should be brought only by either the Attorney General or the Disciplinary Commission of this Court.
Note. — Reported in 198 N. E. 2d 381.

=== CASE 2217385 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:26.526138+00 ===

297 N.W.2d 275 (1980)
STATE of Minnesota, Respondent,
v.
Kenneth Reed FILIPI, Appellant.
No. 50025.
Supreme Court of Minnesota.
August 29, 1980.
*276 Louis D. Bass and John L. Holahan, Jr., Minneapolis, for appellant.
Warren Spannaus, Atty. Gen., St. Paul, Robert F. Carolan, County Atty., and Richard A. Enga, Asst. County Atty., Hastings, for respondent.
Heard by OTIS, ROGOSHESKE, and TODD, JJ., and considered and decided by the court en banc.
OTIS, Justice.
Defendant Kenneth Filipi was tried without a jury and convicted of unlawful possession, with intent to sell a schedule I controlled substance (marijuana), and unlawful possession of a schedule II controlled substance (cocaine). He here contends there was not probable cause to arrest him; that Minneapolis police had no authority to make the arrest in Dakota County; and that the court should have suppressed as evidence marijuana seized from a closed duffel bag in the locked trunk of defendant's automobile. We reverse the marijuana conviction and affirm the cocaine conviction.
Defendant's arrest was the product of a Minneapolis police department investigation of one Pinkney, who resided in St. Louis Park, a Minneapolis suburb. An undercover policeman had purchased marijuana from Pinkney in early 1978, and on April 4, 1978, another order was placed. Pinkney agreed to deliver the marijuana later that day.
After placing Pinkney's residence under surveillance, the police saw him drive a silver EL Camino pickup from his home to a Howard Johnson's Motel parking lot in Bloomington, where he met a party, matching defendant's description, in a late 1960s model tan Pontiac automobile. The officers observed what appeared to be a transfer of money and recorded the Pontiac's license number. Following the meeting the El Camino headed west on Interstate 494. The Pontiac was followed until it was lost in the Lakeville/Farmington area of Dakota County.
Pinkney returned to his home and contacted the undercover officer to arrange delivery of the marijuana. When the officer arrived to take delivery, he arrested Pinkney.
Pinkney then agreed to cooperate with the police by placing another order with his supplier. An officer dialed the number supplied, and Pinkney arranged for delivery of *277 ten pounds of marijuana in St. Paul at 3:45 that afternoon. Pinkney also informed police that his source, a man named Ken, lived in Lakeville with a man named David Chambers. The phone number supplied by Pinkney was listed to a David Chambers at a Lakeville address. A check of the license number showed that the Pontiac observed earlier was registered to defendant, Ken Filipi.
By 2:00 that afternoon Minneapolis policemen were in position to observe the Chambers residence in Lakeville. The Pontiac was parked in the driveway. Shortly after 3:00 defendant departed the house, placed a duffel bag in the trunk of the auto, and drove off. The policemen followed him for a short distance, then stopped and arrested him, purely coincidentally in front of the Eagan city police station. Defendant was taken into the station where he was advised of his rights and searched. The search yielded a cylinder containing cocaine.
Outside the station another officer, without defendant's permission, removed the keys from the Pontiac's ignition and opened the locked trunk. Inside was the closed duffel bag that defendant had earlier placed there. Police opened the bag and found several plastic garbage bags wrapped around a brick of marijuana.
Following these events the Dakota County sheriff's office was contacted. Pursuant to a warrant the Chambers residence was searched and more items were seized. All items seized were taken to the Minneapolis Police Department.
1. Defendant contends that police lacked probable cause to arrest him, primarily because the arrest was based on hearsay information and Pinkney was not a credible informant.
Probable cause to arrest exists when reasonable grounds for suspicion are accompanied by circumstances sufficiently strong in themselves to warrant a cautious person in believing the accused to be guilty of a crime. State v. Brazil, 269 N.W.2d 15 (Minn.1978).
Within prescribed limits hearsay may be considered in determining whether probable cause exists. Such information may be regarded where (1) the informant acquires his knowledge of the reported activity in a reliable manner, and (2) the police officer has a sound basis for believing that the informant is credible or that the information is otherwise reliable. State v. LaBarre, 292 Minn. 228, 235, 195 N.W.2d 435, 440 (1972). See also Spinelli v. United States, 393 U.S. 410, 415, 89 S.Ct. 584, 588, 21 L.Ed.2d 637 (1969); Aguilar v. Texas, 378 U.S. 108, 114, 84 S.Ct. 1509, 1514, 12 L.Ed.2d 723 (1964). Even where an informant is not credible, his information may be sufficiently reliable where it is supported by "corroborating factors [that] provide a substantial basis for crediting the informant's tip * * *." State v. Causey, 257 N.W.2d 288, 291 (Minn.1977).
There is no doubt that Pinkney came upon his information in a reliable manner  direct dealings with defendant. Moreover, whether or not Pinkney could properly be characterized as credible, independent information obtained prior to defendant's arrest corroborated the hearsay. See United States v. Harris, 403 U.S. 573, 91 S.Ct. 2075, 29 L.Ed.2d 723 (1971). For this reason the information supported a finding of probable cause.
2. Defendant also contends that his arrest was unlawful because it occurred in Dakota County, outside the jurisdiction of the Minneapolis police officers who arrested him.
The record furnishes no evidence that defendant was ever physically within the City of Minneapolis, much less that he committed any crime within the city. Defendant was arrested for a crime committed entirely outside the city and, therefore, outside the bailiwick of the arresting officers. These Minneapolis policemen were not pursuing a suspect who was fleeing their jurisdiction or had escaped from their custody, nor were they acting in obedience to a jurisdictional authority. Therefore, they had no police authority to arrest defendant outside their jurisdiction. Minn.Stat. *278 § 629.40 (1978).[1]See also State v. Mastrian, 285 Minn. 51, 54-55, 171 N.W.2d 695, 698-99 (1969), cert. denied, 397 U.S. 1049, 90 S.Ct. 1381, 25 L.Ed.2d 662 (1970).
Nevertheless, we find the arrest lawful. A police officer outside his jurisdiction is not completely stripped of the power to arrest. It has been stated:
Beyond his own bailiwick, ordinarily an officer has only the arrest powers of a private citizen, such as these may be, in the district where the arrest is made. Thus, if an arrest by a private citizen would be lawful under the existing circumstances, an arrest by an officer away from his own bailiwick would be lawful, otherwise not. This rule has been applied to arrests made by city policy officers outside the confines of their municipalities, and also to peace officers of one state operating in another.
E. Fisher, Laws of Arrest § 142 (1967) (footnotes omitted). We subscribe to that rule. See Smith v. Hubbard, 253 Minn. 215, 224, 91 N.W.2d 756, 764 (1958).
In this state the power of private persons to arrest is governed by Minn.Stat. § 629.37 (1978), which provides:
A private person may arrest another:
(1) For a public offense committed or attempted in his presence;
(2) When such person has committed a felony, although not in his presence; or
(3) When a felony has in fact been committed, and he has reasonable cause for believing the person arrested to have committed it.
In this case a felony had in fact been committed and the arresting persons had probable cause to believe that defendant committed it. This arrest, therefore, was within the statute and was one a private person would have been entitled to make.
Defendant, nevertheless, contends that because these policemen acted under color of their office, they should not be vested with the arrest authority of private persons. He relies on Collins v. State, 143 So.2d 700 (Fla.App.1962), where uniformed policemen outside their jurisdiction knocked on a motel door and were admitted by reason of their official position. Upon entering they saw a marijuana plant and arrested the occupant. The state argued that the arrest was proper because the policemen saw marijuana in plain view, which meant a felony was being committed in their presence and justified a citizens arrest. The arrest, however, was held unlawful because the police officers had established the prerequisite for a citizens arrest only by obtaining access to defendant's private living quarters under color and authority of their office and without a "valid basis in law for the intrusion." Id. at 703.
This case is not comparable. Here the police officers, while outside their jurisdiction, did not establish the basis for the private arrest by using incidents of their authority, e. g., badges and uniforms, to induce defendant to surrender protections he enjoyed against private citizens generally. The appearance of police authority entered the picture only after a valid basis for the arrest had been established.
While we note that it would have been preferable had these Minneapolis police officers informed jurisdictional authorities of their investigation, we nevertheless hold that the arrest was lawful as within the authority conferred on private persons by Minn.Stat. § 629.37 (1978).
3. Defendant finally contends that the warrantless seizure of marijuana from a *279 closed duffel bag taken from the locked trunk of his automobile was unconstitutional and that the evidence should have been suppressed. We agree.
The search at issue was conducted under color of police authority and the limits of the Fourth Amendment apply. The state contends that this warrantless search was justified by exigent circumstances and the so-called "automobile exception."[2] to the warrant requirement. The scope of that exception, however, has been recently limited by the Supreme Court in United States v. Chadwick, 433 U.S. 1, 97 S.Ct. 2476, 53 L.Ed.2d 538 (1977), and Arkansas v. Sanders, 442 U.S. 753, 99 S.Ct. 2586, 61 L.Ed.2d 235 (1979).
Both Chadwick and Sanders scrutinized warrantless searches of containers that were located in motor vehicles. Chadwick involved contraband seized from a locked footlocker that had been removed from an automobile trunk. Sanders involved marijuana seized from an unlocked suitcase in an automobile. In both cases probable cause existed, but the "automobile exception" was ruled inapplicable and the evidence was suppressed. These searches were outside the exception for two reasons. First, suitcases and footlockers are used as repositories of personal effects, and therefore, are surrounded by a greater expectation of privacy than a motor vehicle. Second, and perhaps more important, the Court held that exigent circumstances, the backbone of the automobile exception, normally disappear once the object to be searched is securely within police control and beyond the defendant's reach.[3] That the container was situated inside an automobile is not significant.
[T]he exigency of mobility must be assessed at the point immediately before the search  after the police have seized the object to be search and have it securely within their control. Once police have seized a suitcase, * * * the extent of its mobility is in no way affected by the place from which it was taken. Accordingly as a general rule there is no greater need for warrantless searches of luggage taken from automobiles than of luggage taken from other places.
Sanders, 442 U.S. at 763-64, 99 S.Ct. at 2593 (citations and footnotes omitted). In the same vein, the problems entailed in securing a suitcase, duffel bag, or other like container are significantly less than the burdens of securing a motor vehicle. Id. See also United States v. Calandrella, 605 F.2d 236 (6th Cir. 1979); United States v. Meier, 602 F.2d 253 (10th Cir. 1979); United States v. Johnson, 588 F.2d 147 (5th Cir. 1979).
The Chadwick/Sanders rule required that the evidence seized from the duffel bag be suppressed. Because this evidence was central to the conviction for possession of marijuana with intent to sell appellant is entitled to a new trial as to that charge.[4] However, the cocaine taken from defendant's person was seized in the course of a lawful search, incident to arrest. Moreover, the evidence of defendant's possession of cocaine was so overwhelming and the marijuana and cocaine charges so distinct that we are of the opinion and hold that the failure to suppress the marijuana as evidence was harmless error as to the cocaine conviction.
Affirmed in part, reversed in part.
AMDAHL, J., not having been a member of this court at the time of the argument and submission, took no part in the consideration or decision of this case.
NOTES
[1]  Minn.Stat. § 629.40 (1978) provides:
ARRESTS, ANYWHERE IN STATE.
Subdivision 1. In any case wherein any sheriff, deputy sheriff, police officer, marshal, constable, or peace officer may by law, either with or without a warrant, arrest any person for or upon a charge of any criminal offense committed without his jurisdiction, and the person to be arrested escapes from or is out of the county, city or town, the officer may pursue and apprehend the person to be arrested anywhere in this state.
Subd. 2. When any sheriff, deputy sheriff, police officer, marshal, constable, or peace officer shall, in obedience to the order of a court, or proper police authority, or in fresh pursuit as provided in subdivision 1, be outside of his jurisdiction he is serving in his regular line of duty as fully as though he was within his jurisdiction.
[2]  See generally Chambers v. Maroney, 399 U.S. 42, 90 S.Ct. 1975, 26 L.Ed.2d 419 (1970); Carroll v. United States, 267 U.S. 132, 45 S.Ct. 280, 69 L.Ed. 543 (1925); 2 W. LaFave, Search and Seizure § 7.2 (1978).
[3]  Other "exigent circumstances" may exist when there is reason to believe the container holds explosives or other such dangerous instrumentalities. See Sanders, 442 U.S. at 763 n. 11, 99 S.Ct. at 2593 n. 11; United States v. Johnson, 588 F.2d 147, 151 n. 5 (5th Cir. 1979).
[4]  See City of Moorhead v. Miller, 295 N.W.2d 548 (Minn.1980).

=== CASE 2217389 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:26.627664+00 ===

297 N.W.2d 175 (1980)
Willard Lynn DORIAN, Sr., As Guardian Ad Litem for Willard Lynn Dorian, Jr., a minor, and for all others similarly situated, Plaintiff and Appellant,
v.
William D. JOHNSON, Director, Bureau of Vital Statistics, State of South Dakota, in his official capacity; Judith K. Call, Secretary of Health, in her official capacity; and their agents, assigns, and successors in office, Defendants and Appellees.
No. 12751.
Supreme Court of South Dakota.
Considered on Briefs March 13, 1980.
Decided October 8, 1980.
*176 Todd A. Schweiger and Anita M. Remerowski of South Dakota Legal Services, Mission, for plaintiff and appellant.
Margaret Crew, Asst. Atty. Gen., Pierre, for defendants and appellees; Mark V. Meierhenry, Atty. Gen., Pierre, on brief.
WOLLMAN, Chief Justice.
FACTS
Plaintiff, Willard Lynn Dorian, Sr., appeals from the order denying his request for a writ of mandamus, a permanent injunction, and declaratory relief. We affirm.
Plaintiff is the guardian ad litem of Willard Lynn Dorian, Jr. William D. Johnson is the director of the Bureau of Vital Statistics (Bureau), South Dakota Department of Health.
Willard Lynn Dorian, Jr., was born March 3, 1976, to Amy Lou Respects Nothing, who was not married at the time of the conception or birth of the child. Amy Lou Respects Nothing named plaintiff as the child's father, but the birth certificate showed the child's last name as Respects Nothing, pursuant to SDCL 34-25-13.3.[1]
On May 4, 1977, plaintiff signed an affidavit acknowledging the paternity of Willard Lynn Dorian, Jr. Shortly thereafter, the paternity affidavit was submitted to the Bureau with the mother's consent and a request that the birth certificate reflect the acknowledgment of paternity and show the child's last name as Dorian.
The Bureau subsequently issued an amended birth certificate. A line had been drawn through Willard Lynn Dorian, Jr.'s original surname of "Respects Nothing" and the name "Dorian" typed in above the delineated words, as required by ARSD 44:09:05:07 and 09.[2] The word "amended" appears at the top of the certificate.
Plaintiff then filed a class action suit in circuit court, contending that the Bureau had unlawfully discriminated in amending the birth certificate rather than issuing a *177 new certificate. Plaintiff claims that the amended certificate calls attention to the fact that Willard Lynn Dorian, Jr., is illegitimate.
I
The first contention on appeal is that South Dakota law imposes a duty upon the state to issue a new birth certificate instead of an amended certificate when paternity of the child is acknowledged by affidavit. We do not agree.
The South Dakota Legislature has enacted statutes governing vital records and the registration, amendment, and certification of births, deaths, fetal deaths, burials, marriages and divorces. SDCL ch. 34-25. These statutes provide for only two instances in which a new birth certificate is to be issued.[3] The first instance is upon legitimation of the child and is governed by SDCL 34-25-15:
In cases of legitimation, the state department of health, upon receipt of proof of the marriage of the parents of an illegitimate child together with an affidavit of paternity signed by both parents of the child, shall prepare a new certificate of birth in the new name of the legitimated child.
The second instance in which a new birth certificate is issued is upon adoption. SDCL 34-25-16 provides:
Within ten days after the filing of every original, amended or annulled decree of adoption, the clerk of courts shall forward to the department such information necessary to establish a new certificate of birth on a form prepared by the department.
The legislature did, however, give the secretary of health the authority to adopt regulations under which a certificate could be amended. This authority is granted to the secretary of health in SDCL 34-25-51, which provides in part:
A certificate or record registered under this chapter may be amended in accordance with regulations adopted by the secretary of health. ...
We conclude that while adoption or legitimation by marriage results in the issuance of a new certificate, other certificates can only be amended, as prescribed by regulations adopted by the secretary of health.
The rules of statutory construction require that the purpose of a statute or statutes is to be determined from a reading of the act as a whole. State v. Douglas, 70 S.D. 203, 16 N.W.2d 489 (1944). Likewise, "this court will not enlarge a statute beyond its face where the statutory terms are clear and unambiguous in meaning and do not lead to an absurd or unreasonable conclusion." Ogle v. Circuit Ct., Tenth Jud. Circuit, 89 S.D. 18, 21, 227 N.W.2d 621, 623 (1975). Furthermore, words and phrases should be given their plain meaning and effect. Board of Regents v. Carter, 89 S.D. 40, 228 N.W.2d 621 (1975).
Here, the legislature has made a distinction between a new certificate and an amended certificate. The use of the plain meaning of these words does not lead to an unreasonable conclusion. Accordingly, we hold that the Bureau did not err in issuing an amended birth certificate.
II
The second issue is whether the prohibition of the issuance of a new birth certificate to an illegitimate child upon acknowledgment of paternity is violative of the due process and equal protection clauses of the United States and South Dakota Constitutions. We hold that it is not.
This Court has in the past utilized a two-part test in determining whether the equal protection clause has been violated. City of Aberdeen v. Meidinger, 89 S.D. 412, 233 N.W.2d 331 (1975). See also Morrill v. Wollman, 271 N.W.2d 356 (S.D.1978). The first part of this test is "whether the statute does set up arbitrary classifications among various persons subject to it." City *178 of Aberdeen v. Meidinger, supra, 89 S.D. at 415, 233 N.W.2d at 333. The second part of the test is the application of the appropriate standard of review to this arbitrary classification.
In the case at bar, we do not find it necessary to apply the second part of the test. We conclude that the statutes involved here do not set up arbitrary classifications among various persons subject to the statute.
"[I]n order to subject a law to any form of review under the equal protection guarantee one must be able to demonstrate that the law classifies persons in some manner." Nowak, Rotunda & Young, Constitutional Law, p. 527 (1978). In this case plaintiff contends that the state's policy of amending birth certificates distinguishes illegitimate children from legitimate children and certain legitimated children. Plaintiff does not contend that the applicable statutes on their face classify or distinguish between legitimate and illegitimate children. Instead, plaintiff contends that in reality the statutes impose a significant burden on an illegitimate child. Plaintiff contends that an amended birth certificate carries with it the "stigma of illegitimacy" for the rest of the illegitimate's life because it identifies the child as an illegitimate on the face of the amended birth certificate.
There are, however, a number of circumstances under which a birth certificate is amended. All mistakes on an original birth certificate are corrected by amending. Additionally, SDCL 34-25-14 provides that children of unknown parents are to be named by the examining physician. This birth certificate might later be amended to reflect the parents' name. Finally, the birth certificate of a legitimate child born to a married woman would be amended to reflect the paternity of a third party. All of these situations would result in an amended rather than a new birth certificate.
As plaintiff points out, however, these changes are somewhat different than those changes where the father acknowledges paternity of an illegitimate child. These changes, plaintiff contends, are easily distinguishable from the changes on an amended birth certificate of the type issued in the present case.
Plaintiff concedes, however, that there is one situation where an amended birth certificate would have the same appearance as the one in issue here. A situation might arise where the child of a married couple is given the mother's maiden surname. The parents later decide to change the child's name to the father's surname. On the face of the certificate, the amendment would look identical to the one complained of in this case and would not in and of itself indicate legitimacy or illegitimacy.
Furthermore, an illegitimate child can have a birth certificate that on its face would indicate that the child is legitimate. Under SDCL 34-25-13.3, the child of an unmarried mother can be given the surname of the father if an affidavit of paternity is submitted upon the birth of the child. Yet under South Dakota law, this child is still illegitimate. See SDCL 25-5-5.
Examination of the applicable South Dakota law, then, establishes that not all children with amended birth certificates are illegitimate. Second, not all illegitimate children have amended birth certificates. It follows that legitimacy or illegitimacy cannot be determined from the face of the birth certificate. The state's statutory scheme involved here neither classifies on the basis of illegitimacy nor treats illegitimate children differently than legitimate children. "Enactments of the legislature should be upheld unless they are clearly and unmistakably unconstitutional." Matter of D. T., 89 S.D. 590, 595, 237 N.W.2d 166, 169 (1975). We conclude, therefore, that the state's statutory scheme does not deny equal protection.
Plaintiff contends that the state's policy with respect to the issuance of amended birth certificates is invalid because it falls the heaviest on a protected class, citing Lane v. Wilson, 307 U.S. 268, 59 S.Ct. 872, 83 L.Ed. 1281 (1939). We do not find this argument persuasive. We have already noted that there is no discriminatory classification. *179 The statutes and regulations involved here affect a number of situations where a birth certificate is amended.
Accordingly, the order appealed from is affirmed.
All the Justices concur.
NOTES
[1]  SDCL 34-25-13.3 provides:
If the mother was not married either at the time of conception or birth, the child's surname shall be shown on the birth certificate as the legal surname of the mother at the time of birth unless an affidavit of acknowledgment of paternity signed by both parents is received stating the surname of the child to be that of the father.
[2]  ARSD 44:09:05:07 requires that the Bureau, upon acknowledgment of paternity, amend the certificate to show such paternity and, upon request of the parents, amend the certificate to reflect the change of the child's surname to that of the father. ARSD 44:09:05:09 provides in part:
Certificates of birth ... may be amended by the state department of health in the following manner:
(1) Completing the item in any case where the item was left blank on the existing certificate;
(2) Drawing a single line through the item to be amended and inserting the correct data. The line drawn through the original entry must not obliterate such entry.
[3]  We make no ruling on whether legitimation and adoption under SDCL 25-6-1 requires the issuance of a new birth certificate.

=== CASE 9738702 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:01:15.20308+00 ===

ANDERST, Circuit Judge.
This is an action for malicious prosecution. It originates from a mental illness proceeding initiated by the appellee against the appellant. From a jury verdict in favor of the appellant, the trial court entered a judgment n. o. v. We reverse.
Appellant and appellee had known each other for several years on a social basis. When appellant and his wife incurred marital difficulties, appellant’s wife and family moved in with appellee and his family. Altercations occurred between appellant and appellee involving verbal abuse, threats and force. Several argumentative and threatening telephone conversations were also held between appellant and appellee and his family members.
Appellee, a practicing attorney, made an appointment to see the deputy state’s attorney in charge of mental illness hearings to discuss bringing an action against appellant. Appellee disclosed to her the same facts and information he testified to at trial. After their meeting, the deputy state’s attorney prepared an application for emergency treatment alleging appellant to be mentally ill, which was signed by appel-lee under oath. Upon receipt of the appli- ■ cation, the chairman of the county board of mental illness issued an emergency warrant for detention. Appellant was detained and placed in custody. Several weeks later following a hearing the proceeding was dismissed.
Appellant then instituted suit against ap-pellee for malicious prosecution. The case came on regularly for trial. All issues were submitted to a jury after the court had properly instructed them as to the law. The jury returned a general verdict in favor of appellant and against appellee in the sum of $30,000. Appellee moved for judgment notwithstanding the verdict, which after a hearing, was granted, the trial court entering a judgment dismissing appellant’s complaint.
Appellant has raised the following issues on appeal: (1) The trial court erred in granting judgment notwithstanding the verdict because the question of probable cause was properly an issue for the jury; (2) The trial court erred in not allowing appellant to amend his pleadings to conform to the proof by adding exemplary damages; and (3) The trial court erred in granting a conditional order for new trial, since the damages awarded, properly considered, are not excessive.
Appellee argues the trial court was correct in ruling the question of probable cause was a question of law rather than fact, especially in this case where appellee also had the defense of advice of counsel and the protection of SDCL 27A-9 2.1 At first glance it would appear that we have arrived at irreconcilable opinions concerning this issue in the past. However, a careful review of the cases shows that we have followed an established distinction. In our first decision on the issue, Jackson v. Bell, 5 S.D. 257, 264 65, 58 N.W. 671, 673-74 (1894), we set out the following general rule:
The question of probable cause is a mixed question of law and fact, and when such a defense is alleged, and evidence has been offered in relation thereto, its credibility is to be considered and determined by the jury, under proper instructions as to what facts, if they exist, constitute or fail to constitute probable cause; and when, as in this case, the defendant’s belief of the facts relied on by the plaintiff to prove a want of probable cause is essential, it is always a question of fact to be submitted to the jury for determination.
We followed with Krause v. Bishop, 18 S.D. 298, 300, 100 N.W. 434, 435 (1904):
Whether or not the facts, when so undisputed, constitute probable cause, or *805whether or not, where the defendant acted upon the advice of counsel, after a full statement of the facts to him, and there is no evidence that the defendant acted maliciously or in bad faith, other than proof that the plaintiff was acquitted, the defendant is protected, are questions of law for the court.
In Malloy v. Chicago, M. & St. P. Ry. Co., 34 S.D. 330, 148 N.W. 598 (1914), we held that the trial court was correct in ruling on the question of probable cause where the record failed to reveal any substantial conflicts in the testimony. Next, in Wren v. Rehfeld, 37 S.D. 201, 204, 157 N.W. 323, 324 (1916), we said, “[W]hen there is a substantial conflict in the evidence as to the facts, then the questions of probable cause and of acting under advice of counsel are for the jury.” This was followed by Pierce v. Lyons, 42 S.D. 543, 176 N.W. 521 (1020), wherein we held that if there were' conflicts in the evidence, probable cause was a question of fact for the jury.
From these early cases, two lines developed, one holding it a question of fact for the jury, Huntley v. Harberts, 264 N.W.2d 497 (S.D. 1978); Kirby v. First Nat. Bank of Vermillion, 64 S.D. 404, 266 N.W. 883 (1936); Larsen v. Johnson, 47 S.D. 202, 197 N.W. 230 (1924); Braathen v. Weller, 44 S.D. 118, 182 N.W. 637 (1921); Larsen v. Johnson, 43 S.D. 223, 178 N.W. 876 (1920); the other holding it a question of law, McIntyre v. Meyer, 81 S.D. 417, 136 N.W.2d 351 (1965); Kunz v. Johnson, 74 S.D. 577, 57 N.W.2d 116 (1953); Brown v. Keyes, 54 S.D. 596, 223 N.W. 819 (1929). The distinction between these two lines of cases is that if the evidence or facts to be drawn therefrom are clear and undisputed, the question is one of law, but if the evidence or the inferences to be drawn therefrom are disputed, it becomes a question for the jury. In cases with undisputed or admitted facts, the question of probable cause is one entirely for the court to determine, but if the facts are in conflict and reasonable minds could reach different conclusions, it is for the jury’s determination after proper instruction by the court. The question of probable cause may be one of law or one of fact, depending upon the circumstances in each case.
Advice of counsel does not necessarily shield a person against a charge of malicious prosecution. Huntley v. Harberts, supra. To constitute a good defense, the advice of counsel must have been sought in good faith, from honest motives, and for good purposes, after a full and fair disclosure of all facts within the accuser’s knowledge and information, and the advice received must have been followed in good faith. Jackson v. Bell, supra; Kunz v. Johnson, supra. If the facts are undisputed, it is a question of law, Kunz v. Johnson, supra, but when the facts are in dispute, it is a jury question. Wren v. Rehfeld, supra.
Likewise, immunity granted by statute is not absolute. A malicious prosecution is one that is begun in malice, without probable cause to believe it can succeed, and which finally ends in failure. Kunz v. Johnson, supra. As we said in Krause v. Bishop, supra, the law must be enforced; human agencies must be employed for that purpose; and the law wisely protects all persons who act in good faith and upon reasonable presumptions. The question whether or not a person acted maliciously in starting a prosecution and causing the arrest of another is a question of fact to be determined by the jury. Braathen v. Weller, supra.
Both parties agree there were material conflicts in the facts presented. The trial court was correct in the first instance in submitting the questions of probable cause and the defenses of advice of counsel and protection of statute to the jury for their determination after properly instructing them. No useful purposes would be served by our commenting on or setting forth the evidence, which we think is sufficient to sustain the jury’s verdict.
After the parties had submitted their evidence and before settlement of the instructions, appellant moved to amend his complaint to conform to the evidence by adding to his prayer for relief a claim for *806exemplary damages.2 The trial court denied the motion to amend as not being timely. The allowance of an amendment to the pleadings is within the sound discretion of the trial court, Leggett v. Dinneen, 40 S.D. 336, 167 N.W. 235 (1918), arid unless there has been an abuse of such discretion, this Court will not interfere with the exercise of that discretion. Edwards v. Chicago, M. & St. P. Ry. Co., 21 S.D. 504, 110 N.W. 832 (1907). The test for allowing an amendment under SDCL 15- 6-15(b) is whether the opposing party will be prejudiced by the amendment; i. e., did he have a fair opportunity to litigate the issue, and could he have offered any additional evidence if the case had been tried on the different issue. American Property Services v. Barringer, 256 N.W.2d 887 (S.D. 1977). We find no abuse of discretion by the trial court in denying the motion to amend.
The trial court, after ordering the judgment notwithstanding the verdict under the provisions of SDCL 15-6-J)(c), further ordered that if the judgment n. o. v. were thereafter vacated or reversed, a new trial would be granted on the grounds that the damages were excessive and appeared to have been given under the influence of passion or prejudice.
A person who has been prosecuted maliciously and without probable cause may recover for the expense to which he has been put as well as for the injury to his feelings or personal mortification. Jackson v. Bell, supra. The instructions of the court allowed the jury to award damages based upon appellant’s (1) humiliation, embarrassment and mental anguish; and (2) expenses of defending himself against the mental illness petition. The evidence, taken in the light most favorable to appellant, shows actual out-of-pocket damages in excess of $4,000. Appellant was also unable to sleep; he was unable to concentrate on his work, which suffered; and he was extremely distraught. There being no accurate means of measuring the detriment suffered by the victim in actions of this character, the law from necessity leaves the assessment of damages to the unbiased judgment and common sense of the jury, according it broad discretion. Mental suffering resulting from such , a wrongful act and from the disgrace attending it is properly the subject of compensatory damages, which are largely within the discretion of the jury under proper instruction by the court. This Court will seldom interfere with a'verdict in such cases unless all of the circumstances demonstrate that the jury acted under some improper influence, bias, passion, or prejudice. Eller v. Lord, 36 S.D. 377, 154 N.W. 816 (1915). Damages, to be so excessive as to warrant a new trial, must be so excessive as to appear, beyond all measure, unreasonable and outrageous, and such as manifestly show the jury was actuated by passion, partiality, prejudice or corruption. Schuler v. City of Mobridge, 44 S.D. 488, 184 N.W. 281 (1921). Upon the record before us, we cannot find this verdict excessive nor that the jury in rendering it was actuated by passion, prejudice, or improper influence.
The judgment and order appealed from are reversed, and the trial court is directed to reinstate the jury verdict.
HENDERSON and FOSHEIM, JJ., concur.
WOLLMAN, C. J., and MORGAN, J., dissent.
ANDERST, Circuit Judge, sitting for DUNN, J., disqualified.
. Repealed by 1977 S.D. Sess. Laws ch. 189, § 126.
. This motion was made under the provisions of SDCL 15-6- 15(b).

=== CASE 2217403 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:26.908843+00 ===

48 Ill. App. 2d 194 (1964)
198 N.E.2d 705
Earl Sudduth, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
Board of Fire and Police Commissioners of the City of Rockford, Illinois, Defendant-Appellee.
Gen. No. 11,835.
Illinois Appellate Court  Second District.
April 29, 1964.
Rehearing denied May 27, 1964.
*195 Berry & Simmons, of Rockford, for appellant.
William E. Collins, of Rockford, for appellee.
MORAN, J.
Appellant, a police officer with some nine and one-half years service on the Rockford police department, was tried by the Rockford Board of Fire and Police Commissioners on various charges of misconduct. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Board discharged Appellant from the force. He then filed a suit in the Circuit Court of Winnebago County under the Administrative Review Act seeking to reverse the order of the Board. The Circuit Court affirmed the Board's order of discharge and this appeal results.
In our view, the principal point in this appeal is Appellant's contention that the order of discharge was based upon alleged acts of misconduct other than those set forth in the written charges against him, and we shall discuss that contention first.
*196 The pertinent section of the Cities and Villages Act, Ill Rev Stats 1961, c 24, sec 10-2-17 provides that:
"... no officer or member of the fire or police department of any municipality ... who has held that position for more than one year prior to the date this Division 2 becomes effective in that municipality, ... shall be removed or discharged except for cause, upon written charges, and after an opportunity to be heard in his own defense. These charges shall be investigated by the board of fire and police commissioners, and in case an officer or member is found guilty, the board may remove or discharge him, or may suspend him not exceeding 10 days without pay."
[1] The charges in these administrative proceedings need not be drawn with the same precision required of pleadings in judicial actions, Joyce v. City of Chicago, 216 Ill. 466, 471, 472, 75 N.E. 184 (1905), although the charge must be sufficiently clear and specific to allow the preparation of a defense. Schyman v. Department of Registration & Education, 9 Ill. App. 2d 504, 510-512, 133 NE2d 551 (1st Dist 1956). Moreover, as the language of the statute itself implies, "The removal can only be for a cause set forth in (the) written charges against the officer..." City of Rockford v. Compton, 115 Ill. App. 406, 415 (2d Dist 1904); Cartan v. Gregory, 329 Ill. App. 307, 321, 322, 68 NE2d 193 (1st Dist 1946).
Appellant was served with the following written charges by the Chief of Police prior to the hearing:
"The charges are, one, conduct unbecoming an officer and detrimental to the police force. Second, gross inefficiency and incompetency in carrying out duties. Third, absence from duty without leave. Specific instances are as follows: (1) On September 25th and 26th, 1962 you failed to report *197 for duty. (2) On September 25th, 1962 you attempted to commit suicide by taking an overdose of seconal tablets. (3) On numerous occasions you have been guilty of disobedience, inattention to duty and negligence involving the use of firearms. The date of your suspension was September 25, 1962."
As the hearing opened, the charge of failing to report for duty on September 25 was dismissed by agreement, it appearing that Appellant had not been scheduled to work that day.
The hearing before the Board took place on November 29, 1962, and Appellant was represented by counsel. The evidence pertinent to this appeal was, in substance, as follows:
Appellant, a divorced man, awoke with a headache the morning of September 24, 1962. He was not required to work that day nor the following day, September 25. He was not due back at work until 2:30 p.m. on September 26. At about 9:00 a.m. on September 24, Appellant telephoned a Mrs. Clausen, a married woman whom he had known for some years, and asked her to come over to his apartment. She did so, and both she and Appellant testified that they remained at his apartment, engaged in conversation, until about 11:00 a.m. Thereafter, they visited various taverns in the City of Rockford, where Appellant consumed an undetermined amount of alcoholic beverages. Appellant's headache persisted throughout the day, according to his testimony, and several bartenders and tavern patrons testified on his behalf that he did complain of a headache on various occasions that day. He was seen to take pills or capsules from time to time, the exact number, again, a matter of some uncertainty. He testified that he was taking two types of pills for his headaches  second, a pink capsule, and fiorinal, a white tablet. Appellant admits that he took a number *198 of fiorinal pills on September 24, but states that he does not remember whether he took any seconal that day.
Mrs. Clausen testified that she and Sudduth went to their separate residences at about 1:15 a.m. on September 25. Shortly thereafter, appellant telephoned her, informing her that he still had his headache and mentioning that he either had taken or was going to take some more pills. She returned to his apartment, noticed that he looked a bit dizzy and eventually drove him to a hospital.
Appellant's own recollection of the events of September 24-25 was somewhat sketchy. He testified that he was in a "partial blackout" from about 2:00 p.m. on September 24 until he finally went home at about 1:15 a.m. the following morning. In fact, his "blackout" during that period seems almost complete. He did not remember all of the drinks he had and had only a faint recollection of the last tavern he visited, although the evidence indicates he was there for six or seven hours. He testified that he had no recollection of leaving this last tavern, nor of going home, nor of telephoning Mrs. Clausen and seeing her again at his apartment. His next recollection after his faint remembrance of the last tavern is that of waking up in the hospital on September 27, three days later.
Appellant testified that he purchased two bottles of seconal, each containing 100 capsules, about a week and one half before September 24. He stated that his mother had been taking seconal for years, and that he purchased these two bottles for her, because her supply was running low. He stated that he did not purchase these capsules for himself. His mother was out of town when he bought them and did not return until September 27.
Appellant first testified that he purchased these seconal capsules for his mother pursuant to a prescription she had for them. Upon further inquiry it developed *199 that his mother's prescription was some years old and was for thirty capsules, not 200. The purchase was made by appellant from one, Hall, a fellow police officer, who was also a registered pharmacist and worked as such on a part-time basis. However, Hall was given no prescription for the seconal, and the capsules he sold Appellant were obtained by him from a wholesale drug house. This transaction between Sudduth and Hall took place at the police station. Hall, called as a rebuttal witness by the City, testified that he thought the capsules were for Sudduth's mother. He was not asked when the sale to Appellant had taken place.
Appellant testified that he had obtained seconal capsules from Hall on two or three previous occasions during 1961 and 1962. No doctor ever prescribed seconal for Appellant. He stated that he has had headaches for a number of years, and that he has been taking seconal since 1957 or 1958. He denied, however, that he ever purchased any for his own use. All purchases, he says, were for his mother.
Appellant testified that he has had "blackouts" of this kind on two or three prior occasions. He has never seen a doctor about it. He testified that, "Sometimes when I take a half pill it happens." (From the context, Appellant apparently was referring to seconal.) He then retracted his previous testimony somewhat, saying that he had never really blacked out, "except sometimes I don't remember some things."
Mrs. Clausen found one bottle of the seconal capsules at Appellant's apartment when she responded to his call early on September 25, and she delivered that bottle to the hospital. Another bottle was found in Appellant's pocket at the hospital. One of Appellant's witnesses was Dr. Paul Johnson, a Rockford physician and surgeon of some twenty-eight years experience, who had been called to attend Appellant at the hospital. He testified that he saw Appellant at about 4:30 *200 a.m. on September 25, and found him to be incoherent, violent on occasion to the extent that he had to be restrained, and smelling of alcohol. It was his impression that Appellant was under the influence of alcohol. He also saw the two bottles of grain and one half seconal capsules. He testified, on direct examination, that a count had been made of the capsules in the two seconal bottles, and eight capsules were missing from one bottle, six from the other. He testified, in response to a question by Appellant's attorney, that in his opinion a combination of alcohol and seconal "... is a bad combination. Both are depressants individually. If you drink enough alcohol you will go into a coma. If one drinks (sic) enough seconal he will go into a coma. Combine the two and you have a peculiar behavior many times. There will be excitation, so much so it is a well known fact that there are some people who like that combination. It gives them excitation and they become violent."
Appellant's stomach was pumped, but no analysis of the contents was made. Dr. Johnson testified that a dosage of fourteen seconal tablets would result in a deep coma, or possibly death, if the stomach were not pumped.
Dr. Johnson's initial diagnosis was "delirium induced by alcohol and barbiturates." Appellant was hospitalized four and one-half days and was in restraint for about the first 36 hours. The hospital records showed that Appellant was admitted at 3:00 a.m. on September 25 and discharged the afternoon of September 29. Dr. Johnson's final diagnosis was the same as his admitting diagnosis, and he testified that, as of the date of the hearing, nothing had happened to change his opinion.
Appellant's testimony concerning the number of pills and capsules he took during this eventful period of September 24-25 is extremely vague. At one point he *201 testified that he did not know whether he had taken any seconal capsules at all during the period in question. Whether the mystery is attributable to the "blackout" or not is unclear. In any event, Appellant does not deny that he took seconal on September 24-25, and, from a review of the entire record, we believe the conclusion that he did take a sufficient quantity of seconal to induce the "delirium" referred to by Dr. Johnson is not against the manifest weight of the evidence. Appellant attempted to account for the 14 missing capsules with the explanation that he had taken four capsules prior to September 24, and that his mother, upon her return from her vacation on September 27, had found six more capsules on the floor of his apartment. His mother did not testify, nor was any reason offered for her failure to do so. No capsules had been found by police Captain Pirello who searched Appellant's apartment in company with Mrs. Clausen the morning of September 25, and it appears that the apartment was unoccupied thereafter until the alleged discovery by Appellant's mother on September 27.
Joe Carsolini, a registered pharmacist, called as a witness by the City, testified that seconal is a barbiturate used as a sedative. It cannot legally be sold without a prescription.
Appellant testified that he had not attempted to commit suicide. Dr. Christa Newton, a psychiatrist, called as a witness on his behalf, testified that she interviewed Appellant for fifteen minutes on October 3, 1962, and that in her opinion, based on that interview, Appellant had not in the preceding one or two weeks suffered from any illness involving suicidal tendencies.
The Board admitted into evidence, over Appellant's objection, a copy of the Board's minutes dated May 5, 1961, and a copy of a letter written by the Board to *202 Appellant, dated May 6, 1961. The minutes read as follows:
"... it was resolved that Officer Earl Sudduth is guilty of the charges filed against him by Chief of Police Thomas P. Boustead, namely; guilty of conduct unbecoming an officer and detrimental to the service; gross inefficiency and incompetency in carrying out duties and that said Officer Earl Sudduth be suspended from the Rockford Police Department without pay for a period of ten days commencing May 6, 1961.
"It was further resolved that the secretary be directed to send a letter to Officer Earl Sudduth advising him of said decision and that a copy of said letter be attached hereto and made a part of this record."
The Board's letter to Appellant read:
"You are hereby notified that the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners have found you guilty of the following charges presented on April 19, 1961:
"Guilty of conduct unbecoming an officer and detrimental to the service; gross inefficiency and incompetency in carrying out duties.
"You are further notified that you are hereby suspended from the Rockford Police Department commencing May 6, 1961 for a period of ten (10) days without pay.
"This is to advise you that you will not be entitled to any back pay during the time of your suspension by Chief of Police, Thomas P. Boustead, which commenced April 4, 1961 or during the time of suspension by the Board of Fire and Police *203 Commissioners which commenced April 8, 1961."
The order of the Board in the instant case, dated December 3, 1962, is as follows:
"The Board finds Officer Sudduth guilty of conduct unbecoming an officer and detrimental to the police force, in that on September 24 and 25, 1962, while in company with a married woman, not his wife, he visited various taverns in the City of Rockford indulging in the excessive use of intoxicating liquors and administered to himself without a prescription a habit forming hypnotic drug called, Seconal, as a result of which he had to be hospitalized and physically restrained because of delirium induced by alcohol and drugs, so that he was unfit for duty, it appearing that he had, on a previous occasion, failed to report for duty because of the excessive use of barbiturates and had for some years been given to the use of barbiturates to ease the pain of alleged headaches, though no physician had prescribed their use and, it further appearing that this same officer on April 19, 1961 had negligently and carelessly discharged a loaded pistol at police headquarters endangering the life of another officer for which he was on May 6, 1961 suspended for ten days by this Board.
"It is, Therefore, Ordered:
"That Policeman Earl Sudduth, be, and he is hereby discharged and dismissed from the Rockford Police Force."
We come now to the question of whether the Appellant has been discharged on grounds other than those set forth in the charges. A point by point comparison of the findings and the charges will be helpful.
*204 It will be noted that the Board's findings commence with the statement that it "finds Officer Sudduth guilty of conduct unbecoming an officer and detrimental to the police force ..." and that this same general language is found in the opening portion of the written charges. The City does not contend on this appeal that an officer could properly be brought to trial upon a general charge of "conduct unbecoming an officer and detrimental to the police force," without a more detailed specification, or that an order of the Board discharging an officer on such general grounds, without specific findings, could be sustained. See Farmer v. Civil Service Commission of Chicago, 329 Ill. App. 326, 68 NE2d 193 (1st Dist Abst 1946), holding that discharge of an officer based on a mere general finding that he was "guilty of conduct unbecoming a police officer" was a nullity, since the officer was entitled to know the facts upon which his discharge was based.
The findings go on to recite that on September 24 and 25, 1962
"... while in company with a married woman, not his wife ..."
which we must ignore, since none of it is contained in the written charges. Cartan v. Gregory, supra; City of Rockford v. Compton, supra. The next portion of the findings recites that:
"... he visited various taverns in the City of Rockford indulging in the excessive use of intoxicating liquors and administered to himself without a prescription a habit forming hypnotic drug called, Seconal, as a result of which he had to be hospitalized and physically restrained because of delirium induced by alcohol and drugs ..."
*205 The only specific charge to which this finding might relate is the allegation that,
"On September 25th, 1962, you attempted to commit suicide by an overdose of Seconal tablets."
That there is a variance between a charge that Appellant attempted to commit suicide by an overdose of seconal, and a finding that put himself in a hospital in a violent state of delirium due to seconal and alcohol, is obvious. The question we have to answer, however, is not whether a technical distinction exists, but whether the Appellant has been denied substantial justice.
Faced with a charge that he attempted suicide by means of seconal, Appellant was obviously on notice that he was going to be confronted with evidence that he took seconal, and that it had ill effects upon him. We believe he was also on notice that evidence of his consumption of alcohol on the occasion in question would be presented, and that the alcohol he did consume had something to do with his physical condition during the period involved. Appellant called as his own witness  out of order and before the City had rested  Dr. Johnson, who testified that Appellant's condition at the time in question was delirium due to a combination of seconal and alcohol. We think the Board's finding that Appellant put himself in the hospital in a condition of delirium, due in part to the use of seconal, is within the general scope of the original charge of attempted suicide by means of seconal. This is not a matter of the Board having gone beyond the charge, and having found the Appellant guilty of some conduct more serious than or substantially different from that charged. If analogies are helpful, we think that this particular finding of the Board is somewhat akin to a conviction on a lesser included offense, such as a manslaughter verdict on a murder *206 charge. See 21 ILP, Indictments and Informations, sec 131. See also Hayes v. Civil Service Commission of Chicago, 348 Ill. App. 146, 108 NE2d 505 (1st Dist 1952), where a charge that a Chicago policeman violated a department rule against outside employment by engaging in the tavern business, without specifying that such conduct also constituted a violation of the state law prohibiting law enforcement officers from engaging in the tavern business, was broad enough to justify a finding that the policeman did engage in such business "contrary to law." The Court observed that, "In our view there was no necessity of a specific charge of the violation of the Dram Shop Act since the charges contained allegations of facts which were sufficient to apprise plaintiff of all the matters alleged against him." 348 Ill App at 150, 151, 108 NE2d at 507. Similarly, we feel that the charge against Appellant that he attempted suicide by means of an overdose of seconal was sufficient to apprise him of the entire factual situation he was required to meet.
The Board's finding against Appellant continues:
"... so that he was unfit for duty ..."
It is true that the charge does not expressly allege, in terms, that Appellant was "unfit for duty." It does allege, however, that on September 25, he attempted suicide by taking an overdose of seconal, and that he "failed to report for duty" on September 26. Appellant knew prior to the hearing that he had been due to report for work at 2:30 p.m. on September 26; he knew that he had failed to report at that time; and he also knew that the reason he had failed to report was that he was occupying a hospital bed, still delirious from the effects of the alcohol and seconal. Under these circumstances we think the language of the *207 charge gave Appellant ample notice that he would be confronted with evidence that he was, in fact, unfit for duty, and the finding of the Board in this regard does not go beyond the substance and reasonable import of the charge.
The finding of the Board continues:
"... it appearing that he had, on a previous occasion, failed to report for duty because of the excessive use of barbiturates and had for some years been given to the use of barbiturates to ease the pain of alleged headaches, though no physician had prescribed their use ..."
We see nothing in the charge that would put Appellant on notice that his past use of barbiturates was to be in issue, let alone a ground of his discharge, and accordingly, this portion of the Board's findings cannot be used to support the order of discharge.
The final portion of the Board's findings reads as follows:
"... and, it further appearing that this same officer on April 19, 1961, had negligently and carelessly discharged a loaded pistol at police headquarters endangering the life of another officer for which he was on May 6, 1961, suspended for ten days by this board."
The charge recites that "On numerous occasions you have been guilty of disobedient, inattention to duty and negligence involving the use of firearms." We do not find it necessary to decide whether this portion of the charge is sufficient to support the Board's finding relating to the firearms incident of April 19, 1961, because, as we will point out later in this opinion, there was no evidence to support this portion of the Board's finding.
*208 We proceed now to a consideration of Appellant's next contention  that the findings of the Board are against the manifest weight of the evidence. Appellant concedes that the Circuit Court was authorized to set aside the findings of the administrative agency only if they were against the manifest weight of the evidence, and that this Court has no greater right. Adamek v. Civil Service Commission, 17 Ill. App. 2d 11, 17, 149 NE2d 466 (1st Dist 1958). And, in order to reach the conclusion that a particular finding is against the manifest weight of the evidence, a court must be satisfied that "an opposite conclusion is clearly evident." Kelley v. Civil Service Commission, 31 Ill. App. 2d 115, 117, 175 NE2d 630 (1st Dist 1961); Arboit v. Gateway Transp. Co., 15 Ill. App. 2d 500, 507, 146 NE2d 582 (2d Dist 1957); Ritter v. Hattesberg, 14 Ill. App. 2d 548, 555, 145 NE2d 119 (2d Dist 1957); Niman v. Pecatonica Livestock Exchange, 13 Ill. App. 2d 144, 151, 141 NE2d 327 (2d Dist 1957). Confining our inquiry to those findings which we have held to be fairly within the written charges, the question is, then, whether conclusions opposite to those findings are clearly evident. We believe they are not. We do not believe it to be "clearly evident" that Appellant took no seconal during the period of September 24-25, or that he took an insufficient amount of it to cause physical and mental complications. Nor do we believe it to be clearly evident that he imbibed but an insignificant amount of alcohol during his rounds of the various taverns with Mrs. Clausen. And, when Appellant's own witness, Dr. Johnson, the treating physician, testified that in his expert opinion Appellant was in a state of delirium induced by alcohol and barbiturates, we find ourselves not only disinclined to reach the opposite conclusion, but, rather, impelled to the same conclusion. The uncontradicted evidence shows that Appellant did not regain consciousness until September *209 27, and that he had been scheduled to work on September 26. Accordingly, we believe the Board's findings that Appellant,
"... on September 24 and 25, 1962, ... visited various taverns in the City of Rockford indulging in the excessive use of intoxicating liquors and administered to himself without a prescription a (habit forming hypnotic) drug called, Seconal, as a result of which he had to be hospitalized and physically restrained because of delirium induced by alcohol and drugs, so that he was unfit for duty. ..,"
are not against the manifest weight of the evidence, but are entirely in accord with the evidence. The bracketed portion of the foregoing quotation is not supported by the evidence, but we deem this immaterial since, whatever the properties of seconal, its effect upon Appellant was obviously an undesirable one.
The additional finding of the Board that
"... this same officer on April 19, 1961 had negligently and carelessly discharged a loaded pistol at police headquarters endangering the life of another officer for which he was on May 6, 1961, suspended for ten days by this Board,"
has no proper evidence in the record to support it. The only evidence offered by the City in this connection was the copy of the Board's resolution of May 5, 1961, and its letter to Appellant dated the following day, informing him of his suspension. Neither of these documents refers to any incident involving negligence with a loaded pistol or endangering the life of another officer. They refer, simply, to a finding that Appellant was "guilty of conduct unbecoming an officer and detrimental to the service; gross inefficiency and incompetency *210 in carrying out duties." As we have already noted, such a general finding, containing no specification of the particular acts of which the officer is found guilty, is a nullity. Farmer v. Civil Service Commission, supra. It does not appear that Appellant sought review of that finding, and we are not, of course, reviewing it here, except to hold that it has no value as evidence in the instant proceeding. The order of the Board discharging Appellant in the present case was entered on December 3, 1962. After suit had been filed in the Circuit Court seeking to set aside that order, the Circuit Court, apparently on its own motion, entered an order on April 12, 1963, some three months after the Board's order of discharge, that the transcript of the hearing which resulted in the order of May 5, 1961, be made a part of the record in this case. The attorney for the City then appeared before the Board on April 16, 1963, pursuant to notice served upon Appellant's attorney, and moved that the 1961 transcript be made part of the record in this cause, in accordance with the order of the Circuit Court. Appellant's attorney made no objection to this procedure, and the 1961 transcript was thereupon marked as an exhibit and made a part of the record herein.
Appellant has abstracted this transcript of the 1961 hearing and has devoted a considerable part of his brief and argument to a rehashing of the merits and even the evidentiary rulings in the 1961 matter. He has not questioned the propriety of the inclusion of the 1961 transcript in the record of this cause, but has confined his argument to the question of whether the incidents involved in the 1961 hearing can again be made the basis of substantive charges against him. Appellee contends that the 1961 incident involving the pistol was considered by the Board in the instant proceeding *211 only by way of aggravation, and not as an independent substantive charge. From our review of the record we are unable to tell how the Board used the 1961 incident. The written findings merely recite the incident along with the events of September 24-25, making no distinction that is apparent to us.
[2] In any event, there was no evidence presented during the course of the instant hearing which supports that portion of the findings which relates to the pistol incident and this fact cannot be changed by supplementing the record with a transcript not considered by the Board at the time it discharged Appellant. Nor does the Appellant's failure to object to the procedure have any bearing upon the matter. The failure to object cannot create evidence, and the fact is that there was no evidence before the Board concerning the gun incident at the time it entered its order. And, once its order was entered, the Board had no authority, by direction of the Circuit Court or otherwise, to supplement the record upon which the order was based. See Cartan v. Gregory, 329 Ill. App. 307, 317, 68 NE2d 193 (1st Dist 1946):
"The discharge of each plaintiff was ordered and executed on June 16, 1944. The jurisdiction of the Commission was then exhausted. The subsequent preparation, typing and filing of the other documents purporting to be a finding and decision, was outside the limits of the jurisdiction of the Commission."
See also Farmer v. Civil Service Commission, supra:
"The record should be complete before he is discharged. There is no warrant in law for making up the record to support the discharge after a person has been discharged. Such a practice cannot be countenanced."
*212 Therefore, we hold that the "gun incident" could not be considered by the Board for any purpose, nor can Appellant's discharge be supported in any degree by reference to that incident.
[3, 4] We must now determine whether the improper portions of the Board's findings so infect the findings as a whole that the order of discharge must be set aside. To review those portions of the findings which we deem improper:
(a) The reference to Appellant's consorting with a "married woman not his wife" is improper, since this was not part of the charge;
(b) The finding that Appellant had on a previous occasion failed to report for duty because of the excessive use of barbiturates was not part of the charge, nor do we find any evidence in the record to support such a finding;
(c) The finding that Appellant "had for some years been given to the use of barbiturates to ease the pain of alleged headaches, though no physician had prescribed their use" goes beyond the charges;
(d) The finding concerning the gun incident had no evidence to support it.
These infirmities in the Board's findings are not insignificant. It is regrettable that the charges were not drawn with greater attention to the anticipated evidence, and that the findings were not drawn with greater attention to the charges and the evidence actually heard. We can readily conceive of cases which would require reversal because of such irregularities. However, it is apparent that the principal concern of the Board in this case was Appellant's conduct on September 24-25, 1962, and his resultant delirium *213 which persisted for at least another two days. We find it impossible to conclude that this ground, standing alone, would not have resulted in Appellant's discharge from the police force. Conduct of an apparently less serious character has been held sufficient to warrant discharge. See, e.g., Sayles v. Board of Fire and Police Com'rs of City of Champaign, 25 Ill. App. 2d 262, 166 NE2d 469 (3rd Dist 1960) (failure to pay personal debts and execution of wage assignment in violation of department rules); Hammers v. Board of Fire and Police Com'rs of City of Mattoon, 10 Ill. App. 2d 218, 134 NE2d 647 (3rd Dist 1956) (leaving duty station); Martin v. Civil Service Commission, 7 Ill. App. 2d 128, 129 NE2d 248 (1st Dist 1955) (two officers discharged, one for failing to turn in an arrested person's property without delay, and the other for unauthorized signing of another's name to inventory receipt). The statute does not define the necessary "cause" for discharge, and the Board may exercise its reasonable judgment and discretion in determining what conduct does amount to "cause." City of Aurora v. Schoeberlein, 230 Ill. 496, 502, 82 N.E. 860 (1907); Kammann v. City of Chicago, 222 Ill. 63, 65, 66, 78 N.E. 16 (1906). If we believed there was any likelihood of the Board having reached a different conclusion had its finding been free of the errors noted, we would reverse. However, we do not believe that the result would have been any different had the irregularities mentioned not occurred, and, accordingly, we hold that the errors in the proceedings do not require reversal. Johnson v. Duke, 247 Ill. App. 372, 377 (2d Dist 1927). We do not regard the proceedings at any stage below as a model of how such matters should be conducted, but we are convinced from our review of the entire record that substantial justice has been done.
*214 We have considered the remaining assignments of error and find them to be without merit, and the judgment of the Circuit Court of Winnebago County is affirmed.
Affirmed.
ABRAHAMSON, P.J. and CARROLL, J., concur.

=== CASE 9738704 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:01:18.349884+00 ===

LARSON, Justice.
This defendant appeals from a conviction of manslaughter, in violation of section 690.10, The Code 1977. He assigns as error rulings by the trial court (1) in admitting scientific evidence offered by the State and in refusing psychological evidence offered by the defendant; (2) in admitting items of evidence allegedly seized without valid consent or search warrant; (3) in refusing to permit cross-examination of a witness regarding an alleged breach of an agreement with defendant’s attorney; and (4) in refusing to dismiss the indictment because of alleged prosecutorial misconduct. We find no merit in defendant’s assignments of error and affirm the conviction.
The defendant and Barbara Johnson, the victim, had dated for some time before her death. The State, which charged him with murder, alleged that the defendant had wielded the knife that killed her. The defendant contended he came upon the scene and found Barbara in a pool of blood, and that bloodstains found on his clothing were caused by dragging her body to get help. According to the defendant, a knife, which he was holding when he went to a neighbor’s house, had been found by him by the body. The State used an expert witness to show through analysis of the bloodstains and examination of the knife and clothing fibers that the defendant was not a mere passerby but had in fact stabbed the victim.
I. The State’s Expert Testimony.
Clothing worn by the defendant and victim on the night of the killing, as well as the murder weapon, were analyzed by Herbert MacDonell, a criminalist. He testified that blood patterns on the defendant’s clothing could only have been produced by being in the immediate vicinity where blood was spattered at a great velocity, as in a *83stabbing or beating, and that it could not have resulted from mere contact with the body. He also testified blood patterns on the defendant’s pants were consistent with wiping a bloody knife like the murder weapon. The knife blade had been broken during the attack, and cloth fibers were found on the broken edge, indicating that Barbara had been stabbed with the knife after it was broken. After photographing the knife blade, MacDonell removed fibers from it for testing. He testified certain red fibers were consistent with those of Barbara’s blouse; the blue fibers “had similar properties to both garments, but . were more similar to those of Jeffrey Hall’s corduroys’ coarse weave than the tighter weave of Barbara Johnson’s.” He found “the red fibers . . . physically over the blue fibers, intertwined and physically over them in some locations,” indicating that Barbara was stabbed after the knife had come into contact with the defendant’s pants.
The defendant assigns the following bases of error as to this testimony: that there was insufficient foundation for MacDonell’s expert testimony on the bloodstains; that testimony about the knife and clothing fibers was not admissible because of insufficient chain-of-custody foundation and alleged alteration; and that MacDonell’s testimony of the similarity of the blue fibers in the defendant’s trousers was irrelevant and prejudicial.
A. Foundation. Witness MacDonell is a professor of criminalistics at Elmira College in New York. Under a grant from the Law Enforcement Assistant Agency, he had conducted experiments on the flight characteristics of blood. His study in the area of blood characteristics, as applied to criminal investigation, was described by him:
[W]e spent two years, myself and an associate, doing just about all we could possibly do with human blood .... We subjected blood to various types of impact conditions and velocities, distances falling and spraying, to study basically the pattern produced under known conditions. This gives us a scale of reference like a ruler. We could then use these patterns to compare to a crime scene.
He was in the process of writing a book about the results of his tests, and had conducted seminars on the subject for crime investigators. He has been involved in over two hundred death investigations and has “testified on the geometric interpretation of bloodstain patterns on forty-two different occasions .... ” While he acknowledged being one of the few people in the nation qualified in this field, he said tests similar to those he performed are now being conducted at the University of California at Berkeley.
Professor MacDonell described the study of blood characteristics as one based primarily on the laws of physics and mathematics, and testified that the properties of blood may be measured and its behavior predicted. He added that “[t]he interpretation of the pattern would depend upon the experience and knowledge of the examiner.” The defendant seizes upon this language which, he says, puts this sort of evidence in the same category as voiceprint and polygraph tests, which have largely been held to be inadmissible. He asserts that bloodstain analysis was not a proper subject for opinion evidence because it is “scientific” in nature and lacks the foundational requirement of general acceptance in the scientific community.
We discussed the status of the polygraph’s “general scientific acceptance,” as well as other indicia of its reliability in State v. Conner, 241 N.W.2d 447, 458-59 (Iowa 1976), and concluded that this area of study had not been proven sufficiently reliable for expert testimony, in part because “the breadth, sensitivity and importance of the inference of polygraph evidence demands a higher standard of trustworthiness than is required of other kinds of scientific evidence.” Id. at 459.
The rule requiring general scientific acceptance as a foundation for scientific evidence had its genesis in the early case of Frye v. United States, 293 F. 1013 (D.C. Cir.1923), in which the court said:
*84Just when a scientific principle or discovery crosses the line between the experimental and demonstrable stages is difficult to define. Somewhere in this twilight zone the evidential forces of the principle must be recognized, and while courts will go a long way in admitting expert testimony deduced from a well-recognized scientific principle or discovery, the thing from which the deduction is made must be sufficiently established to have gained general acceptance in the particular field in which it belongs.
Id. at 1014. The rationale of Frye, which also involved the use of polygraph evidence, has' since been applied by some courts to determine the admissibility of all scientific evidence. See McCormick’s Handbook of the Law of Evidence § 203, at 488-89 (2d ed. 1972).
However, the Frye standard has been frequently criticized. One author has said:
“General scientific acceptance” is a proper condition for taking judicial notice of scientific facts, but not a criterion for the admissibility of scientific evidence. Any relevant conclusions which are supported by a qualified expert witness should be received unless there are other reasons for exclusion. Particularly, probative value may be overborne by the familiar dangers of prejudicing or misleading the jury. ... If the courts used this approach, instead of repeating a supposed requirement of “general acceptance” not elsewhere imposed, they would arrive at a practical way of utilizing the results of scientific advances.
McCormick, supra § 203, at 491. Other writers have rejected the rule on a variety of grounds.1
In determining whether to require general scientific acceptance as a separate prerequisite for the admission of scientific evidence, we make these observations. (1) Such a rule imposes a standard for admissibility not required of other areas of expert testimony, McCormick, supra § 203, at 488-89. (2) It is inconsistent with modern concepts of evidence, such as embodied in the Federal Rules of Evidence, which provide that “[i]f scientific, technical, or other specialized knowledge will assist the trier of fact to understand the evidence or to determine the fact in issue, a witness may testify thereto in the form of an opinion or otherwise.” Fed.R.Evid. 702. Similarly, it would be inconsistent with our own decisions which have established that we are “committed to a liberal rule which allows opinion testimony if it is of a nature which will aid the jury and is based on special training, experience, or knowledge with respect to the issue in question.” Haumersen v. Ford Motor Co., 257 N.W.2d 7, 11 (Iowa 1977). Neither federal rule 702 nor the accompanying advisory committee’s comments draw any distinction between foun*85dation requirements for scientific and nonscientific evidence. Moreover, the Supreme Court of Maine, in applying their rule of evidence identical to federal rule 702, held that, if there had been a requirement of general scientific acceptance prior to adoption of its rule, such requirement was abrogated by the rule. State v. Williams, 388 A.2d 500, 503-04 (Me.1978); see United States v. Brown, 557 F.2d 541, 556 (6th Cir.1972) (“[t]he clear trend in federal court is toward the admission of expert testimony whenever it will aid the trier of fact.”). (3) Despite its apparent simplicity, distinguishing “scientific” evidence from other areas of expert testimony is a difficult determination in many instances. McCormick, supra § 203, at 490. The instant case illustrates this difficulty of classifying evidence as scientific or non-scientific. The defendant says the study of blood flight characteristics is itself a science. The witness, on the other hand, testified it was based primarily upon physics and mathematics, which impart accuracy and predictability to the study. (4) “Acceptance in the scientific community” is a nebulous concept; as it has been said, “court records are full of the conflicting opinions of doctors, engineers and accountants, to name just a few of the legions of expert witnesses,” United States v. Stifel, 433 F.2d 431, 438 (6th Cir.1970), cert. denied, 401 U.S. 994, 91 S.Ct. 1232, 28 L.Ed.2d 531 (1971) (neutron activation analysis evidence admitted), and “[i]n testing for admissibility of a particular type of scientific evidence, whatever the scientific ‘voting’ pattern may be, the courts cannot in any event surrender to scientists responsibility for determining the reliability of that evidence.” United States v. Williams, 583 F.2d 1194, 1198 (2d Cir.1978) (specto-graphic voice-identification evidence admitted).
We believe that the rationale of Frye should apply insofar as it bears upon the reliability of the proffered evidence. Accordingly, we do not believe that “general scientific acceptance” is a prerequisite to admission of evidence, scientific or otherwise, if the reliability of the evidence is otherwise established.
Although the foundation evidence on reliability submitted here was not overwhelming, the trial court did not abuse its discretion in finding the bloodstain analysis sufficiently reliable to be admissible. Any weaknesses in the analysis could have been, and we presume they were, pointed out by cross-examination, with the ultimate weight of the evidence determined by the jury. United States v. Stifel, 433 F.2d at 438.
In the present case, the evidence offered to show the reliability of the bloodstain analysis included: (1) Professor MacDonell’s considerable experience and his status as the leading expert in the field; (2) the existence of national training programs; (3) the existence of national and state organizations for experts in the field; (4) the offering of courses on the subject in several major schools; (5) use by police departments throughout the country in their day-to-day operations; (6) the holding of annual seminars; and (7) the existence of specialized publications.
Determinations of admissibility of such evidence must necessarily be made on an ad hoc basis, United States v. Wainwright, 413 F.2d 796, 802 (10th Cir.1969), and it would be impossible to establish rules binding in every case. Obviously the complexity of the subject matter will influence the foundational showing of reliability. For example, the foundation for neutron activation analysis, as in United States v. Stifel, 433 F.2d at 435-41, or polygraph evidence, as in State v. Conner, 241 N.W.2d at 459, would require greater imput from the scientific community than, for example, blow-ups of handwriting exemplars, ballistic comparisons, or tire tracks.
Another consideration for admissibility is the likely effect of the proffered evidence upon the fact-finding process. As we stated in Conner,
the breadth, sensitivity and importance of the inference of polygraph evidence demands a higher standard of trustworthiness than is required of other scientific *86evidence .... In a field where so much depends on subjective analysis by the machine operator and the outcome of trial may well turn on the polygrapher’s opinion, we believe a strong showing of scientific acceptance and evidentiary reliability must be made.
Id.; see State v. Williams, 388 A.2d at 501 (polygraph evidence impinges upon jury’s duty of assessing witness credibility).
In this case, weighing of the probativeness, materiality, and reliability of this evidence against possible prejudice in its use, supports the trial court’s ruling. As compared to such matters as neutron activation analysis, or the “conservation of momentum-vector analysis,” Henkel v. Heri, 274 N.W.2d 317, 322-23 (Iowa 1979), the study of blood characteristics is relatively uncomplicated. The witness testified that spattered blood on the defendant’s clothing was indicative of close proximity to the victim at the time of the stabbing, and not, as defendant claimed, a result of dragging the victim’s body, which would have been evidenced by blood smears. Such testimony was also probative as to the defendant’s participation in the stabbing, because of the location of the blood spots, which appeared in an arc from the front of the defendant’s shirt, over his shoulder to the back of the right leg. Professor MacDonell testified
[t]he mechanism has to be one of being close to a source of spattered blood and receiving those spatters on clothing. The location on the front and back of a shirt and back of the trousers is a result of blood being cast-off or spattered because both mechanisms will allow fine spots of blood to be produced. And in the arc, as I have described it, that is a continuation of a pattern from the front of the shirt over the shoulder and on the back of the right back leg. This is consistent to being close to a source of blood which is in some way transported up into the air as in a beating or knifing or anything physical that would pick blood up and project it up into the air and in an arc. That is the significance of these blood stains to me. There are some transfer patterns present, but blood spots of this size are not transferred in that manner. They are projected.
Such observations are largely based on common sense, and in fact, lie close to the ken of an average layman. In pointing out this consideration, one court has distinguished comparison analysis of bite-marks from polygraph evidence in this manner:
[T]he trier-of-fact . . . was shown models, photographs, x-rays and dozen of slides of the victim’s wounds and defendant’s teeth. It could see what we have seen in reviewing the exhibits to determine the admissibility of the evidence .... Thus, the basic data on which the experts based their conclusions were verifiable by the court. ... In short, in admitting the evidence, the court did not have to sacrifice its independence and common sense in evaluating it.
People v. Marx, 54 Cal.App.3d 100, 111, 126 Cal.Rptr. 350, 356 (1975). In the instant case, the defendant’s clothing was in evidence, and the bloodstains were readily observable. We fail to see any real distinction between this evidence and other areas of expert testimony readily received by courts, including ballistics, fingerprints, and blood types.
This evidence need not wait an assessment by the scientific community; the foundation evidence of reliability and the inherent understandability of the evidence itself provided sufficient bases for its admission. Moreover, a trial court has broad discretion on issues of admissibility of such expert evidence. State v. Paulsen, 265 N.W.2d 581, 589 (Iowa 1978); State v. Peterson, 219 N.W.2d 665, 673 (Iowa 1974). We conclude that the trial court did not abuse its discretion in admitting the bloodstain analysis evidence.
B. Alteration. The defendant claims that the removal of cloth fibers from the knife edge for microscopic examination by Professor MacDonell “prevented Jeffrey from having an evaluation by an independent laboratory” concerning the relative position of the fibers, and his only adequate remedy would be the exclusion of that evi*87dence. He also argues that this evidence should be excluded because the State did not sufficiently negate the possibility that the fibers became attached to the knife while it was in police custody. This possibility is supported by holes in the sacks in which the items were kept and by the fact that the items were transported in the same container.
Before physical evidence may be presented at trial, it must be identified as relating to the instant case. Part of the showing required is that it is “reasonably probable . . . alteration of evidence did not occur.” State v. Bakker, 262 N.W.2d 538, 543 (Iowa 1978). Such alteration could either destroy the probative value of the object or result in manufactured evidence. The “[t]rial judge determines the sufficiency of physical evidence identification in light of the article’s nature, circumstances surrounding its custody and the likelihood of intermeddlers tampering with it.” Id. Once the trial court has determined that the identification is sufficient, “[cjontrary speculation effects the weight of the evidence but not its admissibility.” State v. Lunsford, 204 N.W.2d 613, 617 (Iowa 1973). A determination that the showing is sufficient will only be overturned for a clear abuse of discretion. Id. Professor MacDonell’s removal of the fibers was necessary for testing. Without such testing the probative value of the presence of red and blue fibers on the broken edge of the knife would have been greatly reduced. We conclude that such a minute alteration of evidence necessary for analysis, which neither destroys it nor diminishes its probative value, does not render it inadmissible.
The defendant’s second argument is not supported by the record. While the existence of holes in the evidence bags at trial leads to speculation about when the fibers got on the knife blade, Professor MacDonell testified that there were no such holes in the bags before he examined the evidence. With such a record, we cannot say the trial court abused its discretion in finding the identification sufficient.
C. The fiber evidence. The defendant argues that the evidence the blue fiber was similar to the fibers of the pants he was wearing should have been excluded (1) because it was nonprobative and (2) even if it were probative, its value was outweighed by its prejudicial effect. The defendant’s claim that the fiber evidence was nonprobative rests on the fact that thousands of pairs of jeans have been made from the same cloth. Thus, he argues that the evidence does not distinguish him from the owners of those other jeans. He relies upon State v. Peterson, 219 N.W.2d 665, 669-70 (Iowa 1974), where we held that constitutionally infirm evidence of the defendant’s blood type introduced in the State’s case-in-chief could not be habilitat-ed under a theory of anticipatory impeachment. Dictum in that case indicated that blood type evidence was nonprobative of the murderer’s identity because of the large proportion of the population who share the blood type. We have recently limited that dictum, recognizing the relevance of such evidence. State v. Mark, 286 N.W.2d 396, 412-13 (Iowa 1979). The fiber evidence was probative of the fact that the defendant used the knife because the inference is more likely with this evidence than without it. See State v. Sheffey, 250 N.W.2d 51, 55 (Iowa 1977).
The defendant’s second contention relies on a principle of our common law which we have recognized as the same as Fed.R.Evid. 403. State v. Harmon, 238 N.W.2d 139, 144-45 (Iowa 1976). The federal rule provides:
Although relevant, evidence may be excluded if its probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury, or by considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or needless presentation of cumulative evidence.
In asserting this as a basis for exclusion of the fiber evidence, the defendant misper-ceives the meaning of the term “unfair prejudice” in this context: “[u]nfair prejudice within [the rule’s] context means an undue tendency to support decision on an *88improper basis, commonly, though not necessarily, an emotional one.” Fed.R.Evid. 403, Advisory Committee’s Note; accord, State v. Harmon, 238 N.W.2d at 145 (evidence prejudicial where “its admission would have a wrongful effect on the jury because of the baggage it brings with it, ...While this evidence was prejudicial to the defense in the sense that it supported a finding of guilt, it was not prejudicial in the sense used in the rule.
II. Psychological Testimony.
A defense psychologist testified extensively about the defendant’s psychological tendencies. He testified the defendant would never outwardly express anger or be aggressive and that he was not explosive, impulsive or prone to anger. However, the trial court would not allow him to answer the following question: “Do you have an opinion based on reasonable psychological and medical certainty as to whether or not Jeffrey Hall was capable of committing a homicide?” The trial court allowed the general testimony but declined to allow this specific opinion as “going directly into the very question that the jury must decide, and a question that broad would be beyond what I believe an expert may testify to.”
In Grismore v. Consolidated Products Co., 232 Iowa 328, 5 N.W.2d 646 (1942), this court broke new ground in the acceptance of opinion testimony, but it also established limitations for its use:
Of course, we are not to be understood as saying that opinion testimony should be received as to all matters. It should be received only as to such matters as are the proper subjects of opinion testimony. No witness should be permitted to give his opinion directly that a person is guilty or innocent, or is criminally responsible or irresponsible, or that a person was negligent or not negligent, or that he had capacity to execute a will, or deed, or like instrument, or, ... respecting whether a county attorney had probable cause to believe the plaintiff was guilty of the crime charged. But the reason is that such matters are not subjects of opinion testimony. They are mixed questions of law and fact. When a standard, or a measure, or a capacity has been fixed by law, no witness, whether expert or nonexpert, nor however qualified, is permitted to express an opinion as to whether or not the person or the conduct in question measures up to that standard. On that question the court must instruct the jury as to the law, and the jury must draw its own conclusion from the evidence. However, courts have permitted both scientific and practical experts to express their opinion whether a certain method used, or course of conduct, was a proper one.
Accord, State v. Jiles, 258 Iowa 1324, 1331, 142 N.W.2d 451, 455 (1966). The trouble with the question here is in determining the subject matter of the inquiry. If the defendant’s attorney, by asking the psychologist whether the defendant was “capable” of committing the crime based on “reasonable psychological and medical certainty,” was seeking evidence of insanity or diminished capacity, that purpose was not made apparent. In the form in which it was asked, “capability” could, in fact, have many meanings, legal as well as physical or psychological. Thus, as the trial judge pointed out, there was no showing the question was within the witness’ qualification to answer.
As we have already noted, the trial court is vested with broad discretion in ruling on such matters, and we will not reverse in the absence of clear evidence of abuse. While it would perhaps have been more consistent with the trial court’s ruling on blood analysis evidence, as discussed in Division I, to have admitted this evidence, we do not believe the trial court abused its discretion in sustaining the objection to the question in its proffered form.
III. Seizure of Items.
A. The consent to search. On the evening of the defendant’s arrest, he was taken to the police station for questioning. He was asked for consent to remove his bloody clothing and for withdrawal of body specimens. His consent was given and he signed *89a consent form. He now contends the consent was invalid because it was not voluntary.
The rules for appellate examination of this issue are well settled in our cases. Review of a voluntariness issue requires examination of the totality of the circumstances. State v. Jacoby, 260 N.W.2d 828, 832 (Iowa 1977); State v. Cullison, 227 N.W.2d 121, 127 (Iowa 1975). This court’s scope of review is de novo. State v. Folkens, 281 N.W.2d 1, 3 (Iowa 1979). The burden of proof is on the State to show the validity of the consent by a preponderance of evidence. Id.
With these principles in mind, we address the issue of voluntariness, first on the defendant’s claim of extreme emotional distress. There was some evidence the defendant was “upset” while at the police station, one doctor testifying that he “wouldn’t be in any condition to make any decision on his own at that point.” However, there was also evidence that the defendant was relatively calm and that he was quietly seated between his parents when the consent form was signed. His father signed the form as a witness. We have held that emotional distress must be shown to have been so severe that it impaired capacity for self-determination or made the consent involuntary. See State v. Jacoby, 260 N.W.2d at 833 (emotional state insufficient to vitiate waiver of Miranda rights); State v. Hansen, 225 N.W.2d 243, 349-50 (Iowa 1975). We have examined the entire record on the claim that he was under such severe emotional distress that his consent was not voluntary. We conclude it does not, standing alone, support the claim, but consider it as part of the totality of circumstances, together with the following complaints, on the voluntariness issue.
The defendant also claims trickery was used to obtain his consent because one of the officers, when asked by the defendant whether the victim was dead, replied that he “didn’t know.” The agent did in fact know she was dead. It is true that devious activity by authorities is “one of the circumstances relevant to the issue of vol-untariness . . .State v. Cullison, 227 N.W.2d 121, 128 (Iowa 1975). This issue was raised in State v. Cooper, 217 N.W.2d 589 (Iowa 1974), where the defendant claimed waiver of his Miranda rights was thereby rendered invalid. We.said in that case that
[deception of any nature by representatives of the state cannot be condoned. However, we conclude deception standing alone does not render a waiver of constitutional rights involuntary as a matter of law unless the deceiving acts amount to a deprivation of due process. Nevertheless, deception becomes a factor to be considered in reviewing the totality of the circumstances in making the determination as to the voluntariness of the waiver even though the act does not per se produce exclusion.
Id. at 597. Accord, State v. Jacoby, 260 N.W.2d at 832-33 (deception as to death of victim; considered in totality of circumstances and held insufficient to vitiate waiver). We conclude that this deception did in fact occur, but we consider it only as part of the totality of circumstances in determining voluntariness; it is insufficient alone to vitiate the consent.
B. Alleged violation of agreement. The defendant also claims that, following his arrest and before the consent was signed, his lawyer and the prosecuting attorney had reached an agreement on the telephone that the authorities would not talk to him any more unless his lawyer was present. The consent, he claims, was obtained from him in violation of that agreement. He urges us to rule this alleged breach vitiated the consent and rendered the items seized inadmissible on the ground it violated our Code of Professional Responsibility DR7-104(A)(1):
During the course of his representation of his client a lawyer shall not:
(1) Communicate ... on the subject of the representation with a party he knows to be represented by a lawyer in that matter unless he has the prior *90consent of the lawyer representing such other party or is authorized to do so.
We believe such a violation, assuming it occurred, is akin to deception and would not require exclusion of the evidence unless it amounted to a deprivation of constitutional rights in itself or, as part of the totality of the circumstances, rendered the consent involuntary. See State v. Jacoby, 260 N.W.2d at 833.
The evidence was conflicting on the content of the conversation, although it is undisputed that the defendant’s attorney was reached by telephone at his lake home twenty miles from Estherville, at approximately 12:15 a.m. He decided not to drive to Estherville, but talked to the county attorney and to one of the officers. The defendant contends the agreement was that the officers were to have no further contact with him after their telephone conference with his attorney. His evidence shows the agreement was that the officers would not talk to him. The State’s testimony was that, under the agreement, they were not to interrogate him further. There is no claim that the defendant was interrogated after the call. We do not believe the evidence supports the claim that the authorities were to have no further contact with the defendant; obviously they would have to have contact with him if for no other purpose than to complete his release from custody as requested by his parents and his attorney. There is evidence, however, that the officers were not to talk to him in the absence of his attorney. We assume for purposes of resolving this issue that the securing of this consent did in fact violate the letter of that agreement, because obviously the authorities would have to “talk” to him to get it. We have never expressly ruled on this issue, but we have held in analogous cases that a defendant’s waiver of his Miranda rights is effective even though made in the absence of an attorney known to represent him. See State v. Iowa District Court, 236 N.W.2d 54, 55 (Iowa 1975); State v. Allen, 224 N.W.2d 237, 239 (Iowa 1974); State v. Winfrey, 221 N.W.2d 269, 273 (Iowa 1974). See also Coughlan v. United States, 391 F.2d 371, 372 (9th Cir.1968).
While we would not condone a breach of such an agreement, we are not persuaded that anything more than differing interpretations of the agreement occurred here. Whether a request for consent, while admittedly done by “talking” to defendant, constitutes such a breach is open to speculation. The defendant does not allege a sixth-amendment violation, such as addressed in Brewer v. Williams, 430 U.S. 387, 97 S.Ct. 1232, 51 L.Ed.2d 424 (1977) (violation of agreement not to interrogate), nor would the effective-counsel protections of the sixth amendment appear to be applicable because, when the agreement was made, no adversary criminal proceedings had been initiated, see Kirby v. Illinois, 406 U.S. 682, 688, 92 S.Ct. 1877, 1881, 32 L.Ed.2d 411, 417 (1972). Rather, the defendant asks that we fashion an exclusionary rule based only upon violations of the ethical standard in DR7-104(A)(1). While we view violations of these standards as serious matters, they fall short of constitutional dimensions and, like the court in Coughlan, we are reluctant to expand the concept of Miranda to these circumstances. Coughlan v. United States, 391 F.2d at 372. We do, however, consider the allegation of breach of the agreement as being akin to allegations of deception, and therefore consider it as a part of the totality of circumstances.
Upon our review of the totality of circumstances, including the defendant’s emotional state and the allegations of deception as to the condition of the victim, and the alleged breach of the attorney’s agreement, we conclude that the State has established the voluntariness of the consent by a preponderance of the evidence and that the evidence seized was properly admitted into evidence.
C. Legality of the search warrant. The defendant contends that a warrant issued for the search of his car was invalid because it was preceded by a warrantless search and was based upon the fruits of that search. If established, this would vitiate the legality of a warrant. State v. *91Folkens, 281 N.W.2d 1, 2-3 (Iowa 1979). Because we have concluded the consent for the search of the car was valid, we need not reach the issue. Nevertheless, we have examined the record upon which the defendant relies. He contends that letters between the defendant and the victim were sought in the warrant application and that the officers’ knowledge of their existence could have been obtained only by a prior search. There is insufficient evidence to support that inference. The ambulance driver testified only that he saw “someone” looking in the car as it was parked at the scene of the crime; it was dark and he could not say who was in the car or what they did, nor did he see anybody looking in the trunk. The defendant also relies on a handprint on the trunk of the car which, he assumes, must have been left by the police after the pre-warrant search. The officers denied a pre-warrant search was made. Upon our de novo review, we find that there was no pre-warrant search which would vitiate its legality.
IV. Scope of Cross-Examination.
The defendant attempted to cross-examine one of the investigating officers concerning the agreement with his attorney and the alleged breach of it. We have already concluded that the breach of that agreement, if it occurred, was only a part of the totality of circumstances. As such it was a matter for the court, not the jury. The defendant argues, however, that the trial court should have allowed him to cross-examine the officer about the alleged breach of the agreement to establish a lack of the witness’s credibility. The basis for this contention is Ped.R.Evid. 608 which provides in part:
Specific instances of the conduct of a witness . . . may . . . , in the discretion of the court, if probative of truthfulness or untruthfulness, be inquired into on cross-examination of the witness . . . concerning character for truthfulness or untruthfulness .
However, it was not shown that this agent was untruthful in regard to his version of the agreement; his version merely differed from that of the defendant’s attorney. Moreover, under rule 608 itself, it may be allowed “in the discretion of the court.” We have similarly stated that the extent and scope of cross-examination is vested in the trial court’s discretion. State v. Sheffey, 250 N.W.2d 51, 55 (Iowa 1977). We do not believe the trial court abused that discretion here.
V. Prosecutorial Misconduct.
The defendant contends he is entitled to dismissal of the charges because of alleged misconduct of the prosecuting attorneys. The first of the specific complaints is that two prosecuting attorneys “contacted” one of the members of the jury panel named Condon before selection of the jury and that they discussed, in his presence, an unrelated murder case in which a defendant had “beaten the system.” The two attorneys, under their version of the incident, were discussing the other case at a pizza and beer establishment owned by Condon, and Condon accidently overheard them. When Condon sat down beside them, the conversion stopped, according to the attorneys. The defendant does not dispute this evidence but he contends that Condon, as a member of the jury panel, was in a position to influence the jurors who actually deliberated on the case. He does not claim this actually happened, only that it might have. The jury records show that Condon was successfully challenged for cause, presumably on this ground, and did not actually sit as a juror. The record fails to support the claim that Condon was “contacted” by the prosecuting attorneys or that the conversation overheard by him was in any manner prejudicial to him.
The other incidents of misconduct concern the failure of the State to provide exculpatory evidence and the identity of the blood expert, Professor MacDonell. The alleged exculpatory evidence consisted of a statement by the victim’s brother immediately after the killing that another brother *92must have killed her and evidence that another car had been seen in the area of the victim’s home at about the time she was stabbed. There had been a police report prepared about the brother’s statement but the report was not furnished to the defendant until the second week of trial. The information concerning the other car was made available approximately two weeks before trial. The identity of the State’s “blood expert” was made several months before the trial, and the defendant took his deposition.
We have held that dismissal is not an appropriate remedy for failure to provide exculpatory evidence. State v. Hillsman, 281 N.W.2d 114, 117 (Iowa 1979). Further we have held that not all material in an investigative file is “Brady ” material which must be disclosed upon request. As we said in State v. Hall, 249 N.W.2d 843, 846 (Iowa 1977), evidence suppressed, to constitute deprivation of due process, “must be material either to the guilt or punishment of the defendant, not merely potentially helpful to the defense.” Evidence of a spontaneous statement by the victim’s brother, without any investigation on his part, that someone other than the defendant might have killed his sister, and evidence that there might have been another car in the area at the time, would have very limited probative value, if any.
Most important, the evidence allegedly withheld was furnished at or prior to trial, and.we have held this to be a sufficient compliance with due process. State v. Folkens, 281 N.W.2d at 7; State v. Epperson, 264 N.W.2d 753, 756 (Iowa 1978). We further note that the defendant does not claim to have requested a continuance to meet the new evidence, and no request appears in the record.
We find no reversible error on any of the grounds urged and therefore affirm the trial court.
AFFIRMED.
All Justices concur except McCORMICK and UHLENHOPP, JJ., who concur specially, LeGRAND, J., who . dissents, and SCHULTZ, J., who takes no part.
. See, e. g., Moenssens, Polygraph Test Results Meets Standards for Admissibility as Evidence, in Legal Admission of the Polygraph 14 (N. Ansley ed. 1975); J. Reid & F. Inbau, Truth and Deception. 309, 310 (2d ed. 1977); J. Richardson, Modern Scientific Evidence §§ 2.5, 6.18, 9.2 n.8 (2d ed. 1974); Boyce, Judicial Recognition of Scientific Evidence in Criminal Cases, 8 Utah L.Rev. 313, 325 (1964); Decker & Handler, Voiceprint Identification Evidence, 26 Am. U.L.Rev. 314, 316 (1977); Greene, Voiceprint Identification: The Case in Favor of Admissibility, 13 Am.Crim.L.Rev. 171, 188, 196 (1975); Jones, Danger Voiceprints Ahead, 11 Am. Crim.L.Rev. 549, 571 (1973); Kaplan, The Lie Detector: An Analysis of its Place in the Law of Evidence, 10 Wayne L.Rev. 381, 385 (1964); Strong, Questions Affecting the Admissibility of Scientific Evidence, 1970 U.Ill.L.F. 1, 14; Tarlow, Admissibility of Polygraph Evidence in 1975: An Aid in Deterring Credibility in a Perjury -Plagued System, 26 Hastings L.J. 914, 917 (1975); Trautman, Logical or Legal Relevancy A Conñict in Theory, 5 Vand.L.Rev. 385, 395 (1952); Note, The Emergence of the Polygraph at Trial, 73 Colum.L.Rev. 1120, 1144 (1973); Note, People v. Barbara: The Admissibility of Polygraph Test Results in Support of a Motion for New Trial’, 1978 Det.Col.L.Rev. 347, 349-50, 361; Note, The Polygraph Technique: A Selective Analysis, 20 Drake L.Rev. 330, 336 (1971); Note, Evolving Methods of Scientific Proof, 13 N.Y.L.F. 677, 681-85 (1967); Note, Pinocchio's New Nose, 48 N.Y.U. L.Rev. 339, 342 (1973); Comment, The Eviden-tiary Value of Spectrograph Voice Identification, 63 J.Crim.L., Crime & Police Sci., 343, 349 (1972); but see Comment, Frye Standard of “General Acceptance" for Admissibility of Scientific Evidence Rejected in Favor of Balancing Test, 64 Cornell L.Rev. 875, 885 (1979).

=== CASE 9738705 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:01:18.356679+00 ===

McCORMICK, Justice
(concurring specially).
I concur in the result and in all but division IIA of the court’s opinion.
I am unable to agree that scientific evidence cannot sufficiently be identified, that admissibility of scientific evidence should be determined on an ad hoc basis, that reliability of a novel scientific technique can be established solely on the basis of the success of its leading proponent in peddling his wares to consumers, that the general acceptance standard is inconsistent with the Federal Rules of Evidence, or that the inference sought to be established in the present case was not of great breadth, sensitivity and importance. However, I concur in the result because I am willing to take judicial notice that the principles of physics upon which the blood spatter analysis depended in the present case are well enough established to be subject to judicial notice. Cf. Stupka v. Seheidel, 244 Iowa 442, 449, 56 N.W.2d 874, 878 (1953) (judicial notice taken of effects of weather on wood); Hemminger v. City of Des Moines, 199 Iowa 1302, 1310, 203 N.W. 822, 825 (1925) (judicial notice taken of effects of hydraulic pressure).
The anomaly in this case is that Professor MacDonell’s government-financed experiments are credited with demonstrating the necessity for exercising extreme caution in evaluating expert opinion based on blood spatter analysis:
Extensive research has recently been conducted in this area by the noted expert Herbert L. MacDonell. ... The results of the experiments were published in late 1971 and suggest that it is sometimes possible to reconstruct events which must have occurred to produce certain bloodstains. The report with accompanying illustrations demonstrate, however, that many of the conclusions drawn from blood spots which have been suggested by others do not stand the test of experimental verification.... Extreme caution would seem to be required in evaluating expert opinion on the subject.
*93(emphasis added). A. Moessens and F. In-bau, Scientific Evidence in Criminal Cases § 6.12(2) at 303 (2d ed. 1978).
I believe the governing principle is that a challenge to admissibility raising the reliability issue puts the burden on the proponent of the evidence to demonstrate that the state of the art or scientific knowledge permits a reasonable opinion to be asserted by an expert. See C. McCormick, Handbook of the Law of Evidence § 13 at 31 (2d ed. 1972).
I agree that the trial court did not abuse its discretion in receiving the evidence under this principle in the facts of this case.
UHLENHOPP, J., joins this special concurrence.

=== CASE 9738707 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:01:18.655779+00 ===

Arterburn, J.
— This is an appeal from a judgment of the Vanderburgh Circuit Court convicting the appellant of the offense of violating Section 17 of the Indiana Uniform Narcotic Drug Act, which provides that it shall be unlawful for any person to obtain or attempt to obtain a narcotic drug by fraud, deceit or the use of a false name. The appellant was charged as follows:
“FRANK M. FREIHAUT being duly sworn upon his oath says that JAMES MERRITT on or about the 7th day of JUNE A. D., 1962, at said County and State as affiant verily believes did then and there unlawfully, feloniously, knowingly and falsely *364by the use of a false name and the giving of a false address which was in the following tenor, to-wit: Robert James, 511 Canal, obtain a certain narcotic drug, to-wit: one (1) two ounce bottle of paregoric, a compound containing opium.
“Then and there being contrary to the form of the Statute, in such cases made and provided, and against the peace and dignity of the State of Indiana.”
A motion to quash the charge was filed, which contended that the court judicially knows that paregoric contains less than two grains of opium, which is exempt under the Indiana Act. [Burns’ §10-3526 (1963 Supp.)]. The motion to quash was overruled, the appellant was tried and convicted, and the motion for a new trial was likewise overruled. The errors properly presented for review on this appeal are presented by the overruling of the motion for a new trial, which specified the overruling of the motion to quash, and that the verdict was contrary to law, the evidence was insufficient to sustain the same, and also specified the giving and the refusal to give certain instructions.
That part of the statute [Burns’ §10-3535 (1956 Repl.)] under which the appellant was prosecuted reads as follows:
“10-3535. Fraud or deceit. — (1) No person shall obtain or attempt to obtain a narcotic drug, or procure or attempt to procure the administration of a narcotic drug, (a) by fraud, deceit, misrepresentation, or subterfuge; or (b) by the forgery or alteration of a prescription or of any written order;, or (c) by the concealment of a material fact; or (d) by the use of a false name or the giving of a false address.
.....
“(7) The provisions of this section shall apply to all transactions relating to narcotic drugs under the provisions of section eight [§10-3526] of *365this act, in the same way as they apply to transactions under all other sections.” (Our italics)
The evidence is undisputed that the appellant went into the Deeg drug store in Evansville, Indiana on June 7, 1962 and purchased a two ounce bottle of paregoric for sixty cents. The law provides [Burns’ §10-3527 (1956 Repl.)] that the druggist shall keep a record of all narcotic drugs sold and dispensed. Although it does not require that the record be signed by the purchaser, in this case this drug store kept a record to be so signed. The appellant signed the record, using the false name , of Robert James. At the time of the purchase, Mrs. Gilbert, the clerk, informed Mr. Deeg, the druggist, of appellant’s paregoric order, and Mr. Deeg gave the paregoric to the clerk, who delivered it to the appellant. Mr.' Deeg' knew the appellant and knew his correct name at the time he delivered the paregoric.
Section 8 of the Act [Acts of 1935, ch. 280, §8, p. 1351, as last amended'-by the Acts of 1961, ch. 90, §4, p. 169, being Burns’ §10-3526 (1963 Supp.)] provides for certain qualified exemptions and the portions pertinent hereto read as follows:
“10-3526. Preparations exempted. — Except as otherwise in this act specifically provided, this act shall not apply to the following cases:
“(1) Prescribing, administering, dispensing, by or under the direction of a licensed physician, veterinarian, or dentist, or selling at retail by a licensed apothecary of any medicinal preparation that contains in one [1] fluid ounce, or if a solid or semisolid preparation, in one [1] avoirdupois ounce, (a) not more than two [2] grains of opium, (b) not more than one-quarter [1/4] of a grain of morphine or of any of its salts, (c) not more than one [1] grain of codeine or any .of its salts, (d) not more than one-half [1/2] of a grain of extract of Cannabis; nor more than one-half [1/2] of a grain of any more potent derivative *366or preparation of Cannabis; (e) not more than one-quarter [1/4] of a grain of isonipecaine or any of its salts; (f) and not more than one [1] of the drugs named above in clauses (a), (b), (c), (d), and (e).
“(2) Prescribing, administering, dispensing, by or under the direction of a licensed physician, veterinarian or dentist, or selling at retail by a licensed apothecary of liniments, ointments, and other preparations, that are susceptible of external use only and that contain narcotic drugs in such combinations as prevent their being readily extracted from such liniments, ointments, or preparations, except that this shall apply to all liniments, ointments, and other preparations, that contain coca leaves in any quantity or combination.” (Our italics)
Viewing the Uniform Narcotic Act as a whole, it is obvious that it was the intent of the legislature that in certain instances it is not necessary to secure a physician’s prescription to buy certain narcotic drugs with a minimum content of opium therein specified, and that paregoric containing less than two grains of opium was within that group and could be obtained without a prescription. However, it is also apparent that even though certain drugs containing a low percentage of a narcotic might be purchased without a physician’s prescription, the law still required that a record be kept of the purchases and sales and to whom made.
“Narcotic drugs” [Burns’ §10-3519 (1963 Supp.)], as defined in the act, reads as follows:
“(14) (a) ‘Narcotic drugs’ means any of the following, whether produced directly or indirectly by extraction from substances of vegetable origin, or independently by means of chemical synthesis, or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis:
*367“1. Opium, isonipecaine, coca leaves, cannabis and opiate;
“2. Any compound, manufacture, salt derivative, or preparation of opium, isonipecaine, coca leaves or opiate; and
“3. Any substance and any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, or preparation thereof which is chemically identical with any of the substances referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 immediately above.
“(b) The term ‘narcotic drugs’ shall also mean, but shall not be limited to, any drug which the Indiana board of pharmacy, after reasonable notice and opportunity for hearing, shall determine has an addiction-forming or addiction-sustaining quality similar to that of any narcotic drug as defined in subsection (a) of this section. In the rules and regulations adopted by the board under the provisions of chapter 120 of the Acts of 1945, as said act may hereafter be amended, the Indiana board of pharmacy shall issue a list of such narcotic drugs and proclaim them to be narcotic drugs as defined by this act. In the determination that any such drug is a narcotic drug, the pharmacy board may take into consideration the fact that such drug has been determined to be a narcotic drug by the federal narcotics law, as [or] has been determined to be a narcotic drug by ‘Presidential Proclamation.’ ”
Under the section defining a “narcotic drug”, paregoric containing two grains or less of opium is not excluded as a narcotic drug within the definition. Under Burns’ §10-3535 (1956 Repl.), the obtaining of a “narcotic drug” by fraud, deceit, or “by the use of a false name” is covered as a violation of the act. This is made all the clearer when we look at paragraph 7 of that section, which states in substance that the provisions of this section shall apply “to all transactions relating to narcotic drugs” under the provisions of Section 8 (§10-3526) of this act, in *368the same way as they apply to transactions under all other sections.
It is therefore apparent that the exemptions provided in Section 8 (§10-3526) of paregoric containing two grains or less of opium, is not an exemption applicable to the section on fraud and deceit, since it specifically excludes that exemption from its application to that section. In other words, a narcotic drug of a certain percentage or less may be exempt from part of the provisions of the Uniform Narcotic Act and not other provisions thereof. That, in our judgment, is the case here. The act does exempt paregoric containing two grains or less of opium from the provisions with reference to a physician’s prescription, etc., but does not exempt the seller of such a drug from the requirement of keeping a record of the sales nor the buyer from the penal provision when obtaining the same by use of deceit, fraud or the use of a false name. This appears to be the construction given in other states where similar questions have arisen. State v. Lee (1963), 62 Wash. 2d 228, 382 P. 2d 491; State v. Sanchez (1962), 13 Utah 2d 307, 373 P. 2d 695.
It is next urged that there was no criminal law violation in this case because the druggist, Mr. Deeg, who actually sold the paregoric, did not rely upon the false name or address given when it was sold to the appellant, since he knew who the appellant was. However,' the statute fixing the penalty upon exemption does not contain any requirement that there be reliance thereon by the seller except where fraud, deceit, misrepresentation, or subterfuge are charged in the obtaining of the drug. The prosecution in this case was not under the fraud and deceit portion of the act, but instead “by the use of a false name and the giving of a false address.” This section of the statute *369requires no reliance, but merely provides that the person “shall obtain or attempt to obtain a narcotic drug . . . by the use of a false name or the giving of a false address.” The evidence is plain in this case that the appellant did “attempt” to obtain the paregoric by the use of a false name. Such act comes within the statute. People v. Oviedo (1951), 106 Cal. App. 2d 690, 235 P. 2d 612; State v. Lee (1963), 62 Wash. 2d 228, 382 P. 2d 491.
From reading the act as a whole, it would seem that the purpose of the act requiring the druggist to keep a record of the sales and to whom made is that an accurate record be kept in order to determine whether the exempt narcotics are being used by an addict or diverted to an unlawful use and false names and addresses being used for that purpose.
Appellant moved to withdraw the submission of the case from the jury on the ground that a police officer as a witness testified that appellant said that he was an addict. The trial court admonished the jury to disregard the statement and overruled the motion to withdraw the submission. We find no evidence of prejudicial error. The statement would ordinarily be admissible to show motive for the act charged. Loveless v. State (1960), 240 Ind. 534, 166 N. E. 2d 864; Watts v. State (1950), 229 Ind. 80, 95 N. E. 2d 570; Warren v. State (1941), 218 Ind. 378, 33 N. E. 2d 105; Riley v. State (1959), 168 Tex. Crim. 417, 328 S. W. 2d 306.
■ Appellant objected to the following portion of the court’s preliminary instruction number 4, reading as follows:
*370*369“Any other interpretation of the law would weaken the safeguards erected by society for its *370protection; for by the non-enforcement of the law and its penalties in all criminal cases where it is shown by the evidence, beyond a reasonable doubt, to have been violated, contempt for the law is bred among the very class that it is intended to restrain.”
This same instruction was before this court in the case of Beavers v. State (1957), 236 Ind. 549, 141 N. E. 2d 118, and after a thorough review of the cases it was held that such instruction was proper “in all respects”, as shown by previous decisions of this court.
The appellant further complains of certain tendered instructions which were refused. Such instructions supported the interpretation which the appellant has sought to give the Indiana Uniform Narcotic Act, and which interpretation we can not accept for the reasons previously stated. We therefore find that the court did not err in refusing to give such instructions.
The judgment of the trial court is affirmed.
Achor, C. J., and Landis, J., concur. Jackson, J., dissents with opinion, in which Myers, J., concurs.

=== CASE 2217929 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:37.448955+00 ===

473 N.W.2d 129 (1991)
238 Neb. 966
STATE of Nebraska, Appellee,
v.
Gary A. KEITHLEY, Appellant.
No. 90-991.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
August 23, 1991.
*131 Gary A. Keithley, pro se.
Don Stenberg, Atty. Gen., and Delores Coe-Barbee, for appellee.
Mark Andersen, amicus curiae.
HASTINGS, C.J., and BOSLAUGH, WHITE, CAPORALE, SHANAHAN, GRANT, and FAHRNBRUCH, JJ.
PER CURIAM.
The defendant, Gary A. Keithley, has appealed from the order of the trial court which denied his motion for postconviction relief filed on July 5, 1990.
On February 28, 1984, the defendant was convicted of first degree sexual assault and was sentenced to imprisonment for 15 to 25 years. The judgment was affirmed in State v. Keithley, 218 Neb. 707, 358 N.W.2d 761 (1984).
The defendant's 15-year-old daughter testified that the defendant had forced her to perform oral sex with him as a form of punishment. The victim's sister testified that when she herself was about 13 years old, the defendant began to approach her almost weekly to engage in oral sex. The sister further testified that this activity led to sexual intercourse within 6 to 8 months. When the sister was 17, she filed charges against the defendant which resulted in his conviction in 1980 for incest.
On August 21, 1985, the defendant filed a motion for new trial on the basis of newly discovered evidence, alleging that the victim had committed perjury during the trial. On November 21, 1985, the public defender filed a petition for a writ of error coram nobis on the same ground. Hearings were held on November 22 and December 30, 1985. The motion and petition were dismissed on January 14, 1986. That judgment was affirmed in State v. Keithley, 223 Neb. xxiii (case No. 86-080, May 21, 1986).
On July 5, 1990, Keithley filed a pro se motion to vacate or set aside his conviction pursuant to Neb.Rev.Stat. §§ 29-3001 et seq. (Reissue 1989). The motion alleged the State prosecutor failed to (1) endorse the names of two witnesses and (2) provide Keithley with unspecified reports from the Omaha Police Division and Child Protective Services. Keithley asserts that as a result of this alleged prosecutorial misconduct, he was denied the "right to confrontation and/or effective cross-examination," the right to a fair and impartial trial, and the right to due process under the U.S. Constitution and the Nebraska Constitution. See, U.S. Const. amends. VI and XIV; Neb. Const. art. I, §§ 3 and 11.
The trial court, on examination of the motion of Keithley and a review of the files and records in the case, determined that the State's witnesses had been properly endorsed and that the prosecutor was not required to provide Keithley and his counsel with unspecified reports from the police and Child Protective Services. On September 21, 1990, the trial court denied an evidentiary hearing on the motion, denied the motion for appointment of counsel, and denied the motion for postconviction relief.
A defendant seeking postconviction relief has the burden of establishing the basis for such relief, and the findings of the district court will not be disturbed unless they are clearly erroneous. State v. Whitmore, 238 Neb. 125, 469 N.W.2d 527 (1991); State v. Salas, 237 Neb. 546, 466 N.W.2d 790 (1991); State v. Otey, 236 Neb. 915, 464 N.W.2d 352 (1991). One moving for postconviction relief must allege facts which, if proved, constitute a denial or violation of his or her rights under the Nebraska or federal Constitution, causing the judgment against the movant to be void or voidable. State v. Dixon, 237 Neb. 630, 467 N.W.2d 397 (1991); State v. Otey, supra; State v. Thomas, 236 Neb. 553, 462 N.W.2d 862 (1990).
*132 The defendant claims the trial court erred in (1) finding that the prosecutor was not required to provide unspecified reports from the police and Child Protective Services, (2) denying an evidentiary hearing, (3) refusing to appoint counsel for him, (4) refusing to allow him to amend his postconviction motion, (5) refusing to liberally construe the facts and allegations in the motion so as to find a claim for ineffective assistance of counsel, and (6) not granting postconviction relief.
The defendant's first claimed error alleges the trial court erred in finding that the prosecutor was not required to provide unspecified reports from the police and Child Protective Services. The record does not show that the defendant or his counsel ever requested the prosecutor or the trial court, either prior to trial or since, to produce the unspecified reports. See Neb.Rev.Stat. § 29-1912 (Reissue 1989). The record does not identify the reports in question or why they would have been of any benefit to the defendant.
At the time of trial the defendant and his counsel knew of the alleged reports, but they did not raise the issue on the direct appeal.
A motion for postconviction relief cannot be used to secure review of issues which have already been litigated on direct appeal, or which were known to the defendant and counsel at the time of trial and which were capable of being raised, but were not raised, in the defendant's direct appeal.
State v. Dillon, 224 Neb. 503, 507, 398 N.W.2d 718, 720-21 (1987). Accord, State v. Otey, supra; State v. Nearhood, 233 Neb. 767, 448 N.W.2d 399 (1989); State v. Kern, 232 Neb. 799, 442 N.W.2d 381 (1989). See State v. Keithley, 218 Neb. 707, 358 N.W.2d 761 (1984).
The defendant next contends that the trial court erred in denying the postconviction motion without an evidentiary hearing. The applicable rule is that an evidentiary hearing may properly be denied on a motion for postconviction relief when the records and files of the case affirmatively establish that the defendant is entitled to no relief. State v. Marshall, 233 Neb. 567, 446 N.W.2d 733 (1989); State v. Luna, 230 Neb. 966, 434 N.W.2d 526 (1989); State v. Reddick, 230 Neb. 218, 430 N.W.2d 542 (1988). In this case, all of the relevant facts are found in the defendant's motion and the files and records of the case. The files and records affirmatively disclose that the defendant was not entitled to relief, and the trial court did not err in refusing an evidentiary hearing.
The defendant's third assigned error contends the district court erred in refusing to appoint counsel for him on his motion for postconviction relief. This contention is also without merit. Under the Nebraska Postconviction Act, it is within the discretion of the trial court as to whether counsel shall be appointed to represent the defendant. See § 29-3004. In the absence of a showing of an abuse of discretion, the failure to provide court-appointed counsel in postconviction proceedings is not error. State v. Rehbein, 235 Neb. 536, 455 N.W.2d 821 (1990), State v. Wiley, 228 Neb. 608, 423 N.W.2d 477 (1988); State v. Paulson, 211 Neb. 711, 320 N.W.2d 115 (1982). Furthermore, "[w]here the record fails to present a justiciable issue of law and fact to the court in a postconviction action, it is not an abuse of discretion to fail to appoint counsel...." State v. Rehbein, supra 235 Neb. at 545, 455 N.W.2d at 827. Accord State v. Wiley, supra. Since the defendant's claims are procedurally barred and are without merit, there was no justiciable issue of law or fact and no abuse of discretion by the trial court.
The defendant's fourth assigned error contends that the trial court erred in failing to allow him the opportunity to amend his postconviction motion. This issue is not addressed in the defendant's brief. See Neb.Ct.R. of Prac. 9D(1)d (rev. 1991). To be considered by the Supreme Court, an error must be assigned and discussed in the brief of one claiming that prejudicial error has occurred. City of Lincoln v. ABC Books, Inc., 238 Neb. 378, 470 N.W.2d 760 (1991). Therefore, this alleged error will not be considered.
*133 The defendant next contends that the trial court erred in refusing to liberally construe the facts and allegations in the postconviction motion so as to find a claim for ineffective assistance of counsel. This contention is without merit. The entire 18-page postconviction motion revolves around how alleged prosecutorial misconduct prejudiced his right to confront and cross-examine the witnesses. Although the defendant contends the alleged failure to provide him with reports from the police and Child Protective Services prejudiced his right to confront and cross-examine witnesses as guaranteed by the U.S. Constitution and the Nebraska Constitution, the defendant fails to identify the reports or show how they would have been of benefit to the defense.
Since the defendant has not shown that his rights under the U.S. Constitution and the Nebraska Constitution were either denied or infringed so as to render his conviction void or voidable, there is no merit to this alleged error.
Finally, the defendant alleges that the trial court erred in failing to grant postconviction relief. Since the record shows that the findings of the trial court were not clearly erroneous, it was not error to refuse postconviction relief.
The judgment of the district court is affirmed.
AFFIRMED.

=== CASE 2217932 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:37.55314+00 ===

106 Ill. App.2d 477 (1969)
245 N.E.2d 548
People of the State of Illinois, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
Isaiah Brown, Defendant-Appellant.
Gen. No. 10,946.
Illinois Appellate Court  Fourth District.
March 6, 1969.
*478 Nicholas J. Neiers, of Decatur, for appellant.
Basil G. Greanias, State's Attorney of Macon County, of Decatur (Frederick P. Erickson, of counsel), for appellee.
SMITH, J.
The defendant was convicted by a jury of burglary and sentenced to the Illinois State Penitentiary for a term of not less than 10 nor more than 20 years. This is an appeal from that conviction in which the defendant asserts that the following error was committed: (1) by *479 the trial court in refusing to suppress evidence obtained in an alleged illegal search of the automobile in which the defendant was riding, (2) the State failed to prove the defendant's guilt beyond a reasonable doubt and (3) the jury was improperly instructed.
[1, 2] Before reaching these errors, a preliminary question is raised; i.e., whether the defendant had an adversary counsel on his motion for new trial. The public defender represented the defendant in the trial and filed a motion for new trial alleging nine points. When this motion was argued, trial counsel stated "I have gone back through this record several times since the trial and since the first pretrial hearing on motion to suppress evidence. I want to say especially to the defendant in this case that it is my opinion there is no grounds for a new trial here. I want further the record to show that I am not going to prostitute my profession by belaboring the court with misrepresentations concerning evidence in this case, so I submit we have filed this motion for a new trial and I am going to ask the court to rule upon the motion on his memory of evidence in this case." Defendant cites Anders v. State of California, 386 U.S. 738, 18 L Ed2d 493; People v. Jones, 38 Ill.2d 384, 231 NE2d 390, which the State's Attorney dismisses with the suggestion that these cases relate to counsel on appeal and do not relate to this case except by analogy. Suffice it to say that a motion for new trial is historically necessary to preserve some errors on appeal and we think it is not even debatable but that the rule of advocacy applies to trial practice. People v. Craig, 40 Ill.2d 466, 240 NE2d 588; People v. Slaughter, 39 Ill.2d 278, 235 NE2d 566. Trial counsel did not pursue the appeal and present counsel was appointed to prosecute it. In this court, present counsel raises three of the same points which were raised in the motion for new trial and, in addition, the point we now discuss.
*480 Anders has been the spawning ground of adversary representation in appeals as a matter of right. Its beneficent objectives in those cases where the alleged error is patent, substantial or fairly debatable cannot be denied. Its unfortunate by-product has been all too frequently to engage court and counsel in a time-consuming academic exercise in a legal and a factual vacuum. Just how candor of counsel on factual or legal issues presented by a record should be condemned rather than commended escapes us. Counsel evaluated the merits of the motion. He raised in that motion the alleged errors now argued in this court. There is no indication that there are other errors not raised in the trial court. New counsel on appeal has been properly appointed and has reviewed the record. Under such circumstances, we cannot say that the defendant has not been fairly, adequately and honestly represented in both the trial court and here. We turn now to the errors assigned.
[3] Defendant's motion to suppress evidence was denied. The evidence was some fifteen guns obtained from the trunk of the car in which the defendant was riding and one obtained from under the seat. Defendant and four others were riding in a car in Robertson, Missouri. The car was driven by one James Mills. A police officer in that city testified that he noticed the car had no license plates. He followed it with red lights on and siren blowing. The car increased its speed, began weaving, narrowly avoided two pedestrians, and turned into a side street. He was able to stop it only by forcing it to the curb. When stopped, the driver had an expired driver's license. The driver stated the car belonged to his brother-in-law, the other occupants stated that it had been borrowed from a friend. Four of the five occupants of the car were from Decatur, Illinois. Defendant's witnesses testified that there was a sticker on the car indicating that it was operating under a permit. The officer asked to see in the trunk; the evidence *481 is in dispute whether the driver-Mills opened the trunk or the officer did it. In the trunk fifteen guns were found identified with the burglary. The officer testified that the driver was under arrest before the search. Mills and the defendant testified otherwise. They stated that the car did not speed up and that they were not avoiding the officer. The credibility of the witnesses is best determined by the trial court who saw and observed them testify. In our judgment this case is controlled by the principles stated in People v. Brown, 38 Ill.2d 353, 231 NE2d 577, where the facts are strongly similar other than that the car here was stopped at 1:30 p.m., while in Brown it was stopped at 1:30 a.m. for a traffic violation. In Brown, it is stated at p 358, 231 NE2d 577, 579:
"It is the duty of police officers when confronted with circumstances giving an appearance of criminal activity to investigate in an effort to determine whether such criminal activity, in fact, exists. This court has sustained such searches, even after the defendant has been picked up as a mere traffic law violator, where the circumstances reasonably indicate that a more serious crime has been committed. People v. Thomas, 31 Ill.2d 212, 201 NE2d 413; People v. Faginkrantz, 21 Ill.2d 75, 171 NE2d 5."
We think a reasonably alert police officer under the circumstances here recited would reasonably believe that he was dealing with more than a mere traffic violator, and that the search was not unreasonable. People v. Zeravich, 30 Ill.2d 275, 195 NE2d 612; People v. Thomas, 31 Ill.2d 212, 201 NE2d 413. The trial court did not err in denying the motion to suppress.
[4] The defendant objects to People's Instruction No. 12 which in substance informed the jury that recent unexplained, exclusive possession of stolen property by *482 defendant may raise an inference of his guilt sufficient to warrant conviction in the absence of other facts and circumstances and evidence which leave in the minds of the jury a reasonable doubt as to guilt. This instruction stated: "Possession may be exclusive even though joint." It is urged that there is no evidence in this record to establish either joint possession or individual exclusive possession in the defendant. People v. Evans, 24 Ill.2d 11, 179 NE2d 657, is cited as authority and if the validity of this instruction depended solely upon the evidence in Missouri, it could well apply and the instruction would thus be inapt. In People v. Evans, supra, the evidence indicated that the defendant neither owned the car, was driving the car nor had a key which would unlock the trunk. Under such circumstances, possession sufficient to infer guilt was not established. In this case, however, the testimony of Mills that the defendant went down a railroad track and came back with the guns in a tote bag certainly shows exclusive possession at that time if believed. It is not the province of this court to determine on this issue whether his testimony should or should not be believed. It was evidence which warranted the giving of the instruction and it was not error to do so.
[5, 6] The defendant further contends that his conviction rests upon circumstances and the unbelievable testimony of his codefendant-Mills. And this is true. Mills pleaded guilty to a lesser crime than burglary and testified on behalf of the People. His testimony on the trial is somewhat at variance with the statements previously given to the Missouri Police. If believed, however, by the jury, it indicated that Mills was driving the defendant to work and on the way back, Brown indicated that he had found something. They stopped at the railroad tracks and Brown went after the objects so found. He returned with a tote sack full of the guns which were offered in evidence and which were beyond *483 dispute the fruits of the burglary. Later Brown, Mills, Tate, a friend of theirs, and Ragsdale, Brown's girl friend, all headed for St. Louis in a car belonging to the brother of Mills. Both Ragsdale and Tate had been made original defendants, but prior to the trial of this case, were dismissed. They testified on behalf of the defendant. Brown had a previous conviction and admitted to it in the courtroom and at the time of the events in question was living with Natalie Ragsdale. Mills also testified that they discussed the disposition of the guns and talked about a trip to St. Louis for that purpose. Brown denied all of this testimony and also furnished an alibi covering the night in question except from 5 o'clock in the afternoon until about 9:30 p.m. It is here argued that since the burglarized place was located close to three or four taverns in a lighted area that the burglary just simply couldn't have taken place at this time without somebody observing it. The credibility of these witnesses and the weight to be given their respective testimony is primarily and fundamentally that of the jury. It is difficult for us to appraise their testimony from the cold record. We see no reason to disturb the jury's verdict.
For the reasons here indicated, we are of the opinion that the defendant had a fair trial and that his guilt was established beyond a reasonable doubt. The judgment of the trial court is accordingly affirmed.
Affirmed.
TRAPP, P.J. and CRAVEN, J., concur.

=== CASE 9738845 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:04:19.548644+00 ===

Boslaugh, J.
This is an appeal in a wrongful death action brought under *596the Nebraska Political Subdivisions Tort Claims Act, Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 13-901 et seq. (Reissue 1987).
The plaintiff and appellant herein, Richard L. Stauffer, the personal representative of the estate of Theresa R. Stauffer, deceased, brought this action against the School District of Tecumseh to recover for Theresa Stauffer’s death in an intersectional collision with the school district’s schoolbus. The collision occurred on September 25,1986, at the intersection of two county roads about 1 mile north and 6 miles west of Tecumseh, Nebraska. The accident involved a pickup truck driven by Theresa Stauffer (hereinafter plaintiff’s decedent) from the north into the intersection in a southerly direction, and a schoolbus driven into the intersection by the defendant’s driver, Gary R. Peters, who was proceeding from the east to the west.
The schoolbus was a typical schoolbus painted yellow, 9 feet 6 inches tall and 22 feet 4 inches long.
In his petition, the plaintiff alleged that the defendant’s schoolbus driver was negligent (1) in failing to maintain a proper lookout, (2) in failing to maintain reasonable control of the schoolbus, (3) in failing to yield the right-of-way, and (4) in driving at an excessive speed for the conditions, and that his negligence was the proximate cause of the wrongful death of the plaintiff’s decedent. In its answer, the defendant admitted the accident occurred but alleged that the plaintiff’s decedent was guilty of contributory negligence sufficient to bar any recovery because she (1) failed to maintain a proper lookout, (2) failed to yield the right-of-way to the defendant’s schoolbus, (3) operated the pickup at a rate of speed greater than was reasonable and prudent under the conditions, and (4) failed to have her pickup under reasonable control.
At the conclusion of all the evidence the plaintiff moved for a directed verdict against the defendant, arguing that the defendant was negligent as a matter of law. Similarly, the defendant moved that the plaintiff’s petition be dismissed because the evidence showed as a matter of law the plaintiff’s decedent was contributorily negligent in a degree sufficient to bar any recovery. The trial court reserved ruling on these motions and eventually decided the case on its merits.
*597The trial court found that the defendant’s schoolbus driver, Peters, was negligent in his failure to keep a proper lookout, failure to yield right-of-way, and excessive speed for the conditions, and that such negligence was one of the proximate causes of the accident. The court further found that plaintiff’s decedent was contributorily negligent because of her failure to maintain a proper lookout and because she operated her pickup at an unreasonable rate of speed under the traffic conditions. The court concluded by holding that decedent’s contributory negligence, when compared with the negligence of the defendant’s driver, was more than slight and that the negligence of the defendant’s driver, when compared with that of the decedent, was less than gross, and awarded judgment to the defendant.
Following the trial court’s decision, the plaintiff filed motions for new trial and for judgment notwithstanding the verdict. Both motions were overruled. The plaintiff has appealed from the judgment for the defendant and from the denial of his motions.
The plaintiff’s assignments of error may be consolidated into one. The plaintiff contends the trial court erred in finding that the plaintiff’s decedent was guilty of contributory negligence sufficient to bar any recovery. This is essentially a finding of fact. The findings of the trial court in an action under the Political Subdivisions Tort Claims Act have the effect of jury findings and will not be disturbed on appeal unless clearly wrong. Kumar v. Douglas County, 234 Neb. 511, 452 N.W.2d 21 (1990); Ohnstad v. Omaha Public Sch. Dist. No. 1, 232 Neb. 788, 442 N.W.2d 859 (1989); Zeller v. County of Howard, 227 Neb. 667, 419 N.W.2d 654 (1988). Under this standard, we review the record and consider the evidence in the light most favorable to the defendant in order to determine whether the trial court was clearly wrong in its findings.
In this case there is no presumption that the plaintiff’s decedent was exercising due care. Such a presumption obtains only when there is no substantial evidence as to care or want of care on the part of the deceased. When there is such evidence, the presumption has no place in the case. Bush v. James, 152 Neb. 189, 40 N.W.2d 667 (1950).
*598The presumption of due care arising out of the natural instinct of self-preservation is not evidence but a mere rule of law and obtains only in the absence of direct or circumstantial evidence one way or the other on the subject. When such evidence is produced, the presumption disappears and may no longer be considered. Anderson v. Nincehelser, 153 Neb. 329, 44 N.W.2d 518.
Omaha Nat. Bank v. Omaha P. P. Dist., 186 Neb. 6, 10-11, 180 N.W.2d 229, 232 (1970).
The record shows that the accident took place on September 25, 1986, about 1 mile north and 6 miles west of Tecumseh, at the intersection of two open and uncontrolled gravel roads. The collision occurred at about 7:15 a.m. on a clear, dry day. The plaintiff’s decedent’s vehicle, a 1983 Chevrolet S-10 pickup, was traveling in a southerly direction on a north-south minimum-maintenance road. The defendant’s vehicle, a 1968 Chevrolet 36-passenger schoolbus, which was being driven by Peters, was westbound on an east-west gravel road with its headlights lighted. Both parties were familiar with the intersection.
The defendant’s schoolbus driver, Peters, testified that on the east-west road about a quarter of a mile east of the intersection there is a small, gradual incline leading up to the intersection. Peters testified that he had accelerated slowly as he approached the intersection because of this hill and that his bus was traveling about 40 miles per hour as it entered the intersection. Peters saw the decedent’s vehicle a “[s]plit second” before the collision. At that time his bus was at the fence line east of the intersection. He testified that the decedent’s vehicle was near the fence line north of the intersection when he first saw it. The vehicles collided near the center of the intersection. The front of the defendant’s schoolbus struck the pickup at the driver’s door or shortly behind it.
Photographs taken by Keith Rodaway, a Nebraska state patrolman, on the day of the accident and received in evidence, show scattered trees and bushes to the north and east of the intersection. The patrolman testified that there were two possible locations where the bus would be “completely hidden” as it approached the intersection, and on his official report *599stated that the “major reason for not seeing danger was trees for both vehicles.”
The photographs themselves indicate, however, that it is very doubtful the trees and bushes were sufficient to obscure the bus as it approached the intersection. In fact, although the plaintiff testified that there were “some good sized trees and brush,” he had stated in a deposition, “I think I did look to the left to see whether or not, you know, you’d be able to see a big yellow school bus coming and, in my opinion, there was no way of missing it.”
After impact, the pickup spun a full 180° in a counterclockwise direction, with its rear end rotating toward the west. The pickup spun and ended up facing north in the right-hand ditch, southwest of the intersection. The force generated from the collision caused the schoolbus to also spin 180° counterclockwise. When the wheels on the right side of the bus struck a ridge of dirt along the south side of the east-west road, a bolt in the steering mechanism of the right front wheel snapped and the bus fell over on its side. The bus came to rest lying on its right side, facing east just west of the intersection.
Trooper Rodaway, who investigated the accident, testified that there were no skid marks or evidence of evasive action to indicate that either driver had made an attempt to stop or swerve. The patrolman testified that when he arrived, some 2 hours after the accident occurred, he found the decedent’s vehicle in third gear. The plaintiff argues that this evidence suggests that the decedent attempted to slow down.
Peters testified that he went to the decedent’s vehicle immediately after the collision and found that the gearshift lever was “down” and that the vehicle was in “road gear.” The gearshift lever may have been moved later into third gear position to facilitate the removal of the decedent’s body from the passenger’s side of the vehicle.
Peters testified that when he first observed the decedent’s vehicle, it was just north of the east-west fence line north of the intersection. He further testified that at that time, his bus was about even with the north-south fence line east of the intersection. Peters then testified that he had measured the distance from a cornerpost where the two fence lines intersect to *600the road edges and that the distance from the cornerpost to the east edge of the north-south road was 23 feet 8 inches and the distance from the cornerpost to the north edge of the east-west road was 26 feet. This evidence suggests that the plaintiff’s decedent was traveling at a rate of speed approximately the same as that of the defendant’s driver just before the impact.
Although the plaintiff’s decedent approached the intersection from the right,
[a] car approaching an intersection is not in a favored position and entitled to proceed regardless of the circumstances merely because [it] is on the right of the other car....
... [A] driver approaching an unprotected intersection where he knows and can readily observe that his view is obstructed must do so at such a speed as will afford him a reasonable opportunity to make effective observations for cars approaching on the intersecting road and give him a reasonable opportunity to properly react to the situation he then observes or could observe, and where his view is completely obstructed and his speed is such that he has given himself no opportunity at all to observe and react appropriately he may, where the facts are undisputed, be found negligent as a matter of law.
Hodgson v. Gladem, 187 Neb. 736, 742-43, 193 N.W.2d 779, 783 (1972). Accord, Crink v. Northern Nat. Gas Co., 200 Neb. 460, 263 N.W.2d 857 (1978); Schenk v. Yosten, 229 Neb. 691, 428 N.W.2d 510 (1988).
The right-of-way granted by the statute is relative and the duty of avoiding collisions at uncontrolled intersections rests upon both drivers.
Although the plaintiff’s decedent’s view to the left was partially obstructed as she approached the intersection, she nevertheless proceeded into the intersection at a speed which the trial court could find was unreasonable. Under the holding in Hodgson, supra, it was the decedent’s duty, her directional right-of-way notwithstanding, as well as that of the defendant’s busdriver, to “approach the intersection at such speed that each may effectively exercise an option on how to proceed as may be indicated by circumstances when they reach a point where they *601can see.” Hodgson, supra at 740, 193 N.W.2d at 782. The plaintiff’s decedent’s failure to do so amounted to contributory negligence in a degree sufficient to bar recovery. See Hodgson, supra. See, also, Schenk v. Yosten, supra; Zeller v. County of Howard, 227 Neb. 667, 419 N.W.2d 654 (1988).
Pearson v. Richard, 201 Neb. 621, 271 N.W.2d 326 (1978), involved a factual situation very similar to that in this case. The Pearson case arose out of a collision at an uncontrolled intersection of county roads. An automobile driven by the plaintiff’s decedent approached the intersection from the north. A milk truck driven by the defendant approached the intersection from the east. The trial court submitted the issues of the plaintiff’s decedent’s contributory negligence in failing to keep a proper lookout and maintain reasonable control of her vehicle to the jury, which returned a verdict for the defendant. On appeal the judgment was affirmed.
In the Pearson case the point of impact was near the center of the intersection. After the impact the vehicles veered to the southwest into a field on the southwest corner of the intersection. At the time of the accident the milk truck was traveling at 40 to 45 miles per hour. No skid marks from either vehicle were found.
In the Pearson case we said at 627, 271 N.W.2d at 329-30:
[I]n determining the question of whether the evidence is sufficient to submit the issues of negligence and contributory negligence to the jury, a party is entitled to have all conflicts in the evidence resolved in his favor and the benefit of every reasonable inference that may be deduced from the evidence, and if reasonable minds might draw different conclusions from a set of facts thus resolved in favor of a party, the issues of negligence and contributory negligence are for a jury. Costanzo v. Trustin Manuf. Corp., 176 Neb. 136, 125 N.W.2d 556 (1963); Flanagin v. DePriest, 182 Neb. 776, 157 N.W.2d 389 (1968). Negligence is a question of fact and may be proven by circumstantial evidence and physical facts. . . . Where there is a reasonable dispute as to what the physical facts show, the conclusions to be drawn therefrom are for the jury. The credibility of witnesses and the weight to be given their testimony are solely for the consideration of the jury. *602Price v. King, 161 Neb. 123, 72 N.W.2d 603 (1955).
In the Pearson case we further stated at 629, 271 N.W.2d at 330:
While it is questionable whether, in the instant case, the circumstantial evidence and physical facts were sufficient to warrant a finding by the court as a matter of law that the decedent was guilty of contributory negligence more than slight, we need not reach that issue for the reason that we conclude that in any event the evidence was sufficient to warrant the submission of the issue of decedent’s contributory negligence to the jury, which was done, and the jury has decided the issue by its verdict. The law is well established in this state that when a motorist enters an intersection of two highways he is obligated to look for approaching motor vehicles and to see those within that radius which denotes the limit of danger. If he fails to see a car which is favored over him under the rules of the road, he is guilty of contributory negligence sufficient to bar a recovery as a matter of law. If he fails to see an automobile not shown to be in a favored position the presumption is that its driver will respect his right-of-way and the question of his contributory negligence in proceeding to cross the intersection is a jury question.
The plaintiff contends that the trial court erroneously admitted the testimony of the defendant’s driver concerning the position of the decedent’s vehicle. Peters testified that he saw the decedent’s vehicle a “ [s]plit second” before the collision and testified as to the respective positions of the vehicles relative to the fence lines running east-west and north-south at the intersection. This testimony was rationally based upon his perceptions and, as such, was admissible. See Neb. Rev. Stat. § 27-701 (Reissue 1989). The defendant’s driver testified that he had firsthand knowledge of the positions of the decedent’s vehicle and his bus a “[s]plit second” before impact. Furthermore, he personally revisited the accident site, observed that conditions appeared the same as they had on the date of the accident, and then personally took measurements from the cornerpost to the respective road edges. The trial court did not abuse its discretion by admitting evidence which was rationally based upon the perceptions of the defendant’s driver.
*603In any event, this was a trial to the court, and it is presumed that the trial court, in reaching its decision, disregarded any evidence which was inadmissible. See, Suess v. Lee Sapp Leasing, 229 Neb. 755, 428 N.W.2d 899 (1988); Jeffres v. Countryside Homes, 220 Neb. 26, 367 N.W.2d 728 (1985); Abel v. Southwest Cas. Ins. Co., 182 Neb. 605, 156 N.W.2d 166 (1968).
The plaintiff also contends that apart from Peters’ testimony, there was no evidence to establish that the decedent was driving at an unreasonable rate of speed. The circumstantial evidence concerning the positions of and the damage to the vehicles following the collision was some evidence as to the speed of the pickup when the vehicles collided. The positions of the vehicles at the time of impact is shown by the marks made by two “tow hooks” located on the bus’ front bumper when they creased the pickup’s left side door. The tow hooks, which were bent to the left, or south, by the force of the collision, are some indication of the pulling effect the motion of the pickup had upon the bus. It was a matter for the trier of fact to draw the inferences and conclusions from the evidence. Based on the foregoing evidence, when considered in the light most favorable to the defendant, the trial court could find that the plaintiff’s decedent was traveling at an unreasonable rate of speed under the conditions and that the plaintiff’s decedent was guilty of contributory negligence sufficient to bar any recovery.
The judgment of the trial court is affirmed.
Affirmed.

=== CASE 9738846 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:04:19.553555+00 ===

Shanahan, J.,
dissenting.
Saying that the fatal intersection was “partially obstructed” does not make it so, especially since the quoted characterization is only the majority’s conclusion and not a reflection of evidence in the Stauffer case. A verbal characterization of the intersection cannot displace visual truth. Consequently, attempted description is no substitute for actual depiction. While the majority offers that “it is very doubtful the trees and bushes were sufficient to obscure the bus as it approached the intersection,” photographic evidence removes all semblance of doubt whatsoever. Since “[o]ne picture is worth more than a thousand words, ” here is at least a thousand words:
*604[[Image here]]
*605The preceding photograph shows Theresa Stauffer’s view to her left, looking southeast, as she drove her pickup south toward the intersection. At the extreme left of the photograph, a tree at the east-west fence line marks the bottom of a hill several hundred feet east of the intersection which Theresa Stauffer was approaching in her pickup. At that time, Peters was driving the bright-yellow 36-passenger schoolbus, which was 22 feet 4 inches long and 9 feet 6 inches high, down the westward-sloping hill at 30 to 35 miles per hour. One can readily discern that a schoolbus is not only painted yellow to be easily seen, but is designed so that the busdriver has a panoramic view for safe operation of the vehicle. In the driver’s seat of the bus and while looking from right to left and vice versa, Peters had an elevated vantage point 8 feet above the ground as the westbound bus began accelerating to 40 miles per hour on the road behind the volunteer and intermittent scrub depicted in the photograph. The light-blue Stauffer pickup was 17 feet long and had a “camper” located in the pickup’s bed just behind the cab, which was approximately 5V2 feet from its top to ground level. Accompanying Theresa Stauffer in the family pickup was the Stauffers’ 7-month-old son, Adam, and both were secured with seatbelts. Adam survived the collision.
As shown in the photograph, no tree is large enough or dense enough to completely conceal the bus. Thus, nothing obstructed Theresa Stauffer’s total view of the big yellow bus as it traveled the distances between or behind the trees or shrubs. To paraphrase a well-known expression, while a tree might have concealed some of the bus some of the time, no tree concealed all the bus at any time. Also, Peters, recounting his panoramic view of the intersection, never mentioned that any obstruction was a factor for him regarding the collision. Rather, as Peters described the collision to Trooper Rodaway, Peters “ [d]idn’t see [Stauffers’] pickup till [the] crash, and didn’t have time to brake.” Peters testified that he failed to see the Stauffer vehicle until the very “ [s]plit second” before the bus struck the Stauffer vehicle at the juncture of the pickup’s cab and bed.
Both Theresa Stauffer and Peters were acquainted with the intersection. The only direct evidence of vehicular velocity pertains to the schoolbus, namely, 40 miles per hour at impact. *606Neither the Stauffer pickup nor the schoolbus left marks on the road surface to indicate braking or evasive action.
In that factual setting, the district court concluded that Theresa Stauffer “was contributorily negligent, sufficient to bar recovery because of her failure to maintain a proper lookout and because she operated her automobile at an unreasonable rate of speed under the traffic conditions then existing,” negligence which “when compared with that of [defendant school district] was more than slight and the negligence of the defendant, when compared with that of the decedent, was less than gross.” The exact nature of the deficiency in Theresa Stauffer’s “lookout” is undisclosed. However, in a further factfinding step, the majority concludes that Theresa Stauffer’s view “to the left was partially obstructed as she approached the intersection ... at a speed which the trial court could find was unreasonable”; hence, according to the majority, a partially obstructed view of the intersection rendered the pickup’s velocity, whatever that velocity may have been, “unreasonable.”
“Negligence is never presumed, and cannot be inferred from the mere fact that an accident happened.” Bixby v. Ayers, 139 Neb. 652, 662, 298 N.W. 533, 539 (1941). Accord Howell v. Robinson Iron & Metal Co., 173 Neb. 445, 113 N.W.2d 584 (1962). Also, contributory negligence is an affirmative defense, and the defendant has the burden to prove contributory negligence. See, Jensen v. Archbishop Bergan Mercy Hosp., 236 Neb. 1, 459 N.W.2d 178 (1990); Lynn v. Metropolitan Utilities Dist., 225 Neb. 121, 403 N.W.2d 335 (1987).
The preceding expressions of Nebraska law bring us to a rule which this court has frequently expressed over several years: A decedent is presumed to have exercised reasonable care for the decedent’s own safety, a rule which is based on the instinct of self-preservation and the natural inclination to avoid personal harm. See, Pearson v. Richard, 201 Neb. 621, 271 N.W.2d 326 (1978); Sheets v. Davenport, 181 Neb. 621, 150 N.W.2d 224 (1967); Wolstenholm v. Kaliff, 176 Neb. 358, 126 N.W.2d 178 (1964). The foregoing “presumption” is, perhaps, nothing more than a combination of procedural rules pertaining to production of evidence: To recover in a negligence action, a *607plaintiff must prove the defendant’s negligence, but a recovery may be barred by the plaintiff’s contributory negligence proved by the defendánt. In the Stauffer case, however, the evidénce clearly establishes negligence on the part of Peters, the school district’s driver, but fails to establish any negligence of Theresa Stauffer.
As an additional rule, one of the “Nebraska Rules of the Road,” Neb. Rev. Stat. § 39-635(1) (Reissue 1988), provides: “When two vehicles approach or enter an intersection from different roadways at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right.” In Reese v. Mayer, 198 Neb. 499, 502, 253 N.W.2d 317, 319 (1977), this court construed § 39-635(1) and stated:
When two vehicles approach an intersection at approximately the same time, the vehicle on the right has the right to proceed in a lawful manner in preference to the vehicle on the left. In other words, the vehicle on the right has the right to the immediate use of the intersection, and it is this use of the roadway that the vehicle on the left is required to yield to the vehicle on the right.
It should be noted that the right-of-way which the vehicle on the left is required to yield to the vehicle on the right is a qualified right-of-way. The driver on the right must exercise due care, may not proceed in disregard of the surrounding circumstances, and where necessary to avoid a collision may be required to yield the right-of-way.
(Emphasis omitted.)
In Wolstenholm v. Kaliff, supra at 363-64, 126 N.W.2d at 182, an action for wrongful death caused by an intersection accident in which the decedent had the directional right-of-way, this court, affirming a plaintiff’s verdict, stated:
The evidence herein is undisputed. Janet A. Kaliff did not see the vehicle being driven by the deceased. No evidence was adduced which would impose any duty on the deceased to raise a question as to the right to proceed. The vehicle of the deceased did have the directional right-of-way, and, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, deceased was presumed to be exercising due *608regard for her own safety and the safety of others. [Citations omitted.] Deceased also had the right to assume that the driver of any other vehicle approaching the intersection in an unfavored position would take the steps necessary to permit her to clear the intersection.
To sustain appellants’ contention that the deceased was guilty of contributory negligence, we must assume contributory negligence merely because a collision occurred. This we cannot do. Negligence is never presumed, and it cannot be inferred from the mere fact that an accident happened. [Citation omitted.] Negligence must be proved by direct evidence, or by facts from which negligence can reasonably be inferred. In the absence of such proof, negligence will not be presumed.
Remarkably similar to the Stauffer case is the situation considered in Price v. King, 161 Neb. 123, 72 N.W.2d 603 (1955), which was also a wrongful death action on account of a fatal intersection accident in which the plaintiff’s decedent, Nellie Price, in the operation of her automobile had the directional right-of-way over a truck owned by Orville Conn and driven by Harry King. Nellie Price was driving her car north on a gravel county road. At the same time, King was driving the truck eastbound at 35 miles per hour on a county road which eventually intersected the road on which Nellie Price was driving. King never slowed the truck’s speed as he approached the intersection and did not apply the truck’s brakes before impact. The truck struck Price’s automobile on the east side of the intersection’s north-south centerline. After the accident, physical facts were inconclusive. King gave contradictory versions concerning his observation, or lack of observation, with respect to the Price automobile before the collision. In an extrajudicial version expressed shortly after the collision, King admitted that “he did not see [Price] until he hit her.” 161 Neb. at 125, 72 N.W.2d at 605. In another version, expressed at trial, King testified that he saw the Price auto approaching the intersection and assumed that he had time to pass safely through the intersection. King and Conn appealed from an adverse verdict. In affirming the plaintiff’s verdict, this court rejected the King-Conn contention that contributory *609negligence precluded recovery in Price’s case and stated:
The defendants contend primarily that the evidence shows Nellie Price was guilty of negligence more than slight as a matter of law when compared with the negligence of the defendants. The only negligence shown on the part of Nellie Price was that she was driving fast. There is no evidence that she was violating any speed limit fixed by statute. Whether she was negligent in failing to keep a proper lookout, or in failing to yield the right-of-way, is dependent upon the facts proved .... The presumption is that she used due care. There is a natural presumption that everyone will act with due care. The mere fact that an accident happens does not prove contributory negligence. Negligence must be proved by direct evidence or by facts from which such negligence can be reasonably inferred. In the absence of such proof, negligence cannot be presumed.... It cannot be said that Nellie Price was guilty of negligence which would as a matter of law preclude a recovery. From the record before us, she could well have assumed that her right-of-way was going to be respected by the driver of the truck.
161 Neb. at 128-29, 72 N.W.2d at 607.
Therefore, in any analysis of Theresa Stauffer’s operation of the pickup, there is a “presumption” that she was operating her vehicle with due care. Consequently, the defendant school district had the burden to prove Theresa Stauffer’s contributory negligence based on established facts. Applying the preceding to the Stauffer case, Peters, from his elevated vantage point inside the bus, glanced at the southbound approach to the intersection for which the Stauffer pickup had the directional right-of-way. Notwithstanding the majority’s characterization that a southbound driver’s view of the intersection was “partially obstructed,” the photographic evidence emphatically and totally dispels the mistaken notion that the entire schoolbus was hidden at any time from Theresa Stauffer’s view. Hence, there is no evidence which can legitimately serve as a basis for the conclusion that Theresa Stauffer was prevented from seeing the westbound schoolbus as it approached the intersection.
*610In the absence of evidence that Theresa Stauffer was prevented from seeing the bus, this court must operate on the premises that she exercised due care and saw the westbound bus, which was visible during its approach to the intersection. Theresa Stauffer then had every reason to believe that Peters saw her vehicle approaching the intersection and that Peters would yield the directional right-of-way. See, Steinauer v. Sarpy County, 217 Neb. 830, 353 N.W.2d 715 (1984) (driver had right to assume that a nonfavored driver would respect the directional right-of-way); Price v. King, supra (driver had a right to assume that a nonfavored driver would respect directional right-of-way). “[W]e are not prepared to say that the driver of a motor vehicle must slow down at every intersection in anticipation that the driver of the vehicle on the nonfavored street is about to commit a negligent act.” Steinauer v. Sarpy County, supra at 840, 353 N.W.2d at 722.
Hence, the photographic evidence blows away the arboreal smokescreen. With elimination of the trees as an obstruction to Theresa Stauffer’s view, as readily acknowledged in the majority’s statement “it is very doubtful the trees and bushes were sufficient to obscure the bus as it approached the intersection,” the bogus issue of lookout falls out. Undaunted at the evaporation of the lookout issue, the majority rushes to the pickup’s “speed” as a basis to defeat Stauffer’s recovery. However, there is no direct evidence concerning velocity of the Stauffer pickup. But “[w]hen there’s a will there’s a way.” The majority settles on the bus’ bent tow hooks and comes to rest at the postaccident position of the two vehicles. Given that the rapidly moving juggernaut of a bus drilled the southbound Stauffer pickup at a point behind the pickup’s left front or driver’s door, the bus’ kinetic energy was transformed into a counterclockwise reactive movement by the Stauffer pickup as the fast-moving and much larger bus tended to come to rest after impact. Thus, the postimpact evidence is so utterly indecisive regarding vehicular velocity that the only reasonable conclusion is absolute inconclusiveness of the physical facts on the question of speed. At that point, without the boot of negligence by Theresa Stauffer, the majority pulls itself up by its bootstraps in a factually unsupported conclusion: Theresa *611Stauffer was driving her pickup at an unreasonable rate of speed sufficient to bar recovery. Quite to the contrary, the evidence fails to support the majority’s conclusion and the district court’s findings.
Moreover, in pertinent part, Neb. Rev. Stat. § 25-21, 185 (Reissue 1989) states:
In all actions brought to recover damages for injuries to a person . . . caused by the negligence ... of another, the fact that the plaintiff may have been guilty of contributory negligence shall not bar a recovery when the contributory negligence of the plaintiff was slight and the negligence... of the defendant was gross in comparison, but the contributory negligence of the plaintiff shall be considered by the [fact finder] in the mitigation of damages in proportion to the amount of contributory negligence attributable to the plaintiff....
Through a process of evaluation and reevaluation involving various calculations for operation of her vehicle, Theresa Stauffer decided that, at her pickup’s present velocity, she could enter and pass safely through the intersection, that is, if Peters would honor the statutory directional right-of-way. Even if Theresa Stauffer, at the edge of the intersection, made a last-second decision against abandoning her right-of-way, or if, just before entry into the intersection, her failure to brake, accelerate, or veer might be characterized as negligence, such conduct would be, at the utmost, negligence not more than slight when compared with Peters’ virtually reckless driving, which was grossly negligent in light of the comparative operation of the colliding vehicles. If there were any negligence on the part of Theresa Stauffer, her negligence is not considered in the abstract and evaluated by reference to a hypothetical, fictional, or mythical person, namely, the reasonably or ordinarily prudent person. Rather, Theresa Stauffer’s negligence, if any, must be analyzed in concrete actuality: her negligence compared with Peters’ negligence. After such comparison, the conclusion reached by the trial court and this court, “plaintiff’s decedent was guilty of contributory negligence sufficient to bar any recovery,” is unrealistic and unsustainable under the evidence and applicable Nebraska *612precedential decisions.
Consequently, the Stauffer case does not turn on a question of fact, but, rather, on the question whether there is fact, a factual basis for the conclusion reached by the district court. Neither creating facts nor arriving at a conclusion without a factual foundation has a legitimate place in the process of factfinding appropriate in a trial, much less in an appellate review. Consequently, the district court was clearly erroneous in its conclusions that Theresa Stauffer failed to maintain a proper lookout and exceeded a reasonable rate of speed under the circumstances. If “comparative negligence” has any meaning in Nebraska, nothing in Theresa Stauffer’s conduct precludes a recovery on account of the school district’s unquestionably gross negligence. Since there was ample evidence on the wrongful death damages sustained by Theresa Stauffer’s next of kin, the district court’s judgment should have been reversed and this cause remanded for a determination of damages.
Not too long ago, in Koncaba v. Scotts Bluff County, 237 Neb. 37, 464 N.W.2d 764 (1991), this court set aside a plaintiff’s recovery when there was evidence supporting the trial court’s judgment under the Political Subdivisions Tort Claims Act. It seems only logical and fair that this court set aside a judgment for a political subdivision when there is no supportive evidence; hence, the district court’s judgment should have been reversed in the Stauffer case.
White, J., joins in this dissent.

=== CASE 9738708 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:01:18.660009+00 ===

Dissenting Opinion.
Jackson, J. — I cannot agree with the majority opinion herein and dissent thereto for the reason that it is admitted that the appellant obtained paregoric from the Deeg Drug Store in Evansville, Indiana, under an assumed name which was known by the druggist to be false. From the record it appears that the proprietor, at the time of such sale, knew the appellant and knew his correct name, the circumstances of the sale were such that the element of entrapment is clearly apparent.
The applicable law, Acts 1961, ch. 90, §4, p. 169, being §10-3526, Burns’ 1963 Cum. Supp., specifically *371excluding the sale of the alleged contraband narcotic from the operation thereof and permitting its sale without the necessity of a prescription, in my opinion, placed upon the seller the burden of refusing to consummate the sale thereof to a person personally known to him, who for some reason gave a name other than his own at the time of the purchase of the drug.
In my opinion the court committed error in overruling the motion to quash and in overruling the motion for a new trial.
The cause should be reversed and remanded with instructions to sustain the motion for a new trial.
Myers, J., concurs.
Note. — Reported in 198 N. E. 2d 867.

=== CASE 2217407 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:26.966637+00 ===

136 Ind. App. 135 (1964)
198 N.E.2d 397
HERRIN, BY NEXT FRIEND, ETC.
v.
STARK.
No. 19,835.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
Filed May 12, 1964.
Ernest M. Wright, of Terre Haute, for appellant.
Dix, Dix, Patrick & Ratcliffe, of Terre Haute, and John J. Thomas, of Brazil, for appellee.
*136 COOPER, J.
This matter comes to us from the Clay Circuit Court wherein the appellant, David Herrin, a minor by his next friend, Ernest M. Wright, filed a cause of action against the appellee, John K. Stark, Jr., for damages for personal injuries sustained in the city of Terre Haute, Indiana, by virtue of a collision between a Jeep automobile and a bicycle.
The matter was tried by a jury and upon the completion of the evidence, the jury rendered their verdict for the defendant. Pursuant to said verdict, the court rendered judgment and decreed that the plaintiff take nothing by reason of his cause of action. Thereafter, the appellant filed his motion for a new trial which the trial court overruled.
The assigned error is the overruling of appellant's motion for a new trial.
In reviewing the record and briefs now before us, it is apparent that the appellant, under Rule 2-17 of the Supreme Court of Indiana, has waived all of the specifications of error contained in his motion for a new trial, with the exception of appellee's tendered instruction #1 which was given by the trial court. Said appellee's instruction #1 reads as follows:
"You are instructed ladies and gentlement that there was at the time of the accident in question a statute in full force in the State of Indiana which reads as follows:
"47-2023. When signal required. 
"a. No person shall slow down or stop a vehicle, or turn a vehicle from a direct course upon a highway, unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety, and then only after giving clearly audible signal by sounding the horn if any pedestrian may be affected by such movement, or after giving an appropriate signal in the manner hereinafter provided in the event any other vehicle may be affected by such movement.
*137 "b. A signal of intention to turn right or left shall be given continuously during not less than the last one hundred (100) feet traveled by the vehicle before turning.
"I instruct you that the rider of a bicycle upon the highways such as David Herrin was required to comply with the above quoted statute. If you find a preponderance of the evidence that David Herrin violated the terms of this statute without justification or excuse then I instruct you that he was guilty of negligence. If you so find and if you further find that this negligence proximately caused or proximately helped to cause the accident in question, then I instruct you that your verdict should be for the defendant, John Stark."
It appears from the appellant's brief that the part the appellant objects to of the defendant's instruction #1, which is relied upon in this appeal, is as follows:
"Plaintiff objects to defendant's tendered instruction No. 1 for the reason that there is no evidence which would make the quoted statute applicable in this case. The undisputed evidence is that the plaintiff was travelling in a straight line. There is no evidence that he slowed down or changed the direction of his course.
...."
The appellant in his argument concedes that the foregoing instruction would be a correct statement of the law under certain facts, but maintains that it is equally clear that said instruction had no application in the evidence in the case at bar and was, therefore, erroneous; however, we cannot agree with the latter portion of the appellant's contention.
The appellant contends that the evidence was without dispute. However, in reviewing the evidence in the record, it is affirmatively apparent that the evidence becomes conflicting as to the immediate events surrounding *138 the accident. It is true that the evidence is without dispute that the appellant was on his way to a Little League Baseball Game, riding his bicycle north on 7th Street in the City of Terre Haute; that said street was marked only with a center line, and at the time of the accident, it was day-light.
It is at this point that the evidence becomes conflicting. It is the appellant's contention that the plaintiff was riding his bicycle in a straight line, and it is the appellee's contention that the plaintiff was riding his bicycle in the lane next to the curb where cars were parked, and swung, or turned his bicycle into the north-bound traffic lane around a parked car into the side of a Jeep which was also traveling north without giving a proper signal, as required by § 47-2023, Burns' Ind. Stat. Anno. It affirmatively appears from the evidence in the record that the appellant admitted that he did not make any signal just prior to the accident.
A careful reading of the testimony in the record now before us given at the trial reveals that said instruction was submitted by the appellee upon the theory of its defense. It is elementary that if there is any evidence in the record disclosing that the appellant suddenly and without an appropriate signal moved from one lane of traffic to another, the questioned instruction was properly given. The appellee, as well as the appellant, is entitled to an instruction upon this theory of the cause.
It is our opinion, after reviewing all of the evidence in the record now before us, that it was the duty of the court to instruct the jury upon the appellee's theory of the case under the evidence and that said questioned instruction was a proper instruction upon *139 such theory. See Scott v. Sisco (1959), 129 Ind. App. 364, 156 N.E.2d 895; Acme-Evans Co. v. Schnepf (1938), 105 Ind. App. 475, 15 N.E.2d 472; Acme-Evans Co. v. Schnepf (1938), 214 Ind. 394, 14 N.E.2d 561; Gulley v. Hamm (1947) (T.D.), 117 Ind. App. 593, 73 N.E.2d 188; Pierce v. Clemens (1943), 113 Ind. App. 65, 46 N.E.2d 836; Mitchell v. Godsey (1941) (T.D.), 109 Ind. App. 399, 32 N.E.2d 745.
Judgment affirmed.
Carson, C.J., Faulconer, Ryan JJ., concur.
NOTE.  Reported in 198 N.E.2d 397.

=== CASE 9738709 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:01:22.400514+00 ===

REYNOLDSON, Chief Justice.
This appeal arises out of the same circumstances we addressed in a related opinion filed today, City of Dubuque v. Telegraph Herald, Inc., 297 N.W.2d 523 (Iowa 1980). The issues here involve the Herald’s attempts to secure information about applicants for the position of Dubuque city manager through Iowa’s open meetings law, chapter 28A, The Code 1979.
Plaintiff newspaper has appealed, and defendants city and council members have cross-appealed, from trial court’s rulings in the Herald’s suit alleging violations of chapter 28A. We affirm on plaintiff’s appeal, affirm in part and reverse in part on defendants’ cross-appeal, and remand with directions.
July 10, 1979, plaintiff Telegraph Herald, Inc., publisher of a Dubuque newspaper, brought a section 28A.6 law action against the city of Dubuque and the individual council members, seeking judicial enforcement of chapter 28A, The Code 1979. The petition alleged that in interviewing and selecting candidates for the position of city manager the council held meetings and closed sessions in violation of the open meetings law. The Herald prayed that the court determine the city had acted illegally, order payment of costs and attorney fees, and enjoin defendants from future chapter 28A violations for one year.
October 25, 1979, the cause came on for trial. The evidence disclosed that the council members and mayor agreed informally, in open meeting, that if some applicants requested confidentiality all applications would be considered in closed session, otherwise all would be considered in open session.
As a result of advertisements approximately forty one applications were received. Five applicants requested confidentiality despite a warning in the advertisement that the applications were subject to the open meetings law. A later survey conducted by the city after this suit was commenced revealed approximately thirteen applicants objected to release of their names.
The evidence shows the council went into closed sessions at several meetings in May, June and July of 1979 to consider and screen these applicants. When the field of candidates had been narrowed to seven, city council members, usually individually but on at least four occasions in pairs, interviewed the finalists personally at various times and places. Council member Farrell testified council members were more likely to become acquainted with an applicant in that type of setting. She further testified the council members did not wish to violate the open meetings law and that corporate counsel had advised the council such “one-on one” interviews would not violate chapter 28A provisions.
During trial the Herald sought to introduce into evidence tape recordings of the closed sessions to determine whether the council legally closed the sessions to discuss matters that might cause irreparable damage to some persons, or merely to discuss qualifications, which would not justify such action. Defendants objected on relevancy grounds, asserting the substance of the closed session was not at issue; rather, the issue was whether they legally could go into closed session to screen applicants. Trial court eventually sustained the objection and ordered the envelope containing the tape sealed.
Trial court filed its ruling October 26, 1979. It held the interviews conducted between final candidates and individual council members did not constitute “meetings” as defined in section 28A.2(2) because less *532than a majority of the council were present. It held the executive (closed) sessions occurring May 16 and 22, June 12 and 18, and July 6, 9 and 11 were all held contrary to one or more chapter 28A requirements, including reference to a specific exemption for closing the meeting, section 28A.5(2); taking final action in open session, section 28A.5(3); and obtaining an affirmative closure vote of two-thirds of the members or, alternatively, of all the members present at the meeting, section 28A.5(1).
Costs, including attorney fees and expenses totaling $3,257.13, were taxed to the city. Contrary to Dubuque’s contention, the taxed fees were not prorated and confined to those incurred with respect to the issue upon which the Herald had been successful. Council members were enjoined “from any further violations of Chapter 28A . . . from October 26, 1979 to October 25, 1980.” Trial court overruled the Herald’s Motion for Enlargement of Findings and Amendment of Decree, designed to secure a holding that the tapes and minutes of the illegally closed council sessions were public records.
The Herald contends on appeal that trial court should have (1) ruled the interviews with applicants, conducted by one or two city council members at a time, were “meetings” subject to chapter 28A provisions, (2) found that the closed sessions of the city council violated chapter 28A on four grounds in addition to those found, (3) held the minutes and tapes of the illegally closed council sessions were public records, and (4) admitted these minutes and tapes into evidence. Finally, the Herald requests that it be awarded costs and attorney fees on this appeal.
Dubuque and the council members assert on cross-appeal that because the Herald was only partially successful in establishing chapter 28A violations, costs and attorney fees should not have been awarded for the entire case.
I. Were the applicant interviews, conducted by one or two city council members, “meetings” under chapter 28A provisions?
Trial court ruled the above-described “one on one” interviews with applicants did not constitute section 28A.2(2) “meetings” because less than the majority of the council were present at each interview. The Herald contends the statutory definition of “meeting” is ambiguous. It suggests various alternative constructions in an attempt to establish that the legislature could not have intended the instant interviews to fall outside the statutory definition.
Section 28A.2(2) provides:
“Meeting” means a gathering in person or by electronic means, formal or informal, of a majority of the members of a governmental body where there is deliberation or action upon any matter within the scope of the governmental body’s policy making'duties. Meetings shall not include a gathering of members of a governmental body for purely ministerial or social purposes when there is no discussion of policy or no intent to avoid the purposes of this chapter.
In construing this statute we take note of the legislative intention expressed in section 28A.1 that “[ajmbiguity in the construction or application of this chapter should be resolved in favor of openness.” See Greene v. Athletic Council of Iowa State University, 251 N.W.2d 559, 560 (Iowa 1977); Annot., 38 A.L.R.3d 1070, 1073 (1971). However, a statute must be read as a whole and given its plain and obvious meaning, a sensible and logical construction. Hamilton v. City of Urbandale, 291 N.W.2d 15, 17 (Iowa 1980) (citing cases). We seek to avoid interpretations that would produce strained, impractical or absurd results. Id. at 19 (citing Loras College v. Iowa Civil Rights Commission, 285 N.W.2d 143, 147 (Iowa 1979)).
It is obvious that the legislature’s definition of “meeting” is confined to the first sentence of section 28A.2(2). It requires a gathering (in person or by electronic means) of a majority of the members of a governmental body. It also requires deliberation or action upon a matter within the scope of the body’s policy making duties. *533Thus, this definition is applicable whenever the term “meeting” is used in chapter 28A, including the second sentence of section 28A.2(2).1 In our view, the second sentence of section 28A.2(2), quoted above, merely reaffirms the right of a majority of a governmental body’s members to meet for a purely ministerial function, or in a social setting (as is often the case* in a small community), without being required to follow chapter 28A provisions, so long as there is no discussion of policy and no intent to avoid the purposes of the act. See City of Miami Beach v. Berns, 245 So.2d 38, 41 (Fla.1971).
The Herald, centering upon the section 28A.2(2) clause “or no intent to avoid the purposes of this chapter,” argues the individual interviews were “meetings” because the council intended to evade the act. A threshold difficulty with this position is that the proof fails to establish this was the council’s “intention.”
The “sunshine laws” are creatures of recent statutes unknown to the common law. Knight v. Iowa District Court, 269 N.W.2d 430, 433 (Iowa 1978). Because the statute does not specify whether actions to enforce chapter 28A are ordinary or equitable, this case should have been, and was, brought and tried as an ordinary action. See In re Oseing, 296 N.W.2d 797, 800 (Iowa 1980). It follows that trial court’s findings are binding here if supported by substantial evidence. Iowa R.App.P. 14(f)(1).
Trial court did not find an intent to violate the act. It concluded the council members were, at all times, acting reasonably on their corporation counsel’s advice. There obviously is a difference between an intention to violate chapter 28A and a good-faith reliance on corporate counsel’s opinion that the provisions of chapter 28A are not implicated in a proposed course of action. See also § 28A.6(3)(a)(3) (reasonable reliance on corporate counsel) and § 28A.6(4) (ignorance of legal requirements no defense to enforcement proceeding). This case does not require us to interpret further the above -quoted section 28A.2(2) clause the Herald relies on, or to speculate concerning its possible applications.
Although other sunshine acts contain varying provisions, our above ruling is supported by opinions from other jurisdictions. See Henderson v. Board of Education, 78 Cal.App.3d 875, 880-83, 144 Cal. Rptr. 568, 571 72 (1978); Sacramento Newspaper Guild v. Sacramento County Board of Supervisors, 263 Cal.App.2d 41, 48 n.4, 69 Cal.Rptr. 480, 486 n.4 (1968); Idaho Water Resource Board v. Kramer, 97 Idaho 535, 571 72, 548 P.2d 35, 71 -72 (1976); People ex rel. Cooper v. Carlson, 28 Ill.App.3d 569, 571 72, 328 N.E.2d 675, 678 (1975); Woodbury Daily Times Co. v. Gloucester County Sewerage Authority, 158 N.J.Super. 448, 450, 386 A.2d 445, 446 (App.Div.1978). The composite rationale which may be distilled from these decisions is that such laws do not prohibit gatherings of less than a majority of the governing body where decisions are not made and official actions are not taken and that the right of free speech might be violated by a law forbidding any discussion by public officers between meet*534ings.2 Activities of a governmental body’s individual members to secure information to be reported and acted upon at an open meeting ordinarily do not violate sunshine statutes. Any other rule would hamstring the progress of governmental bodies, and impose intolerable time burdens on unpaid officeholders.
The Herald’s next two contentions likewise are unpersuasive. The “one on one” interviews were neither “closed sessions” nor “informal gatherings,” measured against our above analysis. Under the first contention, each time a member of a governmental body discussed policy with another individual, a “closed session” would occur. An equally illogical result obtains under the Herald’s “informal gathering” theory, for it ignores the legislature’s apparent intent that temporal proximity exist among members of the governmental body.
Finally, the Herald argues the four interviews conducted by two council members did constitute a “meeting” because the two members constituted a “governmental body” within the section 28A.2(l)(c) definition. But the multimember body referred to in that subsection must be “formally and directly created” by another body qualifying under subsections (a) or (b) before it is a statutory “governmental body” as that phrase is used in the section 28A.2(2) definition of “meeting.” 3
We hold trial court was right in determining these interviews did not violate chapter 28A. If the information gleaned from the interviews (other than personal matters protected by section 28A.5(l)(i)) had been discussed in an open council meeting before final action, the legislative policy that “the basis and rationale of governmental decisions [be] easily accessible to the people” would have been achieved. See § 28A.1, The Code. This result would have been insured had the city disclosed with respect to each applicant the information requested by the Herald, discussed in the companion “public records” case filed today.
II. Did the closed sessions of the city council violate chapter 28A on grounds in addition to those the court found?
Although trial court found that seven executive sessions of the city council were illegally closed, the Herald argues the court erred in failing to hold the closures illegal for four additional reasons. Du-buque and the council members allege no issue is presented for review because the Herald was not prejudiced: trial court agreed the meetings were illegally closed.
The Herald’s petition, formulated under our liberal pleading rules, only generally alleged the closed sessions were “in violation of the provisions of Chapter 28A.” See Iowa R.Civ.P. 69. The newspaper did not employ a motion to enlarge trial court’s findings and conclusions to urge that court to include in its ruling the additional grounds it now asserts. See Iowa R.Civ.P. 179.
We agree the city council illegally closed the sessions for the reasons identified by trial court. We decline to consider additional reasons that, in our view, were not directly presented to trial court nor ruled on there. See generally White v. Citizens National Bank, 262 N.W.2d 812, 814-15 (Iowa 1978); Shaw v. Addison, 236 Iowa 720, 733 34, 18 N.W.2d 796, 803 04 (1945).
III. Do tape recordings of the illegally closed sessions constitute public records open to public inspection?
Trial court overruled the Herald’s Motion for Enlargement of Findings and Amendment of Decree, designed to obtain a holding that the tape recordings of the *535closed sessions became public records open to public inspection. The court relied on the absence of such a penalty in section 28A.6(3), which lists sanctions for violating chapter 28A provisions.4 Trial court found no written minutes of the closed sessions were kept, thus it addressed only the proper treatment of the tape recordings.
We first note section 28A.5(4) removes such tape recordings from the classification of “public records open to public inspection.” After an in camera inspection trial court may determine “what part, if any, of the minutes [or recording] should be disclosed to the party seeking enforcement of this chapter for use in that enforcement proceeding.” (Emphasis supplied.) These limitations upon usage militate strongly against a release of the tapes to the general public.
The Herald argues that in absence of the sanction of making the tapes a public record, a governmental body could maintain secrecy by illegally closing a session intentionally. It cites Allan-Deane Corp. v. Township of Bedminster, 153 N.J.Super. 114, 120, 379 A.2d 265, 268 (App.Div.1977), as authority for such a non-statutory remedy. However, the New Jersey court only authorized the plaintiff’s access to the minutes, a remedy similar to that authorized by our statute.
If the sealed records are of probative value in these cases, they ordinarily will surface and become public in an enforcement trial. On the other hand, adoption of the remedy advanced by the Herald could expose to public view on a mere unintentional omission of a formal step in closing a meeting, vital information relating to litigation strategy, prospective land acquisitions, and specific law enforcement techniques.
We think the legislature balanced these policy considerations and found them to weigh against public exposure. We decline to read into the statute language the legislature could have supplied had it so intended. See Hamilton, 291 N.W.2d at 18-19; Neumeister v. City Development Board, 291 N.W.2d 11, 14 (Iowa 1980). Of course trial court upon appropriate findings has the power under section 28A.6(3)(c) to void any action taken at an illegally closed meeting, thus forcing the governmental body into compliance with chapter 28A requirements.
Trial court rightly denied the Herald’s request to impose the sanction of declaring these tapes public records open to public inspection.
IV. Should tape recordings of the closed sessions have been admitted into evidence?
The Herald also appeals from trial court’s rulings that the tapes should not be admitted into evidence. The court reasoned that (1) the prejudicial effect of disclosure of the tapes outweighed their probative evi-dentiary value, and (2) the tapes could not have evidentiary value since plaintiff did not attack the result of the closed sessions, but only the fact of closure.
Plaintiff did not, and does not, seek imposition of the section 28A.6(3)(c) sanction of voiding the council’s appointment of a new *536city manager. It is apparent that the council’s right to close the sessions was the fighting issue. Ordinarily, this would turn on factors apparent when the decision to close the meetings was made, not on anything subsequently said in the meeting.
In any event, on this issue the Herald was granted all the relief demanded in its petition: a determination that the sessions were illegally closed. Exclusion of the tapes did not affect that result. Nor will we speculate whether they should have been admitted to support one of the additional grounds of illegality we declined to consider in division II. Error, if any, in ruling these tapes inadmissible was harmless.
V. Should the costs and attorney fees trial court awarded be confined to those incurred in litigating successful issues?
In district court counsel for the Herald made a fee application under section 28A.6(3)(b) for their total time of fifty one hours, and $197.13 in advanced costs. Trial court denied defendants’ request to allocate the time and expense to the issue upon which the Herald was successful. It found $60 per hour was reasonable, added the costs advanced, and awarded a total sum of $3,257.13. This amount was taxed as part of the costs against defendant Dubuque only, as trial court found the individual council members were, “at all time[s], reasonably acting on the advice of their corporation counsel.”
On cross-appeal Dubuque argues the Herald advanced two principal contentions below (that the executive (closed) sessions and the individual interviews each violated chapter 28A) and was successful only with respect to one. Therefore, they assert the fees and costs should have been prorated.
Section 28A.6(3)(b) states that a court shall order payment of “all costs and reasonable attorneys fees to any party successfully establishing a violation of this chapter.” (Emphasis supplied.) Dubuque argues that if the two issues had been submitted in separate suits, the Herald would only be entitled to costs and attorney fees in the litigation relating to the sessions found to be illegally closed. It asserts a different result should not obtain merely because the two issues were joined. Du-buque reasons that by being forced to pay costs and attorney fees attributable to the Herald’s second, unsuccessful contention, the city is being penalized for legal conduct.
The Herald interprets section 28A.6(3)(b) to mean that upon proof of any violation, all costs and reasonable attorney fees are to be awarded to the party who established the violation. Of course this interpretation would encourage parties to combine frivolous with valid contentions in order to establish a chapter 28A violation, knowing attorney fees would be awarded for the total time expended.
Although we have held trial court has considerable discretion in fixing attorney fees, see Gabel v. Gabel, 254 Iowa 248, 250, 117 N.W.2d 501, 503 (1962), the crucial issue here is not discretion, but statutory interpretation. In view of the statutory language and policy considerations involved, we hold the award for costs and attorney fees should be confined to those costs and fees incurred in successfully establishing a chapter 28A violation. Where, as here, a party is unsuccessful in establishing other alleged violations, the costs and attorney fees must be prorated. Upon remand trial court should determine that portion of the costs and attorney fees attributable to the individual interviews issue, and amend its judgment to eliminate those items from the award against Dubuque and in favor of the Herald.
Finally, the Herald requests this court to fix attorney fees for its counsel’s services in defending the cross appeal. We do not find express statutory authority in chapter 28A to assess attorney fees for appellate services.
The general rule is that in order to tax attorney fees the situation must fall clearly within the terms of the statute. Wilson v. Fleming, 239 Iowa 918, 919, 32 N.W.2d 798, 798 (1948). Thus while section 472.33, The Code, permits taxing of attorney fees for a successful appeal to the dis*537trict court in a condemnation case, we have held fees cannot be taxed for appeals to this court. Iowa Department of Transportation v. Read, 262 N.W.2d 533, 537 (Iowa 1978); Wilson, 239 Iowa at 920, 32 N.W.2d at 798. In marital dissolution cases the appellate court may award fees, for the appeal, apparently under the general language of section 598.11, which allows a court to order the adverse party to pay a sum “to enable such party to prosecute or defend the action.” See generally In re Marriage of Jennerjohn, 203 N.W.2d 237, 245 (Iowa 1972). Iowa Rule of Criminal Procedure 26 permits an award of fees to counsel for an indigent for services “at every stage of the proceedings . . . through appeal.”
No such language appears in chapter 28A. Under section 28A.6(3), the court that orders payment of costs and reasonable attorney fees is the same court that makes the prior “finding by a preponderance of the evidence that a governmental body has violated any provision of this chapter.” We think both references aré to the district court, and there is no statutory authority for this court to assess attorney fees for appellate services.
We affirm on plaintiff’s appeal, affirm in part and reverse in part on defendants’ cross-appeal, and remand with directions. Costs on this appeal are taxed to plaintiff.
AFFIRMED ON PLAINTIFF’S APPEAL, AFFIRMED IN PART AND REVERSED IN PART ON DEFENDANTS’ CROSS-APPEAL, AND REMANDED WITH DIRECTIONS.
All Justices concur except UHLENHOPP and McCORMICK, JJ., who dissent and SCHULTZ, J., who takes no part.
. The attorney general has reached the same interpretation. See letter from Thomas J. Miller, Attorney General, and David Fortney, Assistant Attorney General, to State Senators Rush and Small (April 11, 1980) (a meeting is a coming together of a majority of members of a governmental body to discuss or act upon matters within the scope of matters committed to their jurisdiction); letter from Bruce L. Cook, Assistant Attorney General, to State Representatives Pellett and Crabb (May 16, 1979) (“[Tjhere clearly must be a ‘majority of the members of a governmental body’ involved in any particular assemblage or gathering to constitute a meeting .... In the absence of a majority of the members, the provisions do not apply and discussions or business conducted by individual members need not be open to the public.”). See also Iowa Freedom of Information Council, Iowa Open Meetings Law Handbook 16 (“An important exception [to the definition of “meetings”] is a gathering of less than a majority of members. If the notice, openness and record-keeping requirements of the new Act were applied to such a gathering, it probably would limit the free speech and associational rights of public officials.”).
. See City of Miami v. Berns, 245 So.2d at 41 (“It would be contrary to reason and violate the right of free speech to construe the law to prohibit any discussion whatever by public officials between meetings. The practice of discussing politics and government is part of our American heritage enjoyed by public officials and private citizens.”).
. See letter from Mark Schantz, Solicitor General, and Fred Haskins, Assistant Attorney General, to Hanson (May 4, 1979) (also expressing the view that the multimember body thus created must be delegated governmental authority—either policy -making or decision-making duties).
. Section 28A.5(4) states:
A governmental body shall keep detailed minutes of all discussion, persons present, and action occurring at a closed session, and shall also tape record all of the closed session. The detailed minutes and tape recording of a closed session shall be sealed and shall not be public records open to public inspection. However, upon order of the court in an action to enforce this chapter, the detailed minutes and tape recording shall be unsealed and examined by the court in camera. The court shall then determine what part, if any, of the minutes should be disclosed to the party seeking enforcement of this chapter for use in that enforcement proceeding. In determining whether any portion of the minutes or recording shall be disclosed to such a party for this purpose, the court shall weigh the prejudicial effects to the public interest of the disclosure of any portion of the minutes or recording in question, against its probative value as evidence in an enforcement proceeding. After such a determination, the court may permit inspection and use of all or portions of the detailed minutes and tape recording by the party seeking enforcement of this chapter. A governmental body shall keep the detailed minutes and tape recording of any closed session for a period of at least one year from the date of that meeting.

=== CASE 9738710 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:01:22.405949+00 ===

UHLENHOPP, Justice
(dissenting in part).
I concur in all of the court’s opinion except division III, with which I disagree.
Section 28A.5(4) requires a tape record of a closed session. The tape recording is not to be divulged to the public. But if an enforcement proceeding is brought under chapter 28A, the tape is examined by the court in camera and the court balances prejudice to the public interest against probative value in the enforcement proceeding to determine whether to reveal part or all of the tape to the party seeking enforcement. I believe these provisions apply before the court tries the enforcement proceeding and decides whether the session was legally or illegally closed.
What happens after the court decides whether the session was legally or illegally closed? If the court holds the session was legally closed, the tape remains confidential and is not divulged to the public. But if the court finds the other way and holds the session had to be open, I think the inevitable effect of the judgment is that the occurrences at the session are not confidential— they constitute public information. Consequently the officials who attended the session could be required to tell what transpired there, and the tape of the session would stand on the same footing and be available to the public. We would have a strange situation if the officials could be compelled to tell what happened but the tape on the identical occurrences could not be heard.
The sanctions in section 28A.6 constitute punishment; they do not deal with the inevitable effect of the judgment itself in rendering the information public. The question the public has is not what punishment is meted out for illegally closing a session, but what happened at the session. Public officials should not be able to render public information permanently secret from the public by the simple expedient of going into closed session.
The trial court and this court have now held that these council sessions had to be open. What transpired at the sessions is therefore public information. The councilmen can be required to divulge that information or it is available from the tape recordings. If courts hold in enforcement proceedings that sessions in question had to be open but then hold that the officials who attended the sessions do not have to divulge what occurred and tapes of the sessions cannot be heard, the courts will perpetuate *538the secrecy they themselves have held illegal.
A situation could arise in which a court holds that a session was closed legally as to one topic but illegally as to another topic. That does not appear to be the situation here. •
I think the trial court should have sustained this part of the Herald’s motion to enlarge findings and amend decree.
McCORMICK, J., joins in this dissent.

=== CASE 9738711 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:01:22.677164+00 ===

MR. JUSTICE KLUCZYNSKI delivered the opinion of the court: The Director of the Department of Registration and Education (Department) revoked three pharmacists’ licenses to practice pharmacy after an administrative determination that they were guilty of “gross immorality” under the Pharmacy Practice Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1973, ch. 91, par. 55.7—6, now Ill. Rev. Stat. 1977, ch. 111, par. 4019, as amended). The revocations were premised upon Federal convictions following the entry of pleas of guilty by Theodore Dolitsky, Sheldon Miller and Aaron Finn to the Federal misdemeanor offense of offering and making a kickback or bribe in connection with the furnishing of drugs and pharmaceutical services for which payment is made in whole or in part out of Federal funds under an approved State medical assistance plan (42 U.S.C. sec. 1396h(b)(l) (1976)). The pharmacists filed three separate actions for administrative review in the circuit court of Cook County. The complaints filed by Miller and Dolitsky were heard by Judge Richard L. Curry, who ruled that the term “gross immorality” is unconstitutionally vague; that the Federal misdemeanor offense to which Miller and Dolitsky pleaded guilty is not encompassed by the legislative proscription of “gross immorality”; and that the pharmacists did not receive a fair hearing before the State Board of Pharmacy since the Board was supplied with the entire 49-count indictment, although the pharmacists were convicted upon only one count following their guilty pleas. Judge Curry reversed the decision to revoke, and the Department filed the instant direct appeal under Rule 302(a) (58 Ill. 2d R. 302(a)) on the ground that the circuit court had held section 7—6 of the Pharmacy Practice Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1973, ch. 91, par. 55.7—6) invalid. The complaint filed by Finn was heard by Judge Arthur L. Dunne, who found that the order of revocation was properly entered and affirmed the decision as not contrary to the manifest weight of the evidence or contrary to law. This court allowed Finn’s motion for direct appeal under Rule 302(b) (58 Ill. 2d R. 302(b)) and consolidated aH three appeals. The pharmacists’ licenses were revoked following three separate hearings before the State Board of Pharmacy. At each hearing certified copies of the Federal convictions were introduced as evidence. Copies of the multicount indictments were attached to the complaints filed with the Board, and in the cases of Miller and Dolitsky, they were admitted into evidence over the objection of counsel. In each case the Board found that the pharmacist had been convicted of the Federal misdemeanor and concluded that the conviction of such an offense constituted “gross immorality” within the meaning of the Pharmacy Practice Act. The Board recommended to the Director of Registration and Education that the pharmacists’ licenses be revoked. After the denial of separate motions for rehearing, the Director accepted the findings, conclusions and recommendations of the Board and revoked the licenses of all three pharmacists. The first issue we address is whether conviction of the Federal misdemeanor offense to which the pharmacists pleaded guilty may constitute a basis for the revocation of their licenses under the Pharmacy Practice Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1973, ch. 91, pars. 55.1 to 55.24). The pharmacists were convicted of paying kickbacks or bribes to nursing homes in connection with the furnishing of drugs and pharmaceutical services in violation of a Federal statute, which at the time the offenses were committed provided: “(b) Whoever furnishes items or services to an individual for which payment is or may be made in whole or in part out of Federal funds under a State plan approved under this subchapter and who solicits, offers, or receives any— (1) kickback or bribe in connection with the furnishing of such items or services or the making or receipt of such payment, or (2) rebate of any fee or charge for referring any such individual to another person for the furnishing of such items or services shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not more than $10,000 or imprisoned for not more than one year, or both.” 42 U.S.C. sec. 1396h(b) (1976). At the time the pharmacists committed the acts which formed the basis of the Federal misdemeanor convictions, the Pharmacy Practice Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1973, ch. 91, par. 55.7—6) provided that the Department of Registration and Education shaE “[r] efuse to issue or renew, or revoke or suspend, any license or certificate of registration issued under the provisions of this Act or of any prior Act of this State when such registration is satisfactorily shown to have been obtained by fraudulent means, or when the applicant for or holder of such license or certificate has been convicted in this or any other state of any crime which is a felony under the laws of this state or convicted of a felony in a federal court, or is found to be guilty of gross immorality, or is found to have wilfully violated any of the rules and regulations promulgated for the administration of this Act, or to be addicted to drugs to such a degree as to render him unfit to practice pharmacy in this state.” (Emphasis added.) No express provision was made for revocation for the commission of misdemeanors or for the payment of bribes or kickbacks. Revocation of the licenses of the pharmacists was based on the general ground of “gross immorality.” The meaning attached to a statutory provision is derived from an examination of the language of the statute and its purpose (see Village of Lombard v. Pollution Control Board (1977), 66 Ill. 2d 503, 507). The statute should be evaluated as a whole; each provision should be construed in connection with every other section and in light of the statute’s general purposes (Neville v. Friedman (1977), 67 Ill. 2d 488, 492; Huckaba v. Cox (1958), 14 Ill. 2d 126, 131). The principal concern of the Pharmacy Practice Act, as provided in the legislative declaration, is with the protection of public health, safety, and welfare. “The Practice of Pharmacy in the State of Illinois is declared a professional practice affecting the public health, safety and welfare and is subject to regulation and control in the public interest. It is further declared to be a matter of public interest and concern that the practice of pharmacy, as defined in this Act, merit and receive the confidence of the public and that only qualified persons be permitted to practice pharmacy in the State of Illinois. This Act shall be liberally construed to carry out these objects and purposes.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1973, ch. 91, par. 55.1.) The Act is designed to assure, through regulations and control in the public interest, that only those who possess the requisite professional qualifications are licensed to practice pharmacy. The term “practice of the profession of pharmacy,” as defined in the Act, means “the compounding, dispensing, recommending or advising concerning contents and therapeutic values and uses, offering for sale or selling at retail, drugs, medicines or poisons, whether pursuant to prescriptions or orders of duly licensed physicians, dentists, veterinarians, or other allied medical practitioners, or in the absence and entirely independent of such prescriptions or orders, or otherwise whatsoever, or any other act, service operation or transaction incidental to or forming a part of any of the foregoing acts, requiring, involving or employing the science or art of any branch of the pharmaceutical profession, study or training. ” (Emphasis added.) (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1973, ch. 91, par. 55.3(d).) The definition emphasizes the performance of acts requiring professional study and training in the science of pharmacy, rather than the business aspects of the practice of pharmacy. The pharmacists and the Department place emphasis on Gordon v. Department of Registration & Education (1970), 130 Ill. App. 2d 435, for the proposition that only convictions for misdemeanors which concern the practice of pharmacy constitute “gross immorality” within the intent and purpose of the Pharmacy Practice Act. The pharmacists argue that their misdemeanors did not concern the practice of pharmacy; the Department argues to the contrary. In Gordon the pharmacist pleaded nolo contendere in the United States district court to two charges of dispensing drugs without a prescription in violation of Federal law. The State Board of Pharmacy determined that two separate sales of legend drugs without a prescription on the same date to the same person indicated a woeful disregard for regulations and was contrary to the public interest. The Gordon court noted that “[t]here are, indeed, many misdemeanors which are not concerned with professional practice and conviction upon such may not be a concern of public interest or welfare.” 130 Ill. App. 2d 435,439. The payment of kickbacks or bribes is not concerned with the exercise of the professional skill of a pharmacist, the focus of the definition of the practice of pharmacy. Such conduct is related to matters 'extraneous to the central concern of the Pharmacy Practice Act, the protection of public health, safety, and welfare through regulation of the practice of pharmacy. A misdemeanor conviction for the payment of kickbacks or bribes is not “gross immorality” for purposes of pharmacy-license revocations. Subsequent to the commission of the conduct which formed the basis for the pharmacists’ Federal convictions, section 7 — 6 of the Pharmacy Practice Act was amended, effective August 27, 1975, to include fee splitting as a ground for license revocation (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1975, ch. 91, par. 55.7—6, now Ill. Rev. Stat. 1977, ch. Ill, par. 4019). Fee splitting, as defined in section 10—1 of the Pharmacy Practice Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1975, ch. 91, par. 55.10—1, now Ill. Rev. Stat. 1977, ch. Ill, par. 4032), encompasses the conduct which formed the basis for the plaintiff pharmacists’ Federal misdemeanor convictions. Section 10—1 prohibits payments to employees, owners or managers of nursing homes of “any rebate, refund, discount, commission or other valuable consideration for, on account of, or based upon income received or resulting from the sale or furnishing *** of drugs or devices, prescriptions or any other service to patients.” The amendment expressly including fee splitting as a basis for revocation is a further indication that such conduct was not included in the general term “gross immorality” (see People ex rel. Gibson v. Cannon (1976), 65 Ill. 2d 366, 373) and cannot constitute a basis for the revocation of the plaintiff pharmacists’ licenses. We hold it was error to revoke the plaintiff pharmacists’ licenses on the ground of “gross immorality” based upon their convictions of a Federal misdemeanor offense involving the payment of kickbacks or bribes. For this reason, the judgment reversing the revocation of Miller’s and Dolitsky’s licenses is affirmed. The judgment affirming the revocation of Finn’s license is reversed. Because of our disposition of this cause, it is unnecessary for us to consider the constitutional issues raised. 50570 — Judgment affirmed. 50571 — Judgment affirmed. 50663 — Judgment reversed.

=== CASE 9738712 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:01:22.681717+00 ===

MR. JUSTICE CLARK, dissenting: The issue is whether “guilty of gross immorality,” as set out in section 7.6 of the Pharmacy Practice Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1973, ch. 91, par. 55.7—6), encompasses the plaintiffs’ Federal misdemeanor offenses of offering or making kickbacks or bribes in the course of furnishing drugs and pharmaceutical services. The majority seems to base its reasoning on essentiaUy two points. First, the majority sees here a lack of nexus between the kickbacks or bribes and the actual practice of pharmacy. Second, it finds significant that, subsequent to the plaintiffs’ commission of the Federal misdemeanors, the legislature enacted a provision which makes such conduct a ground for license revocation (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1975, ch. 91, par. 55.7—6, now Ill. Rev. Stat. 1977, ch. 111, par. 4019). Hence, it concludes, such conduct does not constitute “gross immorality.” I disagree. First, the plaintiffs’ payments of kickbacks or bribes were in connection with furnishing pharmaceutical services, or the practice of pharmacy. That is defined by statute: “The term ‘practice of pharmacy’ or ‘practice of the profession of pharmacy’ means and includes the compounding, dispensing, recommending or advising concerning contents and therapeutic values and uses, offering for sale or selling at retail, drugs, medicines or poisons, whether pursuant to prescriptions or orders of duly licensed physicians, dentists, veterinarians, or other allied medical practitioners, or in the absence and entirely independent of such prescriptions or orders, or otherwise whatsoever, or any other act, service operation or transaction incidental to or forming a part of any of the foregoing acts, requiring, involving or employing the science or art of any branch of the pharmaceutical profession, study or training.” (Emphasis added.) (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1973, ch. 91, par. 55.3(d).) That language clearly is broad enough to bring the conduct of plaintiffs within the scope of the Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1973, ch. 91, par. 55.1 et seq.), specifically within the ambit of “gross immorality,” proscribed by section 7.6 of the Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1973, ch. 91, par. 55.7—6). Moreover, section 1 of the Act provides that it “shall be liberally construed to carry out” the purposes of the Act, also set out in section 1: “The Practice of Pharmacy in the State of Illinois is declared a professional practice affecting the public health, safety and welfare and is subject to regulation and control in the public interest. It is further declared to be a matter of public interest and concern that the practice of pharmacy, as defined in this Act, merit and receive the confidence of the public and that only qualified persons be permitted to practice pharmacy in the State of Illinois.” (Emphasis added.) Ill. Rev. Stat. 1973, ch. 91, par. 55.1. The plaintiffs’ conduct was a betrayal of public confidence; they failed to .meet their obligation to the public. Their actions were not profit-seeking schemes involving outside illicit business activities such as fraudulent real estate ventures or giving kickbacks on providing rocmpharmaceutical services, or unrelated misdemeanors such as traffic offenses. If it had been so, I would not be dissenting. (See Gordon v. Department of Registration & Education (1970), 130 Ill. App. 2d 435, 438-39.) Rather, their wrongful conduct was integrally a part of their profession or livelihood. The plaintiffs dispensed drugs and pharmaceutical services on the basis of monetarily induced demand. Such conduct would rightly encourage consumers and other members of the public to question the plaintiffs’ honesty and integrity while dealing with them. Prevention of injury would seem to be the purpose justifying State licensing of a profession. A qualification for receiving and retaining such professional licenses would seem to be honesty and integrity. (See generally People ex rel. State Board of Health v. Apfelbaum (1911), 251 Ill. 18, and Kaplan v. Department of Registration & Education (1977), 46 Ill. App. 3d 968.) Plaintiffs apparently lacked that qualification while practicing their profession. Second, the legislature’s proscription of fee-splitting, including payment of kickbacks and bribes, by enactment after the plaintiffs’ illegal activities occurred, does not persuade me that this misdemeanor conduct was not, therefore, within the bounds of “gross immorality.” True, a legislative amendment creates a presumption that a change in law is effected, but this presumption is neither conclusive nor controlling. (Bruni v. Department of Registration & Education (1974), 59 Ill. 2d 6, 11-12; Merrill v. Drazek (1975), 62 Ill. 2d 1, 6; Chicago & Illinois Midland Ry. Co. v. Department of Revenue (1976), 63 Ill. 2d 474, 481.) It “may be overcome by more persuasive considerations.” (Scribner v. Sachs (1960), 18 Ill. 2d 400, 411.) “ ‘Gross immorality’ should be measured by the standards of each profession ***.” (Mingo County Medical Society, Inc. v. Simon (1942), 124 W. Va. 493, 496, 20 S.E.2d 807, 809. Accord, Gordon v. Department of Registration & Education (1970), 130 Ill. App. 2d 435, 438-39.) Here, the Board of Pharmacy, composed of plaintiffs’ peers within the pharmacy profession, determined that plaintiffs’ conduct fell below those standards. I think they would have an intimate knowledge of the complexities and mechanics óf their profession such as would justify giving substantial weight to their findings and the Department’s decision. This I find more persuasive than legislative afterthought. I must acknowledge my serious misgivings about the legislature’s use of the words “gross immorality.” That is a broad, vague concept deserving of critical analysis. However, given the majority’s choice of not addressing that constitutional issue, given the inseparable connection between the plaintiffs’ profession and conduct as well as their betrayal of public confidence, and given the interpretation of “gross immorality” by plaintiffs’ peers, I must conclude that the Department’s revocations should have been affirmed. UNDERWOOD and MORAN, JJ., join in this dissent.

=== CASE 9738713 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:01:23.28828+00 ===

MR. JUSTICE RYAN delivered the opinion of the court: This appeal is a sequel to Stuart v. Continental Illinois National Bank & Trust Co. (1977), 68 Ill. 2d 502. Upon remand by that opinion, Elizabeth Stuart and the Illinois Institute of Technology (hereinafter HT) sought to recover “increases, gains, income or profits” accumulating after June 30, 1971, on the $3.5 million granted IIT by the earlier opinion of this court. The circuit court of Cook County dismissed the petition and ruled that only the $3.5 million should be distributed to IIT. The primary issue posed now by Miss Stuart and IIT is whether our earlier opinion gave IIT a right to interest, dating from June 30, 1971, on its grant of $3.5 million. We hold that the $3.5 million grant is the total amount to which IIT is entitled. The protracted litigation involving the will of Harold Stuart has been recounted in earlier proceedings (see 68 Ill. 2d 502; Northern Trust Co. v. Continental Illinois National Bank & Trust Co. (1976), 43 Ill. App. 3d 169), and this particular appeal does not require a complete restatement of those facts. Harold Stuart died on June 30, 1966, leaving a substantial estate. His will provided for the creation of a large charitable trust, with his two sisters and the Continental Bank as trustees. The trustees had the power to designate the charities to whom the assets of the estate would be distributed. Under the provisions of that trust, the bank could veto any distribution ordered by the two sisters. The trustees were unable to agree on a distribution plan, so the circuit court was called on to establish a plan of distribution. The court adopted almost the entire plan submitted by the bank. The two sisters had requested that three-fourths of the trust go to IIT, while the plan approved by the court called for much wider distribution. In our earlier opinion we examined three major issues relevant to this appeal. First, we found that the bank had wrongfully distributed $250,000 to an unqualified charity, and we ordered the money returned, with interest, to the trust. Second, we found that the bank and the two sisters had both designated an additional distribution of $3.5 million to IIT. We ordered disbursement of that amount to IIT. Third, we found that any excess funds should be distributed according to the plan as set forth by the circuit court. Our opinion had, accordingly, dealt with all funds available for distribution. We remanded that case for entry of appropriate orders. On the remand, Miss Stuart and IIT filed a petition for accounting which asked the bank to supply information on all increases, gains, income or profits, accruing after June 30, 1971, on the $3.5 million, and asked that an order be entered directing the bank to distribute that money to IIT. The circuit court dismissed that petition and a direct appeal under Rule 302(b) (58 Ill. 2d R. 302(b)) was granted. In the earlier opinion of this court, it was clearly stated: “We hold, therefore, that upon remand an order be entered directing that an additional $3.5 million of the estate be distributed to IIT.” (Stuart v. Continental Illinois National Bank & Trust Co. (1977), 68 Ill. 2d 502, 536.) It is impossible to negate every possible issue in an opinion and therefore the rule is that “[w]here *** the directions of a reviewing court are specific, a positive duty devolves upon the court to which the cause is remanded to enter an order or decree in accordance with the directions contained in the mandate. Precise and unambiguous directions in a mandate must be obeyed.” (Thomas v. Durchslag (1951), 410 Ill. 363, 365.) While we did not specifically exclude an increase of the IIT grant in the earlier opinion, neither did we include it, and we specifically directed that $3.5 million be distributed to IIT. In contrast, our earlier opinion specificaHy provided for interest on the $250,000 the Continental Bank would be required to return to the trust (68 Ill. 2d 502, 526). The circuit court foUowed our instructions and was correct in dismissing a claim for additional funds. Our earlier opinion effectively distributed aH the proceeds of the Stuart trust. On that appeal, IIT contended that the trial court, in adopting its plan for distribution, had erred in not including IIT in the pro rata distribution of $6.5 million of the funds in excess of the amount required to satisfy all specific grants. Monies in excess of the specific grants were ordered to be distributed to designated group 1 and group 2 charities, as established in the distribution plan, on a pro rata basis. We specificaHy limited IIT’s grant to $3.5 million by holding that they were to receive none of the excess funds. As we stated, “IIT is the only other charity which is precluded from taking a pro rata share of the excess funds, and the court [the initial trial court] could well have concluded that IIT’s share of the estate was already of sufficient size.” (68 Ill. 2d 502, 538.) The $6.5 million included interest or earnings that could well have been attributed to the $3.5 million which this court held should be distributed to IIT. When the matter was presented to the circuit court for a plan of distribution, the $3.5 million was not a segregated fund but was a part of the total assets of the estate, for which the court was asked to form a plan of distribution. Plaintiffs had, at one time, stated in writing that IIT should receive $3.5 million in addition to that which had previously been distributed to it. However, when that amount was agreed to by the bank, plaintiffs insisted that IIT should receive three-fourths of the total estate. Although in our previous opinion we characterize the bank’s action of withdrawing its proposal of the additional grant as “arbitrary and unreasonable” (68 Ill. 2d 502, 536), it should be noted that, at the time of the withdrawal, plaintiffs did not agree to a distribution to IIT of only an additional $3.5 miUion. The court was then called upon by both parties to formulate a plan of distribution of the entire fund. This the court did, excluding IIT from any share in the accumulated excess. Our opinion stated that we could not say that the circuit court’s holding in adopting this plan was inequitable or contrary to the manifest weight of the evidence. The present contention of the plaintiffs is, in effect, asking this court to reconsider at least a part of the distribution plan which we have previously approved. IIT suggests that our finding that “the circuit court erred in its denial of the relief requested by plaintiff IIT in count III” (68 Ill. 2d 502, 533) gave IIT a vested right to the $3.5 million retroactive to June 30, 1971. IIT argues that because it had a vested right to the money, it had a right to the accumulated interest on that money. In particular, it relies on article V(e) of the Stuart wiH, which provides: “[T]he Executors shall, prior to the expiration of such period of five (5) years after my death, select in writing the qualified charitable organizations to take hereunder and the proportion of my estate each such organization is to receive, and the interest of each such charitable organization shall vest at the expiration of such five-year period.” Harold Stuart died on June 30, 1966, thus making June 30, 1971, the date of “vesting.” The term “vest” does not have a single, fixed, clear and precise meaning. Whether found in a statute or in a document, the word must be construed with reference to, and take its meaning from, the context of the provision where it is found. It may be used “when there is an immediate right to present enjoyment or a present fixed right of future enjoyment” of property. (2 W. James, Illinois Probate Law & Practice sec. 43.74, at 50 (1951). See also Pearson v. Hanson (1907), 230 Ill. 610, 617; 92 C.J.S. 1002 (1955).) Once the designation had been made by the Stuart sisters and the bank, the interest became fixed or “vested” and could not be altered by the bank’s subsequent withdrawal of the proposal, or by the plaintiffs’ rejection of the $3.5 million grant and their demand for a grant to IIT of three-fourths of the estate. However, in the context of the will, the enjoyment of the fixed or vested interest was to be delayed until distribution. Because of the litigation wherein both parties requested the court to approve plans for distribution, the right to the enjoyment of the $3.5 million was delayed until the lower court ordered distribution upon remand. “Vest,” as used in the Stuart wiH, meant only that once the designation had been made, it could not be withdrawn. IIT was given a present fixed right to future enjoyment upon distribution, not a present possessory interest. The vested interest of IIT did not carry with it the right to interest on the amount of the grant from June 30, 1971. For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the circuit court of Cook County is affirmed. Judgment affirmed.

=== CASE 9738714 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:01:23.293526+00 ===

MR. JUSTICE UNDERWOOD, dissenting: I believe that it was implicit in our earlier opinion in this case that IIT was entitled to interest on its grant of $3.5 million. In our October 1977 opinion it was determined “that the circuit court erred in its denial of the relief requested by plaintiff IIT in count III of the second amended complaint.” (68 Ill. 2d 502, 533.) While that opinion did not refer specifically to the question of interest on the $3.5 million, the relief requested by plaintiff IIT in count III of its second amended complaint included an amount for “increases, gains, earnings or profits” on the $3.5 million grant. Since the majority opinion concedes that “we did not specifically exclude an increase of the IIT grant in the earlier opinion,” it would seem more logical to resolve the ambiguity by referring to the pleadings to determine what relief was requested, since we concluded that the circuit court had erred in its denial of the relief requested by IIT. More fundamentally, however, it seems contrary to logic and reason to declare, on the one hand, that IIT had a vested right to the $3.5 million grant as of June 30, 1971, but on the other hand to deny IIT any right to the interest which accrued on this grant during the subsequent course of this protracted litigation. The result reached by the majority seems especially unsound when one considers article V(e) of the Stuart will, which provides: “[T] he Executors shall, prior to the expiration of such period of five (5) years after my death, select in writing the qualified charitable organizations to take hereunder and the proportion of my estate each such organization is to receive, and the interest of each such charitable organization shall vest at the expiration of such five-year period.” (Emphasis added.) Since IIT was selected as a charitable organization to take under the will within the 5-year period immediately following the testator’s death on June 30, 1966, its interest “vested” on June 30, 1971, pursuant to the express terms of the will. Despite this fact, the majority opinion concludes that this vested right only entitles IIT to the principal amount of $3.5 million upon distribution, following the termination of this lengthy litigation. This view is based upon what I believe to be an overly restrictive interpretation of the word “vest.” The majority opinion concludes that IIT’s vested interest gave it a “present fixed right to future enjoyment upon distribution” and only guaranteed IIT that once it had been designated as a charitable organization to receive under the will, such designation could not be withdrawn. I find it difficult to accept such an inequitable construction of the Stuart will. I concede that the word “vest” may have a different meaning depending on its legal context, but it seems to me that there is no basis in the language of the will for the conclusion reached by the majority. On the contrary, I think that a careful analysis of the Stuart will reveals that the testator used the word “vest” in the usual sense of an immediate right to present enjoyment. Article V(d) of the Stuart will, which the majority opinion fails to discuss, provides as follows: “The executors acting as trustees may, in their sole judgment and discretion, accumulate the net income of the trust estate and add the same to principal (provided the accumulations shall not take place for more than five years), or may from time to time distribute the net income, or such part thereof, as the trustees in their sole judgment and discretion may deem proper, to such qualified charitable organizations as the trustees may select. ” (Emphasis added.) This clause, to me, demonstrates the testator’s intent that accumulations of net income may be added to the general residue of the trust estate only for the 5-year period immediately following the testator’s death. The only reasonable interpretation of this clause, when read in conjunction with article V(e), is that the testator intended the charitable organizations designated within the prescribed 5-year period to come into present enjoyment and possession of their grants on June 30, 1971. After that date, any accumulation of interest would belong, as of right, to the appropriate designated charity and could not be added to the general residue of the trust estate. Clearly, if the executors had been successful in designating the charities to take under the will and the proportion each was to receive pursuant to article V(e), there would be no doubt that under article V(d) any further accumulations of income prior to distribution would accrue to the benefit of the appropriate charity. The fact that the executors failed to reach agreement prior to June 30, 1971, on the charitable organizations, other than IIT, to take under the will should not operate to deprive IIT of interest that it would otherwise have been indisputably entitled to. The prohibition in article V(d) against accumulations of net income subsequent to the “vesting” date of June 30, 1971, reinforces my belief that the testator used the word “vest” to connote present enjoyment and possession, including the right to receive all “increases, gains, earnings or profits” accruing after the vesting date. I would allow IIT interest on the $3.5 million from the date of vesting, June 30, 1971. MR. JUSTICE MORAN joins in this dissent.

=== CASE 2217423 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:27.303393+00 ===

99 Mich. App. 547 (1980)
297 N.W.2d 713
PEOPLE
v.
CARL JOHNSON
Docket No. 43427.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided August 25, 1980.
Frank J. Kelley, Attorney General, Robert A. Derengoski, Solicitor General, and Ward S. Hamlin, Jr., Prosecuting Attorney (by Leonard J. Malinowski, Assistant Attorney General, Prosecuting Attorneys Appellate Service), for the people.
DeVries & Lamb, P.C., for defendant on appeal.
Before: DANHOF, C.J., and R.B. BURNS and MacKENZIE, JJ.
MacKENZIE, J.
Defendant Carl Johnson was charged with first-degree premeditated murder and felony murder-rape, contrary to MCL 750.316; MSA 28.548, arising out of the death of Terry Lynn Wilson in Bangor, Michigan, on July 4, 1977.
The evidence at trial indicated that defendant and the victim had known each other during high school and that defendant was seen dancing with her in a South Haven bar a few hours before her death. Three witnesses testified that they saw defendant standing beside a cream-colored Pontiac, similar to the one the victim had been driving, between 2 a.m. and 3 a.m. the morning of July 4th. They heard several muffled screams coming from the car, but left when defendant requested them to leave after stating "Go away, I fucked up bad, go away". Several hours later, the victim's body was found in the trunk of her car at a different location. She was nude from the waist down and had been stabbed numerous times, but *551 the cause of death was determined to be a blow to the back of her head most likely from a tire iron. The tire iron was found at the location where the three witnesses had seen defendant. The pathologist was unable to determine whether the victim had been raped.[1]
Defendant was convicted of both first-degree premeditated murder and felony murder-rape in a bench trial before Judge Robert E.A. Boyle sitting by special assignment of the Michigan Supreme Court. On May 26, 1978, defendant was sentenced to life imprisonment in solitary confinement. He appeals as of right.
Defendant raises several issues on appeal. He initially contends that his signed, written waiver of jury trial filed March 30, 1978, was ineffective because it was not executed in open court in compliance with MCL 763.3; MSA 28.856. The statute requires that a waiver of jury trial be in writing, signed by the defendant, filed and made part of the record, and that "[s]uch waiver of trial by jury must be made in open court after the said defendant has been arraigned and has had opportunity to consult with counsel".
It is true that the jury waiver statute is to be strictly construed to the extent that a written waiver is ineffective where defendant does not waive his right in open court. People v Rimmer, 59 Mich App 645; 230 NW2d 170 (1975). In the case at bar, the following colloquy occurred between the trial judge, defense counsel, and the prosecutor in open court on the first day of trial:
"THE COURT: Very well. Now, at this time I want to *552 check  and do I understand that there is no question but what the Defendant has signed a written waiver of jury trial and filed it?
"MR. SEAMAN: That's correct, Your Honor.
"THE COURT: You agree on that?
"MR. HAMLIN: Yes, Your Honor.
"THE COURT: Very well. Thank you. You may now proceed with your opening statement, Mr. Hamlin."
Although the statute does not expressly require an oral waiver, such a requirement has been imposed previously. People v Word, 67 Mich App 663; 242 NW2d 471 (1976).
However, we agree with the Court in People v McKaig, 89 Mich App 746, 750; 282 NW2d 209 (1979), that there should not be a hard and fast rule in every case. There it was held that a valid waiver does not require an oral acknowledgment where it is apparent that the waiver was made in open court. Similarly, in People v Little, 87 Mich App 50, 55; 273 NW2d 583 (1978), it was held that defendant need not orally waive jury trial himself, but it was sufficient if defendant was present when defense counsel did so. See also People v Braxton, 91 Mich App 689; 283 NW2d 829 (1979).
From the testimony of defendant and trial counsel at the motion for a new trial held December 15, 1978, it is apparent that defendant was informed several times before signing the written waiver of the advantages and disadvantages of a jury trial as opposed to a bench trial. Because of pretrial publicity and the complicated nature of defendant's insanity defense, a bench trial was chosen as a matter of trial strategy. Defense counsel anticipated a bench trial well in advance of trial when he moved to disqualify Judge Warshawsky, initially assigned to the case, because he had been exposed to evidence ruled inadmissible. Defendant *553 had been informed by defense counsel that he would be asked about his waiver by the trial judge; in fact, defendant was present when his counsel told the trial court that defendant had waived trial by jury.
Visiting Judge Boyle, who presided at defendant's trial, indicated in his opinion and decision denying a new trial dated November 3, 1978, that he had been informed that the reason he was assigned to the case was that defendant had waived jury trial. In that opinion, Judge Boyle stated that when defense counsel stated that defendant had waived jury trial, defendant nodded his head in agreement.
Although we perceive the better practice to include an express waiver of jury trial by the defendant in court we find no reversible error here. The close relation between defendant and trial counsel, the many pre-trial motions to disqualify Judge Warshawsky, and defendant's nodding agreement that he had waived jury trial all lead to our conclusion that his rights were adequately protected. For the same reasons, we believe his waiver was knowing and voluntary.
Defendant secondly argues that due to the lack of evidence of premeditation or deliberation at the preliminary examination, the magistrate erred in binding defendant over on an open charge of murder. We disagree.
Absent a showing of clear abuse of discretion, this Court will not reverse a magistrate's determination of probable cause. People v Johnson, 93 Mich App 667, 675; 287 NW2d 311 (1979), People v Juniel, 62 Mich App 529; 233 NW2d 635 (1975). The corpus delicti of first-degree murder must be demonstrated at the preliminary examination. Johnson, supra. The evidence at the preliminary *554 examination that defendant had previously known the victim and had danced with her shortly before she was murdered, and that hours later, at the scene of the crime, a witness testified to hearing screams and was told by defendant to leave because he (defendant) had "fucked up", was sufficient to establish probable cause of premeditation and deliberation. We will not discuss defendant's argument that the magistrate abused his discretion in binding defendant over on a charge of felony murder-rape, due to our treatment of defendant's felony murder conviction, infra.
Defendant also alleges that the trial court erred in admitting evidence of certain statements defendant made to the police which were allegedly involuntary. An extensive Walker[2] hearing was conducted, after which Judge Warshawsky ruled inadmissible several statements made by defendant before being apprised of his Miranda[3] rights and one taped statement of defendant determined to be incomplete. Judge Warshawsky ruled that several other statements that defendant made after being given his Miranda warnings were voluntary and admissible.
On appeal from a trial court's determination of voluntariness, this Court is required to examine the entire record and make an independent determination of voluntariness. People v Robinson, 386 Mich 551; 194 NW2d 709 (1972), People v Germain, 91 Mich App 154, 161; 284 NW2d 260 (1979), People v Dixon, 84 Mich App 675; 270 NW2d 488 (1978).
Relevant factors to be considered in this determination are "(a) the duration and conditions of *555 detention; (b) the manifest attitude of the police toward the accused; (c) the physical and mental state of the accused; and (d) diverse pressures which sap or sustain the accused's powers of resistance or self control". People v Allen, 8 Mich App 408, 412; 154 NW2d 570 (1967), citing Culombe v Connecticut, 367 US 568; 81 S Ct 1860; 6 L Ed 2d 1037 (1961). The ultimate consideration is whether "the confession [is] the product of an essentially free and unconstrained choice by its maker". Id.
In the case at bar, defendant, barefoot and clad only in a pair of blue jeans, was arrested and taken to the Bangor state police post between 5:30 and 6 a.m. on July 4, 1977. There he was handcuffed to a bar about shoulder height. After 25 minutes, one of defendant's hands was released and he was allowed to sit in a chair. Defendant stayed in this position for two to three hours and did manage to sleep, though he was aroused several times when his hand slipped off the bar and the handcuffs caught his wrist.
At approximately 11 a.m. that day, the handcuffs were taken off and defendant was questioned for one hour and 15 minutes by Detective Robert Rank. Both defendant and Detective Rank testified that at this time defendant was seated in Rank's office and was offered food and drink. Detective Rank described defendant as fatigued and confused, in the sense that he changed details of his story, but coherent. Defendant signed a waiver of his Miranda rights at that time. It does not appear that any coercive tactics were employed.
After this interview, defendant was seated in a padded chair with one hand cuffed to a wooden table. He was able to rest the restrained hand in his lap and the upper half of his body on the table. At approximately 4 p.m., Detective Rank removed *556 defendant's handcuff and defendant gave another statement after being advised of his Miranda rights. The questioning lasted 30 to 45 minutes.
After thoroughly examining the record, we agree with the trial judge that the conditions and duration of confinement did not render defendant's statements involuntary. Although we do not condone the practice of the state police of handcuffing prisoners to "the rack", defendant was able to sleep off and on, was offered and received food. Defendant claims on appeal that he was cold; however, he did not once mention this to the police and, as the trial court noted, it was July. Defendant also argues that even though informed of his right to be provided counsel if indigent, he thought he would have to take out a loan to pay back an appointed attorney. Defendant testified that in any event he did not believe then that he needed an attorney. Here, we are inclined to give deference to the trial judge's determination of defendant's credibility. Dixon, supra, 681. In summary, as we are not left with a definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been made, we decline to disturb the trial judge's findings. See Dixon, supra.
Defendant claims that certain evidence seized at his apartment violated his Fourth Amendment right to remain free from unreasonable searches and seizures. We disagree. Defendant admitted signing a consent form. Although defendant claims his consent was generated by the threat of an impending search warrant, there was evidence presented that no such threat occurred. To reiterate, where conflicting evidence is presented, the trial judge is in a better position to judge the credibility of witnesses. Under all the circumstances, we find defendant's consent to search was voluntarily given.
*557 Further, the officers searching defendant's residence had duly executed search warrants. Defendant's contention that the warrants were based on the illegally obtained statements of defendant is without merit as we have determined those statements were voluntary and admissible. Moreover, according to the trend of recent Federal and Michigan decisions, it does not appear that application of the exclusionary rule is mandatory where a Miranda violation is concerned. Michigan v Tucker, 417 US 433, 438; 94 S Ct 2357; 41 L Ed 2d 182 (1974), People v Kusowski, 403 Mich 653; 272 NW2d 503 (1978).
Defendant next contends that the trial court erred in refusing to grant his motion for a directed verdict of acquittal on the charge of first-degree murder because of the lack of evidence at trial of premeditation or deliberation. When ruling on a motion for a directed verdict of acquittal, the trial judge must consider the evidence presented by the prosecution up to the time the motion is made, view that evidence in the light most favorable to the prosecution, and determine whether a rational trier of fact could have found that the essential elements of the crime were proven beyond a reasonable doubt. People v Hampton, 407 Mich 354, 368; 285 NW2d 284 (1979).
In People v Morrin, 31 Mich App 301, 329-330; 187 NW2d 434 (1971), Judge, now Justice, LEVIN formulated the following definitions of premeditation and deliberation:
"To premeditate is to think about beforehand; to deliberate is to measure and evaluate the major facets of a choice or problem. As a number of courts have pointed out, premeditation and deliberation characterize a thought process undisturbed by hot blood. While the minimum time necessary to exercise this process is *558 incapable of exact determination, the interval between initial thought and ultimate action should be long enough to afford a reasonable man time to subject the nature of his response to a `second look'". (Footnotes omitted.)
See also People v Tilley, 405 Mich 38; 273 NW2d 471 (1979), People v Walker, 93 Mich App 189, 196; 285 NW2d 812 (1979).
In Walker, supra, this Court relied on People v Meadows, 80 Mich App 680, 691; 263 NW2d 903 (1977), wherein we held the following factors relevant to a determination of whether the accused had an opportunity to subject his actions to a second look: "`(1) the previous relationship of the parties, (2) the defendant's actions prior to the actual killing, (3) the circumstances of the killing itself, and (4) the defendant's conduct after the homicide.'" 93 Mich App, 189-190.
We agree with the trial court that the evidence in the case at bar supports its finding of premeditation and deliberation necessary for a first-degree murder conviction. Richard Abbott testified that he, Michael Hills, and Anthony Marr came upon a trailer and a cream-colored Pontiac while on their way to drive their jeep through the sand dunes at approximately 2 a.m. on July 4, 1977. He said he heard a girl scream in a high-pitched voice three or four times and that the screams sounded muffled like they were coming from the car. Defendant, who was the only person to be seen, told Abbott and his friends to just leave because he had "fucked up" and would explain tomorrow what the problem was. Abbott's testimony was corroborated in detail by the testimony of Hills and Marr.
Merely because the three were unable to testify that the screams were made by Terri Wilson does not require reversal. There was sufficient circumstantial *559 evidence to lead to the reasonable, permissible inference that she was in the trunk of her car screaming for help. The pathologist testified that it would have been highly unlikely that she would have been able to scream after receiving the blow on the back of the head which eventually caused her death. This supports the trial judge's conclusion that she was alive at the time the three men encountered defendant. We also agree that this gave defendant sufficient time to reconsider his actions but that he failed to do so. Regardless of whether defendant had formulated the intent to rape and murder Terri Wilson earlier in the evening, there was sufficient evidence on the elements of premeditation and deliberation.
Defendant next contends his conviction of first-degree felony murder was violative of the due process clause since the underlying felony, rape, had been abolished and replaced with the criminal sexual conduct act, MCL 750.520a, et seq.; MSA 28.788(1) et seq. This argument was recently rejected by the Michigan Supreme Court in People v McDonald, 409 Mich 110; 293 NW2d 588 (1980). In McDonald, the Court found that the Legislature intended that the repealed carnal knowledge statute continue to define "rape" for purposes of the felony murder statute and that the latter statute was unaffected by the passage of the criminal sexual conduct act.
However, under Michigan law, where only one murder occurred, defendant's conviction of both first-degree premeditated murder and first-degree felony murder violates double jeopardy protection. People v Densmore, 87 Mich App 434, 440-441; 274 NW2d 811 (1978), People v Sparks, 82 Mich App 44, 52-53; 266 NW2d 661 (1978). Therefore, defendant's felony murder conviction must be vacated. *560 Since there was ample evidence of premeditation and deliberation and as defendant received only one punishment, his first-degree murder conviction is affirmed.
Affirmed as modified.
NOTES
[1]  His testimony indicated that she had sustained a wound at the opening of her vagina which could have been caused by an erect penis. However, no sperm or other evidence of sexual intercourse was found.
[2]  People v Walker (On Rehearing), 374 Mich 331; 132 NW2d 87 (1965).
[3]  Miranda v Arizona, 384 US 436; 86 S Ct 1602; 16 L Ed 2d 694; 10 ALR3d 974 (1966).

=== CASE 9738715 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:01:24.318832+00 ===

Mr. JUSTICE ROMITI delivered the opinion of the court: The issue in this case is whether a homeowner’s insurer can refuse to defend its insured merely because part of the conduct complained of in the tort complaint allegedly occurred on business property and the policy excludes liability for injuries arising out of business pursuits of any insured, except activities ordinarily incident to nonbusiness activities. We hold that in light of the specific allegations of the tort complaint, the insurer was required to defend and, having failed to do so, cannot now deny coverage. We also hold that any ruling as to the insurer’s liability for that amount of the judgment exceeding the policy limits was premature as the facts had not been fully developed. That issue may, however, now be moot. We remand for a determination of the amount of the damages. On August 14,1974, Ricky Wummel, as administrator of the estate of Clarence H. Wummel II, filed a suit against Harmony Machine Resource, Inc., Marilyn Reis, and Robert Aldal. The complaint alleged that Marilyn Reis was an officer and employee of Harmony, that Aldal was also an employee of Harmony, that Aldal was also Douglas Phillips’ supervisor; that on October 7, 1970, prior to reporting to work at Harmony, Phillips consumed a quantity of alcoholic beverages and prescription medications at Marilyn Reis’ home; that when Phillips reported to work, he was intoxicated and incapable of operating machinery or driving an automobile and that Aldal and Reis knew or ought to have known this and, that after Phillips arrived at Harmony’s premises, Harmony, through Aldal and Reis: 1. Carelessly and negligently undertook to treat the said Douglas W. Phillips for his condition of intoxication; 2. Carelessly and negligently offered medication to the said Douglas W. Phillips; 3. Carelessly and negligently offered medication to the said Douglas W. Phillips, which medication aggravated the physical condition of the said Douglas W. Phillips; 4. Carelessly and negligently offered sleeping pills for which a prescription was necessary to the said Douglas W. Phillips; 5. Carelessly and negligently ordered the said Douglas W. Phillips to leave the premises of Harmony Machine and to drive his automobile back to his home; 6. Carelessly and negligentiy allowed the said Douglas W. Phillips to leave the premises in a condition of intoxication which was dangerous to other individuals in the area of the Harmony Machine premises and other individuals using the public thoroughfares in the area of the Harmony Machine premises; 7. Carelessly and negligentiy ordered the said Douglas W. Phillips to return to his home, knowing that his condition of intoxication made his driving of his car a danger to other motorists and individuals; 8. Otherwise carelessly and negligently caused an accident in which the automobile driven by Douglas W. Phillips collided with an automobile driven by the plaintiff’s decedent, Clarence H. Wummell II. After Phillips left the premises, he had an automobile accident in which plaintiff’s decedent was killed. Harmony Machines Inc. was insured by Crum and Forster Insurance Companies which had issued a workmen’s compensation and employers’ liability policy providing *100,000 for each accident. It does not appear from the record whether this policy protected Marilyn Reis in her capacity as officer of Harmony. Certainly, it did not protect her in her individual capacity. Crum and Forster on September 13, 1974, filed an appearance in the suit on behalf of the corporation and Reis. On September 18, 1974, Richard B. Harty also filed an appearance on behalf of Reis and Aldal.  Marilyn Reis was personally insured under an apartment owner’s policy issued by Aetna Casualty and Surety Company in the amount of *50,000 per occurrence. Shortly after suit was filed, Reis sent a copy of the complaint to Aetna; this apparently was the first notice of the accident given to that insurer. On October 4,1974, Aetna answered, agreeing to file an appearance temporarily on her behalf as additional counsel,1 but reserving its right to deny coverage because (1) notice had not been promptly given as required by the policy (this contention has not been pursued); (2) it was questionable whether an “occurrence” as defined in the policy was alleged in the complaint (this contention also was later dropped) and (3) the policy did not provide coverage since it excluded bodily injury arising out of business pursuits. Aetna, in the letter, also pointed out that the ad damnum was for *1,175,000 more than the policy coverage and that she had already retained Harty to represent her excess claim. No objection of any kind was made to the fact that Harty had entered an appearance on her behalf before Aetna was notified. On February 28, 1975, after participating in certain depositions and in the defense of the case up until that point, Aetna sent Reis a letter denying all liability on the sole ground that the business pursuit exclusion precluded any coverage for the lawsuit. Aetna in that letter stated that its denial was based on the complaint filed by plaintiff and that if the complaint was thereafter amended Aetna would reconsider the question. The attorney retained by Aetna then withdrew from the case. Aetna did not, however, file a declaratory judgment action to determine the question of coverage. Crum and Forster’s attorney and Harty continued as defense attorneys. A judgment was rendered against all three defendants for *350,000. This was reduced by the trial court to *250,000 because of a *100,000 payment by Phillips. At that point Reis filed the present suit for declaratory judgment, contending that coverage did exist under the policy, and demanding, in count I, that Aetna pay the expenses of defense including those on appeal, post an appeal bond for the appeal of the tort judgment, pay the attorneys’ fees incurred in the declaratory judgment action, and pay the full amount of the judgment, including costs and interest. The trial court, finding no coverage, granted summary judgment to Aetna and found there was no reason to delay appeal. Reis appealed the adverse judgment in the instant case. All three defendants had also appealed the adverse judgment in the underlying tort action. After oral argument was heard by the court in the instant case, the Appellate Court for the Second District, by a Rule 23 Order (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1977, ch. 110A, par. 23), reversed the judgment for Wummel in the tort action, finding, as a matter of law, that none of the defendants breached any duty owed to the deceased. The second district’s action, however, does not render the present action moot, both because that decision is still subject to review by the supreme court and because, even if there is no appeal or that decision is affirmed, if Aetna was required to defend Reis, then, as discussed later in this opinion, it is liable for the cost of defense. I.  In Illinois, a liability insurer in doubt over whether it has a duty to defend its insured, cannot simply stand on the sidelines and wait until the tort action is completed before contesting the question of coverage. In a case where there is potential coverage so that the insurer has a duty to defend, but the insurer believes that it has a valid exclusionary defense, it must either (1) secure a declaratory judgment as to its rights and obligations before or pending trial of the original tort action or (2) defend the tort action under a reservation of rights. (Thornton v. Paul (1977), 51 Ill. App. 3d 337, 366 N.E.2d 1048; Aetna Casualty & Surety Co. v. Coronet Insurance Co. (1976), 44 Ill. App. 3d 744, 358 N.E.2d 914; Elas v. State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Co. (1976), 39 Ill. App. 3d 944, 352 N.E.2d 60, appeal denied (1976), 63 Ill. 2d 556; Fragman Construction Co. v. Preston Construction Co. (1971), 1 Ill. App. 3d 1002, 274 N.E.2d 614, appeal denied (1972), 49 Ill. 2d 575; Palmer v. Sunberg (1966), 71 Ill. App. 2d 22, 217 N.E.2d 463, appeal denied (1966), 34 Ill. 2d 631; Sims v. Illinois National Casualty Co. (1963), 43 Ill. App. 2d 184, 193 N.E.2d 123.) Where a duty to defend exists, but the insurer fails to take either course of action, its failure to defend is unjustified, and in a subsequent action by the insured against it, it is barred from disputing the questions of coverage. (Associated Indemnity Co. v. Insurance Co. of North America (1978), 68 Ill. App. 3d 807, 386 N.E.2d 529; Thornton v. Paul (1977), 51 Ill. App. 3d 337, 366 N.E.2d 1048; Aetna Casualty & Surety Co. v. Coronet Insurance Co. (1976), 44 Ill. App. 3d 744, 358 N.E.2d 914; Elas v. State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Co. (1976), 39 Ill. App. 3d 944, 352 N.E.2d 60, appeal denied (1976), 63 Ill. 2d 556; Cowan v. Insurance Company of North America (1974), 22 Ill. App. 3d 883, 318 N.E.2d 315; Fragman Construction Co. v. Preston Construction Co. (1971), 1 Ill. App. 3d 1002, 274 N.E.2d 614, appeal denied (1972), 49 Ill. 2d 575; Palmer v. Sunberg (1966), 71 Ill. App. 2d 22, 217 N.E.2d 463, appeal denied (1966), 34 Ill. 2d 631; Sims v. Illinois National Casualty Co. (1963), 43 Ill. App. 2d 184, 193 N.E.2d 123.) This is not a collateral estoppel resulting from the prior adjudication against the insured, since that doctrine only applies where the issue was necessarily ruled upon in the first adjudication. (Apex Mutual Insurance Co. v. Christner (1968), 99 Ill. App. 2d 153, 240 N.E.2d 742; Cowan v. Insurance Co. of North America (1974), 22 Ill. App. 3d 883, 318 N.E.2d 315.) Rather, the estoppel referred to is equitable in nature and arises from the doctrine that “the insurer has no right to insist that the insured be bound by the provisions of the insurance contract inuring to its benefit, i.e., the ‘Exclusions’ provisions, when it has already breached the contract by violating the provisions inuring to the benefit of the insured, i.e., the defense provisions.” (Sims v. Illinois National Casualty Co. (1963), 43 Ill. App. 2d 184, 197, 193 N.E.2d 123, 129; quoted in Palmer v. Sunberg (1966), 71 Ill. App. 2d 22, 32, 217 N.E.2d 463, 467, appeal denied (1966), 34 Ill. 2d 631; Aetna Casualty & Surety Co. v. Coronet Insurance Co. (1976), 44 Ill. App. 3d 744, 749, 358 N.E. 914, 917; and Associated Indemnity Co. v. Insurance Co. of North America (1978), 68 Ill. App. 3d 807, 386 N.E.2d 529; see also Cowan v. Insurance Co. of North America (1974), 22 Ill. App. 3d 883, 318 N.E.2d 315.) Obviously, therefore, since Aetna in this case refused to defend and did not seek a declaratory judgment that there was no coverage, it cannot raise the defense of noncoverage if it had a duty to defend the tort action. It is well established in Illinois that the liability insurer’s duty to defend a tort action is determined by the allegations of the tort complaint. (Maryland Casualty Co. v. Peppers (1976), 64 Ill. 2d 187, 355 N.E.2d 24; Elas v. State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Co. (1976), 39 Ill. App. 3d 944, 352 N.E.2d 60, appeal denied (1976), 63 Ill. 2d 556; Fragman Construction Co. v. Preston Construction Co. (1971), 1 Ill. App. 3d 1002, 274 N.E.2d 614, appeal denied (1972), 49 Ill. 2d 575; Thompson v. Glover (1969), 115 Ill. App. 2d 253, 253 N.E.2d 132.) When the allegations of that complaint “state facts which bring the case within, or potentially within, the coverage of the policy, the insurer is from this time on unjustified in not defending the insured.” McFayden v. North River Insurance Co. (1965) , 62 Ill. App. 2d 164, 170-71, 209 N.E.2d 833, 836, appeal denied (1966), 33 Ill. 2d 625, quoted in Fragman Construction Co. v. Preston Construction Co. (1971), 1 Ill. App. 3d 1002, 1007, 274 N.E.2d 614, 617, 618, appeal denied (1972), 49 Ill. 2d 575; in accord, Associated Indemnity Co. v. Insurance Co. of North America (1978), 68 Ill. App. 3d 807; 386 N.E.2d 529; Maryland Casualty Co. v. Peppers (1976), 64 Ill. 2d 187, 355 N.E.2d 24; Aetna Casualty and Surety Co. v. Coronet Insurance Co. (1976), 44 Ill. App. 3d 744, 358 N.E.2d 914; Elas v. State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Co. (1976), 39 Ill. App. 3d 944, 352 N.E.2d 60, appeal denied (1976), 63 Ill. 2d 556.) The insurer can safely and justifiably refuse to defend only when the allegations of the complaint clearly show that the claim is beyond the policy coverage. We rule that the allegations did not clearly show that the claim was beyond the policy coverage and thus Aetna was obligated to defend the Wummel action.  Paragraph 10 of the Wummel complaint alleged that Phillips consumed a quantity of alcoholic beverages and certain prescription drugs in Reis’ apartment. We agree with the defendant that the paragraph does not clearly indicate that Wummel was contending she could recover against Reis because of these activities. But any doubt as to the adequacy of the pleadings to bring the occurrence within the coverage of a liability policy is resolved in favor of the insured. (Continental Casualty Co. v. Alexis I. duPont School District (Del. 1974), 317 A.2d 101; 7A Appleman Insurance Law & Practice §4683 (1962).) Since the complaint must be liberally construed to find a claim within policy coverage, when reasonably possible, we construe the complaint as alleging a claim because of the consumption of drugs and alcohol in Reis’ apartment either under the Dramshop Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1975, ch. 43, par. 135), or for negligence.  Aetna, when it denied liability, attempted to protect itself by informing the insured that if Wummel amended the complaint (which she never did), it would reconsider its refusal to defend. But Aetna should have borne in mind that the rules of pleading are very liberal; furthermore, pleadings may be amended even after trial to conform with the proof. This is one reason why the insurer’s duty to defend cannot be limited to claims clearly alleged which fall within the scope of coverage, but must extend, if the insured’s reasonable expectations are to be realized, to any claim which under the pleadings might possibly be presented if that claim potentially falls within the scope of the policy coverage. In this case, the evidence presented at the trial of the tort action related not only to what allegedly occurred at Harmony Machine, but also to what allegedly occurred at Reis’ apartment. And the appellate court in reversing the case noted that Reis’ liability was premised, at least in part, on the fact Phillips obtained alcohol and sleeping pills at her apartment. That court, in reversing the judgment, held that there was no such special relationship as to justify holding Reis liable for not preventing Phillips, an adult male house guest, from having access to her liquor or the contents of her medicine chest. While it is true that the obligation to defend does not depend on the ultimate outcome of the suit (Thompson v. Glover (1969), 115 Ill. App. 2d 253, 253 N.E.2d 132; Allstate Insurance Co. v. Gleason (1964), 50 Ill. App. 2d 207, 200 N.E.2d 383), nevertheless, the fact that liability at trial was based, at least in part, on the fact Phillips obtained the alcohol and pills where he did supports our conclusion that Paragraph 10, which was never amended, did attempt to state a cause of action or theory of recovery even though, as the appellate court concluded, that claim was, as a matter of law, without merit.2  Aetna has conceded in its brief that if the complaint alleged a claim against Reis because of acts occurring at the apartment, it was required to provide coverage. Since we hold that count 10 attempted to allege a cause of action, it follows from Aetna’s own admission that it had a duty to defend and that it breached that duty when it refused to defend. But even if we ignore the allegations in paragraph ten, Aetna had a duty to defend. Aetna contends that because the negligence involved in the Wummel claim arose on the premises of Harmony there was no coverage. However, a homeowner’s liability policy, in the absence of an express provision to the contrary, is not a policy providing limited coverage only applicable on the designated premises; rather it is designed to be a broad type of coverage protecting the insured nearly everywhere. Where, as here, the homeowner’s policy “agreed to pay * * * all sums which the insured shall become legally obligated to pay as damages because of bodily injury or property damage to which this insurance applies, caused by an occurrence” and contains no other provision describing what coverage is provided, the insurer is liable for any accident for which the insured may be legally liable unless coverage is expressly excluded. (St. Paul Fire & Marine Insurance Co. v. Thomas (Fla. App. 1973), 273 So. 2d 117, cert. denied (Fla. 1973), 282 So. 2d 638.) And nowhere in the Aetna policy is there an exclusion of liability arising out of any act occurring on business premises, although Aetna could easily have written in such a provision had it wanted to. Rather, the principal exclusion relied upon by Aetna reads as follows: “This policy does not apply: 1. Under Coverage E — Personal Liability and Coverage F— Medical Payments to Others: e # o d. to bodily injury or property damage arising out of business pursuits of any insured, except activities therein which are ordinarily incident to nonbusiness pursuits.” All that is excluded by this provision are injuries arising out of business pursuits. Not all that occurs on business'premises are business pursuits. However, we need not even determine whether the giving of medication or prescription sleeping pills to an intoxicated person must be considered a business pursuit merely because the individual happens to be an employee, since the exclusion does not apply to activities therein which are ordinarily incident to nonbusiness pursuits. The parties have cited no cases involving a similar factual situation and we have found none. However, we find State Farm Fire & Casualty Co. v. MacDonald (1967), 87 Ill. App. 2d 15, 230 N.E.2d 513, to be analogically persuasive. In that case the insured while engaged in his usual occupation of repairing elevators engaged in a little horseplay. He struck a rubber mallet against a fire door, the mallet rebounded and hurt someone else. The court in finding coverage reasoned at 87 Ill. App. 2d 19-21, 230 N.E.2d 515, 516: “The question in the case before us is not as readily resolved as that posed in the respective foregoing cases. We must determine whether the momentary deviation from his ‘business pursuits’ — the horseplay with the mallet — should be classified as an activity ordinarily incident to nonbusiness pursuits, and whether the swinging of the mallet at the time, place and in the manner indicated, had any business purpose whatsoever. Apparently, there are no cases which have decided this precise question. The language of the insurance contract expressing this exception to the exclusion of coverage tends to obscure rather than elucidate the meaning of the clause. The plaintiff suggests a hypothetical situation which, in its opinion, would be covered under this particular contract clause. It suggests that of a salesman entertaining a customer on a golf course. In such event, the plaintiff contends that the salesman would be engaged in a ‘business pursuit,’ and if, in the course of the game, he injured his customer while swinging his golf club, the injury would come within the exception to the exclusion of policy as an activity ordinarily incident to nonbusiness pursuits. Apparently, MacDonald’s deviation from his business pursuit is without significance to the plaintiff, and the fact that the horseplay bears no relation to the business purpose or pursuit, also causes it no concern. It appears to us that the hypothetical situation suggested by the plaintiff may readily be considered as analogous to the case before us. Indeed, we find an act of horseplay at least as alien to repairing an elevator and as akin to a nonbusiness pursuit as an inadvertent and injurious golf swing, which may have business overtones. But regardless of the propriety of such analogy, it is our task to construe the policy clause in question with reference to the facts of this particular case. It is beyond dispute that the meaning of the phrase, ‘other than activities therein which are ordinarily incident to nonbusiness pursuits’ is unclear, ambiguous, and it has long been recognized that an insurance contract is unlike most contracts. In an insurance contract, absent statutory requirements, the company determines and drafts its policy provisions. The insured takes the contract as he finds it. Any lack of clearness in the meaning of such contract is the responsibility of the insurer. That construction of the policy will be adopted which favors the insured and resolves the uncertainty in his favor. ° °. A construction of the clause of the policy in question which resolves the uncertainty in favor of the insured can be made without perverting the ordinary meaning of the exclusionary clause. Under the language of the clause, it is definite and clear that certain types of activities which occur as a part of “business pursuits” were meant to be covered by the contract and included within the protection afforded by the policy. The incident under consideration occurred during a business pursuit, and it is at least as logical to conclude that the defendant’s impulsive action, which caused the injury, was the type ordinarily incident to a nonbusiness pursuit, as it would be to reach an opposite determination. Equivocal expressions in an insurance contract whereby an insurer seeks to narrow the range of its liability are properly construed most strongly against the insurer. Under the circumstances of this case and the pertinent provisions of the policy, we believe that further inquiry into the enigma of the meaning of the exception to the exclusionary clause would be fruitless.”  An insured reading the exclusion would reasonably assume that it was the nature of the activity which was controlling (see 7A Appleman Insurance Law & Practice, §4501.10 (Cum. Supp. 1978)), and that the insurer only meant to exclude peculiarly business activities from coverage. Otherwise, if we consider activities to be excluded merely because performed on business premises or during business hours, we ignore the language of the exemption to the exclusion. As we noted earlier, if the insurer had intended to exclude all activities conducted on the business premises it could have said so. Since it did not, we will not write such language into the contract. Since the allegation that the insured gave medication and sleeping pills to Phillips is not clearly beyond the policy coverage, it is immaterial whether the allegations that the insured permitted or ordered Phillips to leave the premises fall within the scope of the exclusion. The duty to defend extends to cases where the complaint alleges several causes of action or theories of recovery, one of which is within the coverage of the policy although the other may not be. Maryland Casualty Co. v. Peppers (1976), 64 Ill. 2d 187, 355 N.E.2d 24. The insurer belatedly has raised the contention that an exclusion of liability coverage and medical payments coverage, where the bodily injury arose out of any premises other than an insured premises, limits coverage to Reis’ apartment. The inconsistency of this contention is demonstrated by the fact that the policy expressly provides medical payments coverage for accidents on the insured premises or elsewhere. The cited exclusion only applies to injuries arising out of the premises themselves, presumably such accidents as falling glass. The injury here did not arise out of any premises and the exclusion is clearly inapplicable. The insurer, both in its motion for summary judgment and in its brief on appeal, has contended that there was no coverage because the complaint only sought to impose liability upon Reis in her capacity as owner and officer of the company. As we have already ruled, this is incorrect since liability was also alleged against Reis as an apartment owner. But in addition, we would point out that Reis could not have been held liable solely because she was an owner and officer of Harmony Machines. It is hornbook law that “t]he mere fact that a person is an officer * * * of a corporation does not render him liable for the torts of a corporation or of other officers, directors, or agents, but he must be so connected with the tortious act that he would be personally liable for his willful act or negligent conduct without regard to the liability of the corporation.” (13 Ill. L. & Prac. Corporations §352, at 509 (1955), in accord 3A Fletcher, Cyclopedia Corporations §1137 (Perm, ed.).) Reis could only have been held liable if she in some way participated in the acts alleged in the complaint. And the complaint never suggested Reis was liable as principal for Aldal’s conduct. Rather, throughout the complaint, the plaintiff alleged that Reis and Aldal performed or failed to perform the acts complained of. It may be that these allegations as to Reis were groundless, and that she was neither at her apartment nor on the business premises when the complained of conduct occurred, as Aetna seems to contend in its memorandum in support of its motion for summary judgment. But the insurer in its policy expressly agreed to defend any suit against the insured seeking damages because of bodily injury to which the insurance applied, even if any of the allegations of the suit were groundless, false and fraudulent. II.  Since Aetna breached its contract by refusing to defend, it cannot now contend that coverage does not exist. Accordingly, should the judgment against the insured be reinstated, Aetna will be liable, as a matter of law, for the amount of that judgment up to the policy limits (Associated Indemnity Co. v. Insurance Co. of North America (1978), 68 Ill. App. 3d 807, 386 N.E.2d 529; Aetna Casualty & Surety Co. v. Coronet Insurance Co. (1976), 44 Ill. App. 3d 744, 358 N.E.2d 914; Fragman Construction Co. v. Preston Construction Co. (1971), 1 Ill. App. 3d 1002, 214 N.E.2d 614, appeal denied (1972), 49 Ill. 2d 575, plus interest on the total amount until paid. In any event, Aetna is liable for the cost incurred by the insured for conducting her own defense from the time it denied liability. (Tiffiny Decorating Co. v. General Accident Fire & Life Assurance Corp. (1973), 12 Ill. App. 3d 597, 299 N.E.2d 378; County Mutual Insurance Co. v. Murray (1968), 97 Ill. App. 2d 61, 239 N.E.2d 498; Sims v. Illinois National Casualty Co. (1963), 43 Ill. App. 2d 184, 193 N.E.2d 123.) Since, however, an insurer is not required to pay attorney’s fees to counsel whom the insured engaged to guard against a judgment in excess of the insurance where the insurer has not forced the insured by its actions to engage its own attorney (McCabe v. Employers’ Liability Assurance Corp. (1937), 212 N.C. 18, 192 S.E. 687; Fidelity & Casualty Co. v. Riley (5th Cir. 1967), 380 F.2d 153; 7A Appleman Insurance Law & Practice §4691 (1962)), Aetna should be held liable for only the costs of defense incurred by the insured from the time it denied liability and withdrew from the defense of the suit. (Allstate Insurance Co. v. Consolidated Mutual Insurance Co. (1970), 35 App. Div. 2d 535, 313 N.Y.S.2d 181.) Under Illinois law, it is not liable for the attorneys’ fees incurred by the insured in pursuing the declaratory judgment action. (Brown Bag Co. v. Bituminous Casualty Corp. (1969), 117 Ill. App. 2d 287, 254 N.E.2d 577; County Mutual Insurance Co. v. Murray (1968), 97 Ill. App. 2d 61, 239 N.E.2d 498.) The insurer is liable for all of the costs of Reis’ appeal from the tort judgment. Reichert v. Continental Insurance Co. (La. App. 1974), 290 So. 2d 730, writ denied (La. 1974), 294 So. 2d 545. III.  Reis, both below and on appeal, also contended that the insurer, having breached its duty to defend, is liable, as a matter of law, for the entire amount of the judgment, even that which was in excess of the policy limits. At present, of course, there is no judgment against the insured. But, since the determination of the Appellate Court for the Second District is still subject to appeal, the issue is not moot. We cannot agree, however, with the appellant that the insurer’s liability for an excess judgment follows automatically from a breach of its duty to defend. We recognize that the third district in Elas v. State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Co. (1976), 39 Ill. App. 3d 944, 352 N.E.2d 60, appeal denied (1976), 63 Ill. 2d 556, indicated that the insurer would be liable for the entire judgment even if it exceeds the policy limits. (Compare Blakely v. American Employers’ Insurance Co. (5th Cir. 1970), 424 F.2d 728.) However, that statement was only dictum since the court limited recovery to the policy limits, the insured and injured party having entered into an agreement holding the insured harmless from any personal recovery against her. The general rule is to the contrary. The mere failure to defend does not, in the absence of bad faith, render the insurer liable for that amount of the judgment in excess of the policy limits. (Aetna Casualty & Surety Co. v. Coronet Insurance Co. (1976), 44 Ill. App. 3d 744, 358 N.E.2d 914; Comunale v. Traders & General Insurance Co. (1958), 50 Cal. 2d 654, 328 P.2d 198; National Union Fire Insurance Co. v. Carricato (Ky. 1969), 439 S.W.2d 957; Hendry v. Grange Mutual Casualty Co. (5th Cir. 1967), 372 F.2d 222.) Nevertheless, damages for a breach of the duty to defend are not inexorably imprisoned within the policy limits, but are measured by the consequences proximately caused by the breach. (State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Co. v. Allstate Insurance Co. (1970), 9 Cal. App. 3d 508, 88 Cal. Rptr. 246.) Accordingly, if the tort judgment is reinstated and if Reis can show that Aetna in bad faith refused to defend (Associated Indemnity Co. v. Insurance Co. of North America (1978), 68 Ill. App. 3d 807, 386 N.E.2d 529), or in bad faith or negligently failed to settle the claim, or because it abandoned her defense, the excess judgment was entered, she may recover the total amount of the judgment against her. Since the trial court erroneously ruled for the defendant on the issue of its duty to defend, it did not determine the amount of damages. Accordingly, while we determine that Aetna was required to defend the tort action and breached its duty in failing to do so, we reverse for a determination of the amount of damages Aetna must pay. Minimally, as set forth in Part II of this opinion, it is liable for the attorney’s fees from the time it refused to defend plus the costs of appeal. In the event the tort judgment is reinstated, then it would at least be liable for that part of the judgment within the policy limits, plus interest and costs. For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the circuit court is reversed and remanded for further proceedings in accordance with this opinion. Reversed and remanded. JOHNSON, P. J., and LINN, J., concur.   While it is not material in this case, it must be noted that the insurer is in error in its persistent contention that the attorney it retained acted only as “additional counsel.” Assuming that it had any right and duty to defend at all, it had a duty to act for Reis as the counsel, directing the conduct of the case and handling settlement negotiations, etc. While Reis had a right to employ separate counsel because the ad damnum exceeded the policy limits, that attorney could act only as “additional counsel” until Aetna finally refused to defend.    The fact that a complaint is insufficient to state a cause of action does not, of course, excuse an insurer from defending. An insurer must defend if the pleadings state facts bringing the injury within the policy coverage, regardless of the insured’s actual liability to the plaintiff. 7A Appleman Insurance Law and Practice §4683 (1962).

=== CASE 9738716 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:01:24.323542+00 ===

SUPPLEMENTAL OPINION OF DENIAL OF REHEARING MR. JUSTICE ROMITI delivered the opinion of the court:  On petition for rehearing Allstate contends that Thornton v. Paul (1978), 74 Ill. 2d 132, 384 N.E.2d 335, recently decided by our supreme court, requires us to reverse and remand the case to the trial court for determination of coverage. We find that we no longer have jurisdiction to consider this issue as it is moot. Siefferman v. Johnson (1950), 406 Ill. 392, 94 N.E.2d 317; Railway Express Agency, Inc. v. Illinois Commerce Com. (1940), 374 Ill. 151, 28 N.E.2d 116; 2 Ill. L. & Prac. Appeal and Error §22 (1953). The supreme court in Thornton held that because of the conflicting interest of the insurer and the insured, the insurer’s failure to defend the underlying tort proceedings did not estop it from raising, in a garnishment proceeding, the defense of noncoverage as a defense against the plaintiff’s attempt to recover the judgment awarded in the tort action. The court in Thornton did, however, hold that the insurer was liable for the costs of defense. Since our original decision was handed down, the Illinois Supreme Court denied leave to appeal in Wummel v. Harmony Machines, Inc., the underlying action herein involved. Since there neither is nor can be a judgment in favor of Wummel against Reis, any issue whether the insurer is liable for the judgment or is estopped to deny coverage is now moot. There being no judgment existing against Reis, the insurer is only liable under count I for the costs of defense, and Thornton did not alter the insurer’s liability in this regard. Accordingly, the defendant’s petition for rehearing is denied. JOHNSON and LINN, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9738717 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:01:27.989241+00 ===

Mr. JUSTICE MILLS delivered the opinion of the court: The public defender represented defendant. Conflict of interest under these facts? No — we affirm. South contends on appeal that he was denied the effective assistance of counsel because he was represented by the Sangamon County Public Defender while his alleged accomplice (who pleaded guilty and testified against South) was represented by an Assistant Public Defender of Sangamon County. Because this representation gave the appearance of a conflict of interest, the defendant maintains his conviction must be reversed. We disagree. CONFLICT OF INTEREST  In Sangamon County there is a designated “chief public defender,” but he does not exert any supervisory control over the other eight assistant “public defenders” other than assigning the days that a public defender will be appointed the cases of the defendants arraigned on that day. He interviews the applicants for the assistant public defender positions and gives his recommendation to the presiding judge of the Criminal Division, but the circuit judges vote on who will receive the appointment to the positions. At one time he required the assistant public defenders to file reports indicating the number of cases they were appointed for each month, the amount of time spent on each case, and the disposition of each case, but this practice was stopped. The public defenders in Sangamon County are solely responsible for their own cases. They do not appear for each other, discuss cases among each other, or exchange files with each other. Cases involving multiple defendants and public defenders are handled in the same fashion as cases in which private counsel is appointed. None of the public defenders have professional relationships with each other as they maintain their own private offices. They use their own respective private law firm stationery and do not have stationery designating themselves as public defenders. The only thing the public defenders share is their title and the services of an investigator. It seems apparent, then, that the office of the Sangamon County Public Defender is — in fact — a decentralized office. In People v. Spicer (1978), 61 Ill. App. 3d 748, 378 N.E.2d 169, our sister court held that a per se conflict of interest existed in the representation of defendant and a co-defendant by two separate assistant public defenders in a public defender’s office. The defendant’s counsel was charged with a commitment to the co-defendant by virtue of his affiliation with the office of the public defender. The court stated that the case must be viewed as though both defendants were represented by single counsel because when the public defender is appointed for an indigent in a criminal case, it is the office of the public defender that is appointed. The assistant public defenders discharge the duties and obligations of the public defender, but the public defender remains responsible for the acts and conduct of his assistants. The court also noted that representation of defendants with possible conflicting interests by separate assistant public defenders casts a shadow on the loyalty of counsel. However, the evidence in the case at bench clearly indicates that the defendant received vigorous representation by his counsel without the hint of any division of loyalty. The assistant public defenders were independent from the public defender and each other. They shared neither offices nor information and were responsible for only their own cases. Not only were they decentralized, they were apparently related in name only. Defendant asserts that the use of the common investigator by the public defenders and his use of cards identifying himself as the investigator of the office of the Sangamon County Public Defender creates the appearance of a single office. We view this as a de minimis factor. Although the Illinois Supreme Court in People v. Knippenberg (1977), 66 Ill. 2d 276, 362 N.E.2d 681, found it was error for the State to use privileged communications between the defendant and the defense investigator, there was no breach of the attorney-client privilege in this case. No actual conflict of interest arose regarding the use of the investigator since South’s attorney used the investigator to determine whether the co-defendant was going to testify against South and the co-defendant’s attorney did not use the investigator for any purpose whatever. Furthermore, the investigator only reported to the public defenders who asked for information and then only that information which they had requested. We conclude that the investigator’s limited involvement in this case did not create an appearance of conflict. The dissenting justice contends that the “centralized” versus “decentralized” distinction is nonexistent. Although we recognize that the distinction was not created by the legislature, we are examining the office as it is and not as it should be. In fact, the Sangamon County Public Defender’s Office which manifests the distinction could well be operating contrary to the law. However, the legality of that office is not presently before this court. The only matter that is before us and is at issue — raised for the first time on appeal — is whether South was denied the effective assistance of counsel. The docket order recites “Attny. James P. Fox appointed as counsel for defendant South.” The appointee was a duly licensed attorney and an assistant public defender. If his appointment as an assistant public defender was not valid, that would further indicate his independence. Since, in our view, neither an actual conflict of interest nor an appearance of conflict exists in this case, that issue is answered in the negative. By so holding we are not advocating the reorganization of public defenders’ offices to a structure contrary to law, but merely determining that South received proper independent representation. EXCESSIVE SENTENCE South also contends his sentence should be reduced since it is more severe than those received by his two accomplices who pleaded guilty. While the exercise of the right to trial by jury should not result in a more severe punishment than that received by one similarly situated who pleads guilty, it is the reason for the disparity, not the disparity itself, that determines whether the sentence was improper. (People v. Martin (1970), 47 Ill. 2d 331, 265 N.E.2d 685.) It also must be clear that the sentence was improperly imposed. People v. Sivels (1975), 60 Ill. 2d 102, 324 N.E.2d 422.  We conclude that the sentence disparity in this case was justified. The 18-year-old South was sentenced to 3 to 10 years’ imprisonment, co-. defendant David Freligh was sentenced to 1 to 3 years, and co-defendant Ronald Gustin received a sentence of probation. The sentencing judge noted he was aware of the different sentences imposed, but stated that in sentencing he considered both the nature of the offense and the nature and character of the person who committed the offense. As a juvenile, South had committed two burglaries, one felony theft, two misdemeanor thefts, shoplifting, and fleeing a police officer. South’s adult record included burglary and assault. On the other hand, David Freligh had four misdemeanor convictions involving theft and deceptive practices, while Ronald Gustin’s only prior conviction was for retail theft. The differences in the criminal records of the defendants indicate the more severe sentence imposed on South was not an abuse of the trial court’s discretion. Affirmed. GREEN, J., concurs.