=== CASE 2209732 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:42.990417+00 ===

182 Cal. App. 2d 724 (1960)
6 Cal. Rptr. 447
THE PEOPLE, Respondent,
v.
ROBERT LEE GATEWOOD, Appellant.
Docket No. 6865.
Court of Appeals of California, Second District, Division Two.
July 15, 1960.
*725 Robert Lee Gatewood, in pro. per., for Appellant.
Stanley Mosk, Attorney General, and William E. James, Assistant Attorney General, for Respondent.
ASHBURN, J.
Defendant, in propria persona, appeals from order denying his petition for a writ of error coram nobis.
On October 14, 1958, defendant was sentenced to the state prison for the term prescribed by law, following a trial in which he was found guilty of burglary of the second degree. Four prior felony convictions were found to be true. No motion for a new trial was made, nor was an appeal taken from the judgment. Thereafter and on or about May 21, 1959, defendant filed a "Petition for Writ of Error Coram Nobis and/or Motion to Null, Vacate and Set Aside Judgment." No evidence *726 was presented and the matter was disposed of on the petition, to which was attached defendant's "Arguments and Authorities." The petition was denied on May 28, 1959.
Defendant was charged with the burglary of a telephone booth of the Pacific Telephone and Telegraph Company. After defendant had testified and rested his case, the court recalled prosecution witness, Orvil D. Jones, for further testimony. Defendant asserts that the witness, a police agent for the telephone company, told the court and demonstrated how the burglary could have been perpetrated; i.e., "that by snatching and pulling on the placard holder a person could tear the upper-housing cover off and then by use of a screw driver such as found in petitioner's possession could obtain easy access to the money."
The petition alleges these points as grounds for the issuance of the writ: (1) That the testimony of witness Jones was fraudulent and misleading in that it was impossible and improbable that entrance could be obtained in the manner described; that the witness knowingly concealed from the court the true facts as to the construction of a pay telephone. (2) That during the taking of Jones' testimony he, defendant, "tried to no avail, to get his appointed counsel to ask the necessary questions that would have shown the falsity of Mr. Jones' statements," and that the court and appointed counsel "deprived" him of the right to take the witness stand in an attempt to rebut such testimony. (3) That defendant failed to take an appeal because the court "implied" and counsel "told him" that it would be necessary for him to hire an attorney to initiate an appeal.
[1] In discussing the function of a writ of error coram nobis, this court stated, in People v. Hayman, 145 Cal. App. 2d 620, 623 [302 P.2d 810]: "The office of that writ is to bring the attention of the court to such facts as existed at the time of the trial that would have constituted a valid defense, but which, without negligence on the part of the defendant, were not presented, either through duress, fraud or excusable mistake and which, not appearing on the face of the record, would have effected an acquittal of the petitioner or, at least, have caused a more favorable judgment to be entered against him. [Citations.]... [2a] It is not properly used to correct errors of law or to redress irregularities at the trial that could have been corrected on motion for new trial or by appeal. [Citation.] On the contrary, it is a process whose scope is extremely narrow and must be confined to an inquiry into *727 those facts which might have been properly defensive matter at the trial but for the interposition of some agency other than the negligence of the petitioner. [Citation.]"
[3] "It is well settled that the writ may not be used to cure irregularities occurring at the trial except in such circumstances of extrinsic fraud which actually deprived the petitioner of a trial on the merits. [Citations.]" (People v. Egan, 73 Cal. App. 2d 894, 899 [167 P.2d 766].)
The averments in the petition are clearly insufficient to spell extrinsic fraud. (See People v. Mooney, 178 Cal. 525, 527-528 [174 P. 325]; In re Manchester, 33 Cal. 2d 740, 742 [204 P.2d 881]; People v. Darcy, 79 Cal. App. 2d 683, 689 [180 P.2d 752].) [4] The court states, in the Mooney case, page 530: "`In this state it is the settled law that a judgment cannot be set aside because it is predicated upon perjured testimony or because material evidence is concealed or suppressed. The fraud which is practiced in such cases upon both the court and him against whom the judgment is pronounced is not such fraud as is extrinsic to the record; and it is only in cases of extrinsic fraud that such relief may be had. [Citations.]'" [5] People v. Carpenter, 162 Cal. App. 2d 182, 183 [328 P.2d 482]: "The knowing use by officers of perjured testimony to secure a conviction entitles the defendant to a new trial. [Citations.] An essential element stated in all of the cited cases is that the officers knowingly used the perjured testimony." There is no allegation, much less proof, that the prosecution knowingly used or procured the alleged "fraudulent" testimony.
In his argument, defendant also claims that at the time witness Jones testified, he had full knowledge "of the results of a scientific investigation of the booth and pay phone in question, made by the Los Angeles Police Dept. and/or the Pacific Telephone and Telegraph Company's investigative details, which definitely stated that there was no evidence of burglary or attempted burglary of the booth or pay phone. This information Mr. Jones, the police, prosecution and the people concealed from the record." There is no proof in support of this vague and general statement. [6] But, in any event, "The appropriate writ to secure relief from a judgment of conviction obtained by the use of false testimony known by the prosecution to be false is not coram nobis but habeas corpus...." (People v. Adamson, 34 Cal. 2d 320, 327 [210 P.2d 13].) See also People v. Remling, 146 Cal. App. 2d 476, 479-480 [304 P.2d 97].
*728 The allegations and argument of defendant show at most that he might have discredited or contradicted the testimony of witness Jones. The claimed facts which he wishes to show were obviously known to him during the trial. [7] Coram nobis will not lie to review issues known to a defendant at time of trial, and which could have been raised on appeal. (People v. Adamson, supra, 34 Cal. 2d 320, 327; People v. Middleworth, 172 Cal. App. 2d 619, 621 [342 P.2d 348]; People v. Baker, 92 Cal. App. 2d 623, 625 [207 P.2d 58].)
[8] Defendant's claim that he was deprived by court and counsel of the right to present rebuttal testimony stands uncontradicted. However, no evidence was produced in support of these allegations, and in such circumstances neither the trial court nor the appellate court is required to believe even the uncontradicted allegations of the petition. (People v. Smith, 109 Cal. App. 2d 76, 80 [239 P.2d 903]; People v. Martinelli, 118 Cal. App. 2d 94, 98 [257 P.2d 37]; People v. Gurule, 169 Cal. App. 2d 280, 282 [337 P.2d 111].)
[2b] If the facts as stated are true, they were known at the time of trial; it was an error of law which could have been presented on a motion for new trial or by appeal. (People v. Smith, supra, 109 Cal. App. 2d 76, 79.) [9] It is settled by the authorities that the lack of effective aid of counsel is not a basis for relief under a writ of error coram nobis. (People v. Remling, supra, 146 Cal. App. 2d 476, 479; People v. Lewis, 166 Cal. App. 2d 602, 607 [333 P.2d 428].)
There is no evidence to support the claim that defendant's counsel "told petitioner on direct question concerning appeal procedure that hire of counsel would be necessary," or that the court "implied" the same. [10] In any event "... the writ cannot be used to serve the purpose of an appeal when this remedy was lost through failure to invoke it in time, even though such failure occurred without fault or neglect on the part of the one seeking the remedy" (People v. Gamboa, 144 Cal. App. 2d 588, 590 [301 P.2d 390]), or through defendant's alleged ignorance of the law. (People v. Lewis, supra, 166 Cal. App. 2d 602, 607.) [11] "Even if this were thought to be extrinsic fraud, as it is characterized by appellant, it is not that type of factual error or omission which can be reviewed on a writ of error coram nobis. It is not a fact that, if known at the time of trial, would have prevented the verdict of guilty or prevented a valid trial." (People v. Cowen, 118 Cal. App. 2d 106, 107 [257 P.2d 79].)
*729 Defendant has shown no grounds for the issuance of the writ.
The order is affirmed.
Fox, P.J., and Richards, J. pro tem.,[*] concurred.
Appellant's petition for a rehearing was denied August 3, 1960, and appellant's petition for a hearing by the Supreme Court was denied September 7, 1960.
NOTES
[*]   Assigned by Chairman of Judicial Council.

=== CASE 9737276 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:20:32.789154+00 ===

Justice EAKIN,
dissenting.
I must disagree with the conclusion of my colleagues, as I find the statement at issue to be corroborated by the circumstances and sufficiently reliable; finding the trial court abused its discretion by admitting it is inappropriate, in my judgment.
The Commonwealth’s reasoning arguing corroboration is logical; I find appellant’s less so. For example, the year’s time for “reflection” simply means the crime was stale or forgotten in the minds of anyone unconnected to it-only the perpetrators would still be thinking of such a burglary after that much time. Who is going to impress other prisoners with a year old offense, whether it was publicized at the time or not? The size of the take was worth bragging about, but who knew that but the perpetrators? Were one to pick a boast-worthy crime to falsely associate with, one would not be likely *289to pick this one; logically, the decision to brag about this crime suggests actual involvement, not deceitfulness.
The involvement of the police in recording the hotel conversation is a red herring. Unless Auman knew about that involvement, or was somehow coerced during the conversation, this has absolutely nothing to do with reliability or admissibility. Mantra-like finger pointing does little to show why police involvement affected the statement or its reliability. Governmental involvement may make one look at the circumstances with a watchful eye, but unless that eye sees something, police involvement in and of itself is no reason to label anything unreliable. Indeed, the recording limits the prospects of inaccurate recollections that come when authorities are not involved.
The final suggestion, Auman’s purported narcotic use, was found to be a factual non-starter, and we cannot reconsider findings of fact. Consequently, finding no reason to question the reliability of Auman’s statements, I would affirm the sentence.
NEWMAN joins this dissenting opinion.

=== CASE 9737279 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:20:39.534863+00 ===

KINGSLEY, J.
Defendants were charged with two counts of armed robbery. It was alleged that Falcon had suffered a prior felony conviction of the crime of robbery and conspiracy with intent to commit robbery, and it was alleged that Barrett had suffered a prior felony conviction of the crime of burglary on two occasions and the crime of possession of narcotics.
A public defender was appointed. On Barrett’s motion, attorney A. Bryon was substituted as to him in place of the public defender. Each entered a plea of “not guilty” and denied the prior convictions. Motion of counsel to be relieved as to Barrett was denied without prejudice. Defendant Falcon’s motion for separate trials was denied.
A jury was impaneled and sworn to try the cause. On Barrett’s motion, all witnesses, with the exception of the investigating officer, were excluded from the courtroom.
The jury found both defendants guilty of robbery as charged in counts I and II, the degree was set at first degree, and the defendants were found to be armed at the time of both offenses. The jury found the prior conviction alleged against Falcon to be true, and the first, third and fourth prior convictions against Barrett to be true.
Defendants' motions for new trials were denied, probation was denied, and defendants were ordered punished for the term prescribed by law, the sentences on counts I and II to run consecutively.
On October 30, 1965, at about 5:30 p.m., Mr. Gordon, a pharmacist at the Union Service Plan Pharmacy, was typing a label when Falcon came in wearing a stocking over his face and waving a gun. He told Mr. Gordon, 1 ‘ This is an holdup, ’ ’ *139and he demanded narcotics, specifically naming Dilaudid, morphine and cocaine. Mr. Ron Terry Kemp, another employee of the pharmacy, saw a man, Falcon, with a black stocking mask over his face. Falcon, seeing Kemp trying to leave said, “Get back over here or you're dead.” The stocking over Falcon’s face distorted his features to some extent.
After getting the keys Falcon told Kemp to lie down on the floor; Falcon pushed him and Kemp fell on the floor.
Mr. Gordon opened the narcotics cabinet and, upon orders from the man with the stocking over his face, Mr. Gordon put 19 or 20 bottles of narcotics in a bag. Falcon took the bag, ordered Mr. Gordon to lie down and after a while he left.
Miss Matijevich, an employee, was in the back room and a man with a gunmetal colored stocking on his face pushed a mahogany-handled knife with a 6-inch blade against her ribs and said, “I’ll show you what I’m doing at the register.” Miss Matijevich, thinking it was a Halloween prank, put her hand on his shoulder. The man jerked her arm out of place and cut her arm with the knife and asked for the money. He cut her arm again and took all the money from the register. He already had the day’s receipts. He led her and a customer to the back room and ordered them to get down. There was another man in back with a blackish-blue gun who also had a gunmetal colored stocking over his face. The smaller of the two men was wearing a light colored sweater with pink and green blots on it. Both men were wearing white knit gloves.
At about 9 :35 a.m. on December 6, 1965, Miss Matijevich and Miss Lee were working in the pharmacy. A man came around and Miss Matijevich said, “Oh, not again,” and the man said, “Yes, this is a holdup.” The man was wearing the same kind of a black mask as during the prior holdup.
Miss Lee opened the register, the man was waving a gun, the man took the money, and after finding out there was no more money, Miss Lee was ordered to lie down on the floor. Miss Matijevich was led to the narcotics locker and the men said they wanted morphine and Dilaudid. Miss Lee told them they had no more. The two men appeared to be the same men as those who were in the pharmacy on October 30, and the gun looked the same. The telephone rang and the taller man took the phone off the hook, replaced it, and they left. Miss Lee got a glimpse of the second man. The first wore a dark stocking over his face and the second wore a tan stocking.
Mrs. Leyba lived in an apartment at 13921 South Normandie Avenue in Gardena on October 30, 1965. On December *1406, 1965, she lived with her husband, defendant Falcon (her cousin), and defendant Barrett. In the bedroom there was a bureau which had six drawers, three side by side. Mrs. Leyba and her husband used four of the drawers. Falcon was assigned to the second or third drawer on the right and defendant Barrett had the third drawer on the left. The apartment was located across the street from the pharmacy in question. On Halloween Mrs. Leyba, while shopping, heard of a robbery at the pharmacy. She went to the pharmacy, went home, went to the kitchen to prepare a meal, and could not find her black steak knife. It had a 6" blade and was about 11" long. She had last seen the knife that morning. A half an hour later the defendants returned and she asked them if they had seen the knife; they said they had not. They were carrying a brown bag rolled up in a sweater.
Police Officer Burton and Detectives Purcell and Peek went to the Leyba residence at about 5 :40 p.m. on January 6, 1966. Falcon had already moved out. Mrs. Leyba and her husband were at home and Barrett was not at home. The officers were admitted to the apartment, and they asked the Leybas for permission to search. Permission was granted and Mrs. Leyba was present during the search of the bedroom. Mrs. Leyba told the officers that Falcon had been living there, that they had a quarrel and he had moved out. She did not say that either of the two men had property at her residence. Mrs. Leyba observed the officers going through the dresser and she thought she observed the officers remove a package of letters from the dresser drawer which had been assigned to Barrett. In this drawer, in a paper bag beneath some articles of clothing, were found a gun, six bottles, five bullets, and a hypodermic kit. The search also uncovered white gloves, and parts of two stockings. Mrs. Leyha was not sure whether a sweater which belonged to her husband, and which Falcon and Barrett had occasionally borrowed, was hanging in the closet or was removed from the drawer assigned to Barrett.
Officer Burton recalled that the gun, five bullets, and hypodermic kit were found in a paper bag beneath some articles of clothing in the center or third drawer down of a six-drawer dresser, on the left-hand side. White gloves were in the top drawer and a black stocking was on the shelf in the hall.
Officer Burton had a conversation with Barrett on January 10, 1966, at the sheriff’s department. He first advised Barrett that he had the right to remain silent, that he had the right to the services of an attorney prior to making any statements, *141and that any statements he made could be used in court against him. Officer Burton asked Barrett if he understood these rights and Barrett said he did.
Officer Burton exhibited the items to defendant and Barrett was asked to relate any involvement in robberies which had occurred in Gardena. Barrett asked how many “jobs” or “counts” were going to be filed against him and Officer Burton said about four. Officer Burton explained that he was speaking of the robberies at the Union Pharmacy and Barrett said he was involved in two robberies, possibly using the words, “I am only good for two.” Barrett said there was no need of denying his implication as identification had been made and the police had some of the articles. He was asked to relate further information regarding the crimes, and he said he would have to contact his partner and his attorney. Barrett made the statements freely and voluntarily.
Officer Burton first saw the sweater when Mrs. Leyba brought it to him at the police department several days after the search.
Miss Matijevich went to two lineups, one in Gardena and one in East Los Angeles. She did not see Falcon in the lineup in Gardena, but picked out a person who was not either of the defendants. There was one person in this lineup.
Mr. Kemp went to the Gardena police department for identification of one man and did not identify that man as the person he had seen at the pharmacy. He later went to a lineup in East Los Angeles with Miss Matijevich and Elaine Lee. There were five or six men in this lineup and he identified one man, Falcon.
Miss Matijevich recalled that there were four people in the lineup in East Los Angeles. She identified Falcon and Barrett by their actions and their height. The actions which made them identifiable were that they were quick and sharp about their speech and they were very nervous types.
The defense presented no evidence. Several briefs have been filed on behalf of the defendants, including briefs by counsel, and several briefs by Falcon in propria persona.
I
Falcon contends that he and Barrett were held beyond the period set forth in Penal Code section 825 before being arraigned and taken before a magistrate.  We have been unable to find anything in the record to support this contention and matters not shown by the record will not be con*142sidered on appeal.  Furthermore, a delay in arraignment in violation of Penal Code section 825 does not require reversal, unless the delay prevented a fair trial, affected the outcome of the trial, or defendant suffered prejudice. (People v. Wilson (1963) 60 Cal.2d 139, 154 [32 Cal.Rptr. 44, 383 P.2d 452]; People v. Boone (1967) 252 Cal.App.2d 313 [60 Cal.Rptr. 275].) Nothing of that sort appears here.
II
Defendants contend that the reading to the jury of allegations as to defendants’ prior felony convictions constitute error. Defendants argue that it is even more unfair where the two defendants had a single trial, since, even if one defendant admitted his priors, he could be prejudiced by the reading to the jury of the prior convictions of the defendant that did not admit the priors.  It is clearly the law that there is no error where the trial judge reads the allegations of defendant’s prior felony convictions where defendant denys the prior convictions. (People v. West (1967) 253 Cal.App.2d 348, 355 [61 Cal.Rptr. 216] ; see Spencer v. Texas (1967) 385 U.S. 554 [17 L.Ed.2d 606, 87 S.Ct. 648].) Further, the jury was instructed to disregard the alleged prior convictions in the determination as to the guilt or innocence of each defendant of the crimes presently charged.
III
Defendants argue that the fruits of the search were unlawful in that Mrs. Leyba had no authority to give permission to the officers to search furniture occupied by defendants.
However, failure to raise this issue below precludes raising this on appeal.
IV
Defendant Falcon contends that the admission into evidence of the gun, the bottles and other items constituted error. Defendant Falcon contends that no proper foundation was laid for their introduction, and no evidence was offered to show the bottles had held narcotics. 1
Material and relevant evidence which is technically incompetent and inadmissible under exclusionary rules, including lack of foundation, will be considered in support of the judgment if offered and received without objection or motion to strike. (See *143Fishel v. F. M. Ball & Co., Inc. (1927) 83 Cal.App. 128, 132 [256 P. 493].) Further, in response to defendant’s contention that the gun was inadmissible, Mr. Kemp, Mr. Gordon and Miss Matijevich said that the gun entered into evidence resembled the gun held by the robber, and it was found in the premises in which defendants had resided.
Defendant Falcon points out the conflict in Mrs. Leyba’s testimony as to where the items uncovered by the search had been located.  It is for the trier of fact to determine the credibility of witnesses and conflicts in Mrs. Leyba’s testimony cannot be considered by us.
V
Defendants assert that the admission of statements made by Barrett while in custody was error in that Barrett was not warned of his rights. Defendant Barrett was warned of his constitutional rights as required by People v. Dorado (1965) 62 Cal.2d 338, 353-354 [42 Cal.Rptr. 169, 398 P.2d 361]. The warnings set forth in Miranda v. Arizona (1966) 384 U.S. 436 [16 L.Ed.2d 694, 86 S.Ct. 1602, 10 A.L.R. 3d 974], apply only to trials commencing after June 13, 1966, and are not applicable here.2 (Johnson v. New Jersey (1966) 384 U.S. 719 [16 L.Ed.2d 882, 86 S.Ct. 1772]; People v. Rollins (1967) 65 Cal.2d 681 [56 Cal.Rptr. 293, 423 P.2d 221].)
Falcon also asserts that he was not warned of his rights. Since Falcon made no incriminating statements any failure of the police to warn him of his rights is not prejudicial. (People v. Boone, supra (1967) 252 Cal.App.2d 313, 334.)
VI
Falcon asserts that the admission of the statements by Barrett in a joint trial was prejudicial error as to Falcon. People v. Aranda (1965) 63 Cal.2d 518, 530 [47 Cal.Rptr. 353, 407 P.2d 265], held that a trial court may “. . . permit a joint trial if all parts of the extrajudicial statements implicating any codefendants can be and are effectively deleted without prejudice as to the declarant. By effective deletions, we mean not only direct and indirect identifications of codefendants but any statements that could be employed against nondeclarant codefendants once their identity is otherwise established. ’ ’
Prior to the trial, the prosecution had indicated that it *144intended to offer evidence o£ Barrett’s conversation with Officer Burton, in which he had admitted guilt of two robberies but had refused to admit anything more until he had talked to his attorney and “his partner.” Defendant Falcon moved for a separate trial. In the course of the argument on that motion it was disclosed that, in response to further questions, Barrett had indicated that he meant Falcon by the reference to “his partner.” The prosecutor assured the court that the latter portion of the conversation would not be offered and, on that assurance, the motion for a separate trial was denied. The assurance was followed at the trial, Officer Burton testifying only to the reference to “his partner,” but not to the identification of the partner.
Defendant Falcon contends that, even though the portion of Barrett’s statement which identified Falcon as the “partner” was not put into evidence, still the reference to a “partner” was prejudicial. We agree. Clearly, the reference was to the crime partner involved in the holdups and whose existence was shown by the testimony of the victims. There is in evidence, also, the Leyba testimony which showed that Barrett and Falcon had both lived with the Leybas and had used the same bureau. The probability that, in light of this other testimony, the jury would have deduced that Barrett meant Falcon when he talked about a “partner” is almost overwhelming.
In People v. Lara (1967) 67 Cal.2d 365 [62 Cal.Rptr. 586, 432 P.2d 202], both defendants in a joint trial had confessed. The Supreme Court describes the two confessions in the following terms: “Alvarez’ confession to the police named Lara as his partner in crime. Although the latter’s confession did not mention Alvarez by name, it referred to him consistently as ‘this other person’; in the light of other evidence in the case identifying Lara as one of the two persons involved in the shooting, this allusion amounted to an equally damaging implication by necessary inference. The same reasoning applies to Alvarez ’ statement to Meza that he and ‘ his buddy, Tony, ’ had shot and killed a fellow who had given him a ride home earlier that morning. On the other hand, no implication of Alvarez appears in Lara’s statement to his girl friend that ‘me and some other ones’ shot the victim, or in his statement to his sister that ‘Him and some boys’ committed the crime. [Citation.]” (67 Cal.2d 365, 392, fn. 24.) It held that the admission of the confessions, under these circumstances, violated Aranda, but that the error was nonprejudicial in the *145light of the fact that each defendant’s own confession incriminated the maker and in light of the other evidence of guilt. In the case at bench, there was no confession from Falcon, so that the admission of Barrett’s statement, if error, was necessarily prejudicial. (Bruton v. United States (1968) 391 U.S. 123 [20 L.Ed.2d 476, 88 S.Ct. 1620].) It will be noted that the Supreme Court in Lara draws a distinction between the confession which referred to “me and some other ones” or to “Him and some boys”—thus suggesting a plurality of co-conspirators—and the confession which referred to “this other person”—thus indicating a single associate. It is the latter situation which is before us and, as to it, the language of the Supreme Court is here equally applicable: “. . .in the light of other evidence in the case identifying Lara [Falcon] as one of the two persons involved in the shooting [burglaries] , this allusion amounted to an equally damaging implication by necessary inference.” (People v. Lara, supra (1967) 67 Cal.2d 365, 392, fn. 24.)*
VII
Defendant Falcon alleges that permitting the investigating officer to remain present in the courtroom after other witnesses were excluded pursuant to a defense motion was error. The matter of exclusion of witnesses is in the sound discretion of the court. (People v. King (1962) 199 Cal.App.2d 333 [18 Cal.Rptr. 624].) Further, the defendants did not show they were prejudiced. In People v. White (1950) 100 Cal.App.2d 836, 838 [224 P.2d 868], defendant claimed that the trial court abused its discretion in permitting the investigating deputy sheriff to remain at counsel table when other witnesses were excluded. The White court held defendant did not show how he was prejudiced and there was no error.
VIII
Defendant Falcon contends that he and Barrett were entitled to counsel during the lineup (Gilbert v. California (1967) 388 U.S. 263 [18 L.Ed.2d 1178, 87 S.Ct. 1951]; United States v. Wade (1967) 388 U.S. 218 [18 L.Ed.2d 1149, 87 S.Ct. 1926]), and that their privilege against self-incrimination was violated. The courts have refused to apply the Gilbert-Wade rules retroactively (Stovall v. Denno (1967) 388 U.S. 293, 296 [18 L.Ed.2d 1199, 1203, 87 S.Ct. 1967]; People v. Feggans (1967) 67 Cal.2d 444 [62 Cal.Rptr. 419, 432 P.2d
*14621]), and defendant was not entitled to counsel during the lineup.  Further the lineup procedure is not violative of the privilege against self-incrimination. (United States v. Wade, supra (1967) 388 U.S. 218 [18 L.Ed.2d 1149, 87 S.Ct. 1926]; People v. Boone, supra (1967) 252 Cal.App.2d 313.)
Falcon also contends that had he been out on bail he would not have had to submit to the lineup. It is clear that defendant would have been required to submit to identification, whether on bail or not. There is nothing in the record to show that the lineup was unfairly conducted.
IX
Defendants contend that they were not sufficiently identified, pointing out certain inconsistencies in Miss Matijevich’s testimony. Strengths or weaknesses of identification, incompatibility of or discrepancies in testimony, uncertainties of witnesses in giving testimony, are matters for the jury in the first instance, and the trial court on a motion for new trial, and unless it can be said as a matter of law that there was no evidence to support the conviction, we cannot disturb the judgment. (People v. Zurica (1964) 225 Cal.App.2d 25, 31 [37 Cal.Rptr. 118]; People v. Shaheen (1953) 120 Cal.App.2d 629, 636 [261 P.2d 752].)  Further, the fact that Miss Matijevich did not use facial features for identification was not improper. Identification may be sufficient when such identification relies on size, appearance, talk, walk and voice. (People v. DeWitt (1950) 98 Cal.App.2d 709, 714 [220 P.2d 981],)3
Defendants say that Mrs. Leyba’s testimony was suspect because she was trying to protect her husband. Credibility of witnesses is for the trier of fact. Falcon contends that Mrs. Leyba’s testimony concerning the missing knife was error. Any discrepancy regarding the color of the handle of the knife, and uncertainties as to dates, go to the weight of the testimony and not to its admissibility. (See People v. DuBont (1965) 235 Cal.App.2d 844, 849 [45 Cal.Rptr. 717].)
X
Defendants contend that the prosecutor committed misconduct in presenting evidence of fingerprint exemplars without relating this evidence to the crimes charged. It is clear that these were secured and offered as part of the proof *147of the alleged prior convictions. When the records of the convictions were offered, it was stipulated that they referred to the defendants on trial, making the use of the fingerprint exemplars unnecessary. We cannot say, since the priors had theretofore been denied, that the prosecutor was wrong in preparing and presenting his case on the assumption that that position would be adhered to; there is nothing to show that he was required to anticipate that a change in tactics would make this link in his ease unnecessary.
Defendants also claim that the prosecution knowingly introduced false evidence. There is nothing in the record before us to support that charge nor is there anything to support the claim that there was collusion between Mrs. Leyba and the prosecutor.
XI
Other errors are urged by Falcon, but, since the judgment must be reversed for the reasons above given, they need not be discussed, since they involve matters which, even if error, are not likely to recur on a retrial.
XII
It is claimed that it was error to impose consecutive sentences, in the light of the provisions of section 669 of the Penal Code. But that section applies only to express life sentences and not to indeterminate sentences even though such sentences have a maximum term of life. (People v. Shaw (1965) 237 Cal.App.2d 606 [47 Cal.Rptr. 96] ; People v. Kostal (1958) 159 Cal.App.2d 444, 453-455 [323 P.2d 1020] ; see, also, In re Quinn (1945) 25 Cal.2d 799 [154 P.2d 875].)
The purported appeals from the orders denying new trials are dismissed. As to defendant Falcon, the judgment is reversed. As to defendant Barrett, the judgment is modified by striking therefrom the findings that such defendant was armed with deadly weapons within the meaning of Penal Code section 12022 at the times of the commissions of the offenses charged and found in counts I and II. In all other respects the judgment as to defendant Barrett is affirmed.
Jefferson, J., concurred.
Mr. Gordon said that he could not definitely identify the bottles and stated that since the labels had been removed he could only say that the bottles might have been the ones taken in the robberies.
The trial commenced on. May 25, 1966.
(Italics and "bracketed words added.)
Defendant says Miss Matijevich’s testimony is inherently improbable. Clearly there is no physical impossibility or apparent falsity. (See People v. Barnett (1958) 159 Cal.App.2d 22 [323 P.2d 96].)

=== CASE 2209657 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:41.984111+00 ===

267 Cal.App.2d 560 (1968)
THE PEOPLE, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
JOHN ROBERT DAW, Defendant and Appellant.
Crim. No. 3210.
California Court of Appeals. Fourth Dist., Div. One.
Nov. 21, 1968.
George H. Chula for Defendant and Appellant.
Thomas C. Lynch, Attorney General, William E. James, Assistant Attorney General, and Edward Duddy, Deputy Attorney General, for Plaintiff and Respondent.
BROWN (Gerald), P. J.
John Robert Daw was convicted after jury trial of possessing marijuana (Health & Saf. Code,  11530). He was granted probation upon conditions, and appeals from the probation order deemed a final judgment (Pen. Code,  1237).
[1] On April 27, 1967, driver Daw and two companions were traveling east on Highway 80 near Lake Jennings Road *563 in Daw's Volkswagen bus when its loud noise and smoke belching attracted the attention of Deputy Sheriffs Gore and Rickly. Following Daw's vehicle, the officers observed it weaving several times from the shoulder to the center line of the freeway. Officer Gore suspected the driver might be intoxicated. The officers stopped the Volkswagen; they were justified in doing so to investigate possible Vehicle Code violations. (People v. Mickelson, 59 Cal.2d 448 [30 Cal.Rptr. 18, 380 P.2d 658]; People v. Slade, 264 Cal.App.2d 188, 189 [70 Cal.Rptr. 321].)
[2] Officer Gore went to the driver's side of the bus. The window was open and the officer noted a strong smell of incense. Gore asked Daw for his driver's license. Daw had difficulty locating it as he thumbed through his wallet. Gore then asked Daw to step from the vehicle. Daw alighted, had to support himself with his hand on the side of the bus, was unsteady on his feet, and walked with a floating effect, stepping higher than necessary, to the rear of the bus.
Gore asked Daw why he was unsteady. Daw replied he was under the influence of creation. Daw's eyes were dilated and his speech slurred. Asked if he had been drinking alcohol, Daw said he was under the influence of nature. Daw was asked at various times if he had used marijuana. He said "Of course. Everybody that is, uses pot." Daw became very nervous when the subject of interrogation touched upon narcotics or marijuana. At one point when asked a question Daw spread his arms and stared at the sun without blinking.
Officers Gore and Rickly conferred after approximately ten minutes of questioning Daw. Rickly asked Gore if he thought Daw "was under the influence of something, if he was drunk or something." Gore may have stated he thought Daw was under the influence of marijuana. Rickly testified "there was some thought had passed through my mind he might be. But that I wasn't satisfied in my own opinion that that was the actual case."
Rickly took over the questioning to satisfy himself "beyond a reasonable doubt that he would be under the influence."
Rickly asked Daw if he was under the influence of marijuana. Daw answered "he was under the influence of all creation, nature. He was under God's influence. Something to that effect." There were several accusatory statements or questions directed to Daw by the officers regarding their feeling Daw was under the influence of marijuana.
The officers asked Daw if they could search the bus. He *564 responded, "Why ruin my life for something that will be legal in four months."
Officers Gore and Rickly again conferred and finally were able to agree there was sufficient evidence to arrest Daw for being under the influence of marijuana.
Rickly arrested Daw for being under the influence of marijuana, and told him his Miranda rights. Daw said he understood his rights.
There can be no question the officers' interrogation of Daw had reached an accusatory stage designed to elicit incriminating statements well before he was told his constitutional rights to counsel and to remain silent. Even more remarkable than the officers' belated advice to Daw is Daw's trial attorney's failure to object to the pre-Miranda warning admissions or to make any motion to strike them. The officers were not taken on voir dire. The damaging statements and admissions were revealed to the jury with no ruling concerning their admissibility requested of the trial court.
[3] In the course of a motion to suppress evidence which was found by a search of the bus after Daw's arrest, Daw's attorney, at the end of the People's case, mentioned as a ground of that motion, "The admissions that came in after Officer Gore had formed an opinion, reasonably or not, was certainly a violation of Miranda." However, no motion to strike the admissions which had come in without objection was made. Because this trial was held after January 29, 1965, the date of the final decision in People v. Dorado, 62 Cal.2d 338 [42 Cal.Rptr. 169, 398 P.2d 361], Daw's failure to object to the introduction of his pre-Miranda warning admissions operates as a waiver of the Escobedo-Dorado objection. (People v. Doherty, 67 Cal.2d 9, 13-14 [59 Cal.Rptr. 857, 429 P.2d 177]; People v. Huddleston,  [fn. *] (Cal.App.) 69 Cal.Rptr. 857.)
As Officer Rickly arrested and warned Daw, Officer Gore searched the vehicle. He found a small wooden box containing four marijuana cigarettes located on a shelf under the dashboard to the left of the steering column. Daw and his companions were then arrested for possessing marijuana.
The officers radioed for a narcotics unit. Deputy Sheriff Narron responded and conducted a further search of the bus finding cigarette papers, a coin purse containing marijuana debris and a sandwich bag containing 43 1/2 grams of marijuana, enough for 40 extra large marijuana cigarettes. The bulk marijuana was found in a suitcase belonging to one of *565 Daw's passengers. Marijuana debris was found in Daw's pockets.
After he had been told his Miranda rights, Daw admitted he knew marijuana was in the car. Daw and his passengers were on a trip to Mexico. He was asked why he was transporting marijuana into Mexico when it would be easily obtained there. Daw said it was a long trip and he would need it to relax. Daw tried to convince Officer Rickly marijuana was a good thing and offered to share it with Rickly.
Daw admitted at the trial the box in which the four marijuana cigarettes were found belonged to him. He denied ever having smoked marijuana or ever having seen marijuana.
[4] Daw contends the warrantless, non-consensual search of his vehicle was illegal. Illegality is predicated upon the officers' surveillance of Daw's vehicle for one half to three quarters of a mile before stopping it. Contrary to Daw's contention, there is no Fourth Amendment right protecting against "unreasonable surveillance" of automobiles on a public highway by officers charged with the duty of detecting traffic violations. We have noted the officers were justified in stopping the vehicle for apparent Vehicle Code violations. Daw's arrest was justified, wholly apart from his admissions, by his appearance and acts reasonably indicating he was under the influence of a narcotic. (People v. Davis, 240 Cal.App.2d 496, 500-501 [49 Cal.Rptr. 663].) The search of the vehicle was legal as incident to Daw's arrest and the motion to suppress the discovered evidence correctly denied.
Daw's contention he was initially arrested for possessing marijuana before a search established probable cause to arrest for possession is based upon a misstatement of the record. Daw testified on direct examination by his counsel he was initially arrested for being under the influence of marijuana. It was after the search incident to his first arrest that Daw was arrested for possession.
[5a] The trial court erred by failing to give, on its own motion, a jury instruction that oral admissions of the accused should be viewed with caution. (People v. Ford, 60 Cal.2d 772, 799 [36 Cal.Rptr. 620, 388 P.2d 892]; People v. Deloney, 41 Cal.2d 832, 840 [264 P.2d 532]; People v. Bemis, 33 Cal.2d 395, 398 [202 P.2d 82].) The People concede error, but argue it was not prejudicial in this case.
[6] An admission is "any statement by an accused relative to the offense charged." (People v. Atchley, 53 Cal.2d 160, 170 [346 P.2d 764].) [5b] A failure to give the cautionary *566 instruction is not necessarily reversible error. (People v. Koenig, 29 Cal.2d 87, 94 [173 P.2d 1]; People v. Wheelwright, 262 Cal.App.2d 63, 71 [68 Cal.Rptr. 356].)
To determine whether the trial court's error was prejudicial, it is our duty to reweigh all of the evidence to determine whether in our opinion it is reasonably probable a result more favorable to the appealing party would have been reached in the absence of error. (People v. Watson, 46 Cal.2d 818, 835-836 [299 P.2d 243]; Aldabe v. Aldabe, 209 Cal.App.2d 453, 457 [26 Cal.Rptr. 208]; People v. Wheelwright, supra, 262 Cal.App.2d 63, 71.) The ultimate consideration is whether a miscarriage of justice has resulted within the meaning of article VI, section 13 of the California Constitution.
[7] Ignoring all of Daw's extrajudicial statements, he was erratically driving a vehicle in which there was a strong odor of incense. An expert in the field of narcotic law enforcement testified people who are smoking marijuana will burn incense to kill the odor of marijuana. Daw stood unsteadily on his feet, walked with a floating effect, stared at the sun without blinking, spoke in a slurred voice and made nonresponsive answers to questions. His eyes were dilated and he reacted nervously when narcotics or marijuana were mentioned. The People's expert testified these factors indicated Daw was under the influence of marijuana. Marijuana cigarettes were found in a box Daw admitted in court was his and which was located on a shelf between the door and steering column on the driver's side of the vehicle owned and being driven by Daw. Marijuana was found elsewhere in Daw's vehicle and marijuana debris was found in his clothing.
Bolstering the above were Daw's statements made at the scene of the arrest after he was warned of his Miranda rights. Daw admitted knowing marijuana was in the car, tried to convince the officers marijuana was a good thing and offered to share it with the officers (a virtual confession, as an offer to share implies possession).
Would a cautionary instruction as to these admissions have led with reasonable probability to a different result? We think not. Daw's defense was his denial he made the statements attributed to him or acted as described by the officers and his denial he had ever used or seen marijuana. He was seriously impeached by evidence of the marijuana cigarettes in his wooden box and by the marijuana debris in his pockets.
The judgment is affirmed.
Coughlin, J., and Whelan, J., concurred.
NOTES
[fn. *]  *. A rehearing was granted on July 25, 1968.

=== CASE 2209662 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:42.036286+00 ===

348 Ill. App. 21 (1952)
107 N.E.2d 795
Agnes Fessler, Appellant,
v.
Daniel E. Weiss, Appellee.
Gen. Nos. 45,606, 45,651.
Illinois Appellate Court.
Opinion filed September 9, 1952.
Released for publication September 23, 1952.
*22 *23 IRVING M. GREENFIELD, and EDWARD A. MYERSON, both of Chicago, for petitioner; IRVING D. LEVIN, of Chicago, of counsel.
WYATT JACOBS, of Chicago, for respondent; CHARLES E. HECKLER, of Chicago, of counsel.
*24 MR. JUSTICE SCHWARTZ delivered the opinion of the court.
[1] On June 26, 1951, the circuit court of Cook county entered an order in this case which (a) vacated a judgment entered June 14, 1951, upon a verdict for $10,000, (b) set aside an order denying a motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict, (c) set aside an order denying a motion for a new trial, and (d) granted a new trial. From that portion of the order which granted a new trial, plaintiff petitions this court for leave to appeal. She also prosecutes an appeal from the balance of the order. On motion, the petition for leave to appeal was consolidated with the appeal. A motion to dismiss the appeal has been made on the ground that the order must be construed as a whole and as such is not a final order. As we have determined the matter on its merits, this motion is denied.
The suit is for personal injuries sustained by plaintiff while riding in a cab which collided with defendant Daniel E. Weiss's automobile. At the time of the accident defendant was covered by a liability insurance policy issued to him by the Preferred Accident Insurance Company of New York, under which the company agreed to defend him at its own cost against any suit brought against him to recover damages due to injuries caused by his automobile.
Wyatt Jacobs was retained by the insurance company and entered his appearance on behalf of defendant Weiss in January 1949. Over two years later, on April 19, 1951, the case reached the "A" trial call, that is, a list of cases which must be ready when reached. Jacobs or his associate, William H. Warvel, answered the trial call daily thereafter. In early May 1951 insolvency proceedings were instituted in New York against the insurance company and it was declared insolvent. After notifying defendant Weiss, Warvel appeared before the motion judge on June 11, *25 1951, and asked leave to withdraw Jacobs' appearance for Weiss, as the liquidator had refused to give Jacobs further authority to represent him in any suits. Weiss was present on June 11th when Jacobs' motion was argued before the motion judge and he agreed to abide by the decision of the court on that motion. At that time the case was practically ready to be assigned for trial, and the motion judge refused to allow Jacobs to withdraw. Jacobs and Warvel answered the call on June 12th, 13th and 14th, and on the last named date, the case was assigned for trial to JUDGE HENRY J. INGRAM, sitting in Cook county on a temporary assignment.
On June 14, 1951, the case came on for trial before JUDGE INGRAM. Weiss was not present. The jury was called and plaintiff proceeded to present her evidence. At the close of plaintiff's case a verdict was directed for certain defendants other than Weiss and one Goldman. No evidence was presented for Weiss. The jury returned a verdict of guilty as to Weiss and codefendant Goldman and assessed plaintiff's damages at $10,000. A motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict or for a new trial was formally made and formally denied without contest by JUDGE INGRAM and judgment on the verdict was entered against both Weiss and Goldman.
[2] On Saturday, June 16, 1951, two days after entry of the judgment, Jacobs appeared before JUDGE INGRAM, who was then sitting in the "Marriage Court," with a motion to vacate the judgment and the orders referred to. JUDGE INGRAM refused to hear Jacobs' motion at that time. On June 19, 1951, Jacobs presented to HON. HARRY M. FISHER, Motion and Assignment Judge of the Circuit Court, a motion to vacate the judgment and post-trial orders. This motion was supported by the affidavit of Mr. Warvel. After some argument and the presentation of a counter-affidavit *26 by Mr. Levin, counsel for plaintiff, the court on June 26, 1951 entered the order here in question. The court took judicial notice of the fact that JUDGE INGRAM, the trial judge, was not within the jurisdiction and held that the matter therefore came properly before his branch of the court. He concluded from the affidavits which had been filed and from the statements of counsel which had been presented to him that the proceedings at the trial, the verdict, and the subsequent post-trial motions and orders were all had pursuant to an understanding between counsel, and that Weiss had not been notified of the trial. Recalling the fact that he had ordered Mr. Jacobs to continue his representation of Weiss even though the insurance company had become insolvent and had denied Jacobs' motion for leave to withdraw, the court held that under such circumstances it could not presume that the lawyer had authority to consent tacitly or expressly to the verdict and the entry of the post-trial orders; that Weiss was not notified of the time of the trial; and that under such circumstances it was unjust to permit the judgment to stand. The court entered these orders pursuant to par. 7, section 50 of the Practice Act, which is as follows:
"(7) The court may in its discretion before final judgment, set aside any default, and may within thirty days after entry thereof set aside any judgment or decree upon good cause shown by affidavit, upon such terms and conditions as shall be reasonable."
The foregoing provision was enacted to take the place of term time, during which, it was said, all matters rested within the breast of the court and were always subject to change upon the exercise of proper discretion. The question, therefore, is whether there was such an abuse of discretion in the entry of the order of June 26, 1951, as to require reversal by this court.
[3, 4] It is argued that the insolvency of the insurance company and the refusal of the liquidator to *27 continue Jacobs' employment in the case, left counsel devoid of authority to represent Weiss. Ordinarily, dissolution of a corporation or partnership terminates the relationship of attorney and client. Sinnott v. Hanan, 156 App. Div. 323, 141 N.Y. Supp. 505; 5 Am. Jur., Attorneys-at-law, sec. 38. However, in this case counsel entered his appearance for Weiss, and the later liquidation of the insurance company did not affect the attorney-client relationship between him and Weiss. Jacobs' primary responsibility was to defend Weiss, and the fact that he was being paid by a third party cannot be allowed to detract from that responsibility in any respect.
[5, 6] An attorney who has entered an appearance of record for a client may not terminate that relationship without a formal withdrawal of record by leave of court. Jacobson v. Ashkinaze, 337 Ill. 141; Krieger v. Krieger, 221 Ill. 479. Here, the motion judge's refusal to allow Jacobs to withdraw was entirely justified. Had counsel acted earlier, his motion to withdraw might well have been allowed. However, at the time his motion was acted upon, the trial was only a few days off. He had answered ready to the trial call for approximately a month after the insolvency of the insurance company. The time between the refusal of his motion and the trial was so short that, by his own admission, he was unable to notify Weiss. After his motion for withdrawal was refused, counsel apparently recognized his duty toward Weiss by answering himself or having Warvel answer the trial call daily and by having Warvel appear for Weiss at the trial.
[7] It does not follow, however, that counsel were authorized to give away Weiss's case. Plaintiff cites numerous cases where clients were held to be bound by the allegedly unauthorized actions of their attorneys, with their only recourse being a suit against the negligent counsel. Four of them involve consent decrees *28 later attacked despite the fact that they had originally been entered with the approval of complainant's counsel. Bergman v. Rhodes, 334 Ill. 137; Benevolent Society v. Aid Society, 283 Ill. 99; City of Kankakee v. Lang, 323 Ill. App. 14; Consaer v. Wisniewski, 293 Ill. App. 529. In the City of Kankakee and Consaer cases the question of the authority of counsel was not put directly at issue. The attorney who approved the decree for complainants in the Bergman case had represented them for many years through a long course of litigation and the question of his authority was apparently not argued on appeal. The Benevolent Society case involved a question of attorneys' fees rather than the subject matter of the litigation. In none of these cases did the courts purport to lay down a flat rule that the authority of an attorney extends to giving away the entire substance of a suit. Quite the contrary  in the Bergman and Benevolent Society cases the Supreme Court specifically stated that an attorney's authority to bind his client is limited to the "conduct and management of the litigation," a phrase that cannot be interpreted as authorizing a consent to judgment.
[8, 9] The early case of People ex rel. Wright v. Lamborn, 2 Ill. 123, laid down the rule that a lawyer employed to defend a suit is not authorized to consent to the entry of judgment against his client without the client's consent. This rule has not been overruled. In Village of Dolton v. Dolton Estate, 331 Ill. 88, 93-4, the Supreme Court stated that if any attorney did exceed his authority in that respect, the remedy of the client would be against the attorney rather than against the winning party. However, this rule was laid down with respect to an attempt to set aside a judgment after the term. Such is not the situation here. Defendant here moved for a new trial within the 30-day period provided in the Civil Practice Act, and the action of the lower *29 court in granting a new trial is a matter of discretion. It cannot be reversed, except for abuse of that discretion. Couch v. Southern Ry. Co., 294 Ill. App. 490; Wagner v. Chicago Motor Coach Co., 288 Ill. App. 402; Tone v. Halsey, Stuart & Co., 286 Ill. App. 169. Cases refusing to set aside consent decrees and judgments after a term of court has ended are not controlling here, where defendant moved for and had been granted a new trial within the time provided by sec. 50 of the Civil Practice Act.
[10] The court in exercising its discretion took note of the fact that counsel had been denied leave to withdraw. Considering that fact, along with all the other facts of the case, the court concluded that it could not be presumed that counsel's acquiescence in the verdict and judgment was authorized by his client, and that it would be unjust to make the client bear the responsibility for counsel's failure to notify him as to the time and place of the trial. The discretion was in our opinion soundly exercised.
[11-13] It is urged upon us that under the rules post-trial motions should be presented to the trial judge and that therefore JUDGE FISHER did not have jurisdiction to enter the order in question. It is true that normally such motions should be presented to the trial judge. Having heard and seen the witnesses and being familiar with the evidence, he is in the best position to pass upon post-trial motions. It would be intolerable to allow a losing party to shop around among the justices of a court for a hearing on post-trial motions before some one other than the trial judge. The circuit court has by section 6 of the orders of its executive committee provided that motions subsequent to trial should be heard by the trial judge. However, this rule does not apply to a situation such as is presented by the facts of this case. The trial judge was no longer sitting in Cook county, and it appears from the facts *30 that the trial itself was uncontested and that the post-trial motions were purely formal. If we were to apply the principle in a case such as this, it would in effect deprive the court of the jurisdiction reposed in it pursuant to par. 7, section 50 of the Civil Practice Act, supra. Under the circumstances in question, it was proper for JUDGE FISHER to have assumed jurisdiction of the motion.
[14, 15] In the event of the death of a trial judge, his successor may rule on a motion for a new trial, even though he has not heard nor seen the witnesses. People v. Ficke, 343 Ill. 367; People v. McConnell, 155 Ill. 192. We take cognizance of the fact that it is common practice for judges outside of Cook county to preside in Cook county courts; and in the ordinary case where an actual trial has been held, these judges being familiar with the trial and having heard and seen the witnesses, should hear post-trial motions as provided by the rule. This, however, does not apply to a situation such as is presented by the facts in the instant case.
Other points were made and argued by plaintiff which we consider not applicable to the instant case.
[16] In one respect, however, the court erred. He stated to counsel that if counsel consented, he would impose terms on the entry of the order. Under the circumstances here, the court should have imposed terms without requiring counsel to consent to the vacation of the judgment and a new trial. These terms should be adequate to reimburse plaintiff and counsel for the labor and expense, including reasonable attorneys' fees, incurred by reason of the mistrial. For that purpose the cause is remanded.
The order is affirmed in all other respects. The petition for leave to appeal from that part of the order granting a new trial is denied.
*31 Order affirmed in part, reversed in part, and cause remanded with directions.
ROBSON, P.J. and TUOHY, J., concur.

=== CASE 9737281 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:20:42.308022+00 ===

DEVINE, P. J.
The question in this case is whether an activity, described below, constitutes the loading of a truck. If it can be so held, an insurance policy issued by appellant Allstate Insurance Company subjects that company to liability resulting from a certain accident.
Liability Under the Vehicle Policy
P. E. O’Hair & Co., a corporation, has brought this action for declaratory judgment at the behest of its insurer, American Insurance Company, which had issued a general liability policy to O’Hair. Allstate is the insurer of Richard Oppermann, a plumbing contractor, having issued a liability policy covering injuries resulting from the “use” of his vehicle. The policy further provides that “use” includes “loading and unloading” of the vehicle. It also provides that any person using the vehicle with the permission of the named insured is also insured. Thus, O’Hair is insured by the Allstate policy if the vehicle was being used, which means, in this case, if it was engaged in a loading operation when the accident occurred.
On October 14, 1963, Oppermann drove his truck to the premises of 0 ’Hair, a seller of plumbing supplies, and parked at a loading dock at the rear of the building. He walked to the purchasing counter and ordered two or three lengths of four-inch diameter, double hub, soil pipe, five feet in length. Each length of pipe weighed about 45 to 50 pounds. James Keough, an employee of 0 ’Hair, whose duties included the taking and filling of orders, waited on Oppermann as he had done a number of times in the past.
The supply of soil pipe was stacked, pyramid style, approximately 100 feet to the rear of the building. Soil pipe was always kept in the yard, never in the building. Oppermann *197drove his truck from the loading dock to a point between 10 and 30 feet from this pile. Each individual section of pipe is bound together by two steel bands. Keough had attempted to take some pipes from the pile before he found that the band had to be cut. Oppermann stated that Keough broke the band on one end with the claw of a hammer. (Keough testified that it had already been cut.) Since the band on the other end of the pipe was still taut, it prevented Keough from removing any pipe. Keough asked Oppermann if he had any “snips” to cut the steel band; Oppermann replied that he did, got a pair from his truck, and, while standing in front of the pile, cut the band. The pipes were released and fell on Oppermann, causing the injuries for which he seeks recovery in a superior court action.
It was Keough’s job to load the pipe onto customers’ trucks; however, customers would often assist in this task. Oppermann had done so previously. It was the intention of both Keough and Oppermann that immediately after the band was cut, Keough would place the pipe on Oppermann’s truck. Prior to the cutting of the band, nothing had been removed from the pile or had been placed on the truck.
The trial judge decided that under the facts recited above, which were contained in an agreed statement, the accident arose out of the loading of the truck within the meaning of the Allstate policy, and that Allstate was obliged to defend O’Hair as an additional insured and to indemnify O’Hair to the extent of $50,000, the amount of the policy, and to reimburse O’Hair for any costs, expenses and attorneys’ fees theretofore incurred because of Allstate’s rejection of a tender of defense.
Although the term “unloading” has been construed a number of times in relation to insurance policies, the word “loading” apparently has not yet been interpreted in this state.  There is no doubt, however, that in California the “complete operations” doctrine has supplanted the more restrictive “coming to rest” rule. (Entz v. Fidelity & Cas. Co., 64 Cal.2d 379, 383 [50 Cal.Rptr. 190, 412 P.2d 382] ; Truck Ins. Exchange v. Webb), 256 Cal.App.2d 140, 145 [63 Cal.Rptr. 791].) The acceptance of the more liberal doctrine in place of the “coming to rest” theory finds its application in the matter of the termination and not the beginning of a loading or unloading operation. The fact that the more liberal rule is adopted in California (as it has gained acceptance generally [see 95 A.L.R.2d 1129]) is an indication that a *198liberal, although, of course, reasonable, interpretation ought to be made in favor of the insured as to what constitutes the commencement of a loading operation. This comports not only with the rule that uncertainties in insurance policies are to be resolved against the insurer (Continental Cas. Co. v. Zurich Ins. Co., 57 Cal.2d 27, 32 [17 Cal.Rptr. 12, 366 P.2d 455]), but also with the rule that the “loading and unloading” clause is one of “extensions,” that is, the insertion of such a clause in an insurance liability policy leads to the conclusion that it was inserted for the purpose of extending the coverage of the policy to accidents not covered by the other provisions of the standard motor vehicle liability policy. (American Auto. Ins. Co. v. American Fid. & Cas. Co., 106 Cal.App.2d 630 [235 P.2d 645].)
Before passing from the rules of interpretation set forth above to their application to the facts, we remark that although insurance is present in this case (Oppermann had automobile liability insurance, O’Hair had premises liability insurance), we must decide the single question whether O’Hair is an additional insured under the Allstate policy. The principle involved is the same as if a person who did not participate in the operation, a passerby, were injured by the falling pipe. (Such an unfortunate accident happened to a school girl in an unloading operation, as described in American Auto. Ins. Co. v. Transport Indem. Co., 200 Cal.App.2d 543 [19 Cal.Rptr. 558].) Let us suppose that in such a case the only parties able to respond to a judgment were the owner of the vehicle and his insurer: would the operation constitute “loading” within the meaning of the vehicle owner’s insurance policy ?
We remark, too, that although the action of Oppermann, the named insured, in bringing the lawsuit against an unnamed party, O’Hair, as an additional insured, seems at first blush incongruous, such action is supported by authority. (Travelers Ins. Co. v. Norwich Union Fire Ins. Soc., 221 Cal. App.2d 150 [34 Cal.Rptr. 406].)
We support the trial court’s conclusion that the accident arose out of loading of the truck within the meaning of the Allstate policy. Our reasons are:
1. It is said in the agreed statement that it was the job of Keough to load the trucks of customers. It is a fair, if not inescapable inference that when Keough went to the pile of pipes he was going about his job of loading them. Oppermann, in assisting Keough, was then engaged in the same operation.
*1992. Nothing remained in the performance of the transaction except the loading. The sale had been made. No preliminary steps, such as selection of merchandise, measuring, weighing, or the like were to be accomplished.
3. The fact that the soil pipe was always kept in the yard and never in the building tends to show no preparatory steps were to be performed at any distance. Indeed, there is nothing in the agreed statement to show that any preparatory steps, such as cutting the pipe to length, were ever performed in the yard.
4. While Keough proceeded to the place where the pipe was stacked, Oppermann drove his truck to a place close to the pile. Thus, both vehicle and the man (Keough) who was charged with the duty of loading proceeded toward the same place.
5. The snips with which the cut was made were carried in the vehicle.
6. Direct motions toward transportation of the pipe were made by both men. It is agreed that Keough attempted to move the pipe. If motion of the pipe itself be required, actual motion was caused by the severing of the band. Although the motion took a direction which was not intended, since the pipe fell on Oppermann, nevertheless the process of cutting the steel band was intended to, and did cause the pipes to be moved as part of the plan of both men to lift them into the truck.
The combination of all of these factors constitutes “loading."
The ease of Spurlock v. Boyce-Harvey Machinery (La. App.) 90 So.2d 417, is one in which the accident occurred when wire bands binding bundles of grader blades were severed, and the operation was held to be “loading." It is true that one bundle had been loaded. We do not regard this distinction as significant. The intention of the parties to the case before us certainly was to load the vehicle. The fact that the pack was not a second bundle does not seem important. In fact, in the Spurlock case, there was a preparatory step still to be performed on the second bundle, that is, tagging the blades. In the case before us, no such preliminary step was contemplated. We do not regard the case of General Acc. Fire & Life Assur. Corp. v. Jarmuth, 32 Misc.2d 424 [150 N.Y.S.2d 836], to be persuasive. In that case, the driver of the insured automobile went to a public garage to pick up his car. While awaiting its arrival he set down two pieces of luggage he *200intended to load into the ear. An employee of the garage fell over the bags. The court held that the “complete operation” of loading the bags had not yet commenced. We have some doubt that the case would have been decided in the same way in this state. (See criticism of it as having minimized the causal factor in American Auto. Ins. Co. v. Master Bldg. Supply & Lumber Co., 179 F.Supp. 699, 703.) But the case is distinguishable anyway. The bags over which the insured party fell were not being put in motion at all.
The automobile need not be, in the legal sense, the proximate cause of the claim; the events giving rise to the claim must, however, arise out of and be related to its use. (Entz v. Fidelity & Cas. Co., 64 Cal.2d 379, 385-386 [50 Cal.Rptr. 190, 412 P.2d 382] ; American Auto. Ins. Co. v. Transport Indem. Co., 200 Cal.App.2d 543, 550 [19 Cal.Rptr. 558] ; Home Indem. Co. v. Transport Indem. Co., 263 Cal.App.2d 100 [69 Cal.Rptr. 504].) We are of the opinion that the event causing the accident arose out of and was related to the use of the vehicle.
It is argued by appellant that the buyers of vehicle ■ insurance do not need “ premises-operations ” coverage, which • is provided otherwise, and that it would be wrong to shift the burden of risks of this kind to the purchasers of automobile insurance. But many loading and unloading operations are performed where premises coverage would not apply. Besides, an operator of premises may have no insurance or inadequate insurance. The vehicle policy, in its reference to loading and unloading, does not exclude those operations wdien they are performed on premises which are or could be insured.
It is further argued that it is obvious that Oppermann never contemplated the possibility that his own company would be asked to cover OTTair under the circumstances of this ease. Of course, Oppermann did not contemplate that this particular accident would happen. He did have the right to benefit by the law, whether he was aware of it or not, that where there is some causal relationship between the accident and the use of the vehicle, the person conducting the unloading operations is covered by the policy, whether he is the driver of the vehicle, the consignor or consignee, or a third person. (See Entz v. Fidelity & Cas. Co., supra, p. 383, and cases cited.)
For its part, Allstate must have contemplated that in view of the multitudinous lawsuits relating to what constitutes use of a vehicle, many kinds of accidents would be covered pro*201vided they occur in the course of operations which are an integral part of loading or unloading the vehicle. A line might be drawn by the courts, as a rule of convenience, so that eases falling on one side would be within the use of the vehicle, and the others would not, but the drawing of the line might well do injustice in particular cases. The very nature of loading and unloading operations is such as to preclude formulary disposition.
Apportionment
Appellant says that if “the court should decide that the claim results from the use of the automobile, the question then arises as to how the insurers should apportion any loss.” But apportionment was not an issue in the ease. No judgment affecting the liability of American Insurance Company could be made because that company is not a party to the cause. In the complaint for declaratory relief, O’Hair asks that the Allstate policy be declared solely and primarily responsible for the matters alleged in the complaint. Allstate in its answer simply asks that plaintiff take nothing, although there is a prayer for general relief. The answer makes no reference whatever to American Insurance Company or to apportionment. It is true that in the agreed statement of facts it is said that one of the issues is “To determine the degree of coverage afforded by the Allstate policy, should O’Hair be found to be an additional assured thereunder.” The court gave its response to this by declaring that plaintiff is insured under the Allstate policy to the extent of $50,000 (the full amount of the policy) for liability from this accident. Nothing is said in the findings of fact, conclusions of law, or judgment about apportionment, or about American Insurance Company. The policy of American Insurance Company is attached to the agreed statement, as is a policy of Continental Casualty Company covering the excess of American’s policy. The existence of the policy covering the premises probably was made use of in the trial court, as it was here, in support of the argument, stated above, that vehicle policies should not be burdened with such coverage. But it seems that the issue of apportionment was not tried. Surely there is nothing in the judgment about it upon which we could act. The issue of apportionment, therefore, must await other proceedings.
The judgment is affirmed.
Battigan, J., concurred.

=== CASE 9737282 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:20:42.313204+00 ===

*202CHRISTIAN, J.
I dissent.
Apparently no prior California decision has considered the circumstances in which loading should be held to have commenced. I would adopt the test propounded by a learned writer: 1 ‘ The ‘ complete operation ’ doctrine contemplates that the loading commences when the items of cargo leave their original location on the way to the vehicle . . . and that unloading does not cease until the items of cargo have reached the final point of delivery toward which the transportation of the cargo by automobile was a part.” (Risjord, Loading and Unloading, 13 Vand. L. Rev., 903, 904; italics added.)
As the majority opinion points out, California is committed to the “complete operations” rule by several cases involving unloading. (Entz v. Fidelity & Cas. Co. (1966) 64 Cal.2d 379, 384 [50 Cal.Rptr. 190, 412 P.2d 382] ; Truck Ins. Exchange v. Webb (1967) 256 Cal.App.2d 140, 145 [63 Cal.Rptr. 791].) Useful analogies to our ease may be drawn from cases dealing with the opposite end of the sequence: when unloading is to be held to have ended. No simple test can be found in these decisions, but the principle which seems to have guided them all is that when the term “loading and unloading” is used without elaboration or restriction in an insurance policy it is to be applied to each case in the manner most likely to conform with the reasonably implied intentions of the parties to the contract of insurance. Therefore, “ ‘the automobile need not be, in the legal sense, the proximate cause of the claim; the events giving rise to the claim must, however, arise out of and be related to its use.’ ” (American Auto. Ins. Co. v. Transport Indem. Co. (1962) 200 Cal.App.2d 543, 550 [19 Cal.Rptr. 558] ; Home Indem. Co. v. Transport Indem. Co. (1968) 263 Cal.App.2d 100 [69 Cal.Rptr. 504].) It seems to me that here the collapse of the pile of pipe did not “arise out of” the loading of the truck; the accident would as well have occurred if the retaining band had been cut preparatory to moving two or three lengths of pipe to some other place such as a stock bin inside the warehouse.
In Entz v. Fidelity & Cas. Co., supra, 64 Cal.2d 379, at p. 383, the Supreme Court held, in a case involving an injury which assertedly occurred in the course of unloading transit-mix cement, that unloading “has been completed when, following removal of the material from the vehicle, the deliveror has finished his handling of it, and it has been placed in the hands of the receiver at the designated reception point, even though it is necessary for the consignee, or someone on his *203behalf, to transport it thereafter to another point.” By analogy it seems to me reasonable to hold here that loading has not commenced when neither of the men had commenced moving the material from its “original location on the way to the vehicle.” (Risjord, op. cit., supra.) The accident occurred as the result of a merely preparatory step taken by Oppermann. Compare San Fernando Valley Crane Service, Inc. v. Travelers Ins. Co. (1964) 229 Cal.App.2d 229 [40 Cal.Rptr. 165], another transit-mix cement case, in which unloading was held not to extend to the collapse of a bucket crane which was conveying cement from the insured vehicle to the spot on the construction site where the cement was to be used. This conclusion was held to be more likely to represent the intention of the parties in view of the fact that the cement could have been conveyed away from the truck by other means; it was considered “not reasonable to conclude that such parties intended an extension of coverage to an accident occurring after concrete has been placed in a receptacle furnished by or on behalf of the purchaser and while it is being mechanically conveyed to a location some distance above the ground.” (229 Cal.App.2d at p. 236.) By analogy here, it is unlikely that Oppermann and Allstate intended an extension of coverage to an accident which occurred before the workmen commenced moving the load to the truck. Such an extension would include risks which Oppermann would hardly think of in connection with the use of his truck, and which his insurance carrier would have great difficulty in evaluating for purposes of fixing a premium. (See also Truck Ins. Exchange v. Webb, supra, 256 Cal.App.2d 140, 145 [63 Cal.Rptr. 791].) Consistent with this view is American Auto. Ins. Co. v. American Fid. & Cas. Co. (1951) 106 Cal.App.2d 630 [235 P.2d 645], where property damage resulting from negligent operation of facilities used in unloading the insured oil truck was held to be covered. In contrast to our facts, the negligent act there occurred during the actual course of unloading operations.
Finally, it seems to me that a test for the commencement of the loading process should be developed which can be applied with reasonable predictability. Otherwise parties are required to litigate, through the appellate stage, every case where an injury is in some manner related in time and place to the loading of an insured vehicle. For example, the present ease, in the view of the majority, turns upon a set of unusual facts which do not seem to relate to any guiding principle. I think *204the test suggested by Risjord, op. cit., supra, is preferable: it is predictable in its results, and it is likely to represent the unexpressed intentions of the parties.
I would reverse the judgment.
A petition for a rehearing was denied December 3, 1968. Christian, J., was of the opinion that the petition should be granted. Appellant’s petition for a hearing by the Supreme Court was denied December 30,1968.

=== CASE 9737283 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:20:42.577748+00 ===

OPINION ANNOUNCING THE JUDGMENT OF THE COURT
Justice NIGRO.
The issue presented in the instant appeal is whether the Superior Court erred in refusing to review Appellant Jerome Mouzon’s challenge to the discretionary aspects of his criminal sentence based upon its conclusion that his claim of excessiveness failed to raise a substantial question as a matter of law because his sentence was within the statutory limits. As we find the Superior Court erred, we reverse.
Traditionally, the trial court is afforded broad discretion in sentencing criminal defendants “because of the perception that the trial court is in the best position to determine the proper penalty for a particular offense based upon an evaluation of the individual circumstances before it.” Commonwealth v. Ward, 524 Pa. 48, 568 A.2d 1242, 1243 (1990). Under Pennsylvania’s Sentencing Code, 42 Pa.C.S. § 9701 et seq., a trial court must “follow the general principle that the sentence imposed should call for confinement that is consistent with the protection of the public, the gravity of the offense as it relates to the impact on the life of the victim and on the community, and the rehabilitative needs of the defendant.”1 Id. § 9721(b). The court must also consider the statutory *424Sentencing Guidelines, which were promulgated in order to address the problems associated with disparity in sentencing. See id.; see also 42 Pa.C.S. §§ 2151-2155 (governing creation and adoption of the Sentencing Guidelines); 204 Pa.Code §§ 303.1-303.18 (Pennsylvania Sentencing Guidelines); see generally Commonwealth v. Sessoms, 516 Pa. 365, 532 A.2d 775, 776-77 (1987) (discussing the formation of the Sentencing Commission and the development of the Guidelines).2
The Sentencing Guidelines enumerate aggravating and mitigating circumstances, assign scores based on a defendant’s criminal record and based on the seriousness of the crime, and specify a range of punishments for each crime.3 “In every case in which the court imposes a sentence for a felony or misdemeanor, the court shall make as a part of the record, *425and disclose in open court at the time of sentencing, a statement of the reason or reasons for the sentence imposed.” 42 Pa.C.S. § 9721(b); see 204 Pa.Code § 303.1(d). The Sentencing Guidelines are not mandatory, however, so trial courts retain broad discretion in sentencing matters, and therefore, may sentence defendants outside the Guidelines.4 See 42 Pa.C.S. § 9721(b); Commonwealth v. Ellis, 700 A.2d 948, 958 (Pa.Super.1997). If a court departs from the sentencing recommendations contained in the Sentencing Guidelines, it must “provide a contemporaneous written statement of the reason or reasons for the deviation.” 42 Pa.C.S. § 9721(b); see 204 Pa.Code § 303.1(d).
Appellate review of sentences is governed by § 9781 of the Pennsylvania Sentencing Code, which makes clear that there is no absolute right to appellate review of the discretionary aspects of a sentence.5 See id. § 9781. Rather, allowance of an appeal raising such a claim will be granted only when the appellate court with initial jurisdiction over such claims, most typically the Superior Court, determines that there is a substantial question that the sentence is not appropriate under the Sentencing Code. See id. § 9781(b).6 To facilitate the Superior Court’s exercise of discretion under § 9781(b), Rule *4262119(f) of the Pennsylvania Rules of Appellate Procedure requires appellants seeking appellate review of the discretionary aspects of a sentence to include in their brief a separate “concise statement of the reasons relied upon for allowance of appeal with respect to the discretionary aspects of a sentence,” which “shall immediately precede the argument on the merits with respect to the discretionary aspects of sentence.” Pa.R.A.P. 2119(f). From an appellant’s Rule 2119(f) statement, the Superior Court decides whether to review the discretionary aspects of a sentence based upon a case-by-case determination as to whether “a substantial question concerning the sentence exists.” In the Interest of M.W., 555 Pa. 505, 725 A.2d 729, 731 (1999) (citing Commonwealth v. Tuladziecki, 513 Pa. 508, 522 A.2d 17, 19 (1987)). To demonstrate that a substantial question exists, “a party must articulate reasons why a particular sentence raises doubts that the trial court did not properly consider [the] general guidelines provided by the legislature.” Commonwealth v. Koehler, 558 Pa. 334, 737 A.2d 225, 244 (1999) (quoting Commonwealth v. Saranchak, 544 Pa. 158, 675 A.2d 268, 277 (1996)); see Commonwealth v. Goggins, 748 A.2d 721, 727 (Pa.Super.2000), allocatur denied, 563 Pa. 672, 759 A.2d 920 (2000) (appellant is required only to make a plausible argument that his sentence is either inconsistent with a particular provision of the Sentencing Code or contrary to the fundamental norms underlying the sentencing process).
Pursuant to § 9781(f) of the Sentencing Code, “[n]o appeal of the discretionary aspects of the sentence shall be *427permitted beyond the appellate court that has initial jurisdiction for such appeals.” 42 Pa.C.S. § 9781(f). As a result, this Court lacks jurisdiction to consider challenges to the discretionary aspects of sentences that the Superior Court has already reviewed. See id. § 9781(b), (f); Tuladziecki, 522 A.2d at 18. However, nothing in the Sentencing Code precludes this Court from reviewing the Superior Court’s application of legal principles. See Commonwealth v. Smith, 543 Pa. 566, 673 A.2d 893, 895 (1996). In fact, we have previously concluded that this Court may review issues, such as the one presented by this appeal, regarding whether the Superior Court correctly interpreted and applied the Sentencing Code and case law in sentencing matters. Id.
Here, Appellant’s sentence was imposed after he was convicted for committing several armed robberies and related offenses in Philadelphia over an eleven-day period in October 1997. The crimes involved three separate incidents where Appellant and several co-conspirators entered two food markets and a restaurant and, at gunpoint, stole money from customers and the establishments’ cash registers. A police investigation of the crimes led to the arrest of one co-conspirator on November 14, 1997. Later that same day, the police obtained and executed an arrest warrant for Appellant and a search warrant for his residence, which resulted in the recovery of an old .44 magnum revolver from the basement, which witnesses later identified as the one used in the robberies. On November 15, 1997, Appellant gave a statement to the police acknowledging his involvement in one of the robberies and admitting that he had brandished the .44 magnum handgun. Following further police investigation, on December 19, 1997, Appellant gave a second inculpatory statement regarding his involvement in one of the other robberies.
Upon the completion of the police investigation, Appellant was charged with numerous crimes stemming from his involvement in the three robberies. Following a three-day trial, on December 22, 1998, a jury found Appellant guilty of eight counts of robbery, eight counts of possessing an instrument of *428crime, and seven counts of conspiracy.7 On June 23,1999, the trial court imposed a prison term of ten to twenty years for each of five robbery convictions, ten to twenty years for each of two conspiracy convictions and two and one-half to five years for one possessing an instrument of crime conviction.8 The court ordered that all of the sentences were to run consecutively, for an aggregate sentence of seventy-two and one-half years to one hundred forty-five years imprisonment. This sentence was within the statutory legal limits, but was above the aggravated range of the Sentencing Guidelines. The trial court stated on the record that it considered the applicable Guidelines, the presentence report, and the mental health evaluation of Appellant. N.T., 6/23/99, at 26-28. The court also explained its reasons for deviating from the Guidelines, which included: Appellant’s denial of his involvement in the crimes despite multiple identifications by proximate eyewitnesses; his “social hereditary history,” i.e., his father was also incarcerated; his lack of remorse for terrorizing a neighborhood and for pointing a handgun at innocent victims and threatening to shoot them; his history of substance abuse and its adverse affects on his family and employment; his poor likelihood of rehabilitation; and the danger he poses to the community. Id. at 26-30. Appellant filed a post-sentence motion to vacate and reconsider the sentence, which the trial court denied on June 30,1999.
On appeal to the Superior Court, Appellant alleged that the trial court abused its discretion in sentencing him to the absolute maximum penalty for each offense, arguing that under the circumstances of the case, sentencing him to what amounted to a life sentence was arbitrary, excessive, unreasonable, shocking to the conscience and disproportionate to the crimes committed. Appellant pointed out that he was a twenty-year-old first-time offender with neither an adult or juvenile record, and that he did not discharge a gun or injure anyone during the robberies. According to Appellant, the *429sheer magnitude of the trial court’s deviation from the Sentencing Guidelines presented a substantial question of excessiveness that warranted the Superior Court’s review.
In a memorandum opinion filed May 23, 2001, the Superior Court concluded that Appellant failed to raise a substantial question warranting appellate review, and therefore, declined to review the merits of his claim. Slip. Op. at 6-8. In so concluding, the Superior Court relied upon cases holding that, under 42 Pa.C.S. § 9781, a claim of excessiveness that is raised against a sentence within the statutory limits fails to raise a substantial question as a matter of law. See id. (citing Commonwealth v. Burton, 770 A.2d 771 (Pa.Super.2001)) (citation omitted) (“a claim of excessiveness when the sentence is within the statutory limits is not a substantial question”); Commonwealth v. Petaccio, 764 A.2d 582 (Pa.Super.2000) (citation omitted) (“A [bald] claim of excessiveness of sentence does not raise a substantial question so as to permit appellate review where the sentence is within the statutory limits.”); Commonwealth v. Martin, 727 A.2d 1136, 1143 n. 8 (Pa.Super.1999) (“A claim of excessiveness of sentence fails to raise a substantial question for review where, as here, the sentence is within the statutory limits.”).9 This Court subsequently granted Appellant’s Petition for Allowance of Appeal.
*430On appeal here, Appellant essentially argues that the Superior Court violated his right to appeal by concluding that, under § 9781(b), the excessiveness of a sentence within the statutory limits cannot be reviewed as a matter of law because such a claim does not raise a substantial question that the sentence is inappropriate under the Sentencing Code.10 We agree with Appellant that the Superior Court erred.
Even before the Guidelines were enacted, this Court recognized that a trial court could abuse its discretion by imposing a sentence that was “manifestly excessive,” even when that sentence was within the statutory limits. For example, we stated that sentencing lies “within the sole discretion of the trial court, and the sentence imposed will not be reviewed by *431an appellate court, unless it exceeds the statutorily prescribed limits or is so manifestly excessive as to constitute too severe a punishment.” Commonwealth v. Wrona, 442 Pa. 201, 275 A.2d 78, 81 (1971) (emphasis added); see also Commonwealth v. Garramone, 307 Pa. 507, 161 A. 733, 735 (1932) (applying “manifestly excessive” exception to conclude trial court abused its discretion in imposing death sentence). Similarly, in Commonwealth v. Person, 450 Pa. 1, 297 A.2d 460, 462 (1972), we concluded that when a trial court imposes a sentence that is within the statutory limits, “there is no abuse of discretion unless the sentence is manifestly excessive so as to inflict too severe a punishment.” The Superior Court consistently adhered to these principles and addressed claims by appellants that their sentences, though within the statutory limits, were manifestly excessive. See, e.g., Commonwealth v. Norris, 248 Pa.Super. 330, 375 A.2d 122, 123-24 (1977) (“It is equally well-settled that an appellate court will not find an abuse of [the trial court’s] broad discretion, providing that the sentence is within statutory limits, unless the sentence imposed is so manifestly excessive as to inflict too severe a punishment.”); Commonwealth v. Straw, 238 Pa.Super. 535, 361 A.2d 427, 428 (1976) (same); Commonwealth v. Zelnick, 202 Pa.Super. 129, 195 A.2d 171, 173 (1963) (same); Commonwealth v. Bilinski, 190 Pa.Super. 401, 154 A.2d 322, 325 (1959) (same).
In keeping with this standard, when the General Assembly amended the Sentencing Code in 1980 it stated in clear language that “an appellate court shall vacate the sentence and remand the case” where it finds that the trial court:
(2) sentenced within the sentencing guidelines but the case involves circumstances where the application of the guidelines would, be clearly unreasonable; or
(3) sentenced outside the sentencing guidelines and the sentence is unreasonable.
42 Pa.C.S. § 9781(c)(2) & (3) (emphasis added).11 Thus, under the clear and unambiguous language of the statute, the Superior Court is required to vacate sentences that are outside of *432the Guidelines if they are “unreasonable,” and is also required to vacate sentences within the Guidelines if they are “clearly unreasonable.” See 1 Pa.C.S. § 1921(b) (“When the words of a statute are clear and free from all ambiguity, the letter of it is not to be disregarded under the pretext of pursuing its spirit”). There is no language in § 9781 which in any way indicates that an excessiveness claim is excluded from this mandate.
In fact, in applying the statutory provisions of § 9781(b), this Court has continued to recognize that an appellant may raise an excessiveness challenge even when he is sentenced within the statutory limits for a particular crime. For example, in Commonwealth v. Koehler, 558 Pa. 334, 737 A.2d 225 (1999), a capital case on direct appeal to this Court, we addressed, inter alia, the appellant’s claim that the sentences imposed for his non-capital convictions were excessive. Although we ultimately declined to review the merits of the appellant’s excessiveness challenge, this Court did not find that such a claim was precluded as a matter of law. Rather, we denied discretionary review under § 9781 because, after reviewing the appellant’s prefatory Rule 2119(f) statement, we found that he had “failed to set forth a substantial question that the sentence was inappropriate, and thus deserving of our review.” Id. at 244. See also Commonwealth v. Saranchak, 544 Pa. 158, 675 A.2d 268, 277 (1996) (dismissing appellant’s discretionary sentencing challenge to a sentence imposed within the statutory limits, but outside of the Guidelines, because the appellant failed to provide the required Rule 2119(f) prefatory statement). Clearly then, this Court has not sanc*433tioned a rule such as that applied by the Superior Court below whereby an excessiveness challenge raised against a sentence within the statutory limits is per se precluded from receiving appellate review.12
While it is undoubtedly true that the legislature granted the Superior Court discretion to decide whether it will review a challenge to the discretionary aspects of sentencing, § 9781(b) does not grant the Superior Court the discretion to exclude an entire class of challenges from having the opportunity to receive appellate review on the merits. See Commonwealth v. Cappellini, 456 Pa.Super. 498, 690 A.2d 1220, 1227 (1997) (although an appellant is not entitled to appeal discretionary aspects of sentencing as of right, the Superior Court “must determine whether [the] appellant has raised a substantial question” so as to merit appellate review). The legislature has set forth the terms of appellate review of sentences, and the Superior Court cannot sua sponte alter the requirements regarding whether a claim may receive appellate review on the merits, nor can it legislate its own exclusions.13 Further*434more, because our General Assembly has chosen to preclude this Court from reviewing most claims challenging the discretionary aspects of sentencing, it is all the more crucial that defendants receive at least one opportunity to receive appellate review of sentences that raise a substantial question under § 9781(b).14 See Commonwealth v. Smart, 387 Pa.Su*435per. 518, 564 A.2d 512, 514 (1989) (appellate review of sentencing “would become a mockery and a sham if all sentences were routinely affirmed under the guise of discretion of the trial court”).
If an appellant, like Appellant here, complies with all statutory and procedural requirements regarding a challenge to the discretionary aspects of sentencing, and articulates in his Rule 2119(f) statement a substantial question so as to warrant appellate review, § 9781 requires the Superior Court to review the manner in which the trial court exercised its discretion. This does not mean, however, that the Superior Court must accept bald allegations of excessiveness. Rather, only where the appellant’s Rule 2119(f) statement sufficiently articulates the manner in which the sentence violates either a specific provision of the sentencing scheme set forth in the Sentencing Code or a particular fundamental norm underlying the sentencing process, will such a statement be deemed adequate to raise a substantial question so as to permit a grant of allowance of appeal of the discretionary aspects of the sentence. See Koehler; 737 A.2d at 244 (party must articulate why sentence raises doubts that sentence was improper under the Sentencing Code); Saranchak, 675 A.2d at 277 n. 18 (“Appellant must, at a minimum, explain specifically why he thinks his sentences were improper”); Goggins, 748 A.2d at 727 (appellant need only make a plausible argument that a sentence is contrary to the Sentencing Code or the fundamental norms underlying the sentencing process).
*436Based on the above, we conclude that the Superior Court erred in finding that Appellant’s excessiveness challenge failed to raise a substantial question as a matter of law because his sentence was within the statutory limits.15 Thus, we reverse the order of the Superior Court and remand this case to the Superior Court for proceedings consistent with this opinion.
Justice NEWMAN and Justice SAYLOR concur in the result.
Justice CASTILLE files a dissenting opinion.
Justice EAKIN files a dissenting opinion in which Justice CASTILLE joins.
. To that end, Pennsylvania’s statutory scheme specifies the grade and degree of each particular crime. See, e.g., 18 Pa.C.S. § 907(b) ("A person commits a misdemeanor of the first degree if he possesses a firearm or other weapon concealed upon his person with intent to *424employ it criminally.”); id. § 3701(2)(b) (“Robbery under subsection (a)(l)(iv) is a felony of the second degree; robbery under subsection (a)(l)(v) is a felony of the third degree; otherwise it is a felony of the first degree.”). Moreover, the General Assembly has provided the statutory maximum legal sentences for each grade and degree of crime. 18 Pa.C.S. §§ 1103 (sentence of imprisonment for felony), 1104 (sentence of imprisonment for misdemeanors). If the trial court imposes a sentence of total confinement, the sentence must include a minimum period of imprisonment, which "shall not exceed one-half of the maximum sentence imposed.” 42 Pa.C.S. § 9756(b).
. In 1978, the General Assembly empowered the Pennsylvania Commission on Sentencing to formulate Sentencing Guidelines, which the General Assembly subsequently adopted. This Court has recognized that the Sentencing Guidelines were promulgated in order to structure the trial court’s exercise of its sentencing power and to address disparate sentencing. See Ward, 568 A.2d at 1243-44; Sessoms, 532 A.2d at 776-77. Legislative history also indicates that the Guidelines were enacted "to make criminal sentences more rational and consistent, to eliminate unwarranted disparity in sentencing, and to restrict the unfettered discretion we give to sentencing judges.” Commonwealth v. Gause, 442 Pa.Super. 329, 659 A.2d 1014, 1016 (1995) (quoting Pennsylvania House Journal, 3130 (September 21, 1978)) (emphasis added in cited text).
. Essentially, the Guidelines set forth a recommended standard range ("standard range”) in which any given defendant's sentence should fall, based on the gravity of the defendant’s offense and the defendant’s prior record. For each standard range that corresponds to a particular offense committed by a particular defendant, the Guidelines also sets forth an "aggravated range” and a "mitigated range” to guide the court should it believe that a sentence in the standard range would be inappropriate under the circumstances. See 204 Pa.Code § 303.13.
. A sentence outside of the Guidelines is one imposed outside of all the recommended ranges, i.e., either below the mitigated range or above the aggravated range for a particular crime. Of course, a court may not legally impose a sentence that exceeds the statutory limits. See supra, n. 1.
. Under the statute, however, a challenge to the legality of a sentence can be brought as of right. See 42 Pa.C.S. § 9781(a) (“The defendant or the Commonwealth may appeal as of right the legality of the sentence.”).
. Specifically, subsection (b) provides:
(b) The defendant or the Commonwealth may file a petition for allowance of appeal of the discretionary aspects of a sentence for a felony or a misdemeanor to the appellate court that has initial jurisdiction for such appeals. Allowance of appeal may be granted at the discretion of the appellate court where it appears that there is a substantial question that the sentence imposed is not appropriate under this chapter.
42 Pa.C.S. § 9781(b). As a general matter, the legislature has granted the Superior Court “exclusive appellate jurisdiction of all appeals from final orders of the courts of common pleas ... except such classes of *426appeals as are ... within the exclusive jurisdiction of the Supreme Court or the Commonwealth Court.” 42 Pa.C.S. § 742 (emphasis added).
This Court has exclusive jurisdiction of appeals from final orders of the courts of common pleas in cases where the death penalty is imposed. See id. §§ 722(4), 9711(h). Accordingly, when a capital defendant appeals to this Court, we review any other appeals relating to lesser sentences imposed upon the defendant as a result of the same criminal episode, including challenges to the discretionary aspects of sentencing pursuant to § 9781. See Pa.R.A.P. 702(b) (Matters Tried With Capital Offenses); Commonwealth v. Koehler, 558 Pa. 334, 737 A.2d 225, 244-45 (1999) (addressing capital appellant’s challenges to discretionary aspects of sentencing imposed upon appellant’s non-capital offenses); Commonwealth v. Saranchak, 544 Pa. 158, 675 A.2d 268, 277 (1996) (same).
. 18 Pa.C.S. §§ 3701 (a)(l)(ii), 907(b) and 903, respectively.
. Each sentence imposed was the maximum permitted by law for the crime.
. See also, e.g., Commonwealth v. Nixon, 718 A.2d 311, 315 (Pa.Super.1998) (quoting Commonwealth v. Dungan, 372 Pa.Super. 323, 539 A.2d 817 (1988)); Commonwealth v. Nelson, 446 Pa.Super. 240, 666 A.2d 714, 720 (1995); Commonwealth v. Canfield, 432 Pa.Super. 496, 639 A.2d 46, 48 (1994); Commonwealth v. Breter, 425 Pa.Super. 248, 624 A.2d 661, 662 (1993); Commonwealth v. Jones, 418 Pa.Super. 93, 613 A.2d 587, 593 (1992) (en banc).
Significantly, the Superior Court below ignored a number of conflicting cases in which it has reviewed excessiveness challenges to sentences within the statutory limits just like any other challenge to the discretionary aspects of sentencing. See, e.g., Commonwealth v. Cunningham, 805 A.2d 566, 574-75 (Pa.Super.2002); Commonwealth v. Eby, 784 A.2d 204, 206 (Pa.Super.2001); Commonwealth v. Rodda, 723 A.2d 212, 214 (Pa.Super. 1999) (en banc); Commonwealth v. Davis, 737 A.2d 792, 798 (Pa.Super. 1999); Commonwealth v. Smart, 387 Pa.Super. 518, 564 A.2d 512, 514 (1989); Commonwealth v. Quier, 366 Pa.Super. 275, 531 A.2d 8, 11-12 (1987); Commonwealth v. Simpson, 353 Pa.Super. 474, 510 A.2d 760, 761-62 (1986).
. The Commonwealth contends that Appellant waived this claim because he did not raise it in his Pa.R.A.P. 1925(b) statement of matters complained of on appeal, but instead, raised it for the first time on appeal to this Court. The Commonwealth also argues, for the first time, that Appellant filed his 1925(b) statement late. We reject the Commonwealth's assertion that this Court cannot consider this appeal.
First, although ordinarily "[ijssues not raised before the lower court are waived and cannot be raised for the first time on appeal,” Pa.R.A.P. 302(a), a claim will not be considered waived if it could not have been raised in the lower tribunal. See Shalala v. Illinois Council on Long Tern Care, Inc., 529 U.S. 1, 12-13, 120 S.Ct. 1084, 146 L.Ed.2d 1 (2000) (claim must be ripe for judicial review); Treski v. Kemper Nat'l Ins. Cos., 449 Pa.Super. 620, 674 A.2d 1106, 1113 (1996) (case or controversy must exist at all stages of the judicial process or the matter will be dismissed). Here, despite the Commonwealth's assertions to the contrary, Appellant could not have raised the claim he raises here until the Superior Court summarily dismissed his excessiveness challenge without reviewing its merits. The Commonwealth nonetheless contends that because § 9781(b) existed at the time of Appellant's appeal to the Superior Court, Appellant should have raised this issue, even though the statute had not yet been applied to his case. The mere existence of a statute, however, does not create a justiciable controversy. See Treski, 674 A.2d at 1113.
Moreover, to the extent the Commonwealth now argues that Appellant filed his 1925(b) statement in an untimely manner, the Commonwealth only asserted this issue after this Court granted allocatur. The Commonwealth did not raise in the lower courts a claim that Appellant failed to comply with Pa.R.A.P. 1925(b), and did not even file a brief in opposition to Appellant's petition for allowance of appeal. Rather, the Commonwealth simply supplied this Court with a copy of the "Letter Brief” it had previously filed with the Superior Court, which did not address this issue. Thus, the Commonwealth has waived any objections it may have had to the Superior Court’s decision. See Pa.R.A.P. 302(a).
. In its entirety, subsection (c) states:
*432(c) The appellate court shall vacate the sentence and remand the case to the sentencing court with instructions if it finds:
(1) the sentencing court purported to sentence within the sentencing guidelines but applied the guidelines erroneously;
(2) the sentencing court sentenced within the sentencing guidelines but the case involves circumstances where the application of the guidelines would be clearly unreasonable; or
(3) the sentencing court sentenced outside the sentencing guidelines and the sentence is unreasonable.
In all other cases the appellate court shall affirm the sentence imposed by the sentencing court.
42 Pa.C.S. § 9781(c).
. Although each state employs its own distinctive sentencing scheme, and this Court is not bound by decisions from the courts of our sister states, we note that other jurisdictions have provided for appellate review of excessiveness claims, even where the challenged sentence is within the range permitted by law. See, e.g., State v. Johnson, 136 Idaho 701, 39 P.3d 641, 645 (2001) (an appellant challenging a sentence as excessively harsh can establish a clear abuse of discretion if he shows the sentence is unreasonable upon the facts of the case; the appellate court conducts an independent review of the record and focuses on the nature of the offense and the character of the offender); State v. Wisehart, 569 A.2d 434, 436-37 (R.I.1990) (although sentencing is a matter of discretion for the trial judge, appellate court may set aside clearly excessive sentence within the statutory limits); State v. Pillot, 115 N.J. 558, 560 A.2d 634, 636-38 (1989) (even if a sentence falls “within the discretionary parameters of” the sentencing code, an appellant can sustain an excessiveness claim by demonstrating an abuse of discretion); see also State v. Cunningham, 236 Kan. 842, 695 P.2d 1280, 1284 (1985); Johnson v. State, 447 N.E.2d 1072, 1075-76 (Ind. 1983). But see State v. Slade, 291 N.C. 275, 229 S.E.2d 921, 927 (1976) (where sentence is within statutory limits, the punishment actually imposed by the trial court is a discretionary matter); Awkard v. Commonwealth, 21 Va.App. 40, 461 S.E.2d 419, 420 (1995) (same).
. If this Court were to adopt the per se rule applied by the Superior Court below, it would have the far-reaching effect of denying all future *434challengers like Appellant the opportunity to establish that the trial court abused its discretion because any such claim would automatically be dismissed, without review on the merits, for failing to raise a substantial issue as a matter of law. In fact, this per se rule would preclude an appellate court from even considering whether an appellant’s 2119(f) statement raised a substantial question for appellate review, and would simply require dismissal as a matter of course.
Moreover, in arguing that the Superior Court properly applied this per se rule, the Commonwealth attempts to have it both ways. The Commonwealth wants appellate review when it believes the trial court has imposed a sentence that is less than what the statutory Guidelines recommend, but wants this Court to prohibit appellate review of a defendant’s claim that his sentence, though within the statutory limits, is more that what the Guidelines recommend. See, e.g., Smith, 673 A.2d at 896 (in challenging the trial court’s imposition of an unreasonably "lenient” sentence, the Commonwealth argued that "if a sentence improperly deviates from the established guidelines, the sentence must be vacated”). A defendant, however, shares an equal right to demand that a trial court properly consider the Sentencing Guidelines and impose a reasonable sentence. Indeed,.just as the Superior Court properly grants review of sentences wherein the Commonwealth raises a substantial question regarding the trial court's exercise of its discretion in imposing a sentence that was more lenient than that recommended by the Sentencing Guidelines, see, e.g., Commonwealth v. Childs, 445 Pa.Super. 32, 664 A.2d 994, 996 (1995) (citing cases), defendants should have the same opportunity for appellate review of an appeal from a discretionary aspect of sentencing if they establish that their challenge involves a substantial question suitable for appellate review.
. The Commonwealth argues that the Superior Court did conduct appellate review when it applied the per se rule and dismissed Appellant’s claim because he failed to make out a prima facie case showing an abuse of discretion. However, the Commonwealth’s broad view of what constitutes appellate review is contrary to case law, the plain language of § 9781, and our Rules of Appellate Procedure.
This Court has made clear that there are two distinct levels of a challenge to the discretionary aspects of sentencing: (1) raising a substantial question and (2) arguing the merits of the challenge. Commonwealth v. Tuladziecki, 513 Pa. 508, 522 A.2d 17, 18 (1987). Section 9781(b) "merely requires an appellant to indicate how the trial court abused its discretion before the appellate court will consider the merits of his contentions as to the discretionary aspects of his sentence.” Com*435monwealth v. McFarlin, 402 Pa.Super. 502, 587 A.2d 732, 735 (1991) (emphasis added). This first level of review is further clarified in Pa.R.A.P. 2119(f), which requires appellants to include in their brief a separate “concise statement of the reasons relied upon for allowance of appeal with respect to the discretionary aspects of a sentence,” which "shall immediately precede the argument on the merits." Pa.R.A.P. 2119(f) (emphasis added); see also In the Interest of M.W., 725 A.2d at 731 (appellate court decides whether to review the discretionary portions of a sentence by reviewing the Rule 2119(0 statement). Thus, the Superior Court's dismissal of Appellant's claim in this case by concluding that he had failed to raise a substantial question under § 9781(b) simply did not constitute appellate review on the merits.
. Appellant argues that § 9781 unconstitutionally violates his, and all appellants', right to appeal an unreasonably harsh and excessive sentence. See Pa. Const, art. V, § 9 ("There shall be a right of appeal in all cases ... from a court of record ... to an appellate court....”). However, given our conclusion that the Superior Court erred in concluding that, as a matter of law under § 9781(b), an appellate court cannot consider an excessiveness claim where the sentence is within the statutory limits, there is no need to reach Appellant's constitutional claim. See P.J.S. v. Pennsylvania State Ethics Comm'n, 555 Pa. 149, 723 A.2d 174, 176 (1999) ("a court should not reach the constitutional issue if the case can properly be decided on non-constitutional grounds”).

=== CASE 9737284 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:20:42.583969+00 ===

Justice CASTILLE,
dissenting.
I join the Dissenting Opinion of Mr. Justice Eakin, but write separately to address some additional points.
Like Justice Eakin, I have no quarrel with the lead opinion’s comprehensive description of the workings of the Sentencing Code and the availability of appellate review of discretionary sentencing decisions. I also agree with the lead opinion that a claim that a sentence is excessive, but which falls within the statutory maximum allowable for the crime at issue is not categorically barred from appellate review under the Sentencing Code. Having said that, however, I agree with Justice Eakin that merely invoking the term “excessive sentence” or “manifestly excessive sentence” does not raise a substantial question that there was an unreasonable application of governing sentencing precepts in a particular sentence. Where, as in *437the case sub judice, the Superior Court determines that an excessive sentencing claim is mere boilerplate and thereby fails to raise a substantial question, I do not believe there has been a denial of the right to appeal an alleged excessive sentence. Instead, there has been a failure to identify a specific claim qualifying for review in an area where, by necessity, deference must be accorded the sentencing judge’s exercise of discretion.
In the late 1980s, two decisions from this Court — Commonwealth v. Tuladziecki, 513 Pa. 508, 522 A.2d 17 (1987) and Commonwealth v. Devers, 519 Pa. 88, 546 A,2d 12 (1988) — had the effect of significantly restricting review of discretionary sentencing decisions. In the years since those cases were decided, the Superior Court has had much practical experience in implementing the holdings of those cases and the statutory framework they effectuate, i.e., in identifying what sort of showing is necessary to demonstrate a substantial question that discretion was abused, as is required to warrant an appeal under 42 Pa.C.S. § 9781(b). The doctrine of res ipsa loquitur does not apply in the sentencing arena. A mere allegation of excessiveness, no less than a mere allegation of unreasonable sentencing leniency made by the Commonwealth, is not self-proving. A “substantial” question exists only where the defendant or the Commonwealth actually offers to prove the manner in which, on the facts of an individual case, the sentence was in fact unreasonable under the Sentencing Code guidelines. If a sentence is so obviously excessive, it should not be too difficult to explain why that is so. Appellant failed to do so here.
The fact that the sentencing court in the case sub judice imposed some maximum, consecutive sentences, and the fact that the overall scheme effectively amounts to a life sentence does not, in my mind, automatically raise a substantial question that the sentence was unreasonable under the Code. Appellant played an active role in three separate gunpoint robberies of business establishments, conducted with conspirators. In each case, there were multiple victims. People who commit multiple violent felonies against many separate victims *438run a very real and deserved risk of lengthy incarceration without there being anything remotely unreasonable about it. As the sentencing court noted, on the eight robbery convictions and three criminal conspiracy convictions alone, appellant faced a possible maximum sentence — if all sentences were the maximum statutorily allowable and they were all imposed consecutively — of 110 to 220 years. Appellant did not receive anywhere near that “maximum allowable sentence.”
Although the overall sentence here has the effect of being a life term, no one component sentence was unlawful. Rather, as is often the case, it is the cumulation of sentences consecutively imposed which leads to appellant’s complaint of excessiveness. But appellant is not entitled to a volume discount for his many violent crimes. There were three separate episodes here and eight separate robbery victims — not to mention the other persons present and threatened by the conspiracies. Each life — whether taken, or whether threatened at gunpoint, as here — has individual value. There is a reason why crimes such as armed robbery are graded as felonies of the first degree, the highest designation short of murder. In short, although appellant received a substantial sentence, it must be remembered that he committed a significant amount of serious crime. In my view, the length of the overall sentence alone does not automatically raise a substantial question.
I have an additional concern with the lead opinion. The claim actually briefed on appeal, and the issue upon which this Court actually granted review, involves appellant’s constitutional challenge to 42 Pa.C.S. § 9781(b). The lead skirts that issue, see Op. at 628 n. 15, and instead raises and decides an issue premised upon the validity of Superior Court’s alleged per se construction of § 9781 as barring claims of sentence excessiveness. If the lead is correct in its view that the Superior Court was merely applying a long line of precedents holding that “a claim of excessiveness that is raised against a sentence within the statutory limits fails to raise a substantial question as a matter of law,” see Op. at 623 & n. 9 (collecting cases), then appellant obviously could have presented a claim *439in Superior Court that that authority erroneously construed § 9781(b) — which is the claim the lead now finds meritorious. But appellant did not raise such a claim. Instead, appellant apparently believes that it is § 9781(b) itself that categorically bars his claim, and he claims it is unconstitutional for doing so. Appellant’s constitutional challenge fails because it is he who misconstrues § 9781(b) as barring sentencing excessiveness claims. And, because I agree with Justice Eakin that the Superior Court — which has had far more experience with evaluating the requirements of § 9781(b) and Rule 2119(b) than we have had — does not misapprehend the workings of the Sentencing Code in this regard, the issue the court addresses sua sponte fails.
Although I respectfully disagree with the lead opinion’s assumption that the Superior Court applies a per se rule of non-reviewability, and I disagree with the Court’s mandate, I reiterate that I entirely agree with the lead opinion’s analysis of the general availability of appellate review of discretionary sentencing issues. If we were in the business of issuing advisory or supervisory opinions, I would join those astute observations in a heartbeat. My disagreement arises only from my understanding of Superior Court precedent and the facts and posture of this case.

=== CASE 9737285 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:20:42.587767+00 ===

Justice EAKIN,
dissenting.
The majority states the Superior Court relies on cases that hold “a claim of excessiveness that is raised against a sentence within the statutory limits fails to raise a substantial question as a matter of law.” Proposed Opinion, at 623. I do not think that is the holding below, and therefore must offer my dissent.
Neither this case nor other Superior Court jurisprudence holds that every sentence within the statutory maximum is unreviewable. It holds that if the discretionary aspects of a sentence are to be reviewed (i.e., a substantial question about the sentence has been raised), one must in fact offer some specificity. Pa.R.A.P. 2119(f); see also Commonwealth v. Rodda, 723 A.2d 212, 214 (Pa.Super.1999)(“We will be inclined to recognize a substantial question where an appellant ad*440vanees a colorable argument that the trial court’s actions are inconsistent with a specific provision of the Sentencing Code or contrary to the fundamental norms which underlie the sentencing process”). Commonwealth v. Dungan, 372 Pa.Super. 323, 539 A.2d 817, 826 (1988) (“[W]e must determine whether appellant has presented a suitable ‘statement of question’ by brief reasons indicating a ‘substantial question’ exists____”) (emphasis is added; citation omitted). Merely alleging the sentence was “manifestly excessive” or referring to the “magnitude of digression” from the guidelines, is near to boilerplate. See Commonwealth v. Saranchak, 544 Pa. 158, 675 A.2d 268, 277 (1996)(emphasis added) (“Appellant’s boilerplate assertion that he should be resentenced simply because the trial court sentenced him outside the Sentencing Guidelines without more does not present a substantial question”); Commonwealth v. Tuladziecki, 513 Pa. 508, 522 A.2d 17, 20 (1987)(“It is only where a party can articulate reasons why a particular sentence raises doubts that this scheme as a whole has been compromised [sentencing guidelines] that the appellate court should review the matter....”); Commonwealth v. Lutes, 793 A.2d 949, 964 (Pa.Super.2002)(emphasis added) (“[A] bald allegation that a sentence is excessive does not raise a substantial question”). That is all appellant’s Rule 2119(f) statement does. Referring to “all the circumstances” is not to enumerate those circumstances or explain why they give reason to undo the sound discretion of the sentencing court. This is conclusion, not explanation.
The obligation lies with the challenging party to say why that sentence is manifestly excessive — failure to do so is failure to raise a substantial question. Accordingly, while my colleagues offer an analysis with which I cannot disagree, I believe there is a misapprehension of the Superior Court’s decision.
Justice CASTILLE joins this dissenting opinion.

=== CASE 9737286 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:20:45.035671+00 ===

JOHNSON, J.:
¶ 1 Walter Ceo appeals the order entered December 17, 2001, dismissing his current petition under the Post Conviction Relief Act (PCRA), 42 Pa.C.S. §§ 9541-9546. Ceo’s petition, nominally his fourth, sought reinstatement, nunc pro tunc, of his right to direct appeal. The trial court concluded that the petition was untimely because Ceo filed the petition more than thirty days after his judgment of sentence became final. We conclude, in the interest of justice, that Ceo’s current PCRA petition is an extension of litigation of his timely first petition and is not, therefore, untimely. Accordingly, we reverse the trial court’s order dismissing Ceo’s petition and direct reinstatement of his right to direct appeal nunc pro tunc.
¶ 2 On November 1,1995, a jury convicted Ceo of second-degree murder, kidnapping, aggravated assault, robbery, criminal conspiracy, and four counts of reckless endangerment. On April 17, 1996, the Honorable Eugene H. Clarke, Jr., sentenced Ceo to serve a term of life imprisonment for the murder conviction, and a consecutive term of four to ten years’ imprisonment for aggravated assault with concurrent sentences on the remaining counts. Ceo, represented by the Defender Association of Philadelphia, requested that counsel appeal the judgment of sentence. Counsel failed, however, to comply with Ceo’s wishes and admitted its failure in a letter of August 20, 1996. Counsel suggested that Ceo seek reinstatement of his right to appeal by way of a PCRA petition.
¶ 3 Thereafter, Ceo timely filed his first PCRA petition, pro se, on November 25, 1996. The court appointed as counsel Edward C. Meehan, Esquire, who amended Ceo’s petition, requesting reinstatement of his right to appeal nunc pro tunc. The PCRA court granted relief, reinstating *1265Ceo’s direct appeal rights, on July 10, 1997. In a letter of July 15, 1997, Attorney Meehan promised Ceo that he would file the appeal. He never did so. Nonetheless, in a second letter dated May 14, 1998. counsel reassured Ceo that he had in fact filed an appeal and was awaiting the decision of this Court.
¶ 4 Subsequently, Ceo learned of Attorney Meehan’s misrepresentation and, on December 9, 1998, filed a second pro se PCRA petition. Again the PCRA court appointed new counsel who filed an amended petition. The court granted relief on March 10, 1999, and again granted Ceo the right to file a direct appeal nunc pro tunc. Counsel for Ceo filed the notice of appeal; however, counsel failed subsequently to file a brief, and this Court dismissed his appeal, per curiam, on July 28, 1999.
¶ 5 Ceo filed his third PCRA petition in October 1999, and again the trial court appointed counsel to represent Ceo. Counsel filed an amended petition, and on January 21, 2000, the PCRA court again granted Ceo the right to file a direct appeal, nunc pro tunc. Again, counsel failed to file a brief, and this Court dismissed the appeal on July 14, 2000.
¶ 6 Ceo filed his fourth and present PCRA petition, pro se, on May 25, 2001, and the court appointed counsel to represent him. Although counsel filed an amended petition requesting reinstatement of Ceo’s direct appeal right nunc pro tunc, the PCRA court issued notice of its intent to dismiss the petition without a hearing. Thereafter, on December 17, 2001, the court dismissed the petition as untimely filed. Ceo filed this appeal.
¶ 7 Ceo presents a single issue for our review:
Whether the defendant is entitled to relief under the Post Conviction Relief Act in the form of the grant of leave to file a notice of appeal nunc pro tunc, reinstatement of appellate rights, as the result of the ineffective assistance of prior counsel.
Brief for the Appellant at 4.
¶ 8 “An appellate court’s review of an order denying post conviction relief is limited to examining whether the evidence of record supports the determination of the PCRA court and whether the ruling is free from legal error.” Commonwealth v. Padden, 788 A.2d 299, 309 (Pa.Super.2001). “We will not disturb findings of the PCRA court that are supported by the certified record.” Id.
¶ 9 In this matter, the trial court concluded that Ceo’s current petition was untimely. Based solely on the text of the PCRA, the court’s ruling does not appear erroneous. Pursuant to 42 Pa.C.S. section 9545, any PCRA petition must be filed within one year of the date the judgment becomes final. “A judgment of sentence becomes final once an appellant’s means of direct review of a conviction, including discretionary review in the Supreme Court of the United States and the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania, have concluded or the time limits for seeking a direct appeal have expired.” Commonwealth v. Tedford, 566 Pa. 457, 781 A.2d 1167, 1170-71 (2001) (citing 42 Pa.C.S. § 9545(b)(3)). In this case, the PCRA court reinstated Ceo’s right to direct appeal on July 10, 1997; thus, Ceo’s judgment of sentence became final thirty days later on August 11, 1997, and a notice of appeal should have been filed by that date. See Pa.R.A.P. 903(a) (Time for Appeal. General Rule.).
¶ 10 Although Ceo did not file his current petition until May 25, 2001, he argues that he is entitled to relief because prior counsel effectively abandoned him on each prior reinstatement of his direct appeal rights. Brief for Appellant at 9. Ceo con*1266tends accordingly that his present PCRA petition should be deemed an extension of litigation of his first timely petition pursuant to our holdings. Brief for Appellant at 11-12 (citing Commonwealth v. Peterson, 756 A.2d 687 (Pa.Super.2000), Commonwealth v. Leasa, 759 A.2d 941 (Pa.Super.2000), and Commonwealth v. Robinson, 781 A.2d 152 (Pa.Super.2001), appeal granted, 568 Pa. 682, 796 A.2d 316 (2002)). The PCRA Court, the Honorable Jane Cutler Greenspan, acknowledged Ceo’s “forceful argument” for reinstatement but refused to grant the relief Ceo sought, reasoning that “the Pennsylvania Supreme Court has never adopted such reasoning,” and “has consistently reversed the Superior Court’s attempts to avoid the time bar.” Trial Court Opinion, 12/17/01, at 2. We conclude, in view of the circumstances of this case, that the decisions on which Ceo relies are controlling and compel reinstatement of his right to direct appeal nunc pro tune.
¶ 11 In Peterson, Leasa, and Robinson, we considered whether the respective defendants’ second or subsequent PCRA petitions were time-barred under Section 9545 where those petitions sought redress of claims raised in a timely first petition. In Peterson, we concluded that the trial court erred in dismissing a defendant’s “second” PCRA petition as untimely because the petitioner suffered ineffective assistance of counsel appointed to amend his first PCRA petition. See 756 A.2d at 689. Peterson’s counsel did not file an amended petition and although he filed a Finley letter with the trial court, see Commonwealth v. Finley, 379 Pa.Super. 390, 550 A.2d 213 (1988), he failed to await leave of court before withdrawing representation. See Peterson, 756 A.2d at 689. The trial court then denied the defendant’s first petition. When the defendant filed a second PCRA petition merely restating the allegations of the first, we concluded that considerations of simple justice compelled recognition of the second petition as the defendant’s inartful attempt to secure appellate review of the allegations he previously raised. See id. Because the first petition, which was facially timely, would have been reviewed on its merits but for the dereliction of counsel, we recognized the second petition as an extension of litigation of the first and remanded the matter for appointment of new counsel. See id. n. 3.
¶ 12 Similarly, in Leasa, we recognized that where appellate review of the order denying a defendant’s first PCRA petition is precluded by counsel’s inaction resulting in dismissal of the appeal, his second petition, although untimely, is merely an “extension of litigation” of the first. See Leasa, 759 A.2d at 942. In Leasa, as in two instances in this case, counsel filed a notice of appeal but then failed to file any supporting brief. See id. Consequently, this Court dismissed the appeal. When the defendant then sought review in a “second” petition of points previously raised, we recognized that the second petition was merely an extension of the first. See id. Accordingly, we required reinstatement nunc pro tunc of the defendant’s right to appeal the denial of his first petition. See id. Because the second petition merely extended the timely first petition, we expressly rejected “any claim that Appellant’s second petition should have been dismissed by the PCRA court as untimely filed pursuant to 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 9545.” See id.
¶ 13 In Robinson, we considered a defendant’s appeal from the dismissal of his “third” PCRA petition where, again, that petition merely sought review of claims raised in a timely first petition. See 781 A.2d at 158. The record showed that following the trial court’s denial of the first *1267petition, the defendant had timely appealed to this Court but had been denied review because his appointed counsel failed to file an appellate brief. See id. Because the defendant had been denied his right to appellate review of that first petition by the malfeasance of his counsel we recognized, in conformity with Peterson and Leasa, that his later attempts to resurrect the underlying claims must be considered an extension of the litigation of the first petition. See id. To the extent the defendant’s subsequent petitions sought review of issues raised in that timely first petition, they could not be deemed untimely under Section 9545. See id.
¶ 14 Implicit in the disposition of each of these cases is the proposition that every PCRA petitioner, regardless of the seriousness of his underlying offenses, is entitled to meaningful appellate review of post-conviction claims raised in his first petition so long as that petition is timely filed. See Commonwealth v. Kubis, 2002 PA Super 296, ¶ 6, 808 A.2d 196, 203 (2002) (Johnson, J. dissenting). Where the dereliction of counsel or other circumstances for which the defendant is not responsible operate to waive those claims, the defendant’s right to review remains to be discharged. Consequently, when the defendant restates those claims in a second or subsequent PCRA petition that would be otherwise time-barred, we are compelled to recognize that the later petition is not an unentitled “second bite at the apple,” but merely the first bite that he was unlawfully denied. Thus, where counsel appointed to advance the petitioner’s right to review of his first PCRA petition fails to act, resulting in a waiver of the petitioner’s substantive right, a subsequent petition seeking review of the same questions is properly considered an extension of the first petition. See Peterson, 756 A.2d at 689 n. 3, Leasa, 759 A.2d at 942, Robinson, 781 A.2d at 159. Such a practice does not, as the Commonwealth contends, attempt to “create jurisdiction” in violation of Section 9545; nor does it allow post-conviction relief outside the PCRA. Letter Brief at 6-7. Rather, it recognizes that jurisdiction, once properly invoked by a timely first petition under the PCRA, cannot be extinguished by the dereliction of counsel. Cf. Commonwealth v. Hall, 565 Pa. 92, 771 A.2d 1232, 1236 (2001) (Nigro, J., concurring).
¶ 15 The Supreme Court of Pennsylvania has never invalidated this line of reasoning. Although the Court has emphasized the exclusivity of the PCRA and the jurisdictional bar on untimely petitions for relief, it has not addressed whether Section 9545 bars relief on a second petition where the petitioner timely invoked jurisdiction in a first petition and counsel’s dereliction waived the petitioner’s right of review. But see Robinson, 781 A.2d 152 (appeal granted by Commonwealth v. Robinson, 568 Pa. 682, 796 A.2d 316 (2002)). This distinction is critical and renders the cases on which the Commonwealth relies readily distinguishable. See Hall, 771 A.2d at 1233-34 (finding second PCRA petition time-barred where petitioner failed to file timely first petition and did not establish his reliance on counsel to file an appeal).
¶ 16 In this case, the record demonstrates that Ceo timely filed a first PCRA petition seeking reinstatement nunc pro tunc of his right to direct appeal. Although the trial court granted that right, Ceo then suffered a pattern of dereliction by three successive appointed counsel extending from abandonment to patent misrepresentation concerning the status of his appeal. Even the most innocuous of these occurrences equal those we addressed in Peterson, Leasa, and Robinson. The documented misrepresentation of Ceo’s sec*1268ond counsel substantially exceeds them. In view of these aggravated circumstances, we conclude that Ceo’s subsequent PCRA petitions, although facially untimely, constitute extensions of the litigation of his timely first petition. See Peterson, 756 A.2d at 689; Leasa, 759 A.2d at 942; Robinson, 781 A.2d at 159. Accordingly, Ceo’s current petition is not untimely under Section 9545 and the PCRA court erred in so holding. Ceo is entitled to reinstatement nunc pro tunc of his right to direct appeal and appointment of competent counsel to prosecute his appeal.
¶ 17 Order REVERSED. Case REMANDED for further proceedings consistent with this Opinion. Jurisdiction RELINQUISHED.
¶ 18 Judge BOWES files a Dissenting Opinion.

=== CASE 9737287 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:20:45.050626+00 ===

BOWES, J.,
Dissenting.:
¶ 1 As I believe that the majority’s disposition in this case is inconsistent with our Supreme Court’s pronouncements in Commonwealth v. Lantzy, 558 Pa. 214, 736 A.2d 564 (1999), Commonwealth v. Hall, 565 Pa. 92, 771 A.2d 1232 (2001), and Commonwealth v. Eller, 569 Pa. 622, 807 A.2d 838 (2002), as well as our recent panel decision in Commonwealth v. Fairiror, 2002 PA Super 290, 809 A.2d 396, I must respectfully dissent.
¶ 2 The facts of this case undoubtedly are egregious. Appellant’s counsel falsely told him that a direct appeal had been filed. Subsequently, Appellant’s two PCRA counsel both abandoned representation. Nonetheless, I do not believe that we have jurisdiction to entertain this appeal.
¶ 3 At the onset, one must be mindful that there is no constitutional right to post-conviction relief. Pennsylvania v. Finley, 481 U.S. 551, 107 S.Ct. 1990, 95 L.Ed.2d 539 (1987). Therefore, Appellant’s right to such review is purely a matter of legislative grace. Our legislature has permitted such review through enactment of the Post-conviction Relief Act, (“PCRA”) 42 Pa.C.S. § 9541, et. seq., which is the means of obtaining collateral relief, 42 Pa.C.S. § 9542. Our legislature’s enactment of 42 Pa.C.S. § 9545 limits our jurisdiction to consider the merits of a collateral attack and provides that a petition for post-conviction review must be filed within one year of when a judgment of sentence becomes final. Commonwealth v. Pursell, 561 Pa. 214, 749 A.2d 911 (2000) (timeliness requirements of 42 Pa.C.S. § 9545(b) are jurisdictional in nature, and the courts lack jurisdiction to grant PCRA relief unless a petition is timely under that section). It is beyond dispute that this fourth PCRA petition was not timely filed.
¶ 4 Our Supreme Court has made clear that vindication of the constitutional right to direct review granted in the Pennsylvania Constitution, Pa. CONST, art. V, § 9, cannot be obtained outside the parameters of the PCRA, stating that the “PCRA provides the exclusive remedy for post-conviction claims seeking restoration of appellate rights due to counsel’s failure to perfect a direct appeal.... ” Lantzy, supra at 223, 736 A.2d at 570.
¶ 5 In the present case, Appellant sought restoration of his appellate rights, and his entitlement to relief must be examined within the confines of the PCRA. He sought restoration of his rights in an untimely-filed PCRA petition. I believe that under the Supreme Court’s directives in Hall and Eller, we may not consider this fourth petition an “extension” of Appellant’s timely-filed first petition. Hall holds that a petition seeking a direct appeal nunc pro tunc based on an allegation that counsel was ineffective for failing to *1269file a direct appeal has to be brought within the one-year time limitations of the PCRA. Further expanding this holding in Eller, supra, our Supreme Court found that a petition seeking reinstatement of appellate rights must be dismissed if untimely, even when the defendant asked his attorney to file an appeal and his attorney refused to do so. The Court stated, “The PCRA confers no authority upon this Court to fashion ad hoc equitable exceptions to the PCRA time-bar in addition to those exceptions expressly delineated in the Act.” Id, at 634, 807 A.2d at 845.
¶ 6 It must be remembered that Hall and Eller merely reinforce the consistent pronouncements from our Supreme Court that any allegation of ineffective assistance of counsel, no matter how framed, will not save an untimely filed PCRA petition under any circumstances. E.g., Commonwealth v. Howard, 567 Pa. 481, 788 A.2d 351 (2002); Commonwealth v. Gamboa-Taylor, 562 Pa. 70, 753 A.2d 780 (2000); Commonwealth v. Pursell, supra; Commonwealth v. Beasley, 559 Pa. 604, 741 A.2d 1258 (1999); Commonwealth v. Fahy, 558 Pa. 313, 737 A.2d 214 (1999).
¶ 7 The instant case involves ineffective assistance of counsel with respect to Appellant’s first, second, and third PCRA counsel, who did not perform their professional duty to file a direct appeal.1 However, there is no authority for the proposition that this type of failure to act is such that the filing requirement can be ignored.
¶ 8 Perhaps our Supreme Court will make a crucial distinction between ineffective assistance of counsel and a wholesale dereliction of duty in the face of a defendant’s request for action, as is presented in this case, so that we may “relate back” subsequent petitions. However, in light of the Court’s unequivocal position that ineffective assistance under any guise does not fall within any exceptions, we are without jurisdiction to entertain this petition.
¶ 9 Clearly, this Court in Fairiror, supra, recognized the impact of Hall on “relation back” cases.
¶ 10 Whether Lantzy, Hall, and Eller are cases with which this Court agrees, we must abide by the Supreme Court’s dictates in this regard. Vindication of the constitutional right to direct review is not allowed outside the parameters of the PCRA. In this case, prior PCRA counsels’ dereliction of duty, as unconscionable as it is, ultimately must be viewed in the context of ineffective assistance of counsel. Further, we do not have the authority to fashion an equitable remedy by relating back untimely petitions to timely petitions when counsel’s representation is deficient. Since the fifing requirements of 42 Pa.C.S. § 9545 are not met, we lack jurisdiction to consider the merits of this PCRA petition, regardless of how much we prefer to do so in light of the obvious injustice presented.
¶ 11 Our legislature and Supreme Court have spoken and have deprived us of jurisdiction to act, even in these compelling circumstances. We, as an intermediate appellate court, are without authority to ignore them. See Commonwealth v. Kirkner, 569 Pa. 499, 805 A.2d 514 (2002) (a legislative enactment may not be modified by judicial discretion, even when the judiciary has good intentions). However, this case presents the perfect opportunity for the Supreme Court to find that certain types of ineffective assistance of counsel shock the conscience of the court such that the defendant’s constitutional right to direct appeal must be vindicated. Until that *1270day, however, I believe we must follow its dictates and find this petition to be untimely. Accordingly, I would affirm the PCRA court’s dismissal of this petition as untimely filed.
. I believe that these PCRA counsel, who engage in the wholesale abandonment of their client resulting in their client’s loss of important constitutional guarantees, should be sanctioned.

=== CASE 2209677 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:42.179507+00 ===

812 A.2d 1050 (2002)
372 Md. 342
Garrison THOMAS
v.
STATE of Maryland.
No. 33, Sept. Term, 2002.
Court of Appeals of Maryland.
December 18, 2002.
*1051 Peter F. Rose, Asst. Public Defender (Stephen E. Harris, Public Defender, on brief), Baltimore, for Petitioner.
Diane E. Keller, Asst. Atty. Gen. (J. Joseph Curran, Jr., Atty. Gen., on brief), Baltimore, for Respondent.
Argued Before BELL, C.J., ELDRIDGE, RAKER, WILNER, CATHELL, HARRELL and BATTAGLIA, JJ.
RAKER, Judge.
Garrison Thomas, petitioner, was convicted in the Circuit Court for Charles County of felony murder, robbery, and second-degree murder. In this appeal, he raises two questions for review. The primary question is whether the trial court erred in admitting as evidence of consciousness of guilt the fact that petitioner resisted when, pursuant to a search warrant, the police sought to obtain a sample of his blood. The second question is whether the trial court's rulings restricting the cross-examination of a key State's witness and limiting access to that witness' psychiatric records violated petitioner's right to confrontation. We shall hold that the evidence of petitioner's refusal to provide a blood sample was inadmissible to show consciousness of guilt. Accordingly, we shall reverse.
I.
Petitioner was convicted of killing Beverly Renee Mitchell. A passerby discovered *1052 Ms. Mitchell's body in Charles County on the evening of March 23, 1995. Police collected physical evidence surrounding her body, including her ATM card and a bank receipt for a withdrawal of $60.00 dated March 22, 1995. The medical examiner ruled her death a homicide, caused by strangulation and blunt force injuries to the head.
Marva Mitchell, the victim's mother, last saw her daughter on the evening of March 22, 1995. She had asked her daughter to bring some money to her sister's husband, James Porter. Marva Mitchell had stopped at the Porter residence earlier that day to tell Mr. Porter that Beverly Mitchell would be bringing the money he needed to get to work the next day. Petitioner, who lived in the basement of the Porters' home, was present during that conversation. Beverly Mitchell visited her mother that evening around 9:00 p.m.; when she left, she said that she was going to the Porters' home. Porter testified that Ms. Mitchell dropped off $10.00 at his house that evening.
On the morning of March 24, 1995, the police located Ms. Mitchell's car in the 1100 block of 10th Street, Southeast, in Washington, D.C. On that same day, police located witness Novella Lee Harris. Harris directed investigators to the victim's car keys and told the police information that linked petitioner to the car. Harris recounted that at approximately 2:30 a.m. on March 23, 1995, petitioner knocked on her door. He was wearing a dark brown wig and women's clothing and identified himself as "Cookie." He was seeking narcotics. Petitioner was driving a car later identified as the car belonging to the victim.
Harris, petitioner, and another man smoked crack together for much of the following day. Petitioner, appearing nervous about the car, told Harris differing stories about how he got the car, wiped the car down to remove his fingerprints, and moved the car to the location where police discovered it. Harris saw petitioner discard the car keys in two different locations and saw him attempt to set fire to the car. Petitioner finally left Harris' home around 8:00 a.m. on March 24, 1995.
On June 25, 1998, approximately three and one quarter years after the murder, with the investigation at a standstill, the police decided to approach petitioner to collect hair and blood samples. Because petitioner was then living in the District of Columbia, police sought and secured a search warrant, issued by the District of Columbia, for blood and hair samples from petitioner.[1] The police met petitioner at his residence and took him to a police station in the District of Columbia. At the station, police showed him the warrant and gave him an opportunity to read it. Detectives explained that because of the search warrant, petitioner was required to give police hair and blood samples. Petitioner resisted, stating, "You ain't getting it." He was restrained forcibly on the ground, and a nurse from a local hospital drew a blood sample. Petitioner calmed down after the blood was drawn and cooperated with the officers in providing hair samples. He also cooperated with police in giving a second blood sample. The laboratory examination of the blood sample *1053 excluded petitioner as a source of the blood found at the crime scene.
Petitioner's trial commenced in June 1999 in the Circuit Court for Charles County. Novella Lee Harris was a key witness against petitioner. Petitioner filed two Motions for Subpoena for Tangible Evidence and In Camera Review to obtain pre-trial discovery of Harris' psychiatric records from Crownsville State Hospital, located in Crownsville, Maryland, and St. Elizabeth's Hospital, located in the District of Columbia. Petitioner requested an in camera review of the records from Crownsville State Hospital to determine whether the records contained relevant information regarding any psychiatric disorders that could provide background for cross-examination. He also asked the court to subpoena records from St. Elizabeth's Hospital in order to conduct a similar review.
After the Circuit Court conducted an in camera review of the Crownsville Hospital records, the court focused on a thirty-day commitment for a mental evaluation of Harris that occurred in May and June of 1982. The court ruled that the records were not relevant to any issue before the court. The judge denied petitioner's motion to subpoena privileged records for pre-trial review from St. Elizabeth's Hospital on the following two grounds: petitioner did not show any likelihood that the records contained any relevant information, and St. Elizabeth's Hospital is not an agency under Maryland control.
At trial, during the cross-examination of Harris, petitioner asked about her "history of emotional problems." In response to the State's objection, petitioner argued that he wanted to explore Harris' "weird feelings" and whether they resulted from smoking crack or emotional problems. The court sustained the objection but permitted some latitude to defense counsel, ruling as follows:
"You can ask her what was causing her weird feelings. I have no problem with that. And if you want to ask her anything further about emotional problems then you can approach the bench because I don't know where we are going to go and I don't believe that you do either."
Defense counsel never questioned Harris further about her feelings or psychiatric history.
Petitioner moved in limine to preclude the State from introducing testimony that petitioner resisted when the police officers sought to draw a sample of his blood. The State argued that the refusal to give the blood sample was admissible as evidence to show consciousness of guilt. Petitioner argued that the evidence was not relevant because the police attempted to take the blood sample over three years after the murder and because many innocent reasons other than consciousness of guilt could explain a person resisting police attempts to procure a blood sample. Petitioner maintained that the evidence of his refusal was ambiguous and therefore irrelevant. He argued that even if the evidence were relevant, its prejudicial effect outweighed its probative value. The trial court denied petitioner's motion, and the State offered the evidence at trial.[2] Petitioner *1054 was convicted, and the judge sentenced him to life imprisonment for felony murder and merged the other convictions for sentencing purposes.
Petitioner noted a timely appeal to the Court of Special Appeals. In an unreported opinion, the intermediate appellate court affirmed, holding that the trial court did not abuse its discretion in admitting the evidence of Thomas' refusal to provide a blood sample as evidence of consciousness of guilt. The court also held that the trial judge did not abuse his discretion by excluding Harris' psychiatric records as irrelevant and by limiting cross-examination regarding her alleged emotional problems.
We granted Thomas' petition for writ of certiorari to answer the following questions:
"Whether testimony that the accused resisted attempts to draw his blood is admissible as evidence of `consciousness of guilt.'
"Whether the accused's right to confrontation includes pre-trial disclosure of the State's key, non-victim witness' psychiatric history, as well as cross-examination of that witness regarding her psychiatric history."
Thomas v. State, 369 Md. 570, 801 A.2d 1031 (2002). We hold that the trial court erred in admitting the testimony regarding petitioner's refusal to submit to blood testing to show consciousness of guilt.
II.
Petitioner's first argument is that the trial court erred in denying his motion in limine to exclude testimony regarding his refusal to submit to a blood test. He contends that the evidence is irrelevant because it is ambiguous in that the demand for the blood occurred more than three years after the murder and that his conduct was susceptible to many possible innocent explanations. Even if probative, any probative value it might have is substantially outweighed by the danger of prejudice.
The State argues that petitioner's resistance, after he was informed of his legal obligation to comply, was relevant to show a consciousness of guilt. The State contends that any possible innocent explanation for the conduct goes to the weight of the evidence but not its admissibility. The State argues that petitioner's refusal to submit to blood testing, unaccompanied by any indications of religious or other concerns, shows his fear that the test results might produce inculpatory evidence linking him to Ms. Mitchell's murder. The State concludes that the trial court properly exercised its discretion in admitting the evidence to show consciousness of guilt.
Petitioner's second issue relates to his ability to cross-examine Ms. Harris. He argues that the trial court erred in denying his Motions for Subpoena for Tangible Evidence and In Camera Review. He argues that the trial court should have subpoenaed records from St. Elizabeth's Hospital even though the hospital is not a Maryland agency. Petitioner also contends that although the trial court briefly reviewed the Crownsville Hospital records in camera, due process required that the court conduct a thorough review for information relevant to Harris' mental state.
*1055 Denial of pre-trial access to the psychiatric records, he argues, undermined his ability to prepare a proper cross-examination. Finally, petitioner asserts that, in contravention of the Confrontation Clause of the Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution and Article 21 of the Maryland Declaration of Rights, the trial court deprived him of a fair trial by limiting his cross-examination of Harris about her psychiatric history.
The State argues that the trial court properly denied petitioner's motions as to Harris' Crownsville psychiatric records. In addition, the State argues that because petitioner actually had the Crownsville records pre-trial, the scope of the court's in camera review made little or no difference. Moreover, petitioner could not identify anything relevant in those records. As to the St. Elizabeth's Hospital records, the State contends that because the Hospital is an out-of-state agency and the defense could not show any likelihood that the records contained relevant information, the trial court did not err. Finally, as to the scope of Harris' cross-examination, the trial court did not abuse its discretion.
III.
The fundamental test in assessing admissibility is relevance. Maryland Rule 5-402 provides as follows:
"Except as otherwise provided by constitutions, statutes, or these rules, or by decisional law not inconsistent with these rules, all relevant evidence is admissible. Evidence that is not relevant is not admissible."
Relevant evidence is evidence "having any tendency to make the existence of any fact that is of consequence to the determination of the action more probable or less probable than it would be without the evidence." Md. Rule 5-401; see also Snyder v. State, 361 Md. 580, 591, 592, 762 A.2d 125, 131 (2000)(noting that evidence is relevant when "in conjunction with all other relevant evidence, the evidence tends to make the proposition asserted more or less probable"). Relevant evidence is generally admissible. See Md. Rule 5-402. A trial court, however, may exclude otherwise relevant evidence "if its probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice." Md. Rule 5-403.
A person's behavior after the commission of a crime may be admissible as circumstantial evidence from which guilt may be inferred. This category of circumstantial evidence is referred to as "consciousness of guilt." We observed in Snyder v. State, 361 Md. 580, 591, 762 A.2d 125, 131 (2000) that "[i]f relevant, circumstantial evidence regarding a defendant's conduct may be admissible under Md. Rule 5-403, not as conclusive evidence of guilt, but as a circumstance tending to show a consciousness of guilt." 361 Md. at 593, 762 A.2d at 132; see also Martin v. State, 364 Md. 692, 706, 775 A.2d 385, 393 (2001); Whittlesey v. State, 340 Md. 30, 62 65, 665 A.2d 223, 239-40 (1995); Hunt v. State, 312 Md. 494, 508-09, 540 A.2d 1125, 1132 (1988); Wright v. State, 312 Md. 648, 654-55, 541 A.2d 988, 991 (1988); Davis v. State, 237 Md. 97, 105-06, 205 A.2d 254, 259 (1964), cert. denied, 382 U.S. 945, 86 S. Ct. 402, 15 L. Ed. 2d 354 (1965); Westcoat v. State, 231 Md. 364, 368, 190 A.2d 544, 546 (1963). Conduct typically argued to show consciousness of guilt includes flight after a crime, escape from confinement, use of a false name, and destruction or concealment of evidence. See, e.g., Whittlesey, 340 Md. at 63-65, 665 A.2d at 239-40 (flight); Sorrell v. State, 315 Md. 224, 230-31, 554 A.2d 352, 355 (1989)(failure to return during trial); Wright, 312 Md. at 654-57, 541 A.2d at 991-92 (use of false name to conceal identity); Sewell v. State, 34 Md.App. 691, 694-95, 368 A.2d 1111, 1114 *1056 (1977)(destruction of evidence); 2 McCormick on Evidence § 263, at 172-73 (John W. Strong ed., 5th ed.1999)(flight from scene or from jurisdiction after crime, assuming false name, changing appearance, resisting arrest, attempting to bribe arresting officers, forfeiture of bond by failure to appear, escape from confinement); 2 J. Wigmore, Evidence § 276, at 111 (3d ed.1940)(flight, escape from custody, resistance to arrest, concealment of evidence, assumption of false name).
A person's post-crime behavior often is considered relevant to the question of guilt because the particular behavior provides clues to the person's state of mind. The reason why a person's post-crime state of mind may be relevant is because, as Professor Wigmore suggested, the commission of a crime can be expected to leave some mental traces on the criminal. 1 Wigmore, supra, § 173, at 632.
Applying our accepted test of relevancy, "guilty behaviour should be admissible to prove guilt if we can say that the fact that the accused behaved in a particular way renders more probable the fact of their guilt." Andrew Palmer, Guilt and the Consciousness of Guilt: The Use of Lies, Flight and Other `Guilty Behaviour' in the Investigation and Prosecution of Crime, 21 Melb. U.L.Rev. 95, 98 (1997). As is the nature of circumstantial evidence, the probative value of "guilty behavior" depends upon the degree of confidence with which certain inferences may be drawn. Professor Wigmore has identified two distinct inferencesfirst, an inference of a guilty state of mind from the guilty behavior; and second, an inference of guilt from the guilty state of mind. See 1 Wigmore, supra, § 173, at 632. Some courts have identified four inferences that are necessary to establish admissibility. In the context of flight as consciousness of guilt evidence, the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit reasoned that the probative value of the evidence
"depends upon the degree of confidence with which four inferences can be drawn: (1) from the defendant's behavior to flight; (2) from flight to consciousness of guilt; (3) from consciousness of guilt to consciousness of guilt concerning the crime charged; and (4) from consciousness of guilt concerning the crime charged to actual guilt of the crime charged."
United States v. Myers, 550 F.2d 1036, 1049 (5th Cir.1977); see also, e.g., United States v. King, 200 F.3d 1207, 1215 (9th Cir. 1999); United States v. Hankins, 931 F.2d 1256, 1261-62 (8th Cir. 1991); United States v. Dillon, 870 F.2d 1125, 1126-27 (6th Cir.1989); United States v. Howze, 668 F.2d 322, 324 (7th Cir.1982); Ex parte Weaver, 678 So. 2d 284, 290 (Ala.1996); State v. Reyes, 705 A.2d 1375, 1377 (R.I. 1998). While refusal to give a blood sample is not the same as flight, it is analogous conduct and a similar analysis is required. 1 J. Weinstein & M. Berger, Weinstein's Evidence § 401[10], at 72-75 (1993); cf. Wright, 312 Md. at 655, 541 A.2d at 991-91 (noting that in the context of consciousness of guilt, while assumption of an alias is not the same as flight, it is analogous conduct).
In Snyder v. State, this Court identified four inferences that must be satisfied before the evidence that Snyder failed to inquire about the progress of the police investigation into his wife's murder was admissible to show consciousness of guilt. 361 Md. at 596, 762 A.2d at 134. We discussed the reasoning process undergirding the relevancy of consciousness of guilt evidence:
"The relevance of the petitioner's failure to inquire depends upon whether that evidence supports four inferences: [1] from the failure to inquire, satisfaction of the case not being solved or actively *1057 pursued; [2] from the satisfaction of the case not being solved or actively pursued, a consciousness of guilt; [3] from a consciousness of guilt, a consciousness of guilt of murder; and [4] from a consciousness of guilt of murder, actual guilt of murder."
Id. at 596, 762 A.2d at 134.
Although evidence of consciousness of guilt has long been allowed as evidence in the courts of this State and universally is admitted in courts around the country, courts have nonetheless recognized the danger with respect to this category of evidence and increasingly have become cautious in evaluating it. See, e.g., Myers, 550 F.2d at 1049-50; Miller v. United States, 320 F.2d 767, 770-73 (D.C.Cir. 1963); Ex parte Weaver, 678 So.2d at 287-91; State v. Lee, 381 So. 2d 792, 794-95 (La.1980); 2 McCormick, supra, § 263, at 173-74. Several cases seem to recognize such evidence as potentially unreliable and unfairly prejudicial. See, e.g., Howze, 668 F.2d at 324-25; Myers, 550 F.2d at 1049-50; Miller, 320 F.2d at 770-73; Lee, 381 So.2d at 794-95; State v. Onorato, 171 Vt. 577, 762 A.2d 858, 859-60 (2000); 2 McCormick, supra, § 263, at 174. In Wong Sun v. United States, 371 U.S. 471, 483 n. 10, 83 S. Ct. 407, 415 n. 10, 9 L. Ed. 2d 441 (1963), the United States Supreme Court noted: "[W]e have consistently doubted the probative value in criminal trials of evidence that the accused fled the scene of an actual or supposed crime."
It is the Myers third prong, from consciousness of guilt to consciousness of guilt concerning the crime charged, that in the instant case is particularly important.[3] Knowledge that the person is suspected of the charged crime is important because the value of the conduct lies in the culprit's knowledge that he or she has committed the charged offense and in his or her fear of apprehension. In the context of flight, one court noted:
"From this analysis of the reasons for the admissibility of such evidence, the force of the rule that evidence of flight because of one crime cannot be considered on the trial of another and entirely different offense is apparent, as in such case the flight does not disclose any guilty conscience in regard to the offense in question."
Ex parte Jones, 541 So. 2d 1052, 1056 (Ala.1989)(quoting State v. Bonning, 60 Mont. 362, 199 P. 274, 275 (1921), overruled on other grounds State v. Campbell, 146 Mont. 251, 405 P.2d 978 (1965)). Thus, many courts emphasize the importance of connecting a defendant's consciousness of guilt to a consciousness of guilt for the specific crime alleged. See, e.g., Snyder, 361 Md. at 596, 762 A.2d at 134; United States v. Murphy, 996 F.2d 94, 96-97 (5th Cir.), cert. denied, 510 U.S. 971, 114 S. Ct. 457, 126 L. Ed. 2d 389 (1993); United States v. Beahm, 664 F.2d 414, 419-20 (4th Cir. 1981); Myers, 550 F.2d at 1050; Lee, 381 So.2d at 794; Reyes, 705 A.2d at 1376-77; 2 McCormick, supra, § 263, at 174. There must be an evidentiary basis, either direct or circumstantial, to connect a defendant's consciousness of guilt to the particular crime charged in order to submit the evidence for jury consideration. See Snyder, 361 Md. at 596, 762 A.2d at 134; Myers, 550 F.2d at 1049-51; Commonwealth v. Osborne, 433 Pa. 297, 249 A.2d 330, 333 (1969).
*1058 On several occasions, this Court has held that a defendant's conduct was too ambiguous and equivocal to be admissible as evidence of consciousness of guilt. In Snyder, this Court noted that the evidence of the defendant's conduct, not inquiring as to the progress of the police investigation of his wife's murder, failed to satisfy the four inferences necessary in order to be relevant. 361 Md. at 596, 762 A.2d at 134. Concluding that the evidence was not probative of the defendant's guilt and hence was inadmissible, we reasoned:
"We believe that, under the circumstances of this case, evidence that the defendant failed to call the police to inquire about the status of the investigation, even for seven years, is too ambiguous and equivocal to support such inferences. At best, the admission of the evidence invites the jury to speculate."
Id. at 596, 762 A.2d at 134.
Similarly, in Bedford v. State, 317 Md. 659, 668, 566 A.2d 111, 115 (1989), we held that the evidence offered by the State to show consciousness of guilt was so equivocal that it should have been excluded because it was more prejudicial than probative. In that case, we addressed evidence of an escape attempt. When Bedford was strip-searched in preparation for a visit off prison grounds, officers discovered inside his undergarments a four-inch piece of metal sharpened to a point. The State argued that the wire supported an inference that Bedford planned to escape. We noted:
"The authorities are uniform that evidence of a consciousness of guilt is generally circumstantial and should be more probative on the issue of ultimate guilt than prejudicial to the defendant. If the judge finds that the proposed material is likely to lead a reasonable jury to infer the defendant's guilt without causing him substantial prejudice, then the judge may allow the jury to consider the evidence in reaching a verdict as to the charged offense. If, however, the inference as to ultimate guilt is weak and the circumstantial evidence merely tends to create in the minds of jurors the impression that the defendant is of questionable character and has a propensity for bad acts ... then the evidence should be excluded."
Id. at 667-68, 566 A.2d at 115 (citations omitted). We reasoned that "[t]here are too many other possible reasons why Bedford could have been in possession of that wire" to make the wire probative of guilt and, instead, the evidence could cause the jury to make other, impermissible inferences about him. Id. at 668, 566 A.2d at 115.
The relevance of the evidence as circumstantial evidence of petitioner's guilt depends on whether the following four inferences can be drawn: (1) from his resistance to the blood test, a desire to conceal evidence; (2) from a desire to conceal evidence, a consciousness of guilt; (3) from a consciousness of guilt, a consciousness of guilt of the murder of Ms. Mitchell; and (4) from a consciousness of guilt of the murder of Ms. Mitchell, actual guilt of the murder. The question in this case is whether the evidence of petitioner's refusal to submit to the drawing of his blood was connected sufficiently with the murder charge and whether its probative value was outweighed by any unfair prejudicial effect. We conclude that the trial judge erred in admitting the evidence in this case.
There is no evidence in this record for the jury to have found that any alleged consciousness of guilt on petitioner's part was connected to a consciousness of guilt of the murder of Ms. Mitchell. The record indicates that Ms. Mitchell was killed on March 22, 1995. The police did not seek to *1059 obtain a blood sample from petitioner until three and one quarter years later, on June 25, 1998.[4] When police decided to seek a search warrant for blood and hair samples from petitioner, the investigation had stalled, and they were hoping to "get lucky." Officer Knowlan testified at trial that police gave petitioner the search warrant to read and explained that legally he was obligated to have his blood taken. There is no evidence in this record, either direct or circumstantial, that petitioner was aware that the police wished to test his blood in connection with the murder investigation of Ms. Mitchell. The officer never testified as to what, if anything, police told petitioner as to the reason why they wanted his blood. Moreover, the State never entered the search warrant into evidence.[5] Therefore, there was absolutely no evidence from which the jury could conclude that petitioner knew that the blood sample was in any way connected to the Mitchell murder. For the evidence to have value as evidence of consciousness of guilt, and then as evidence of guilt of the murder, there must be evidence to support an inference from petitioner's conduct to a consciousness of guilt for the particular crime charged. The jury should not have been permitted to draw an inference of guilt from petitioner's conduct unless the conduct was related to the murder investigation. Because there is no evidence connecting petitioner's refusal to allow the officers to draw his blood and a consciousness of guilt of the murder of Ms. Mitchell, the evidence of defendant's conduct lacks probative value and was inadmissible.
IV.
Although we reverse on the first question, we will address the remaining issue for the guidance of the trial court on remand. Petitioner argues that the trial court erred in denying his motions seeking pre-trial discovery of Harris' psychiatric records from two area hospitals. He also contends the trial court deprived him of a fair trial by precluding cross-examination of Harris about her alleged history of emotional problems. The State, in response, argues that the trial court properly denied petitioner's motions as to Harris' psychiatric records mainly because petitioner failed to proffer that there was any likelihood that they held relevant information. The State also asserts that the trial court properly exercised its discretion in controlling the scope of Harris' cross-examination.
The Court of Special Appeals, in an unreported opinion, affirmed the trial court's judgments, finding no abuse of discretion. In terms of the Crownsville records, *1060 the intermediate appellate court noted:
"In Goldsmith v. State, 337 Md. 112, 651 A.2d 866 (1995), the Court of Appeals held that the victim's psychiatric records were privileged and not discoverable. Id. at 127-28, 651 A.2d 866. It went on to say that even if not privileged, the records sought by the defendant were not discoverable because the defendant failed to show a likelihood that the records contained relevant information. Id..... [Thomas] did not proffer how the Crownsville records were relevant in any way. We are satisfied that [the trial judge] did not abuse his discretion in declaring irrelevant records relating to an admission that occurred 13 years prior to the incident at issue."
With respect to the St. Elizabeth records, the court also agreed with the trial court, reasoning:
"As was the situation in Goldsmith, the St. Elizabeth records are privileged and therefore not discoverable in the instant case. Moreover, [Thomas] failed to show a likelihood that the records contained any relevant information. Additionally, St. Elizabeth's Hospital is not a state agency and the records do not fall with the ambits of Brady v. Maryland, 373 U.S. 83, 83 S. Ct. 1194, 10 L. Ed. 2d 215 (1963)(holding that exculpatory information in the hands of the State is subject to disclosure). Thus, [the trial judge] did not abuse his discretion when he ruled that the records would not be subpoenaed."
Finally, the Court of Special Appeals upheld the trial court's treatment of Harris' cross-examination as follows:
"In the case at bar, [the trial judge] asked [Thomas'] counsel what evidence he had demonstrating any emotional problems that would affect Harris' memory. [Thomas'] counsel pointed to the witness' statement regarding weird feelings. [The trial judge] allowed [Thomas] to ask the witness about weird feelings, but counsel declined to ask. To be relevant, Harris' mental history had to be of consequence to her ability to perceive events on the night in question. Without some additional foundation, the proposed cross-examination would not have linked the witness's prior emotional problems with her ability to remember the events relating to the murder. Thus, [the trial judge] did not abuse his discretion when he refused to allow [Thomas] to cross examine Harris about her mental problems."
We find the reasoning of the Court of Special Appeals persuasive and agree that the trial court properly exercised its discretion in its rulings as to Harris' psychiatric records and psychiatric history on cross-examination.
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT OF SPECIAL APPEALS REVERSED. CASE REMANDED TO THAT COURT WITH INSTRUCTIONS TO REVERSE THE JUDGMENT OF THE CIRCUIT COURT FOR CHARLES COUNTY AND TO REMAND THE CASE TO THAT COURT FOR A NEW TRIAL. COSTS IN THIS COURT AND IN THE COURT OF SPECIAL APPEALS TO BE PAID BY CHARLES COUNTY.
BELL, Chief Judge, concurs in the result and in the opinion except Part IV.
NOTES
[1]  The validity of that warrant is not at issue in this appeal. In Schmerber v. California, 384 U.S. 757, 768, 770-71, 86 S. Ct. 1826, 1834, 1835-36, 16 L. Ed. 2d 908 (1966), the United States Supreme Court clarified that the seizure of blood with a warrant may be reasonable under the Fourth Amendment and held that, under the circumstances presented, a warrantless seizure of blood was reasonable.
[2]  At the conclusion of all of the evidence, the trial court, using Maryland Criminal Pattern Jury Instruction (MPJI Cr) 3:26, instructed the jury on concealment of evidence as consciousness of guilt:
"[C]oncealment or destruction of evidence as consciousness of guilt. This is another one of those inferences that you're permitted but don't have to draw. You have heard evidence from which you could find that the defendant may have concealed or destroyed or may have attempted to conceal or destroy evidence in this case. Concealment or destruction of evidence is not enough by itself to establish guilt but may be considered as evidence of guilt. Concealment or destruction of evidence may be motivated by a variety of factors, some of which are fully consistent with innocence. You must first decide whether the defendant has concealed or destroyed or attempted to conceal or destroy evidence in the case. If you find that he has, then you must decide whether that conduct shows a consciousness of guilt."
[3]  We do not suggest that merely because the evidence may show that a defendant also has committed other crimes there is a basis to exclude the evidence. The point is that the evidence must at least be connected to the crime charged. McCormick suggests that older cases simply overlooked this problem. See 2 McCormick on Evidence § 263, at 173 n. 19 (John W. Strong ed., 5th ed.1999).
[4]  The length of time between the conduct and the crime is not determinative of the admissibility of the evidence. We have noted that the "lapse of time between the crime and the attempted flight goes only to the weight to be accorded to this circumstance, not to the admissibility of the attempt as some evidence of consciousness of guilt." Davis v. State, 237 Md. 97, 105, 205 A.2d 254, 259 (1964), cert. denied, 382 U.S. 945, 86 S. Ct. 402, 15 L. Ed. 2d 354 (1965). Each case must decided on its own facts and circumstances. A circumstance may be so remote, however, as to be of no real value and thus inadmissible. The more remote in time the alleged conduct is from the time the person is aware that he or she is the focus of the investigation for the crime, however, the greater the likelihood that the conduct in question resulted from something other than feelings of guilt concerning the offense charged.
[5]  It is unclear from the officer's testimony whether the search warrant that petitioner was given to read included the supporting affidavit, nor is there any evidence as to whether petitioner read the warrant or whether the police read it to him. The officer could have testified that petitioner was advised that the evidence sought was in connection with the Mitchell murder.

=== CASE 2209680 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:42.21529+00 ===

812 A.2d 1082 (2002)
148 Md. App. 419
Nicole BRITTON
v.
Kerry C. MEIER.
No. 765, Sept. Term, 2001.
Court of Special Appeals of Maryland.
December 20, 2002.
*1083 Samuel J. Brown (Jonathan E. Pasterick and Hillman, Brown & Darrow, P.A. on the brief), Annapolis, for appellant.
Erin Darner Gable (Dalnekoff & Mason, P.A. on the brief), Annapolis, for appellee.
Argued Before HOLLANDER, ADKINS and KRAUSER, JJ.
KRAUSER, Judge.
The issue before us is which state Maryland or Illinoismay exercise jurisdiction over a visitation dispute between a Maryland mother and an Illinois grandfather, when the visitation of the grandfather was originally ordered by an Illinois court with the mother's consent. Holding that Illinois has continuing jurisdiction over this dispute, the Circuit Court for Anne Arundel denied the motion of the mother, appellant Nicole Britton, to terminate the rights of the grandfather, appellee Kerry C. Meier, to visit her four-year old daughter, Savanna Marie Britton, and then dismissed her case. In doing so, it erred.
Although this case is not a dispute between parents and certainly does not involve kidnaping, we are constrained to agree that Illinois has continuing jurisdiction over this dispute, under the Parental Kidnaping Prevention Act of 1980 ("PKPA"), 28 U.S.C. § 1738A (2000). Indeed, we do not quarrel with either the circuit court's interpretation or application of that actonly the implementation of its decision. Once it concluded that under the PKPA Illinois had jurisdiction, it should have contacted its Illinois counterpart before dismissing this case, to determine if that court wished to decline jurisdiction in deference to Maryland, Savanna's home state. Its failure to do so constitutes reversible error.
FACTS
On January 18, 1998, appellant Nicole Trinski Britton gave birth to Savanna Marie Britton in Lake County, Illinois.[1] Savanna's father was Michael Craig Meier. Before Savanna's birth, Michael died in a work-related accident. Nicole and Michael never married.
After his death, Michael's estate received a workers' compensation award on behalf of his heir and daughter, Savanna, and a wrongful death suit was filed. At that time, Michael's father, appellee Kerry C. Meier, successfully petitioned to be appointed administrator of Michael's estate.
After DNA testing confirmed that Michael was Savanna's biological father, appellee filed a petition, on June 15, 1999, for *1084 grandparent visitation in the Circuit Court of the Nineteenth Judicial Circuit in McHenry County, Illinois. Before the matter could be heard, the parties agreed upon a visitation schedule and, with their consent, the court issued an order on November 22, 1999, granting visitation to appellee, his wife and daughter, with Savanna on "the third Saturday or Sunday of every month for four hours at the residence of Savanna Britton."[2] It also required that appellee give appellant seventy-two hours notice of the day of visitation and that, unless otherwise agreed, appellant must be included in any visitation that involved taking Savanna from appellant's residence.
Before the issuance of that order, appellant moved with Savanna from Illinois to Maryland. On June 16, 2000, appellant filed "with the [Illinois] Court a Petition to Remove Respondent, Kerry C. Meier, as Independent Administrator of the Estate of Michael C. Meier." Among the reasons cited by appellant for appellee's removal was appellee's "announced intention to seek further DNA testing to determine the father and child relationship between the deceased and his only daughter and heir of the estate, Savanna Marie Britton." The record does not indicate the present status of that petition.
On or about June 25, 2000, appellee, exercising his visitation rights, visited Savanna in Maryland. Following that visit, on June 28, 2000, appellant filed in Illinois an Emergency Motion for Protective Order. In that motion, appellant stated that appellee had tried, during his recent visit, to "obtain[ ] a hair sample from Savanna to conduct a second DNA test." That effort included pulling Savanna's hair. As a result, appellant requested, among other things, that the Illinois court "enter a protective order preventing Respondent from taking any additional steps to obtain a second DNA test to determine the father and child relationship between Michael Craig Meier and Savanna."
In October 2000, appellee, according to the April 3, 2001 order of the circuit court, "was denied visitation of his granddaughter as a result of a Petition for Ex Parte Relief that was filed by Nicole Britton alleging the same facts as in the Emergency Motion she had filed with the Illinois Court."
On October 23, 2000, appellant filed pro se in the Circuit Court for Anne Arundel County a motion seeking to enroll and then modify the Illinois visitation order. After discovering that the motion was miscaptioned, appellant, with the assistance of counsel, filed an amended motion. In that motion, appellant sought to enroll the Illinois decree and modify it "to terminate all visitation."
In support of her request for termination of visitation, appellant claimed that appellee had previously questioned whether his son was Savanna's father and that, once it was established that he was, appellee was only interested in Savanna because she was the "only other heir in line" to "get all of the proceeds from the wrongful death case" involving her father. She explained that appellee's "sole interest in Savanna is to either have control of her funds thereby obtaining sufficient money on his behalf from the estate of the deceased." She further maintained that appellee's "intention by having visitation with [Savanna was] to simply try and either disprove paternity or get rid of [Savanna] so that [Savanna] will not be an heir to any money received as a result of the wrongful death action which has been filed on behalf *1085 of [Michael]." She also claimed that "[t]he current visitation by [Savanna] with the [appellee was] detrimental to the minor child's health." In support of the latter claim, she asserted "that the visitation has not gone well in the past in that [appellee] causes substantial psychological damage to the minor child and the minor child's sibling."
In Illinois on November 21, 2000between the time appellant filed her pro se and amended motionsappellee filed a Petition for Rule to Show Cause why he was being denied visitation rights with Savanna. The hearing on this petition began on December 6, 2000, but was continued until January 4, 2001, because the Illinois court found that although notice had been given, the "rule to show cause" had not been served. Although appellant was not present, the Illinois court changed appellee's visitation schedule, allowing "visitation beginning the third Saturday of each month at 10:00 A.M. through Sunday (the following day) at 8:00 P.M .... not ... at the residence of Nicole Britton, but ... at such places as Kerry Meier determines." The only condition that it placed on appellee was that "Kerry Meier shall, however, provide Nicole Britton with the address and telephone of the place where they will spend Saturday nights, in case of emergency."
On January 4, 2001, the Illinois hearing that had been postponed on appellee's Petition for Rule to Show Cause was held. Appellant was not present, but her counsel apparently was. The court ordered that the visitation schedule modified on December 6 was to remain in effect. It further ordered that appellant appear before it on February 22, 2001, to show cause why she should not be held in contempt for failing to abide by the court's orders.
On January 19, 2001, appellee filed in the Anne Arundel circuit court a Motion to Dismiss for Lack of Subject Matter Jurisdiction. In a "directive,"[3] filed on February 13, 2001, the Honorable Nancy Davis-Loomis of that court stated that "[t]he Illinois Judgment is enrolled pursuant to the Motion to Enroll the Foreign Judgment."
On April 2, 2001, the Honorable Eugene M. Lerner of the Circuit Court for Anne Arundel County conducted a hearing on appellee's motion to dismiss. After that hearing, the court granted the motion to dismiss and denied appellant's motion to enroll the Illinois order and to modify visitation. This appeal followed.
Standard of Review
"The proper standard for reviewing the grant of a motion to dismiss is whether the trial court was legally correct. In reviewing the grant of a motion to dismiss, we must determine whether the complaint, on its face, discloses a legally sufficient cause of action." Fioretti v. Md. State Bd. of Dental Exam'rs, 351 Md. 66, 71-72, 716 A.2d 258 (1998) (citations omitted). In reviewing the complaint, we must "presume the truth of all well-pleaded facts in the complaint, along with any reasonable inferences derived therefrom." Id. at 72, 716 A.2d 258; see also Bennett Heating & Air Conditioning, Inc. v. NationsBank of Md., 342 Md. 169, 174, 674 A.2d 534 (1996); Faya v. Almaraz, 329 Md. 435, 443, 620 A.2d 327 (1993); Berman *1086 v. Karvounis, 308 Md. 259, 264-65, 518 A.2d 726 (1987). "Dismissal is proper only if the facts and allegations, so viewed, would nevertheless fail to afford plaintiff relief if proven." Faya, 329 Md. at 443, 620 A.2d 327; see also Bobo v. State, 346 Md. 706, 709, 697 A.2d 1371 (1997).
DISCUSSION
Appellant contends that the circuit court erred in denying her motion to enroll and vacate the Illinois visitation order at issue. Maryland, she asserts, had jurisdiction to consider her motion, while Illinois did not. Appellant's motion, we agree, should not have been so peremptorily denied, but not for the reason advanced by appellant. Indeed, the circuit court was correct: Illinois, as the state of initial jurisdiction, had exclusive jurisdiction over this matter. But it erred, we hold, in dismissing appellant's motion before contacting its Illinois counterpart to determine whether it wished to decline jurisdiction in favor of Maryland, Savanna's home state.
Two acts govern interstate custody and visitation disputes: the federal PKPA and the Uniform Child Custody Jurisdiction Act ("UCCJA"). The UCCJA has been adopted by all fifty states and the District of Columbia. Malik v. Malik, 99 Md.App. 521, 526, 638 A.2d 1184 (1994). Maryland and Illinois are, of course, no exception; they adopted the UCCJA with only minor changes. See Md.Code (1999 Repl.Vol. & 2002 Supp.), §§ 9-201-224 of the Family Article ("FL"); 750 Ill. Comp. Stat. Ann. ("ILCS") 35/1-26 (West 1999).
When there is a conflict between the PKPA and state law, the PKPA, under the Supremacy Clause, prevails. Malik, 99 Md.App. at 528, 638 A.2d 1184 (citing U.S. Const art. VI, cl. 2.). This case presents such a conflict: While the UCCJA does not necessarily require Maryland to defer jurisdictionally to Illinois, the PKPA does.
In fact, under FL § 9-204(a) of the Maryland UCCJA, the circuit court did have subject matter jurisdiction to modify the Illinois order at issue. That subsection states:
(a) Grounds for Jurisdiction.A court of this State which is competent to decide child custody matters has jurisdiction to make a child custody determination by initial decree or modification decree if:
(1) this State (i) is the home state of the child at the time of commencement of the proceeding, or (ii) had been the child's home state within 6 months before commencement of the proceeding and the child is absent from this State because of the child's removal or retention by a person claiming custody or for other reasons, and a parent or person acting as parent continues to live in this State;
(2) it is in the best interest of the child that a court of this State assume jurisdiction because (i) the child and the child's parents, or the child and at least 1 contestant, have a significant connection with this State, and (ii) there is available in this State substantial evidence concerning the child's present or future care, protection, training, and personal relationships;
FL § 9-204(a)(1), (2).
While this section does not expressly mention "visitation," it does apply to interstate visitation disputes as the Maryland UCCJA defines a "[c]ustody determination" as "a judicial decision, order, or instruction that relates to the custody of a child or to visitation rights." FL § 9-201(c) (emphasis added). More important, because this section defines "home state" as, among other things, "the state in which the child, immediately preceding the time *1087 involved, lived with the child's parents, a parent, or a person acting as parent, for at least 6 consecutive months," FL § 9-201(f), Maryland was Savanna's home state at the time appellant filed her motion to enroll and vacate the Illinois visitation order, a fact not disputed by either party here. Hence, as Savanna's home state, Maryland did have jurisdiction, under FL § 9-204(a)(1), to hear appellant's claim. But that, as we shall see, does not dispose of this issue.
Although Maryland has jurisdiction under FL § 9-204(a)(1) "to decide child custody matters [by] ... modification decree," it may not exercise that jurisdiction unless it first determines, under FL § 9-214(a), that the initial decree-rendering state does not meet the jurisdictional requirements of the Maryland UCCJA. Harris v. Melnick, 314 Md. 539, 547-48, 552 A.2d 38 (1989). FL § 9-214(a) states:
(a) Jurisdictional requirements.If a court of another state has made a custody decree, a court of this State shall not modify that decree unless (1) it appears to the court of this State that the court that rendered the decree does not now have jurisdictional prerequisites substantially in accordance with this subtitle or has declined to assume jurisdiction to modify the decree and (2) the court of this State has jurisdiction.
In other words, the court below had jurisdiction to consider appellant's motion, as Savanna's home state under FL § 9-204(a), once it determined, under FL § 9-214(a), that Illinois had either declined jurisdiction or did not have "jurisdictional prerequisites substantially in accordance with" Maryland law. To determine what those jurisdictional prerequisites are, we must return to FL § 9-204, specifically FL § 9-204(a)(2).
Although that subsection is couched solely in language stating what criteria Maryland must meet to assume jurisdiction over an interstate custody dispute, that same language has been read as setting forth the criteria or, in the words of FL § 9-214, the "jurisdictional prerequisites" that must be met by the state of initial jurisdiction to retain jurisdiction. See L.G. v. People, 890 P.2d 647, 659 & n. 22 (Colo.1995); Kumar v. Kumar, 32 Cal. 3d 689, 186 Cal. Rptr. 772, 652 P.2d 1003, 1007 & n. 7, 1008 (1982); Szmyd v. Szmyd, 641 P.2d 14, 17 n. 7, 18 (Alaska 1982); Grubs v. Ross, 291 Or. 263, 630 P.2d 353, 360 (1981). This bouncing back and forth between FL § 9-204 and FL § 9-214, which the UCCJA requires a court to do whenever it reviews an interstate custody or visitation dispute, is confusing if not at times confounding. See Harris, 314 Md. at 551, 552 A.2d 38 ("The textual structure of the Uniform Act has undoubtedly helped to blur the distinction between initial jurisdiction and jurisdiction to modify, and to obscure the duty of nonmodification."). The act demands that a court consult FL § 9-204 to determine if Maryland has jurisdiction. Upon concluding it does, the court is then required to review FL § 9-214 to determine whether it can exercise that jurisdiction. But that question cannot be answered unless the court then returns, undirected by that provision, to FL § 9-204 to consult a list of "jurisdictional prerequisites," cast in language that refers only to the assumption of jurisdiction by Maryland, not its loss by other states.
In any event, FL § 9-204 permits Maryland to assume jurisdiction if "it is in the best interest of the child that [Maryland] assume jurisdiction because (i) the child and the child's parents, or the child and at least 1 contestant, have a significant connection with this State, and (ii) there is available in this State substantial evidence concerning the child's present or future *1088 care, protection, training, and personal relationships." Put another way, Maryland may modify the Illinois decree if Illinois does not meet the "significant connection" and "substantial evidence" requirements of FL § 9-204(a)(2). See, e.g., Kumar, 186 Cal. Rptr. 772, 652 P.2d at 1008. That same criteria, as we have noted, applies to other states to determine whether they satisfy the jurisdictional requirements of Maryland law. If they do not, and Maryland does, then, under the Maryland UCCJA, this State may assume jurisdiction. This of course puts the Maryland UCCJA in conflict with the PKPA in this case.
Under the PKPA, because Illinois had initial jurisdiction over this matter, Maryland may not modify the Illinois visitation order at issue here, regardless of whether Illinois satisfies Maryland's jurisdictional requirements, so long as Illinois has jurisdiction under Illinois law and Illinois remains the residence of the child or any contestant. § 1738A(c)(1), (d), (h); see also In re Marriage of Wiseman, 316 Ill. App. 3d 631, 249 Ill. Dec. 935, 737 N.E.2d 325, 330 (2000).
Subsection 1738A(h) of the PKPA states that "[a] court of a State may not modify a visitation determination made by another State unless the court of the other State no longer has jurisdiction to modify such determination or has declined to exercise jurisdiction to modify such determination." That is to say, as long as the court that entered the initial visitation or custody order continues to have jurisdiction under its own law and has not declined jurisdiction, the PKPA precludes another state court from modifying the initial order. See Shanoski v. Miller, 780 A.2d 275, 278 (Me.2001); Moore v. Richardson, 332 Ark. 255, 964 S.W.2d 377, 381-82 (1998); Wiseman, 249 Ill. Dec. 935, 737 N.E.2d at 330; McLain v. McLain, 569 N.W.2d 219, 223-24 (Minn.Ct.App.1997); see also Patricia M. Hoff et al., Interstate Child Custody Disputes and Parental Kidnapping 3-42 (1982)("The PKPA provides that the jurisdiction of a court which has made a decree consistently with its terms continues, so long as the court continues to have jurisdiction under state law (i.e., UCCJA), and that state remains the residence of at least one contestant or the child."). Illinois has, to be sure, jurisdiction over this matter under its own law. The Illinois UCCJA states that Illinois, "having obtained jurisdiction over a child, shall retain such jurisdiction unless it concedes jurisdiction to a foreign state or none of the parties to the action, including the child, remain in Illinois." 750 ILCS 35/4(b). What is more, one of this dispute's contestants, the appellee, continues to reside there. Having satisfied both conditions of § 1738A(h), Illinois has continuing jurisdiction over this matter.
Because Illinois has such jurisdiction over this issue, a Maryland court can modify the Illinois order, under § 1738A(h), only if Illinois declines jurisdiction. But here the Maryland circuit court did not contact its Illinois counterpart to determine if that court wished to do so before dismissing this case. That was error.
In this regard, we note that FL § 9-206(c) provides that, "[i]f the court is informed during the course of the proceeding that a proceeding concerning the custody of the child was pending in another state before the court assumed jurisdiction, it shall stay the proceeding and communicate with the court in which the other proceeding is pending to the end that the issue may be litigated in the more appropriate forum." Although no litigation may have been technically pending in Illinois at the time that appellant's motion was before the circuit court, the policy underlying § 9-206(c) applies with equal force to the instant case. Had the circuit court contacted *1089 the Illinois court before deferring to that court and dismissing this case, Illinois might have, under the circumstances of this case, declined jurisdiction in favor of Maryland. Indeed, there is every reason to believe it would have. It is Maryland, not Illinois, that now is Savanna's home state. It is Maryland, not Illinois, that now has the most significant connection with Savanna. And it is Maryland, not Illinois, where evidence concerning Savanna's "future care, protection, training, and personal relationships" is probably most available. FL § 9-204(a)(2).
Also, this is not a visitation dispute between parents but between a surviving parent and a paternal grandfather. The former, as a parent, has a fundamental right to "make decisions concerning the care, custody and control" of her child; the latter, as a grandparent, does not. Troxel v. Granville, 530 U.S. 57, 66, 120 S. Ct. 2054, 147 L. Ed. 2d 49 (2000). In fact, appellant's relationship with Savanna is constitutionally protected while appellee's is not. Id. What is more, grandparents in Illinois no longer have even a statutory right of visitation. The Illinois statute securing grandparent visitation was struck down for, among other things, failing to give sufficient weight to parental choice. Wickham v. Byrne, 199 Ill. 2d 309, 263 Ill. Dec. 799, 769 N.E.2d 1, 8 (2002). Because appellant has a substantially greater interest at stake here than appellee does, it may be said that Maryland, as appellant's home state, has a substantially greater interest in the outcome of this dispute than Illinois does, as appellee's home state.
Indeed, given the substantial disparity in the respective interests of Maryland and Illinois in this matter, Illinois may choose to defer to Maryland on the issue of visitation. We shall therefore remand this case to the circuit court so that it can consult with its Illinois counterpart to determine whether that court will decline jurisdiction over this dispute. If the Illinois court chooses to do so, then the circuit court shall consider the merits of appellant's request.
JUDGMENT VACATED. CASE REMANDED TO CIRCUIT COURT TO PROCEED IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS OPINION.
COSTS TO BE PAID BY APPELLEE.
NOTES
[1]  "Nicole Edith Trinski" is appellant's maiden name and apparently appears on Savanna's birth certificate. In this case, however, appellant is referred to as "Nicole Britton."
[2]  While that order also grants "Mr. Meier's wife" visitation with Savanna, appellee indicates in his brief that he and his wife were actually divorced at that time.
[3]  This document is listed in the index of the record of this case as "DIRECTIVE FROM JUDGE DAVIS LOOMIS." In his opinion denying appellant's motion to enroll and vacate, Judge Lerner refers to it as the "blue note." In that opinion, Judge Lerner states that "the fact that Judge Nancy Davis Loomis signed a blue note indicating that the Illinois judgment is enrolled pursuant to the Motion to Enroll the Foreign Judgment has no bearing on the issue in this case." Neither party challenges that assertion on appeal.

=== CASE 9737288 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:20:47.132865+00 ===

JOYCE, J.:
¶ 1 Edward Kassab, William C. Archbold, Jr., and Joseph P. O’Brien (collectively Appellants) appeal from the judgment entered against them and in favor of Robert J. Jackson (Appellee) in the Court of Common Pleas of Delaware County. Upon review, we affirm the judgment entered in the trial court. The relevant facts and procedural history of this matter are as follows.
¶2 On June 4, 1998, Appellee filed a complaint in the Court of Common Pleas of Delaware County requesting the dissolution of KAJO Building Associates2 and an award based on a claim of Appellants’ unjust enrichment.3 On December 18, 1998, Appellants filed their answer and counterclaims that alleged breach of contract, breach of fiduciary duty, and fraud against Appellee based on the same position they took in a previous bankruptcy proceeding where these issues were raised but not decided.4 After a bench trial, Ap-pellee was awarded $141,212.38, with interest from July 1, 1995; the order dismissed all counterclaims. Thereafter, Appellants filed timely post-trial motions but'failed to brief those complaints before the trial court. The trial court denied relief. Ap-pellee filed a praecipe for entry of judgment, and judgment was entered on October 4, 2000. Appellants timely appealed.
¶ 3 We digress to acknowledge the appellate history of this matter. When this case was first presented on appeal, a panel of this Court affirmed the trial court’s denial of relief based on Appellants’ failure to brief the issues raised in their post-trial motions. Appellants timely applied for reargument, the application was granted, the earlier panel memorandum was withdrawn, and the case is now before our Court en baric. The issue is whether the trial court abused its discretion when it denied the post-trial motions based upon the absence of a supporting brief.
¶ 4 Appellants aver that the trial court’s decision and the earlier memorandum of this Court were contrary to our holding in Schulz v. Celotex Corp., 447 Pa.Super. 391, 669 A.2d 404 (1996). We disagree.
¶ 5 In Schulz, this Court held that a trial court’s dismissal of post-trial motions for failure to file a brief in support, within the time prescribed by local rule of court, was prohibited pursuant to Pa.R.Civ.P. 239(f). Rule 239(f) specifically prohibits the dismissal of any civil action or proceeding for failure to comply with a local rule other than one promulgated under Rule of Judicial Administration 1901.5 Id. at 404; Pa. R.Civ.P. 239(f).
*1235¶ 6 The key distinction is that in Schulz, the motions were dismissed for failure to comply with a local rule, while in the case sub judice, the motions were dismissed for failure to file a supporting brief. While this may appear to be a semantic difference, the relevant case law of this Commonwealth holds otherwise.
¶ 7 Schulz dealt exclusively with a dismissal ordered pursuant to local rules, which, as we stated earlier, is prohibited.6 See Pa.R.Civ.P. 239(f). In the instant case, local rules are never mentioned. Accordingly, since in our case there is no express or implied reliance on a local rule, we cannot presume the trial court’s decision was based on local rule and Schulz is inapplicable. Our focus is necessarily whether the trial court abused its discretion under the law of this Commonwealth, and we answer that question in the negative.
Post-trial practice is governed by Pa. R.C.P. 227.1, which requires timely objection and specific mention in a post-trial motion before an issue may be considered by the post-trial court. The purpose for this rule is to afford the trial court the opportunity to correct an error at the time it is made, and to inform the court of the issues which must be decided at the post-trial stage, thereby giving it the first opportunity ‘to review and reconsider the determination it made at trial.’
DiSalle v. P.G. Pub. Co., 375 Pa.Super. 510, 544 A.2d 1345, 1363 (1988) (citations omitted).
¶ 8 “To fully effectuate the latter purpose, common sense mandates that any issue raised in a motion for post-trial relief must be briefed and argued to the trial court.” Id. “[Fjailure to set forth an argument in briefs filed in the court in support of post-trial motions constitutes a failure to preserve the issue or issues not argued.” Id. at 1364 (citing Bryant v. Girard Bank, 358 Pa.Super. 335, 517 A.2d 968, 973 (1986)); accord Kraus v. Taylor, 710 A.2d 1142 (Pa.Super.1998).
¶ 9 Appellants’ failure to brief and argue their post-trial motions resulted in the trial court being deprived of its opportunity to address the merits of their post-trial contentions. We find no abuse of discretion in this decision.
¶ 10 Since it is our determination that the trial court was not provided the means to address issues post trial, we are left with nothing to review. DiSalle, supra, at 1364. Having found Appellants abandoned their issues on appeal, we affirm the trial court’s decision.
¶ 11 Judgment affirmed.
¶ 12 FORD ELLIOTT, J., MUSMANNO, J., ORIE-MELVIN, J., and KLEIN, J. Join.
¶ 13 LALLY-GREEN, J., files Concurring Statement in which KLEIN, J. joins.
¶ 14 DEL SOLE, P.J., files Dissenting Opinion in which BENDER, J. joins.
¶ 15 STEVENS, J. Recuses.
. KAJO Building Associates was formed as a real estate partnership. It leased properly to the KAJO law partnership. The real estate partnership consisted of Kassab, Archbold, Jackson, O'Brien, and Richard A. Stanko.
. Although an equal partner, Stanko is not involved in this litigation.
. See In re Granite Partners I, LTD., Bankr.No. 95-18296DWS, Adv. No. 96-0667 (Bankr. E.D.Pa.11/20/1997) (wherein it was argued that Appellee sought to profit from what was alleged to be a partnership deal in violation of the partnership agreement).
.Rule of Judicial Administration 1901 relates to .the several courts of common pleas’ authority to dismiss a case for inactivity. See Pa.R.J.A. No. 1901.
. The authority utilized, a local rule, under which the trial court in Schulz dismissed the motions, was the sole reason for reversal as it violated Pa.R.Civ.P. 239(f). Had the trial court in Schulz dismissed the post-trial motions without doing so under color of a statutorily prohibited local rule, the dismissal itself, pursuant to Pennsylvania case law cited herein, would appear to have been correct.

=== CASE 9737289 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:20:47.136728+00 ===

LALLY-GREEN, JJ.,
Concurring:
¶ 1 I join in the well-reasoned opinion of the majority that when the trial court requests briefs respecting issues raised in a motion for post-trial relief, the parties are *1236to comply with that request or risk having all unbriefed issues waived. As both the majority and the dissent so clearly stated, the trial court has the inherent authority to order the filing of supporting briefs. If the parties fail to comply with the order, the result may be waiver of the unbriefed issues.
¶ 2 I do not agree with my esteemed colleague in the dissent that the court’s letter request “does not have the force of an order of court.” It is my understanding that the custom and practice regarding how the trial court communicates its desire to have briefs to address post-trial motions varies among the individual counties (and judges) of this Commonwealth. The practice in some counties is that the court orders, by oral or written order of court, the parties to file the briefs. In other counties, the court requests the briefs by letter and not by a court order. Whether the court order procedure is the preferred procedure is a matter for the Supreme Court and its procedural rules committees.
¶ 3 Simply stated, the parties are to comply with the court’s request, whether the court issues an order of court or makes a request by letter. In the instant matter, the trial judge sent a letter to the parties instructing them of time frames within which to file briefs addressing the post-trial motions. Obviously, the trial judge requested the briefs to assist the judge in the disposition of the post-trial motions. Accordingly, the judge’s letter requesting briefs for post-trial motions should have the same effect and control on the parties as a court order.
¶4 The failure to enter the letter request into the certified record does not affect the obligation of the parties to comply with the court’s direction. Certainly, placing it in the record assists appellate review. Yet, the absence of the court’s letter request in the certified record does not erase the obligations of the parties. Where the court requests by letter that a party file a brief, whether or not the letter request is part of the certified record, and the party fails to do so, the trial court may consider waived the issues raised in the motion for which the brief was requested.
¶ 5 KLEIN, J. Joins.

=== CASE 9737290 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:20:47.140353+00 ===

DEL SOLE, P.J.,
Dissenting:
¶ 1 I dissent from the Majority’s ruling which holds that issues contained in Appellants’ timely filed post-trial motions are waived because no brief in support of the motions was filed with the trial court. While I do not disagree that a trial court has the authority to order the filing of supporting briefs and that a party’s failure to comply with a court order may result in waiver, no order is contained in the certified record. Attached to Appellee’s Brief is a copy of a letter sent to Appellants’ counsel which states that “Defendants have two weeks after receipt of the notes of testimony to file a brief in support of their post-trial motions.” However, this letter is not included in the certified record and does not have the force of an order of court. Thus, absent a directive per order of court, I believe a brief is not required.
¶ 2 The Majority refers to prior precedent in support of its conclusion that the failure to brief and argue post-trial motions results in waiver. However the cases cited by the Majority, as well as the cases upon which those decisions rely, do not stand for that proposition. Rather prior law directs that in order to preserve an issue it must be included in a timely filed post-trial motion. Further where a brief is filed in support of that motion, any issue raised in the post-trial motion but not included in the supporting brief will be considered abandoned and therefore waived.
*1237¶ 3 In DiSalle v. P.G. Publishing Co., 375 Pa.Super. 510, 544 A.2d 1345, 1364 (1988), the court found a challenge to the compensatory damage award was waived where the appellant did not list that issue in its brief in support of the motion or in any argument contained in that brief. The DiSalle court cited to Bryant v. Girard Bank, 358 Pa.Super. 335, 517 A.2d 968, 973 (1986), wherein the appellant failed “to raise or even suggest” in its post-trial motions issues regarding duty and substantial factor.' The court further held that the appellant’s brief, filed in support of its motion contained no argument on these issues. The court ruled that these two issues were not preserved for its review. Bryant cited to Bell v. City of Philadelphia, 341 Pa.Super. 534, 491 A.2d 1386 (1985). In Bell it was held that an issue was waived which the appellants failed to argue “in the brief filed in the trial court in support of their motion for new trial.” 491 A.2d at 1389. The Supreme Court decision in Commonwealth v. Holzer, 480 Pa. 93, 389 A.2d 101 (1978), was cited in Bell and B'i'yant. In Holzer the appellant raised several issues on appeal that were included in his post-verdict motions which contained 107 assertions of error. However, in the brief and argument before the trial court the appellant briefed and argued only five of those 107 issues. The Supreme Court wrote that the trial court’s refusal to consider the issues which were not included in the brief or oral argument on the motion was proper. It found that it was deprived of the benefit of the lower court’s analysis of those issues and therefore those assignments of error would not be reviewed on appeal. Holzer in turn cites to Commonwealth v. Williams, 476 Pa. 557, 383 A.2d 503, 509 n. 11 (1978), where counsel for appellant neither briefed nor argued a claim of trial error at the trial court’s hearing on post-trial motions. The Court agreed with the trial court which considered this claim to have been abandoned at the hearing on post-trial motions.
¶4 The other case relied on by the Majority has a similar background. In Kraus v. Taylor, 710 A.2d 1142 (Pa.Super.1998), the appellant filed a post-trial motion which included 62 allegations of trial court error. In the brief he filed in support of his motion the appellant reduced the number of errors to 13. The court ruled that the trial court correctly concluded that the remaining 50 errors were abandoned. Because the issues on appeal were not included in the 13 errors argued before the trial court, it was held that the appellant failed to preserve these issues. The court in Kraus cited to Bell v. City of Philadelphia, 341 Pa.Super. 534, 491 A.2d 1386 (1985), where it was held that the appellants’ failure to argue an issue in the brief they filed with the trial court in support of their motion for a new trial precluded review.
¶ 5 Thus, contrary to the Majority’s interpretation, prior case law does not direct that a party must brief and argue their post-trial motions to avoid waiver. These cases hold only that waiver may result where a party elects to file a brief but does not include the issues raised on appeal in that brief. In such an instance the issues included in post-trial motions but not briefed or argued will be considered abandoned. Likewise where a party has been directed by court order to file a brief and fails to do as directed including all the issues they wish to have reviewed, then that party must be prepared to have the issues waived.
¶ 6 In this case it cannot be said that Appellants abandoned claims they included in a timely filed post-trial motion. Furthermore, because the trial court did not order the filing of briefs, I believe it was an abuse of discretion for it to have found *1238the issues waived because no brief was filed. A letter to the parties does not have the same force and effect as an order of court. I would vacate the judgment of the trial court and remand to permit the trial court to consider the merits of Appellants’ issues. If the court desires briefs, I would suggest it enter an order directing the filing of briefs. Accordingly, I dissent.
¶ 7 STEVENS, J., Recuses.
¶ 8 BENDER, J., Joins.

=== CASE 9737291 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:20:48.612462+00 ===

OPINION
Justice SAYLOR.
These consolidated appeals concern constitutional and statutory challenges to the methodology employed by the Department of Revenue to calculate Pennsylvania franchise tax obligations of an out-of-state corporation conducting business activities in the Commonwealth.
Corollary to the capital stock tax imposed on domestic (Pennsylvania) corporations, the Commonwealth imposes a franchise tax upon foreign (out-of-state) corporations authorized to do business within its borders. In conformance with federal constitutional requirements, the tax is ostensibly designed to reach only value attributable to the conduct of instate business activity. Nevertheless, the initial tax base is quite broad in that it subsumes measures of value generated by the taxpayer and its subsidiary corporations, both in and out of state. In attempting to adjust this broad tax base to *144isolate in-state value prior to application of the tax rate, the taxing statute incorporates principles of formulary apportionment. Unlike the methodology utilized to determine the tax base, however, the apportionment formula prescribed by the taxing statute, as interpreted by the Department, does not take into account factors representing in- and out-of-state value generated by taxpayer subsidiaries. Unisys’s present challenges are centered upon the absence of factor representation in single-entity, franchise value apportionment.
Unisys is a Delaware corporation with its principal offices in Blue Bell, Pennsylvania, conducting business in all states of the United States; it was formerly named Burroughs Corporation and is the successor by merger to Sperry Corporation.1 Throughout the tax years in question, Unisys owned, directly or indirectly, the stock of more than one hundred domestic and foreign affiliates doing business in more than one hundred countries. Despite such ownership (and plain requirements of the taxing statute), in its franchise tax returns, Unisys calculated its tax base without reference to value attributable to its subsidiaries. In settling Unisys’s franchise tax for the applicable years, however, the Department increased the tax base to include certain measures of out-of-state value. Nevertheless, in adjusting the tax base to arrive at a taxable value, the Department did not incorporate into the apportionment formula any indices of value pertaining to the out-of-state subsidiaries, which, according to Unisys, had the effect of distorting its tax liability (or, more specifically, increasing the taxable value by some forty-five percent). Unisys filed resettlement petitions with the Department, which were denied, then with the Pennsylvania Board of Finance and Revenue (the Board). The Board also denied Unisys’s petitions, and the company lodged appeals in the Commonwealth Court sitting effectively as a trial court, see Pa.R.A.P. 1571, with the present appeals concerning the tax years ending March 31, 1985, and 1986 (Sperry Corporation returns), and December 31, 1986 (Unisys returns). At all stages of the litigation, Unisys contended that the apportionment formula applied by the Department violat*145ed the Commerce and Due Process Clauses of the United States Constitution, U.S. Const, art. I, § 8, cl. 3;2 U.S. Const. amend XIV, § 1, as well as statutory fair apportionment provisions set forth in Section 401 of the Tax Reform Code of 1971,3 72 P.S. § 7401(3)2.(a)(18).
Pursuant to the procedure for review of Board determinations, see Pa.R.A.P. 1571, the Commonwealth Court considered the appeal on a stipulation submitted by the parties. A divided, en banc court determined that the franchise tax imposed was consistent with constitutional precepts, but that Unisys was nevertheless entitled to statutory relief. See Unisys Corp. v. Commonwealth, 726 A.2d 1096, 1103, 1105 (Pa.Cmwlth.1999). The majority opened its opinion with a detailed overview of the mechanics of the taxing statute applicable to foreign corporations doing business in Pennsylvania. Under Section 601 of the Tax Code, 72 P.S. § 7601, the tax base, termed the capital stock value of the corporation, is first determined by a statutory formula based upon the corporation’s net worth (the sum of the entity’s issued and outstanding capital stock, surplus and undivided profits as per books ..., 72 P.S. § 7601(a)), and average net income ([t]he sum of the net income or loss for each of the current and immediately preceding four years, divided by five, 72 P.S. § 7601(a)). For such purposes, the taxpayer’s net worth includes net worth of subsidiaries, see 72 P.S. § 7601(a) (In the case of any entity which has investments in other corporations, the net worth shall be the consolidated net worth of such entity[.] ).4 Net income, however, is assessed on a separate-company, unconsolidated basis (exclusive of the net income or loss of subsidiary *146corporations), although it includes dividends received from subsidiaries. See 72 P.S. § 7601(a); 61 Pa.Code § 155.26(a), (b); see also Philadelphia Suburban Corp. v. Commonwealth, 535 Pa. 298, 303-05, 635 A.2d 116, 119-20 (1993). See generally Unisys, 726 A.2d at 1098-99. The statute defines capital stock value as the average of seventy-five percent of net worth and capitalized average net income, subject to a fixed deduction.5
Following calculation of the tax base, one of two elective methods of apportionment is employed to arrive at a taxable value, again, in deference to the constitutional proscription against state taxation of value earned outside the state’s borders. The method applicable to foreign corporations per the terms of the Tax Code is known as three-factor apportionment, see 72 P.S. §§ 7602(b), 7401(3)2.(a)(9)(B), 7603.6 This method compares certain in-state business activities of a taxpayer with all such of its activities, regardless of the location. Specifically, the formula calculates the mathematical average of three ratios: intrastate property to property everywhere; intrastate payroll to payroll everywhere; and intrastate sales to sales everywhere. Therefore, the apportionment fraction equals:
Property in PA Payroll In PA Sales in PA Property everywhere + Payroll everywhere + Sales everywhere “ 3 - Apportionment factor
Unisys, 726 A.2d at 1099 (citing 72 P.S. § 7602(b)(1)). In the *147application of this formula, the Commonwealth Court majority emphasized that:
As consistently interpreted and applied by the Department, the property, payroll and sales figures that comprise the three fractions represent only the property, payroll and sales of the taxpayer itself, and not of the taxpayer’s subsidiaries. Thus, under this method, while the net worth of and dividends paid by certain subsidiaries of a corporation are included in the corporation’s actual value, the property, payroll and sales of those subsidiaries are not considered in the apportionment formula.
Unisys, 726 A.2d at 1099 (emphasis added). After apportionment, the tax due is then computed by applying the millage rate to the taxable value.7
Having reviewed the relevant provisions of the Tax Code, the Unisys majority proceeded to consider the pertinent constitutional precepts as developed in seminal decisions of the United States Supreme Court, principally, Container Corp. of Am. v. Franchise Tax Bd., 463 U.S. 159, 103 S.Ct. 2933, 77 L.Ed.2d 545 (1983); Mobil Oil Corp. v. Commissioner of Taxes of Vt., 445 U.S. 425, 100 S.Ct. 1223, 63 L.Ed.2d 510 (1980); Moorman Mfg. Co. v. Bair, 437 U.S. 267, 98 S.Ct. 2340, 57 L.Ed.2d 197 (1978); Norfolk & W. Ry. Co. v. Missouri State Tax Comm’n, 390 U.S. 317, 88 S.Ct. 995, 19 L.Ed.2d 1201 (1968); and Hans Rees’ Sons, Inc. v. North Carolina ex rel. Maxwell, 283 U.S. 123, 51 S.Ct. 385, 75 L.Ed. 879 (1931).8 The starting point of these decisions, again, was the limitation arising under the Commerce Clause upon taxa*148tion by states of corporate income or value generated beyond their borders. See Unisys, 726 A.2d at 1100. See generally Container Corp., 463 U.S. at 164, 103 S.Ct. at 2939; Goldberg v. Sweet, 488 U.S. 252, 260-61, 109 S.Ct. 582, 588, 102 L.Ed.2d 607 (1989). Upon consideration of the difficulties attendant to the delineation of in-state income or value via geographic or transactional accounting,9 the Supreme Court has concluded that the Commerce and Due Process Clauses afford the states latitude, to include multijurisdictional income/value within a corporation’s tax base, provided that certain governing conditions are satisfied. See Container Corp., 463 U.S. at 164-65, 103 S.Ct. at 2940, cited in Unisys, 726 A.2d at 1100-01. As recognized by the Commonwealth Court, the requirement primarily here at issue is fair apportionment of a unitary business enterprise. See id.10
This requirement is comprised of two interrelated concepts. First, in order for a state to assess multijurisdictional income/value (including that which is attributable to subsidiary corporations), the Supreme Court has determined that the taxpayer must be part of a unitary business enterprise, assessed primarily according to the degree of functional integration, centralization of management, and economies of *149scale arising from its inter-entity dynamics. See Unisys, 726 A.2d at 1100 (describing a unitary business enterprise as “an enterprise which carries out distinct multijurisdictional activities resulting in ultimate profit or value derived from the entire business operation” (citing Container Corp., 463 U.S. at 165,103 S.Ct. at 2940)).11 Second, while a state may therefore take interstate income or value into account in evaluating the tax liability of a unitary business enterprise, it must nevertheless make a sufficient attempt to identify the portion of the total which is fairly attributable to in-state business activity, or, in other words, to apportion the income/value prior to taxation. See Unisys, 726 A.2d at 1100-01 (“The functional meaning of [the unitary business enterprise] requirement is that there be some sharing or exchange of value not capable of precise identification or measurement ... which renders formula apportionment a reasonable method of taxation.” (quoting Container Corp., 463 U.S. at 166, 103 S.Ct. at 2933)).12
The Unisys majority proceeded to discuss the substantial difficulty in apportionment with respect to a corporation *150conducting business through subsidiaries and in multiple jurisdictions. See id. at 1100 (citing Container Corp., 463 U.S. at 164,103 S.Ct. at 2939 (observing that in the case of a more-or-less integrated business enterprise operating in more than one State, ... arriving at precise territorial allocations of ‘value’ is often an elusive goal)); cf. id. at 192, 103 S.Ct. at 2954 ([ajllocating income among various taxing jurisdictions bears some resemblance ... to slicing a shadow); International Harvester Co. v. Evatt, 329 U.S. 416, 422, 67 S.Ct. 444, 447, 91 L.Ed. 390 (1947) (“this Court has long realized the practical impossibility of a state’s achieving a perfect apportionment of expansive, complex business activities such as those of appellant”). Therefore, the Supreme Court has determined that a ‘rough approximation rather than precision’ is sufficient to satisfy constitutional demands, so long as the formula used for apportionment appears designed to tax only the value of intrastate business activities. See id. at 422, 67 S.Ct. at 447 (quoting Illinois Central Ry. Co. v. Minnesota, 309 U.S. 157, 161, 60 S.Ct. 419, 422, 84 L.Ed. 670 (1940)). See generally Unisys, 726 A.2d at 1100 (observing that “states must often resort to the use of formulas based upon more readily ascertainable measures of the corporation’s activities within and without the state in order to apportion the taxes”). The Commonwealth Court majority thus recognized that, pursuant to Supreme Court precedent, the authority of states to devise various methodologies for assessing intrastate value or income is broad. See Allied-Signal, 504 U.S. at 784,112 S.Ct. at 2261 (explaining that “our cases give States wide latitude to fashion formulae designed to approximate the in-state portion of value produced by a corporation’s truly multistate activity”); Norfolk & W. Ry., 390 U.S. at 327, 88 S.Ct. at 1002 (noting that “broad tolerance [is] permitted”).
In consideration of the constitutional requirement of fairness in apportionment, the Unisys majority noted that the Supreme Court had repeatedly upheld the constitutionality of a three-factor apportionment formula, going so far as to describe it as something of a benchmark against which other apportionment formulas are judged. Unisys, 726 A.2d at 1101 (quoting Container Corp., 463 U.S. at 170, 103 S.Ct. at 2943). *151The majority distinguished Unisys’s arguments, however, as attacking, not the formula itself, but rather, the Department’s use in the calculation of payroll, property, and sales data of only the parent corporation. See Unisys, 726 A.2d at 1101 (The essence of Unisys’ argument on appeal is that it is fundamentally unfair for the Department to include as income the dividends Unisys received from its subsidiaries and as net worth the value of its investments in the subsidiaries when calculating the actual value of the corporation, but not to include its subsidiaries’ property, payroll and sales in the apportionment formula.). In this respect, the Unisys majority credited the sound logic underlying factor representation. See Unisys, 726 A.2d at 1101 (Since the purpose of the formula is to apportion the value of the unitary business enterprise among different jurisdictions, it can hardly be subject to dispute that an apportionment formula which includes data from the entire enterprise will yield a more accurate result than a formula based solely upon the parent corporation’s operations.). It recognized, nonetheless, that the General Assembly is not necessarily required to implement the most consistent, accurate, or preferred formula, but rather, the question before the court was whether factor representation was constitutionally required. See id. The majority acknowledged the position taken by Justice Stevens in his dissent in Mobil Oil to the effect that factor representation is in fact mandated by constitutional principles;13 however, it also noted that the reasoning applied in a number of state court decisions would support a contrary result, at least insofar as they have rejected a per se or bright line test in the traditional due process analysis. See Unisys, 726 A.2d at 1101.14
*152The Unisys majority then narrowed its inquiry, focusing upon the two-part test crafted by the United States Supreme Court for determining whether an apportionment formula comports with constitutional fairness precepts — in this regard, the Court has indicated that an apportionment scheme will be sustained if it is internally and externally consistent. See Unisys, 726 A.2d at 1101-02 (citing Container Corp., 463 U.S. at 169, 103 S.Ct. at 2942). The internal consistency assessment seeks to determine whether, on its face, the apportionment formula is reasonably calculated to reach only the profits earned within the state, or, in other words, that the formula is not inherently arbitrary. See id. The Commonwealth Court described external consistency as looking to the practical effect of the formula. See Unisys, 726 A.2d at 1102. Under this branch of the analysis, a reviewing court will disallow application of an apportionment scheme if the taxpayer shows that the taxable value attributed to the state ‘is in fact out of all appropriate proportion to the business transacted ... in that state, or has led to a grossly distorted result.’ Container Corp., 463 U.S. at 170, 103 S.Ct. at 2942 (quoting Moorman, 437 U.S. at 274, 98 S.Ct. at 2345, in turn quoting Hans Rees’, 283 U.S. at 135, 51 S.Ct. at 389, and Norfolk & W. Ry., 390 U.S. at 326, 88 S.Ct. at 1001); see also Exxon, 447 U.S. at 223, 100 S.Ct. at 2118.
The Commonwealth Court majority then characterized Unisys’s appeal as predicated upon external consistency and reviewed a series of United States Supreme Court cases concerning that precept. It began by noting that, in Hans Rees’, the Supreme Court disapproved taxation under a single-factor method where the foreign corporation demonstrated that, while approximately eighty percent of its income was allocated to North Carolina under the apportionment formula, less than twenty-two percent of the corporation’s income actually had its source in the corporation’s operations within North Carolina. See Unisys, 726 A.2d at 1102 (Thus, a more *153than 250% difference between an assessment calculated under a state’s apportionment formula and the amount of income actually attributable to a corporation’s operations carried on within a state is outside the allowable margin of error, and therefore offends due process, (citing Hans Rees’, 283 U.S. at 135-36, 51 S.Ct. at 389-90)). Similarly, the court reviewed the disposition in Norfolk & W. Ry., 390 U.S. at 317, 88 S.Ct. at 995, also observing that a one-hundred sixty-six percent difference in tax due under a state’s apportionment formula and under a formula using actual values is also outside the permissible margin of error. See Unisys, 726 A.2d at 1102-03. The majority contrasted two decisions of the Supreme Court in which fourteen and forty-eight percent discrepancies asserted by taxpayers were deemed to be constitutionally acceptable. See id. at 1103 (citing Container Corp., 463 U.S. at 183-84,103 S.Ct. at 1949-50; Moorman, 437 U.S. at 280-81, 98 S.Ct. at 2348). Against this background, the Unisys majority reasoned as follows:
Applying the principles of these cases, we conclude that Unisys has not demonstrated a due process violation. Unisys can claim only that were the total property, payroll and sales of the unitary business enterprise included in the fractions of the three-factor formula, its tax due would be approximately 44.5% less than the figure arrived at by the Board in its calculation under the three-factor formula set forth in the Tax Code. We do not believe that a 44.5% disparity between calculations lies outside of the constitutional margin of error delineated by the Supreme Court. A 44.5% disparity is not even remotely close to the 266% and 300% disparities cited by the Court as unconstitutional in Norfolk & Western Railway and Hans Rees’ Sons, and is somewhat less than the variance upheld in Moorman.
Unisys, 726 A.2d at 1103.
Having thus concluded its constitutional analysis favorably to the Board, the majority moved to Unisys’s contention that it was entitled to statutory equitable relief pursuant to the special apportionment provision set forth in Section 401(3)2.(a)(18) of the Tax Code, 72 P.S. § 7401(3)2.(a)(18), *154which the court described as affording the Department “broad discretion to make appropriate adjustments where any substantial inaccuracy results from application of the allocation and apportionment provisions.” Unisys, 726 A.2d at 1104. Distinguishing constitutional from statutory unfairness, the majority had little difficulty determining the forty-four and one-half percent variance asserted by Unisys required a remedy under the special apportionment provision. See id. (“Even giving due deference to the Department’s interpretation of the statute, we simply cannot say that an allocation so far at variance ‘fairly represents the extent of [Unisys’s] business activity in this State.’ ”). In this regard, as it did in its constitutional inquiry, the majority again accepted the benchmark figures supplied by Unisys as its reference and the fact and amount of the percent disparity.15 In view of the above, the Commonwealth Court remanded to the Board for implementation of statutory relief.
Direct cross-appeals to this Court followed, which raise primarily legal questions, open to this Court’s plenary consideration.
Presently, Unisys maintains its argument that, in settling its franchise tax liability for the years in question, the Department ascribed to it a unitary tax base. Unisys does not dispute its status as a unitary business enterprise, or contest Pennsylvania’s ability to measure the value of its franchise as *155such in the first instance. Rather, it rejects the apportionment of an asserted unitary tax base according to factors attributable to the parent corporation only. In this regard, Unisys emphasizes that the justification provided in Container Corp. and its progeny for permitting states to aggregate interstate value for purposes of taxation depends integrally upon the out-of-state portion being reasonably “apportioned away” prior to arriving at a taxable value, such that the taxing state can ultimately be said to be fairly reaching only value reasonably attributable to business activities within its borders. Where a tax base is determined on a unitary basis, in Unisys’s estimation, constitutional fairness principles require that the apportionment fraction must be unitary as well, and therefore, rationally related to, and consistent with, the tax base that it seeks to divide. According to Unisys, a structural “mismatch” between valuation and apportionment methodologies is not only irrational but also produces an inherent and impermissible distortion in segregating value. Unisys asserts that the methodology resulted in an overstatement of the value attributable to its Pennsylvania business activities on the order of some forty-five percent and maintains that the distortion is inimical to the salient constitutional fairness principles regardless of the degree of numerical disparity in tax liability produced. In support of its primary argument, Unisys cites to decisions of the appellate courts in Maine, Wisconsin, and New York. See Du Pont, 675 A.2d at 89 (citing Tambrands, Inc. v. State Tax Assessor, 595 A.2d 1039, 1044-45 (Me.1991), overruled in part, DuPont, 675 A.2d at 88-89); American Tel. & Tel. Co. v. Wisconsin Dep’t of Revenue, 143 Wis.2d 533, 422 N.W.2d 629, 634-36 (Ct.App.1988); People v. Knapp, 230 N.Y. 48, 129 N.E. 202, 206 (1920). Further, Unisys claims that the statutory fair apportionment provision requires an identical result, again, consistent with the decisions of other state appellate courts. See, e.g., Homart Dev. Co. v. Norberg, 529 A.2d 115, 121 (R.I.1987); NCR Corp. v. Comptroller of Treasury, 313 Md. 118, 544 A.2d 764, 781 (1988).
The Board disagrees fundamentally with Unisys’s position that the franchise tax base assessment is unitary in character. *156To the contrary, it contends, the aspects of the formula that capture consolidated worth are included merely as a “valuation device” used to measure taxpayers’ in-state business activities. In this regard, the Board emphasizes that the average net income component of the tax base assessment is calculated on an unconsolidated basis, with dividends from subsidiaries included only as an appropriate item of income to the taxpayer. Thus, in the first instance, the Board advances its view that factor representation in apportionment is not required in the Pennsylvania scheme even assuming the correctness of Unisys’s core argument that consolidated valuation would require it in theory. The Board emphasizes its position that the Department’s settlements concerning Unisys’s franchise tax liability are consistent with application of the internal and external consistency tests fashioned by the United States Supreme Court, and that Unisys has failed to meet its burden of establishing that the apportionment fractions ascribed do not fairly reflect the extent of Unisys’s business activities in the Commonwealth. The Board also posits that the availability of an alternate, elective method for calculating franchise tax liability ameliorates any unfairness that might otherwise be attributed to apportionment via the three-factor method. Finally, the Board maintains that statutory relief is not warranted because the only evidence of unfairness in the record stems from Unisys’s alternative apportionment formula, which is neither mandated by the statute nor grounded in sound theory. According to the Board, the statutory fair apportionment provision is to be used only in extraordinary circumstances and to avoid constitutional infractions, neither of which is present here.
In considering whether factor representation is required in Pennsylvania franchise tax apportionment, we begin with the question of legislative interpretation, namely, whether the Department’s practice of apportioning solely with reference to the parent company’s property, payroll, and sales factors is a reasonable interpretation of the taxing statute. As noted, the Tax Code requires apportionment of the franchise tax base according to factors attributable to the “taxpayer.” *157See 72 P.S. § 7401(3)2.(a)(10), (12), (13). While the term “taxpayer” is not specifically defined by the statute, its use in context favors the Department’s interpretation that it does not include subsidiary corporations. For example, Section 601 of the Tax Code defines “subsidiary corporation” in terms of majority ownership by “the taxpayer corporation.” See 72 P.S. § 7601. The Department’s interpretation is also supported by the weight of authority from other jurisdictions considering similar provisions. See, e.g., NCR Corp. v. Taxation and Revenue Dep’t, 115 N.M. 612, 856 P.2d 982, 985 (Ct.App.1993) (concluding that “[i]n this case the ‘taxpayer’ is NCR, not its foreign subsidiaries”); NCR Corp. v. South Carolina Tax Comm’n, 304 S.C. 1, 402 S.E.2d 666, 669 (1991) (same); NCR Corp. v. Commissioner of Revenue, 438 N.W.2d 86, 89-90 (Minn.1989); NCR Corp. v. Comptroller, 313 Md. 118, 544 A.2d 764, 777 (1988). But see American Tel. & Tel, 422 N.W.2d at 632; Kellogg Co. v. Herrington, 216 Neb. 138, 343 N.W.2d 326, 332 (1984). Given the reasonableness of the Department’s administrative interpretation, and in keeping with the deference owed it in this regard, see Jay R. Reynolds, Inc. v. Department of Labor and Indus., Prevailing Wage Appeals Bd., 661 A.2d 494, 497 (Pa.Cmwlth.1995), we will not disturb such interpretation in the absence of sufficient proof of a constitutional violation.
Concerning the constitutional questions presented by Unisys, the Commonwealth Court majority provided a detailed and correct overview of the unitary business enterprise concept and the corresponding requirement of fair apportionment, as summarized above. It is noteworthy, however, that the United States Supreme Court has not fully developed the contours of permissible apportionment as concerns multi-jurisdictional, affiliated corporations. Moreover, the Supreme Court’s overall treatment of the guiding principles has been described as lacking concreteness by commentators, as well as by the Court itself.16 Of particular relevance here, the Su*158preme Court has expressly left open questions concerning the necessity of factor representation in apportionment. See Mobil Oil, 445 U.S. at 441 n. 15, 100 S.Ct. at 1233 n. 15.
The United States Supreme Court, nevertheless, has channeled the inquiry through the application of its internal and external consistency tests. See Jefferson Lines, 514 U.S. at 185, 115 S.Ct. at 1338 (“For over a decade now, we have assessed any threat of malapportionment by asking whether the tax is ‘internally consistent’ and, if so, whether it is ‘externally consistent’ as well” (citations omitted)); Goldberg, 488 U.S. at 261,109 S.Ct. at 589 (“we determine whether a tax is fairly apportioned by examining whether it is internally and externally consistent”). As recognized by the Commonwealth Court, an apportionment method is considered internally consistent if, in a hypothetical application by all taxing jurisdictions, no more than one hundred percent of the unitary business’s income or value is taxed. See Container Corp., 463 U.S. at 169, 103 S.Ct. at 2942 (recognizing that the internal consistency standard is satisfied where the formula, if applied by every jurisdiction ... would result in no more than all of the unitary business’s income being taxed). Presently, however, Unisys has not attempted to demonstrate that exclusion of the subsidiaries’ income-producing activities in the denomina*159tor of Pennsylvania’s apportionment formula would result in more than all of its income being taxed.17 Moreover, the Pennsylvania formula as applied by the Department plainly meets the internal consistency test, since if every taxing jurisdiction applied the formula, no more than all of the value of the unitary business would be taxed, as each item of property, payroll, and sales of the parent corporation represented in the numerator of the apportionment fraction can be attributable to only one jurisdiction. Accord Du Pont, 675 A.2d at 89.
As frequently emphasized in the commentary, the internal consistency test constitutes a minimal check on theoretical weaknesses of apportionment schemes. See, e.g., Moore, State and Local Taxation, 42 Wayne L.Rbv. at 1453 (The internal consistency test, in the fair apportionment context, is unexceptional and does little more than serve as a check against blatant multiple taxation in theory, (citation omitted)). The degree to which the Supreme Court intends for external consistency to serve as an additional gauge for theory, as opposed to merely a final check on application of apportionment formulae, is unclear. Certainly, in various *160instances of its descriptions touching upon the test, the Court has sometimes spoken in terms of theory.18 The Court has also recognized, however, that “[e]very method of allocation devised involves some degree of arbitrariness.” Barclays Bank PLC v. Franchise Tax Bd., 512 U.S. 298, 303, 114 S.Ct. 2268, 2272, 129 L.Ed.2d 244 (1994).19 Indeed, in application, the Court’s focus in determining external consistency has fairly regularly been upon result, namely, the degree of disparity between taxation under the state’s apportionment scheme versus the outcome pursuant to some more “neutral” measure or baseline. See, e.g., Container Corp., 463 U.S. at 182-84, 103 S.Ct. at 2949-50; Moorman, 437 U.S. at 272-75, 98 S.Ct. at 2344-45. Further, the Supreme Court has also employed definitive terms to indicate that the external consistency test is an outcome-based assessment. See, e.g., Goldberg, 488 U.S. at 264, 109 S.Ct. at 590 (“It should not be overlooked ... that the external consistency test is essentially a practical inquiry.”); Container Corp., 463 U.S. at 170, 103 S.Ct. at 2942 (couching the relevant inquiry in terms of taxable value which ‘is in fact out of all appropriate proportion to the business transacted ... in that state,’ or has ‘led to a grossly distorted result’ (citations omitted)); International Harvester, 329 U.S. at 422-23, 67 S.Ct. at 447 (“Unless a palpably disproportionate result comes from an apportionment, a result which makes it patent that the tax is levied upon interstate commerce rather than upon an intrastate privilege, this Court has not been willing to nullify honest *161state efforts to make apportionments.”). See generally Moorman, 437 U.S. at 273, 98 S.Ct. at 2344 (“despite ... imprecision, the Court has refused to impose strict constitutional restraints on a State’s selection of a particular formula”). Notably, the Commonwealth Court majority’s percentage-oriented assessment of external consistency, see Unisys, 726 A.2d at 1102-03, represents a fairly typical application.
The challenge facing the Supreme Court has clearly been to allow the states sufficient latitude to surmount the complexities involved in the taxation of multijurisdictional entities while at the same time safeguarding against overreaching by any individual state.20 We conclude that the balance struck by the Court restricts the impact of theoretical attacks upon all but the most arbitrary of formulae by generally limiting the inquiry to the relatively minimal test for internal consistency, while preserving the opportunity for taxpayers to more meaningfully challenge apportionment applications by demonstrating a substantial disparity between the tax burden imposed upon them and some reasonable baseline measure. Accord Container Corp., 463 U.S. at 182-83, 103 S.Ct. at 2949 (observing that “[s]ome methods of formula apportionment are particularly problematic because they focus on only a small part of the spectrum of activities by which value is generated” but noting that “we have generally upheld the use of such formulas” in the absence of “distortive effect[s]” that were “so outrageous ... as to require reversal”).21
*162In order to provide a predicate for assessment of external consistency, therefore, a taxpayer must establish a proper baseline. In the complex field of constitutional restraints on state taxation of multijurisdictional commerce, the dollar figures presented by the parties for comparison have not been predicated upon any uniform set of parameters from which percentage-based comparisons can be easily drawn across cases. The large discrepancies at issue in Hans Rees’ Sons and Norfolk & W. Ry., for example, involved the difference between the tax due and that which would have been owed had the taxing authority taken into account the underlying economic realities specific to the unique circumstances of the aggrieved taxpayer. In Container Corp., on the other hand, the relatively small discrepancy at issue arose when the taxpayer chose to compute its tax liability based upon an *163alternate method that did not reflect the unitary nature of its business. And in Moorman, the forty-eight percent discrepancy represented the difference between two admittedly reasonable apportionment schemes tied to different economic indicators. Although it is therefore clear that different measures may be employed, it is appropriate in all cases as a threshold matter to consider the reasonableness of the method or methods presented by the taxpayer to arrive at a baseline measure.
Here, Unisys has presented a single approach which treats its tax base as wholly unitary and reflects full factor representation in apportionment — in other words, Unisys has added the full property, payroll, and sales figures of its subsidiary corporations to the denominator of the apportionment fraction. Further, it has presented raw data coupled with bottom-line figures that are detached from the data by the admonition that unquantified adjustments have been made to account for undisclosed exemptions/exelusions.22 In order to determine the reasonableness of Unisys’s approach, it is therefore necessary to consider whether Unisys is correct that the tax base is wholly unitary, such that full factor representation in apportionment will produce an appropriate measure of in-state value. In this regard, the Department argues that such a baseline is unreasonable, since the tax base is not a unitary or consolidated one.
Contrary to the Department’s argument, it is apparent that there are unitary aspects to the tax base, as, for example, capital stock value takes into account consolidated net worth. See 72 P.S. § 7601(a). It is important to observe too, however, as the Department also emphasizes, that the average net income component of value is assessed on an unconsolidated basis prior to capitalization. See id,.23 While dividends from *164subsidiaries are included in taxpayer average net income, and this may be viewed as one measure of consolidated value, the more common and broader measure of value attributable to subsidiaries, namely, the net income or profits of subsidiaries, is not assessed under the statute. Considering similar circumstances, other jurisdictions have made adjustments to the denominator of the apportionment fraction to ensure that the value imputation due to dividends from subsidiaries is not overstated. For example, the “Detroit formula,” applied in some jurisdictions, includes in the denominator only a portion of subsidiary factors based on the ratio of dividends received from subsidiary corporations to the subsidiaries’ total net income or profits.24 As explained by several courts in evaluating a similar paradigm:
[i]t may not be unreasonable to suggest that inclusion of subsidiaries’ dividends in the apportionable income [of NCR] should be balanced by some change in the formula denominator. But the balancing should not be done by including the total property, sales, and payroll values____ Instead, the denominators should be modified by including only those percentages of the foreign subsidiaries’ property, payroll, and sales that generated the foreign subsidiary dividend income taxed by Maryland.
NCR Corp. v. South Carolina Tax Comm’n, 304 S.C. 1, 402 S.E.2d 666, 673-74 (1991) (quoting NCR Corp. v. Comptroller of the Treasury, 313 Md. 118, 544 A.2d 764, 781 (1988)).25 *165Indeed, in some cases, in their attempts to establish a baseline by which to adjudge external consistency, taxpayers have acknowledged the inherent reasonableness of adjusting the apportionment formula to account for retained income or profits of subsidiaries. See Tambrands, 595 A.2d at 1042 n. 4 (“Tambrands’ position is that included in the denominators of the apportionment formula factors should be the same percentage of property, sales and payroll of each Foreign Affiliate as the percentage of net income that each Foreign Affiliate paid in dividends to Tambrands.”).26
It is also noteworthy that, in the Pennsylvania formula for calculation of the tax base, net worth of the unitary enterprise is reduced by twenty-five percent (which reduction subsumes a reduction of worth attributable to both parent and subsidiary corporations), see supra note 5, thus adding substantially to the “margin of error” for purposes of the constitutional assessment. See Container Corp., 463 U.S. at 184,103 S.Ct. at 2950. Unisys’s numbers proffered reflecting full factor representation also fail to take this adjustment into account.27 Some *166additional latitude is also due in favor of the Commonwealth in Unisys’s particular circumstance, since it maintains its headquarters in Pennsylvania, thereby demonstrating considerable Pennsylvania activity in the management and production of value. Accord Maxland Dev. Corp. v. Director of Revenue, 960 S.W.2d 503, 506 (Mo.1998) (Income arises partly from transactions in this state when the ‘brains’ — that plan, design, and direct a specialized operation in other states — are in Missouri, (citation omitted)).
While the inherent rationality of factor representation in apportionment cannot be disputed, neither can the need for a taxpayer, addressing a tax base that incorporates unitary aspects but is substantially hybridized and adjusted, to account for the methodology by which the tax base is calculated in establishing a baseline for purposes of external consistency assessment.
We also consider the Pennsylvania franchise taxation provisions that incorporate fair apportionment principles relevant to the constitutional inquiry. See 72 P.S. § 7401(3)2.(a)(18). Such provisions establish a statutory mechanism for equitable adjustment to the extent a taxpayer is able to demonstrate that the application of the tax is unconstitutionally (or perhaps otherwise) unfair, thus ameliorating due process concerns within the confines of the taxing scheme itself.28 Further, regardless of whether statutory fair apportionment precepts sweep beyond the boundaries of constitutional fairness, we conclude that the General Assembly intended for it to be assessed, like external consistency, according to some mean*167ingful reference point established by the taxpayer. Since we find that Unisys has failed to demonstrate the appropriateness of its proffered baseline figures, we also conclude that it has not demonstrated entitlement to relief under Section 401(3)2.(a)(18) of the Tax Code.29
In summary, Pennsylvania’s scheme for taxation of foreign business franchises may be less than ideal and, absent statutory fairness adjustment, unconstitutional in some applications. Nevertheless, a taxpayer alleging Commerce and Due Process Clause violations bears a substantial burden to demonstrate by clear and cogent evidence that the state is taxing income earned outside its jurisdiction. See Container Corp., 463 U.S. at 169-70, 103 S.Ct. at 2942-43. Here, Unisys has presented baseline figures predicated solely upon full factor representation of subsidiaries, while failing to establish an adequate correlation between the hybrid, adjusted tax base ascribed to it and factor representation on such terms. Pursuant to the standards crafted by the United States Supreme Court, we conclude, therefore, that Unisys has failed to carry *168its heavy burden.30 For much the same reasons, we reach the same result on consideration of the statutory fair apportionment provisions.
Accordingly, we reverse the Commonwealth Court’s order and remand for reinstatement of the settlements as approved by the Board. Jurisdiction is relinquished.
Justice NIGRO files a dissenting opinion.
Justice NEWMAN files a dissenting opinion in which Justice CASTILLE joins.
. Further references to Unisys include Sperry and Burroughs for the applicable tax years.
. Although the Commerce Clause does not expressly restrict the states’ authority in the area of income/value taxation, the Supreme Court has long relied upon its negative implications as imposing the relevant constraints. See, e.g., Oklahoma Tax Comm'n v. Jefferson Lines, Inc., 514 U.S. 175, 179-80, 115 S.Ct. 1331, 1335-36, 131 L.Ed.2d 261 (1995) (discussing dormant Commerce Clause jurisprudence generally).
. Act of March 4, 1971, P.L. 6 (as amended, 72 P.S. §§ 7101-10004) (the Tax Code).
. The scope of this statutory definition is tempered by several doctrines, including those of multiformity and unrelated assets, see generally Commonwealth v. ACF Indus., Inc., 441 Pa. 129, 134-35, 271 A.2d 273, *146276 (1970), which have been crafted to accommodate the salient constitutional principles discussed below.
. Specifically, the taxing statute defines capital stock value as:
The amount computed pursuant to the following formula: the product of one-half times the sum of the average net income capitalized at the rate of nine and one-half per cent plus seventy-five per cent of net worth, from which product shall be subtracted one hundred twenty-five thousand dollars ($125,000), the algebraic equivalent of which is (.5 (average net income/.095 (.75)
(net worth))) $125,000
72 P.S. § 7601(a). For tax years 1985 and 1986, the final adjustment was to subtract $100,000, rather than the present $125,000. See 72 P.S. § 7601(a) (superseded).
. Per the noted provisions, the three-factor formula is reposited in the corporate net income taxation statute and incorporated by reference into the franchise tax provisions.
. Thus, for a year in which the tax rate is ten mills, the tax due is represented mathematically by:
actual value x apportionment fraction X .01
Foreign corporations are also afforded the option of calculating capital stock value according to the single-factor formula. The single-factor formula is authorized by the Act of June 22, 1931, P.L. 685, No. 250 (as amended 72 P.S. § 1896), and may be employed by foreign corporations pursuant to this Court’s decision in Gilbert Assocs., Inc. v. Commonwealth, 498 Pa. 514, 516, 447 A.2d 944, 945 (1982). Under that method, the apportionment fraction is based upon the percentage of the corporation's real and tangible personal property located in-state. See 72 P.S. §§ 1894,1896; 61 Pa Code § 155.10.
. While many of the United States Supreme Court decisions in this area concern corporate income tax, the first instances of application of the *148relevant, unitary business principles occurred in the value tax context. See Allied-Signal, Inc. v. Director, Div. of Taxation, 504 U.S. 768, 779, 112 S.Ct. 2251, 2258, 119 L.Ed.2d 533 (1992); Jefferson Lines, 514 U.S. at 181-83, 115 S.Ct. at 1336-37.
. See Container Corp., 463 U.S. at 164-65, 103 S.Ct. at 2940 ("The problem with this method is that formal accounting is subject to manipulation and imprecision, and often ignores or captures inadequately the many subtle and largely unquantifiable transfers of value that take place among the components of a single enterprise.”).
. The full criteria presently governing the imposition of state taxes on the instrumentalities of interstate commerce are set forth in Complete Auto Transit, Inc. v. Brady, 430 U.S. 274, 97 S.Ct. 1076, 51 L.Ed.2d 326 (1977), and permit such taxation when:
the tax is applied to an activity with a substantial nexus with the taxing state, is fairly apportioned, does not discriminate against interstate commerce, and is fairly related to the services provided by the state.
Id. at 279, 97 S.Ct. at 1079; see also Exxon Corp. v. Wisconsin Dep't of Revenue, 447 U.S. 207, 219-20, 100 S.Ct. 2109, 2117-18, 65 L.Ed.2d 66 (1980) (quoting Mobil Oil, 445 U.S. at 436-37, 100 S.Ct. at 1231).
. See also Allied-Signal, 504 U.S. at 783, 112 S.Ct. at 2260 (stating that “the constitutional test focuses on functional integration, centralization of management, and economies of scale”); Container Corp., 463 U.S. at 166, 103 S.Ct. at 2941 (recognizing breadth of unitary business principle and that it could apply "not only to vertically integrated enterprises, but also to a series of similar enterprises operating separately in various jurisdictions but linked by common managerial or operational resources that produced economies of scale and transfers of value”). As noted, the parlies here agree that Unisys and its subsidiaries function as a unitary business enterprise.
. As elaborated by the Supreme Court in Container Coip.:
The unitary business/formula apportionment method is a very different approach to the problem of taxing businesses operating in more than one jurisdiction. It rejects geographical or transactional accounting and instead calculates the local tax base by first defining the scope of the unitary business of which the taxed enterprise's activities in the taxing jurisdiction form one part, and then apportioning the total income of that unitary business between the taxing jurisdiction and the rest of the world on the basis of a formula taking into accouirt objective measures of the corporation's activities within and without the jurisdiction.
Container Corp., 463 U.S. at 164-65, 103 S.Ct. at 2940; see also Allied-Signal, 504 U.S. at 783, 112 S.Ct. at 2260; Mobil Oil, 445 U.S. at 438, 100 S.Ct. at 1232.
. The majority quoted Justice Stevens as follows:
Either Mobil's worldwide petroleum enterprise, ... is all part of one unitary business, or it is not; if it is, Vermont must evaluate the entire enterprise in a consistent manner. As it is, it has indefensibly used the apportionment methodology artificially to multiply its share of Mobil’s 1970 taxable income.
Mobil Oil, 445 U.S. at 461, 100 S.Ct. at 1234 (Stevens, J., dissenting), cited in Unisys, 726 A.2d at 1101.
. The Commonwealth Court cited E.I. Du Pont de Nemours & Co. v. State Tax Assessor, 675 A.2d 82, 88-91 (Me. 1996), NCR Corp. v. Com*152missioner of Revenue, 438 N.W.2d 86, 93 (Minn.1989), and American Tel. and Tel. Co. v. Department of Revenue, 143 Wis.2d 533, 422 N.W.2d 629, 636-37 (Ct.App.1988).
. The majority took care to emphasize that it was not requiring the inclusion of subsidiaries’ data in three-factor formula apportionment in all cases. See Unisys, 726 A.2d at 1105 ("The statute gives broad discretion to the Department to use any method which will produce a fair and equitable result, and we will not here limit the method the Department may use[;][w]e hold only that some form of Subsection (18) relief must be accorded.”).
In dissent, Judge Pellegrini expressed his view that, in order for relief to be required under the statutory fair apportionment provisions, there must be an unfair and unconstitutional allocation and apportionment of the foreign corporation's income that does not fairly represent its actual business activity in the State. See Unisys, 726 A.2d at 1108 (Pellegrini, J., dissenting). Since Judge Pellegrini agreed with the majority’s conclusion that Unisys had failed to establish a constitutional violation, by his reasoning it followed that no statutory relief was due. Judge Doyle also dissented, but without opinion.
. See, e.g., Quill Corp. v. North Dakota, 504 U.S. 298, 315, 112 S.Ct. 1904, 1915, 119 L.Ed.2d 91 (1992) (staling that our law in this area is something of a 'quagmire,' in describing Supreme Court jurisprudence *158regarding constitutional limitations upon state taxation); Northwestern States Portland Cement Co. v. Minnesota, 358 U.S. 450, 457-58, 79 S.Ct. 357, 362, 3 L.Ed.2d 421 (1959) (“application of constitutional principles to specific state statutes leaves much room for controversy and confusion and little in the way of precise guides to the States in the exercise of their indispensable power of taxation”); Ferdinand P. Schoettle, Big Bucks, Cloudy Thinking: Constitutional Challenges to State Taxes Illumination from the GATT, 19 Va. Tax. Rev. 277, 281-82 (Fall 1999) (summarizing the relevant critical commentary). Justices have opined that legislative action may be necessary in order to implement a wholly adequate solution. See Moorman, 437 U.S. at 279-80, 98 S.Ct. at 2347-48; see also ASARCO Inc. v. Idaho State Tax Comm'n, 458 U.S. 307, 352-53, 102 S.Ct. 3103, 3127-28, 73 L.Ed.2d 787 (1982) (O'Connor, J., dissenting). In this regard, commentators have advocated the use of. uniform tax bases and apportionment rules, see, e.g., Kathryn L. Moore, State and Local Taxation of Interstate and Foreign Commerce: The Second Best Solution, 42 Wayne L.Rev. 1425, 1467-68 (Spr.1996), as well as the use of combined accounting procedures. See generally Oliver Oldman and Richard D. Pomp, State Corporate Taxes, 491 PLI/Tax 291, 323-26 (Mar.-Apr.2001).
. Rather, as concerns internal consistency, Unisys asserts primarily that the Pennsylvania franchise tax statute, viewed in tandem with the taxing schemes of other jurisdictions, results in multiple taxation. See Unisys brief at 39 ("The net worth of all subsidiaries is taxed once as part of the capital stock of the parent and a second time as a part, of the capital stock value of those subsidiaries taxable in Pennsylvania or another state.”). The internal consistency test, however, is a narrow one focused solely upon the structure of the taxing scheme in question. See Goldberg, 488 U.S. at 261, 109 S.Ct. at 589 ("If we were to determine the internal consistency of one State's tax by comparing it with slightly different, taxes imposed by other Stales, the validity of state taxes would turn solely on ‘the shifting complexities of the tax codes of 49 other States[;]' [i]n any event, to the extent that other States have passed tax statutes which create a risk of multiple taxation, we reach that issue under the external consistency test[.]” (citation omitted)). See generally Oklahoma Tax Comm'n v. Jefferson Lines, Inc., 514 U.S. 175, 185, 115 S.Ct. 1331, 1338, 131 L.Ed.2d 261 (1995)(This [internal consistency] test asks nothing about the degree of economic reality reflected by the tax, but simply looks to the structure of the tax at issue to see whether its identical application by every State in the Union would place interstate commerce at a disadvantage as compared with commerce intrastate.).
. See, e.g., Container Corp., 463 U.S. at 169, 103 S.Ct. at 2942 (indicating that the factor or factors used in the apportionment formula must actually reflect a reasonable sense of how income is generated); General Motors Cotp. v. District of Columbia, 380 U.S. 553, 561, 85 S.Ct. 1156, 1161, 14 L.Ed.2d 68 (1965) (observing that the Court “has sought to ensure that the methods [of apportionment] used display a modicum of reasonable, relation to corporate activities within the State”); Not folk & W. Ry., 390 U.S. at 325, 88 S.Ct. at 1001 ("Any formula used must bear a rational relationship, both on its face and in its application, to property values connected with the taxing state.” (citation omitted)).
. Accord Daniel N. Shaviro, State and Local Taxation: The Current Judicial Outlook, 22 Cap. U.L.Rev. 279, 287 (Spr.1993) ("[I]t is impossible, from an economic standpoint, to ascribe a definite location to income or value.”).
. In this regard, we are cognizant of the particular difficulty facing the Commonwealth as concerns a value-oriented tax. Many of the cases cited by the parties concern the taxation of corporate income, in which instance the income-based tax base is more readily quantifiable than the value of capital. See Norfolk & W. Ry., 390 U.S. at 324, 88 S.Ct. at 1000 ("Going-concern value, of course, is an elusive concept not susceptible of exact measurement."). In the case of a value tax, therefore, the heightened complexities span both valuation and apportionment. Indeed, to the extent that the Container Corp. Court’s likening of apportionment of income to slicing a shadow is accurate, see Container Corp., 463 U.S. at 164, 103 S.Ct. at 2939, the apportionment of value might be fairly analogized to slicing vapor.
. We acknowledge that some courts would appear to have moved beyond review lor internal and external consistency as interpreted *162above, applying more exacting review of the theoretical underpinnings of apportionment formulae. See, e.g., Tambrands, 595 A.2d at 1044. In dissent, Mr. Justice Nigro appears to adopt such an approach, and, as one indication that the apportionment formula is constitutionally infirm he posits that a corporation's tax liability could, in a hypothetical case, increase even as its in-state factors decrease. See Dissenting Opinion, at 470 (Nigro, J.). To support his conclusion of facial unconstitutionality, moreover, he cites to PPG Industries, Inc. v. Board of Finance and Revenue, 567 Pa. 580, 790 A.2d 261 (2001) (PPG II), in which the Court found that the manufacturing exemption’s headquarters subfactor facially discriminated against interstate commerce. See Dissenting Opinion, at 471-72 (Nigro, J.). It should be noted, however, that, pursuant to the headquarters formula, PPG's tax liability would always increase if PPG were to move or expand operations out-of-state. See PPG Industries, Inc., v. Board of Finance and Revenue, 567 Pa. 565, 575-76, 790 A.2d 252, 258 (1999) (PPG I). Thus, the scheme provided a positive incentive for PPG to conduct business within the Commonwealth and penalized the company for expanding such activities out-of-state, thereby running afoul of the prohibition on discrimination against interstate commerce under Boston Stock Exchange v. State Tax Comm'n, 429 U.S. 318, 97 S.Ct. 599, 50 L.Ed.2d 514 (1977), and its progeny. See PPG I, 567 Pa. at 575-76, 790 A.2d at 258. See generally PPG II, 567 Pa. at 600, 790 A.2d at 273 (Saylor, J., dissenting). Here, by contrast, there is no similar incentive to shift operations either in-state or out-of-state, and hence, no facial discrimination against interstate commerce. Given the imprecision inherent in virtually any attempt to tax the in-state value of a multi-jurisdictional enterprise, the mere fact that one can propose a hypothetical scenario in which the taxpayer's liability increases while its in-state activities diminish, with no causal connection between the two, is an insufficient basis for a finding of facial unconstitutionality.
. This manner of presentation, as well as the absence of additional descriptive data such as the net average income/profits of subsidiary corporations, see infra, substantially constrains a reviewing tribunal in terms of its ability to assess fairness in application of the taxing statute other than strictly on the terms dictated by the taxpayer.
. Although Pennsylvania thus hybridizes consolidated and unconsolidated factors in determining the franchise tax base, such approach is *164not wholly aberrant. See Container Corp., 463 U.S. at 168 n. 5, 103 S.Ct. at 2942 n. 5 (recognizing that “[s]ome States, it should be noted, have adopted a hybrid approach”).
. See 14A Fletcher Cyclopedia of Private Corp. § 6970 (2000) ("the ‘Detroit formula’ ... operates to reduce state’s apportioned share of multijurisdictional taxpayer’s taxable income base by adding a portion of property, payroll, and sales of dividend-producing foreign subsidiaries, determined by dividing net dividends that parent corporation receives from foreign subsidiaries by those subsidiaries' total net profit, into the denominators of the portions of parent corporation's property, payroll, and sales attributable to in-state value under the Uniform Division of Income for Tax Purposes Act, thus lowering the UDITPA fractional multiplier used against taxpayer’s total income and thereby its state taxable income base.”).
. While the tax at issue in NCR Corp. was a corporate income tax, similar overstatement of the contribution of subsidiaries to the parent *165company may occur in the value tax context due to the inclusion of full subsidiary property, payroll, and sales factors in apportionment in circumstances in which the capitalized dividends taken into account in determining the tax base represent merely a portion of the net income or profits of subsidiaries, some of which is retained.
. Accord Container Corp., 463 U.S. at 169 n. 7, 103 S.Ct. at 2942 n. 7 (recognizing as a substantial factor that "the State in that case included dividends from the subsidiaries to the parent in its calculation of the parent’s apportionable taxable income, but did not include the underlying income of the subsidiaries themselves”); Walter Hellerstein, State Taxation of Corporate Income from Intangibles: Allied-Signal and Beyond, 48 Tax L.Rev 739, 832 (Fall 1993) ("inclusion of 100% of the subsidiary’s factors in the parent’s apportionment formula would overstate the subsidiary’s contribution to the parent's income il each dollar of payroll, property, and sales was presumed to bear the same relationship to the apportionable income it produced”); id. (“there are complicated issues bearing on the proper adjustment of the parent's factors to reflect fairly the subsidiary's contribution to the apportionable tax base that tend to be overlooked in the broad endorsements of the principle of factor representation”).
. Indeed, in tax years in which Unisys subsidiaries experienced negative average net income, the statutory adjustment and averaging process required as the means for computing capital stock value resulted in Unisys's pre-apportionment tax base being established at thirty-seven and one-half percent of net worth. (Seventy-five percent of net worth *166plus zero average net income divided by two equals thirty-seven and one-half percent of net worth).
. Accord S.M.Z. Corp. v. Director, Div. of Taxation, 193 N.J.Super. 305, 473 A.2d 982, 990 (App.Div.1984) (explaining, with respect to New Jersey's analog to Pennsylvania’s statutory fair apportionment provisions, [i]t is undeniably clear that our Legislature enacted Section 8 to serve as a ‘safety valve' in cases where the ‘allocation factor' determined under Section 6 may produce an unconstitutional result); cf. Moorman, 437 U.S. at 275, 98 S.Ct. at 2345 (“The Iowa statute afforded appellant the opportunity to demonstrate that the single-factor formula produced an arbitrary result!;] [b]ut the record contains no such showing and therefore the [director’s assessment is not subject to challenge under the Due Process Clause.”).
. Mr. Justice Nigro faults the above reasoning for allegedly shifting to the taxpayer the burden to prove the unconstitutionality of the present taxing scheme by comparison with demonstrably reasonable baseline figures for the tax base. See Dissenting Opinion at 472 (Nigro, J.). As noted even by the dissent, however, the burden has always been on the taxpayer to demonstrate unconstitutionality by clear and cogent evidence. See id. at 467. In this regard, we are merely following the U.S. Supreme Court's lead in requiring, as a practical measure, that the taxpayer present the court with a valid and meaningful set of reference calculations against which to measure the alleged distortionate effects of the challenged taxing statute, once it is determined that the apportionment formula passes the internal consistency test. Compare Container Corp., .463 U.S. at 181, 103 S.Ct. at 2948 (rejecting a claim of alleged unconstitutional distortion where the taxpayer’s baseline figures were founded upon an accounting method suffering from basic theoretical weaknesses) and Moonnan, 437 U.S. at 272, 276, 98 S.Ct. at 2344, 2346 (denying relief in part because taxpayer failed to proffer figures representing the actual profitability of in-state sales subject to the challenged tax) with Hans Rees', 283 U.S. at 134-36, 51 S.Ct. at 389 (providing relief where, although the apportioning methodology was facially sound, the taxpayer adduced convincing reference figures indicating that its income attributable to in-state activities was well below that yielded by the taxing formula) and Norfolk & W. Ry., 390 U.S. at 328, 88 S.Ct. at 1002 (same).
. Other courts have reached similar conclusions predicated upon the adequacy of the taxpayers’ presentations. For example, one court framed the conclusion as follows:
[W]e are unable to determine [from the record], in any meaningful way, the extent to which a reasonably structured formula ... might differ in its results from a formula which excludes that portion of the foreign subsidiary property, payroll, and sales which generated the dividend income. As a further consequence, we cannot tell whether disproportionality [a grossly distorted result] of constitutional proportions is present here.
NCR Corp., 402 S.E.2d at 674 (quoting NCR Corp., 544 A.2d at 781).

=== CASE 9737292 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:20:48.623569+00 ===

Justice NIGRO
dissenting.
In assessing the Pennsylvania franchise tax in the instant case, the Department of Revenue (Department) added the capital stock value of the parent corporation and more than 100 foreign subsidiary corporations in calculating the tax base. However, the Department then calculated Pennsylvania’s share of the tax base, i.e., that portion attributable to business activity in this state, using an apportionment fraction composed of the property, payroll, and sales of only one corporation, the parent. Common sense suggests that this tax base/apportionment factor mismatch renders the taxing scheme fundamentally unfair and, in my view, unconstitutional. Accordingly, I must respectfully dissent.
The Pennsylvania franchise tax was designed to tax out-of-state corporations for the privilege of conducting business within Pennsylvania and is imposed on the capital stock value of a corporation. See Clairol, Inc. v. Commonwealth, Bd. of *169Finance & Review, 513 Pa. 74, 518 A.2d 1165 (1986).1 Because a state may not constitutionally tax value earned outside of its borders, the capital stock of a multi-jurisdiction unitary enterprise must be apportioned so that Pennsylvania taxes only that portion of capital stock value attributable to the enterprise’s business activities within the state. See Container Corp. v. Franchise Tax Bd., 463 U.S. 159, 164, 103 S.Ct. 2933, 77 L.Ed.2d 545 (1983). At the same time, the Due Process and Commerce Clauses of the U.S. Constitution do not allow a state to assess a tax on the interstate activities of an enterprise unless there is a nexus between the interstate activities and the taxing state, and a rational relationship between the portion of the tax base attributed to the taxing state and the intrastate values of the enterprise. See U.S. Const, art. I, § 8, cl. 3; U.S. Const, amend XIV, § 1; Hunt-Wesson, Inc. v. Franchise Tax Bd. of California, 528 U.S. 458, 463-64, 120 S.Ct. 1022, 145 L.Ed.2d 974 (2000) (citations omitted).2 Although a state has wide latitude in fashioning an *170apportionment formula, a formula will be held invalid where a taxpayer proves by clear and cogent evidence that the income attributed to the state is “out of all appropriate proportion to the business transacted by the [taxpayer] in that state,” Hans Rees’ Sons, Inc. v. North Carolina ex rel. Maxwell, 283 U.S. 123, 135, 51 S.Ct. 385, 75 L.Ed. 879 (1931), that application of the formula has led to a grossly distorted result for a taxpayer in a particular case, Norfolk & Western Ry. Co. v. Missouri State Tax Comm’n, 390 U.S. 317, 326, 88 S.Ct. 995,19 L.Ed.2d 1201 (1968), or that the apportionment scheme is “inherently arbitrary” or its application “produce[s] an unreasonable result,” Moorman Mfg. Co. v. Bair, 437 U.S. 267, 274, 98 S.Ct. 2340, 57 L.Ed.2d 197 (1978) (quoting Underwood Typewriter Co. v. Chamberlain, 254 U.S. 113, 121, 41 S.Ct. 45, 65 L.Ed. 165 (1920), and citing Norfolk & Western Ry. Co. v. North Carolina ex rel. Maxwell, 297 U.S. 682, 56 S.Ct. 625, 80 L.Ed. 977 (1936); Bass, Ratcliff & Gretton v. State Tax Comm’n, 266 U.S. 271, 45 S.Ct. 82, 69 L.Ed. 282 (1924)).
In the instant case, Unisys reported its average net income on a separate company, unconsolidated basis and therefore, did not include as income dividends it received from subsidiaries. Unisys likewise reported its net worth on a separate company, unconsolidated basis and apportioned its capital stock value using the statutory three-factor formula. In settling Unisys’s franchise tax for the applicable years, the Department increased the amount reported by Unisys as net worth to include the value of Unisys’s investments in its subsidiaries and increased the amount reported as average net income by adding the amount of dividends paid to Unisys by *171its subsidiaries. The Department then calculated Unisys’s property, payroll and sales apportionment factors on a separate company basis, that is, the factors included only the property, payroll and sales of Unisys itself and not the property, payroll and sales of its subsidiaries. The Department’s methodology in that regard was consistent with its practice of computing the apportionment factor by looking only at the activity of the reporting corporation.3 On appeal here, Unisys claims that this tax base/apportionment factors “mismatch” offends due process notions of fairness and violates the constitutional requirement that a state tax levied upon a multijurisdictional business be rationally related to values connected to that state.
The majority concedes that the inherent rationality of factor representation in apportionment cannot be disputed, and recognizes that there is a mismatch in the Department’s application of Pennsylvania’s apportionment formula because the tax base includes value that is not included in the apportionment factors. The majority further states that Pennsylvania’s franchise taxation scheme “may be less than ideal” and even “unconstitutional in some applications.” Nevertheless, the majority reinstates the Department’s settlement of Unisys’s franchise tax liability, concluding that Unisys failed to meet its burden of proof. I disagree with this conclusion for several reasons.
In my view, if the majority had applied the unitary business principle to all aspects of Pennsylvania’s franchise tax scheme, it would have reached a different result. Instead, the majority discounted the integrated relationship between the value of a unitary business and formula apportionment, and in the process, undermined the underlying foundation of the unitary *172business principle. See Jerome R. Hellerstein & Walter Hellerstein, State Taxation, § 9.15(2) (3d ed.1998); E. George Rudolph, The Unitary Business Concept and Affiliated Corporate Groups, 25 Tax. L.Rev. 171, 205 (1970). As I see it, where the theoretical predicate for apportioning dividend income is that the payors of the intangible income are subsidiary corporations engaged in a unitary business with the parent company, it follows as a matter of principle that the subsidiaries’ factors must be included in the formula employed to apportion such value.4 When a formula, such as the one at issue here, fails to recognize the payroll, property, and sales of the subsidiaries that helped generate apportionable value for a unitary enterprise, there ceases to be a rational relationship between the value being taxed and the activities that gave rise to the value and, in my opinion, the inescapable consequence is that unitary value is not apportioned in a constitutional manner.5 See Paul H. Frankel et al., Factor Representation: Respecting Both Legs of the Unitary Business Principle, 10 J. Multistate Tax’n 6 (Sept.2000) (states that include intangible income in taxpayer’s apportionable tax base without providing representation in the apportionment formula for the factors *173that generated the income eviscerate the unitary business principle and transgress constitutional limits on state taxation).
This position is supported by several state courts that have held that an apportionment scheme is unconstitutional when the composition of the apportionment factors is inconsistent with the tax base, and that mismatch distorts the tax base. See E.I. DuPont de Nemours & Co. v. State Tax Assessor, 675 A.2d 82, 89 (Me.1996) (failure to adjust apportionment factors to properly reflect in-state value may result in taxation of extraterritorial value and therefore, violates the fundamental fairness requirements of the Due Process Clause);6 American Telephone & Telegraph Co. v. Wisconsin Dep’t of Revenue, 143 Wis.2d 533, 422 N.W.2d 629, 634-36 (Ct.App.1988) (tax base/apportionment factor mismatch inherently unconstitutional under Due Process and Commerce Clauses); People v. Knapp, 230 N.Y. 48, 129 N.E. 202, 206 (1920) (consistency between tax base and apportionment fraction is constitutional requirement); see also Homart Development Co. v. Norberg, 529 A.2d 115 (R.I.1987) (not reaching constitutional issue, but concluding that failure to use factor representation results in inherent and manifest distortion).7
*174These state courts applied the same reasoning expressed by U.S. Supreme Court Justice John Paul Stevens, the only Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court to address the issue Unisys raises here. Addressing a taxing scheme with a base/apportionment factor mismatch similar to the one here, Justice Stevens stated in his dissent in Mobil Oil Corp. v. Comm’r of Taxes of Vermont, 445 U.S. 425, 100 S.Ct. 1223, 63 L.Ed.2d 510 (1980):
Unless the sales, payroll, and property values connected with the production of income by the payor corporations are added to the denominator of the apportionment formula, the inclusion of earnings attributable to those corporations in the apportionable tax base will inevitably cause Mobil’s Vermont income to be overstated. Either Mobil’s worldwide “petroleum enterprise,” is all part of one unitary business, or it is not; if it is, Vermont must evaluate the entire enterprise in a consistent manner. As it is, it has indefensibly used its apportionment methodology artificially to multiply its share of Mobil’s ... taxable income perhaps as much as tenfold. In my judgment, the record is clearly sufficient to establish the validity of Mobil’s objections to what Vermont has done here.
Id. at 460-61, 100 S.Ct. 1223 (Stevens, J., dissenting) (internal citations and footnotes omitted).8 In my view, Justice Stevens’ cogent analysis is equally applicable to the instant case.9
*175To demonstrate the weight of that logic as applied to Pennsylvania’s scheme, one need only consider the practical application of taxing dividends paid by subsidiaries to the parent company of a unitary enterprise. Where out-of-state income paid to the parent company in the form of dividends increases, the result is an increase in the capital stock value subject to taxation by Pennsylvania, whether or not the unitary enterprise’s in-state activities increase. In other words, although the tax base increases, there is no corresponding increase in the denominator of the apportionment formula to account for the out-of-state production of the value. In fact, given this mismatch, an enterprise’s Pennsylvania tax liability could increase even while its in-state property, payroll, and sales were decreasing.10 The inherent distortion of such a system is even more apparent where a parent company, such as Unisys, has a large number of subsidiaries.
Unlike the majority, I believe that the systemic deficiency in the Department’s application of the apportionment formula will inevitably cause unconstitutional miscalculations of the *176franchise tax. In my view, the unitary concept, at least to the extent it is applied in computing the tax base, necessarily must carry through to all aspects of the tax computation. Thus, both practical and theoretical consistency, as well as the Due Process and Commerce Clauses, require that some form of factor representation be used in the franchise tax apportionment formula to account for out-of-state value production.
While Pennsylvania’s scheme will no doubt produce constitutional results in some instances, the practical effect of such a scheme on other occasions is the unconstitutional taxation of out-of-state value and impermissible double taxation. See Norfolk & Western, 390 U.S. at 327, 88 S.Ct. 995 (“The facts of life do not neatly lend themselves to the niceties of constitutionalism; but neither does the Constitution tolerate any result, however distorted, just because it is the product of a convenient mathematical formula”). In my judgment, the complete absence of the subsidiaries from the apportionment formula makes it facially apparent that the Pennsylvania statute reaches beyond constitutional limits and taxes value outside its borders. See Norfolk & Western, 390 U.S. at 325, 88 S.Ct. 995 (apportionment formula must be rationally related, both on its face and in its application, to values connected with the taxing state); see also Armco Inc. v. Hardesty, 467 U.S. 638, 644-45, 104 S.Ct. 2620, 81 L.Ed.2d 540 (1984) (a tax that unfairly apportions income from other states is a form of discrimination against interstate commerce, and discrimination can be proved from the face of the tax statute); cf. Fulton Corp. v. Faulkner, 516 U.S. 325, 331, 116 S.Ct. 848, 133 L.Ed.2d 796 (1996) (quoting Oregon Waste Systems, Inc. v. Dep’t of Envtl. Quality of Oregon, 511 U.S. 93, 99, 114 S.Ct. 1345, 128 L.Ed.2d 13 (1994)) (“State laws discriminating against interstate commerce on their face are ‘virtually per se invalid.’ ”); Trinova Corp. v. Michigan Dep’t of Treasury, 498 U.S. 358, 374, 111 S.Ct. 818, 112 L.Ed.2d 884 (1991) (quoting Jenkins, State Taxation of Interstate Commerce, 27 Term. L.Rev. 239, 242 (I960)) (a tax imposed “on sleeping measured by the number of pairs of shoes you have in your closet is a tax on shoes”); PPG Industries, Inc. v. Commonwealth, Bd. *177of Finance & Revenue, 567 Pa. 580, 790 A.2d 261, 264 (2001) (holding manufacturing exception to Pennsylvania’s capital stock and franchise taxes unconstitutional because it facially discriminated against interstate commerce).
In reaching its conclusion here, the majority stresses the U.S. Supreme Court’s caveat that all apportionment formulas are necessarily imperfect. Such a pronouncement does not, however, cure the constitutional infirmity of Pennsylvania’s scheme. Moreover, while it is true that the U.S. Supreme Court has held that a “rough approximation rather than precision” is sufficient to satisfy constitutional demands, to be granted that leeway the formula must first be designed to tax only the value of intrastate business activity. See International Harvester Co. v. Evatt, 329 U.S. 416, 421-22, 67 S.Ct. 444, 91 L.Ed. 390 (1947) (quoting Illinois Central R. Co. v. Minnesota, 309 U.S. 157, 161, 60 S.Ct. 419, 84 L.Ed. 670 (1940)); see also Jerome R. Hellerstein & Walter Hellerstein, State Taxation, § 9.15[4][a] (3d ed.1998) (“rough approximation” standard is designed to provide states with a “margin of error” in implementing theoretically sound formulas). As I see it, Pennsylvania’s mismatched apportionment formula is not designed to tax only in-state activity, and the theoretically unsound taxation scheme is therefore unconstitutional on its face.
The majority ultimately rejects Unisys’s claim that the apportionment scheme is unconstitutional on its face because Unisys used what the majority considers unreasonable methods in calculating the tax base for comparison to the Department’s methodology.11 In so concluding, the majority states that Unisys “presented baseline figures predicated solely upon full factor representation of subsidiaries, while failing to estáb*178lish an adequate correlation between the hybrid, adjusted tax base ascribed to it and factor representation on such terms.” 12 I disagree with the majority’s analysis in dismissing Unisys’s claim.
The reasonableness test the majority applies to Unisys’s baseline figures has no precedential basis and, in my view, its application imposes an additional burden on a taxpayer challenging the constitutionality of a tax apportionment scheme and grants the government too much leeway in assessing the franchise tax. Under the majority’s new test, the Department can impose a franchise tax using virtually any apportionment formulation, unless and until a taxpayer comes forward with a taxing scheme that meets not only the majority’s reasonableness threshold, but also well-established constitutional requirements. Thus, the majority essentially relieves the Department of its primary responsibility for imposing taxes in a constitutional manner, see Container Corp., 463 U.S. at 164, 103 S.Ct. 2933; Hunt-Wesson, 528 U.S. at 463-64, 120 S.Ct. 1022, and creates a bright-line rule requiring precision from taxpayers in an area of tax law in which the majority concludes it is impossible for the Department to be precise. I simply cannot agree with this shifting of the burden onto Unisys to formulate a constitutionally valid system of taxation to compare with the Department’s facially unconstitutional system.
Moreover, in my estimation, the fact that Unisys calculated its franchise tax liability with full factor representation while failing to compensate for the “hybrid” nature of the franchise tax base is not necessarily fatal to its entire claim. Given the *179facial inadequacy of the Department’s methodology, Unisys’s failure to advance a perfect taxation scheme is not dispositive of the constitutional inquiry at issue here. Cf. International Harvester Co. v. Dep’t of Treasury, 322 U.S. 340, 343, 64 S.Ct. 1019, 88 L.Ed. 1313 (1944) (Rutledge, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part) (“If there is a want of due process to sustain” a tax, “by that fact alone any burden the tax imposes on the commerce among the states becomes ‘undue’ ”). Because I would find the Department’s application of the franchise tax statute unconstitutional, the only remaining consideration on remand should be, in my mind, whether the Department should implement full factor representation or some hybrid form of factor representation.
I also believe the majority erred in giving substantial weight to Unisys’s actual franchise tax liability in addressing its constitutional claim. For example, the majority discredits Unisys’s methodology due to its failure to account for the statutory 25% reduction in the net worth of the unitary enterprise when calculating capital stock value under the franchise tax statute. See 72 P.S. § 7601(a). While the 25% reduction ultimately reduces the tax due, I believe the majority overstates its relevance here because the capital stock value formula set forth in § 7601(a) was merely the legislature’s method of establishing the proper tax base, and the 25% reduction of the entire tax base does not impact the calculation of a constitutionally valid apportionment fraction. I am also puzzled by the majority’s reliance on the fact that Unisys’s subsidiaries experienced negative average net income in certain tax years.13 The General Assembly concluded that one of the relevant factors in determining capital stock value is net income, see id., a determination which necessarily requires accounting for a company’s costs, operating expenses, and potentially, losses. Irrespective of profitability, under the taxing statute a company incurs franchise tax liability based on the average of net income and net worth. See id. As *180such, the fact that a subsidiary incurs a net loss does not necessarily skew the apportionment of value.
Furthermore, I do not agree with the majority that the statutory provision of exemptions, deductions and adjustments for determining the tax base creates a “margin of error” for a constitutional assessment of apportionment under the Due Process and Commerce Clauses. The whole purpose of the apportionment formula is to identify in-state commerce and not, as the majority seems to suggest, to simply reduce the tax burden to a level that in all likelihood does not overstep constitutional bounds. Thus, the proper inquiry is whether the apportioned tax base fairly represents the in-state business activity of a taxpayer and not whether the actual dollar amount of the assessed tax adequately represents in-state activity irrespective of the constitutionality of the apportionment factor. See Bacchus Imports, Ltd. v. Dias, 468 U.S. 263, 265, 104 S.Ct. 3049, 82 L.Ed.2d 200 (1984) (where tax has differential impact on in-state and out-of-state activities, the determination of constitutionality does not depend upon whether one focuses upon the benefited or the burdened); cf. Boston Stock Exchange v. State Tax Comm’n, 429 U.S. 318, 331, 97 S.Ct. 599, 50 L.Ed.2d 514 (1977) (discriminatory character of the challenged provisions was demonstrated by the fact that they “foreclose tax-neutral decisions” about where to transact business).
Based on the foregoing analysis, I would hold that factor representation is constitutionally required when taxing a multi-state unitary business, and that Unisys met its burden of showing by clear and cogent evidence that the Department’s application of Pennsylvania’s franchise tax apportionment scheme violates the Due Process and Commerce Clauses of the U.S. Constitution.14
. In its simplest algebraic form, the Pennsylvania franchise tax is expressed as: capital stock value x apportionment factor x statutory tax rate = tax due. See 72 P.S. §§ 7601-7605. A corporation’s capital stock value, i.e., the tax base, is determined by a fixed formula based on: (1) the corporation's net worth, (2) the net worth of any subsidiary of the reporting corporation, and (3) the corporation’s average net income, which includes dividends received from its subsidiaries. See 72 P.S. § 7601(a); 61 Pa.Code § 155.26(a). The apportionment factor is computed by means of a statutory apportionment formula that averages three ratios: (1) the corporation’s property within Pennsylvania to total property everywhere, (2) the corporation's payroll incurred in Pennsylvania to total payroll incurred everywhere, and (3) the corporation's sales within Pennsylvania to total sales everywhere. See 72 P.S. §§ 7602(b), 7401(3)2.(a)(9)(B), 7603. For the tax years in question, the tax rate was 10 mills. See id. § 7602.
. See also Allied-Signal, Inc. v. Director, Div. of Taxation, 504 U.S. 768, 772, 112 S.Ct. 2251, 119 L.Ed.2d 533 (1992) (state may tax a proportionate share of the income of a nondomiciliary corporation that carries out a particular business both inside and outside that state); Goldberg v. Sweet, 488 U.S. 252, 260-61, 109 S.Ct. 582, 102 L.Ed.2d 607 (1989) (central purpose behind apportionment requirement is to ensure that each state taxes only its fair share of interstate transactions); Container Corp., 463 U.S. at 164, 169, 103 S.Ct. 2933 (state may not "tax value outside its borders”; due process requires fair apportionment of unitary business income); Moorman Mfg. Co. v. Bair, 437 U.S. 267, 273, 98 S.Ct. 2340, 57 L.Ed.2d 197 (1978) (“income attributed to the State for *170tax purposes must be rationally related to values connected with the taxing State”).
In essence, the three-factor apportionment formula represents a balance between a state's revenue raising taxation power and the taxpayer's right to be protected from extraterritorial taxation. See Kraft General Foods, Inc. v. Iowa Dep’t of Revenue, 505 U.S. 71, 112 S.Ct. 2365, 120 L.Ed.2d 59 (1992) (formula serves as mechanism for limiting state tax to the portion of income attributable to business activity within the state); Container Corp., 463 U.S. at 170, 103 S.Ct. 2933 (even though the formula does not produce perfectly accurate taxable income figures, “it has become ... something of a benchmark against which other apportionment formulas are judged”).
. As consistently interpreted and applied by the Department, the property, payroll and sales figures that comprise the three apportionment fractions represent only the property, payroll and sales of the taxpayer itself, and not of the taxpayer’s subsidiaries. See Unisys Corp. v. Commonwealth, 726 A.2d 1096, 1099 (Pa.Commw.1999). Thus, under the Department’s method, the net worth of and dividends paid by certain subsidiaries of a corporation are included in the corporation’s actual value, but the property, payroll and sales of those subsidiaries are not considered in the apportionment factor. See id.
. The rationale for apportioning intangible income when the payor and payee are engaged in a unitary business is that such income is, in substance, the operating income of the unitary enterprise, even though it takes the form of intangible income paid by the subsidiary to its parent. See Mobil Oil Corp. v. Comm'r of Taxes of Vermont, 445 U.S. 425, 440-41, 100 S.Ct. 1223, 63 L.Ed.2d 510 (1980).
. Indeed, the U.S. Supreme Court has endorsed three-factor apportionment formulas "precisely because payroll, property, and sales appear in combination to reflect a very large share of the activities by which value is generated.” Container Corp., 463 U.S. at 170, 103 S.Ct. 2933. It is apparent to me that if property, payroll, and sales are the basic ingredients of a fully functioning company, the same factors necessarily represent the basic ingredients of a unitary enterprise composed of multiple companies. However, the majority allows the Department to have it both ways: it includes the value of subsidiaries in the parent’s apportionable tax base on the theory that the parent and the subsidiary are engaged in a unitary business, but then ignores the unitary business principle by apportioning that value by factors that reflect only the parent’s own operations on a separate company basis. See Randy M. Grimshaw & Maxwell A. Miller, Having Your Cake & Eating It Too: State Taxation of Corporate Intangible Income Without Factor Representations, 1 The State & Local Tax Lawyer 1 (1996).
. The Supreme Court of Maine first reached this conclusion in Tam-brands, Inc. v. State Tax Assessor, 595 A.2d 1039 (Me.1991). As the majority correctly notes, in DuPont the Maine Supreme Court abandoned its internal consistency analysis set forth in Tambrands, but specifically affirmed its prior holding as to the external consistency of an apportionment scheme, stating:
At the same time, we reaffirm the ultimate conclusion in Tambrands that the Assessor's failure to adjust a taxpayer's apportionment factors to reflect the taxpayer's activities both within and without the state of Maine may result in the taxation of extra-territorial value and, therefore, may run afoul of the fairness principles of the Due Process Clause.
DuPont, 675 A.2d at 89. Although the Commonwealth Court below and the Department on appeal here both asserted that the Supreme Court of Maine "abandoned” Tambrands, a careful reading of DuPont clearly refutes that position.
. Although the Commonwealth Court below held that factor representation was not a constitutional requirement for an apportionment formula, it observed:
*174Since the purpose of the formula is to apportion the value of the unitary business enterprise among different jurisdictions, it can hardly be subject to dispute that an apportionment formula which includes data from the entire enterprise will yield a more accurate result than a formula based solely upon the parent corporation's operations.
Unisys, 726 A.2d at 1101.
. The majority in Mobil Oil concluded that the constitutional claim had been waived, and therefore did not address that issue. Mobil Oil, 445 U.S. at 441 n. 15, 100 S.Ct. 1223.
. Additionally, two state taxation scholars have expressed sentiments that I find particularly compelling:
Some state courts have rejected a parent's right to include in its apportionment formula a proportionate share of the subsidiary's factors when payor-payee unity is the predicate for the apportionability of intangible income. They have done so without providing a *175satisfactory explanation of the basis for the rejection. These courts have instead taken refuge in the doctrine that "rough approximation, not precision” is the standard for unconstitutional apportionment; that the application of an apportionment formula will be struck down only if the taxpayer can prove "by clear and cogent evidence” that the income attributed to the state is “out of all appropriate proportion to the business transacted ... in that State” or has "led to a grossly distorted result”; or that the apportionment in question falls "within the substantial margin of error inherent in any method of attributing income among the components of a unitary business.” What these opinions fail to consider, however, is that the "rough approximation” standard is designed to provide states with a "margin of error” in implementing theoretically sound formulas that may on occasion produce results that fall short of perfection. The standard should not be employed as a safe harbor for analytically indefensible apportionment regimes that happen to produce results that are not "grossly distorted” in a constitutional sense.
Jerome R. Hellerstein & Walter Hellerstein, State Taxation, § 9.15[4][a] (3d ed.1998) (footnotes and citations omitted).
. Based on the Department’s calculations, the only circumstance in which Pennsylvania fairly taxes in-state value is if, by mere fortuity, the percentage of ihe parent company's business that is conducted in Pennsylvania happens to correspond with the percentage of the unitary enterprise’s in-state business activity.
. As discussed in the majority opinion, the U.S. Supreme Court has addressed challenges to apportionment formulas using percentage comparisons. However, those cases are irrelevant in the sense of numerical comparison because none dealt with an inconsistency between the tax base and an apportionment formula like in the instant case. Moreover, in my view, when a taxing scheme violates the underlying principle of three-factor formulation, i.e., fair apportionment, requiring proof of gross distortion from that formula is nonsensical.
. Importantly, there is no evidence, or even any allegation, that Unisys presented misleading, inaccurate, or patently false numbers. Rather, the majority concludes that Unisys failed to provide a "proper baseline” in terms of the assets it included in its calculation of capital stock value and, due to the unreasonableness of its calculations, there was no legitimate calculations with which to compare the Department's methodology.
I would also note that the calculations provided by Unisys were part of the stipulations of fact that the parties submitted for administrative and judicial review of the Department’s settlement of the franchise tax assessments in this case.
. Under the statutory formula, yearly net losses are included in calculating book value, but the five-year average of net income cannot be less than zero.
. While the Commonwealth would be left with the unenviable task of producing a specific apportionment formula, I would conclude that if value generated by foreign subsidiaries is used to calculate the capital stock value of a unitary enterprise, there must be some type of factor representation in the apportionment formula in order to calculate a constitutionally fair franchise tax on the in-state business activities of a multi-jurisdictional enterprise. Given this conclusion, I would not *181reach the issue of whether Unisys was entitled to relief under the statutory fair apportionment provisions set forth in 72 P.S. § 7401(3)2.(a)(18).

=== CASE 9737293 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:20:48.630051+00 ===

*181Justice NEWMAN
dissenting.
I respectfully dissent. The taxing scheme employed by the Department of Revenue (Department) is unconstitutional as applied to multi-state business enterprises with subsidiaries, such as Unisys Corporation (Unisys), because there is no rational relationship between the income attributable to this Commonwealth for tax purposes and the activities giving rise to that income within the Commonwealth.
The United States Constitution limits the authority of states to tax businesses that operate both within and without their confines. “Under both the Due Process and the Commerce Clauses ... a state may not, when imposing an income-based tax, tax value earned outside its borders.” Container Corp. of America v. Franchise Tax Board, 463 U.S. 159, 164, 103 S.Ct. 2933, 77 L.Ed.2d 545 (1983) (internal quotation omitted). The Constitution does not “allow a State to tax income arising out of interstate activities — even on a proportional basis — unless there is a minimal connection or nexus between the interstate activities and the taxing State, and a rational relationship between the income attributed to the State and the intrastate values of the enterprise.” Id. at 165-166, 103 S.Ct. 2933 (internal quotations omitted).
I recognize that it is not possible to construct a formula that exactly computes the portion of a business conducted within a specific jurisdiction. International Harvester Co. v. Evatt, 329 U.S. 416, 421, 67 S.Ct. 444, 91 L.Ed. 390 (1947). “[T]he States have wide latitude in the selection of apportionment formulas and that a formula-produced assessment will only be disturbed when the taxpayer has proved by ‘clear and cogent evidence’ that the income attributed to the State is in fact ‘out of all appropriate proportion to the business transacted ... in that State,’ or has ‘led to a grossly distorted result.’ ” Moorman Mfg. Co. v. Bair, 437 U.S. 267, 274, 98 S.Ct. 2340, 57 L.Ed.2d 197 (1978) (quoting Hans Rees’ Sons, Inc. v. North Carolina ex rel. Maxwell, 283 U.S. 123, 135, 51 S.Ct. 385, 75 *182L.Ed. 879 (1931) and Norfolk & Western Ry. Co. v. Missouri State Tax Commission, 390 U.S. 317, 326, 88 S.Ct. 995, 19 L.Ed.2d 1201 (1968)).
Nevertheless, a state seeking to apportion the income of a multi-jurisdictional business must do so fairly, which necessitates that the tax be both internally and externally consistent. Container Corp., 463 U.S. 159, 103 S.Ct. 2933, 77 L.Ed.2d 545. Internal consistency requires that “the formula must be such that, if applied by every jurisdiction, it would result in no more than all of the unitary business’s income being taxed.” Id. at 169, 103 S.Ct. 2933. “This test asks nothing about the degree of economic reality reflected by the tax, but simply looks to the structure of the tax at issue to see whether its identical application by every State in the Union would place interstate commerce at a disadvantage as compared with commerce intrastate.” Oklahoma Tax Commission v. Jefferson Lines, Inc., 514 U.S. 175, 185, 115 S.Ct. 1331, 131 L.Ed.2d 261 (1995). “A failure of internal consistency shows as a matter of law that a State is attempting to take more than its fair share of taxes from the interstate transaction, since allowing such a tax in one State would place interstate commerce at the mercy of those remaining States that might impose an identical tax.” Id.
External consistency requires that “the factor or factors used in the apportionment formula must actually reflect a reasonable sense of how income is generated.” Container Corp., 463 U.S. at 169, 103 S.Ct. 2933. “External consistency ... looks not to the logical consequences of cloning [the internal consistency test], but to the economic justification for the State’s claim upon the value taxed, to discover whether a State’s tax reaches beyond that portion of value that is fairly attributable to economic activity within the taxing State.” Oklahoma Tax Commission, 514 U.S. at 185, 115 S.Ct. 1331. To demonstrate external inconsistency, the taxpayer must demonstrate that the income attributed to the State is disproportionate to the business transacted in the State or has led to a grossly distorted result. See Moorman Mfg., supra.
*183In the case at bar, pursuant to Section 602(b) of the Pennsylvania Tax Reform Code of 1971,1 the Commonwealth imposes a Franchise Tax on out-of-state corporations to the extent that they do business within Pennsylvania. The formula for computing the tax is comprised of two components: (1) Actual Value; and (2) an Apportionment Factor. Actual value for the years at issue here was calculated by averaging the capitalized five year average net income with seventy-five percent (75%) of the net worth and subtracting from that figure a one-hundred thousand dollar ($100,000.00) deductible. Net worth of a parent company such as Unisys includes the value of any common stock the corporation owns in other entities, such as subsidiaries, and dividends received from its stock ownership of those subsidiaries. 61 Pa.Code § 115.27(a) and (b). The Apportionment Factor is determined by calculating the percentages of the corporation’s property, payroll, and sales in the Commonwealth. The value of the corporation’s property within the Commonwealth is divided by the value of the corporation’s property everywhere to ascertain the percentage of property within the Commonwealth. 72 P.S. § 7602(b)(1). The same method is employed to determine the percentages of payroll and sales within the Commonwealth. The Apportionment Factor is equal to the average of these three percentages. The Department then multiplies Actual Value by the Apportionment Factor, and that number by 10 mills to arrive at the Franchise Tax due.
The Department calculates the Apportionment Factor using only the property, payroll, and sales of the parent taxpayer corporation, in this case, Unisys itself, and not of the parent taxpayer corporation’s subsidiaries. However, the Department computes Actual Value using the net worth and dividends not only of the parent taxpayer corporation, but also of its subsidiaries. Thus, while the net worth of the parent taxpayer corporation’s holdings in a subsidiary and any dividends paid to the parent taxpayer corporation by the subsidiary are included in Actual Value, the property, payroll, and sales of those subsidiaries are not included in the calculation *184to determine the Apportionment • Factor. As the majority recognizes, “[ujnlike the methodology utilized to determine the tax base ... the apportionment formula prescribed by the taxing statute, as interpreted by the Department, does not take into account factors representing out-of-state value generated by taxpayer subsidiaries.” Majority Opinion, at 450.
I agree that the taxing scheme at issue here is internally consistent. It is well settled that a three-factor apportionment method, such as the one employed here, is constitutionally acceptable. See Container Corp., 463 U.S. at 165, 103 S.Ct. 2933; Butler Bros. v. McColgan, 315 U.S. 501, 505, 62 S.Ct. 701, 86 L.Ed. 991 (1942) (“We cannot say that property, payroll, and sales are inappropriate ingredients of an apportionment formula. [Tjhese factors may properly be deemed to reflect the relative contribution of the activities in the various states to the production of the total unitary income, so as to allocate to [one state] its just proportion of the profits earned by [taxpayer] from [the] unitary business”). If each jurisdiction calculated Actual Value and the apportionment factor in the same manner as does the Department, the aggregate apportionment factor would equal one hundred percent (100%) as each item of property, payroll, and sales must, by definition, be attributed to one and only one jurisdiction. Thus, all jurisdictions, in toto, would tax no more nor no less than one hundred percent (100%) of the Actual Value of Unisys and its subsidiaries. See E.I. DuPont de Nemours & Co. v. State Tax Assessor, 675 A.2d 82, 89 (Me.1996), overruling Tambrands, Inc. v. State Tax Assessor, 595 A.2d 1039 (Me.1991) (Tam-brands held that a taxing scheme analogous to the one at issue here failed the internal consistency test, but DuPont rejected that analysis. DuPont held that the Tambrands scheme was internally consistent but that the taxing body’s failure to adjust the “apportionment factors to reflect the taxpayer’s activities both within and without the state ... may result in the taxation of extra-territorial value and, therefore, may run afoul of the fairness principles of the Due Process Clause”).
While the taxing scheme employed by the Department in the case sub judice is internally consistent, it is nonetheless *185constitutionally infirm because it is not externally consistent. In Mobil Oil Corporation v. Com’r of Taxes of Vermont, 445 U.S. 425, 100 S.Ct. 1223, 63 L.Ed.2d 510 (1980), the United States Supreme Court was faced with a taxing scheme that did not include in the calculation of the apportionment factor the property, payroll, and sales of Mobil Oil’s subsidiaries, even though the tax was imposed on the value of Mobil Oil and dividends it received from its subsidiaries. A majority of the justices of the United States Supreme Court deemed the issue with which we are presently faced waived and, accordingly, refused to address it. Justice Stevens filed a separate dissenting opinion, in which he concluded that “[ujnless the sales, payroll, and property values connected with the production of income by the payor corporations are added to the denominator of the apportionment formula, the inclusion of earnings attributable to those corporations in the ... tax base will inevitably cause Mobil’s Vermont income to be overstated.” Id. at 461, 100 S.Ct. 1223 (Stevens, J., dissenting). Justice Stevens reasoned that “[e]ither Mobil’s worldwide petroleum enterprise is all part of one unitary business, or it is not; if it is, Vermont must evaluate the entire enterprise in a consistent manner. As it is, it has indefensibly used its apportionment methodology to multiply its share of Mobil’s 1970 taxable income.” Id.
The same concerns are implicated here. The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has the constitutional prerogative to tax Unisys for its income fairly attributable to its in-state activities. This extends to income derived from subsidiaries. However, when determining the percentage of business that the taxpayer corporation conducts in Pennsylvania, fairness and external consistency mandate that the same entities used to determine Actual Value are used to calculate apportionment. Assume, arguendo, that the Actual Value of Unisys is $100 and the actual combined value of Unisys’ subsidiaries attributable to the Actual Value of Unisys pursuant to the taxing scheme is $400. Now assume that Unisys conducts 80% of its business within the Commonwealth and that the subsidiaries conduct 10% of their business within the Com*186monwealth. Pursuant to the Pennsylvania taxing scheme, the Actual Value of the taxable corporation would be $500 and the apportionment factor would be 80% (percentage of business Unisys itself conducts in-state). Thus, Unisys would be liable for tax on $400, even though only $120 of its business is attributable to Pennsylvania (80% of $100 + 10% of $400). In fact, this taxing scheme is only externally consistent when the average percentage of property, payroll, and sales in-state for the parent taxpayer corporation is equal to the average percentage of property, payroll, and sales in-state for the combined subsidiaries.
Therefore, I would hold that the taxing scheme is unconstitutional as applied to multi-state business enterprises with subsidiaries because it has the potential to tax extra-territorial income. Whether or not the tax base is purely unitary or a hybrid is of no moment; the tax base is comprised of the parent corporation and at least some aspects of the subsidiaries. The entity or entities used to determine that tax base should be the same entity or entities used to determine proper apportionment. Had the denominator of the apportionment formula included a part of the subsidiaries property, payroll, and sales reasonably designed to balance out the inclusion of subsidiary factors in the tax base, that would be a different question. In this case, however, the Department makes no such attempt at fair apportionment.
I further disagree with the majority that Unisys has failed to demonstrate by clear and cogent evidence that the Commonwealth is taxing income earned extra-territorially. The majority would put the burden on the taxpayer to devise a reasonable apportionment formula and show how that formula differs from the one actually utilized by the Department. I believe that the burden on the taxpayer is to show: (1) that the current scheme has the potential to impose a tax that is not in reasonable proportion to the business activities conducted by the taxpayer in the Commonwealth; and (2) that the tax imposed in this case is unfair.
Unisys has clearly and cogently established both that the current scheme has the potential to impose a tax that is not in *187reasonable proportion to its in-state business activities and that the tax imposed on Unisys is unfair. Thus, the taxing scheme is constitutionally infirm as applied to multi-jurisdictional businesses with subsidiaries. The inclusion of aspects of the earnings of the subsidiaries in the actual value of the parent taxpayer corporation without an attendant inclusion of aspects of the property, payroll, and sales of the subsidiaries in the calculation of the apportionment factor renders the relationship between the tax base and the parent taxpayer corporation’s business activities conducted within the state unreasonable.
Justice CASTILLE joins in this dissenting opinion.
. Act of March 4, 1971, P.L. 6, as amended, 72 P.S. § 7602(b).

=== CASE 2209697 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:42.390795+00 ===

329 Mass. 179 (1952)
107 N.E.2d 307
MARSHALL C. CAVANAUGH, JUNIOR, & another
vs.
FIRST NATIONAL STORES INC.
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Suffolk.
May 5, 1952.
July 3, 1952.
Present: QUA, C.J., LUMMUS, RONAN, WILKINS, & SPALDING, JJ.
C. Sheldon Williams, (Dalton E. Smart with him,) for the plaintiffs.
Saul L. Kaplan, (Jeremiah W. Mahoney with him,) for the defendant.
LUMMUS, J.
This is an appeal by the plaintiffs under G.L. (Ter. Ed.) c. 231, § 96, from an order of the Superior Court sustaining the demurrer of the defendant to counts 3 and 4 of the declaration on the ground that they do not state a cause of action. In count 3 the minor plaintiff, Marshall C. Cavanaugh, Junior, alleges that on December 25, 1945, while he was a viable child in the womb of his *180 mother, who was six months advanced in pregnancy, his mother ate turkey which had been bought at the defendant's store, which the defendant warranted to be wholesome and fit for human consumption, but which was unwholesome and poisonous, and that as a result the mother became violently ill and the plaintiff was born permanently blind on December 26, 1945. In count 4 his father, Marshall C. Cavanaugh, alleges the same facts, whereby the father has lost the services of the child and has been put to great expense.
The earliest and leading case upon the right of a child to recover for an injury to him before his birth is Dietrich v. Northampton, 138 Mass. 14, decided by this court in 1884, in which the opinion was written by Mr. Justice Holmes. In that case the mother slipped and fell on a highway in the defendant town when she was between four and five months advanced in pregnancy. As a result, the child was born prematurely, and lived only fifteen minutes. It was held that an action of tort by the administrator of the child, for causing its death, could not be maintained.
Since that case, a majority of courts before which the question has arisen whether a child can recover for prenatal injury have followed the lead of the Dietrich case. Stanford v. St. Louis-San Francisco Railway, 214 Ala. 611 (1926). Allaire v. St. Luke's Hospital, 184 Ill. 359 (1900). Smith v. Luckhardt, 299 Ill. App. 100 (1939). Newman v. Detroit, 281 Mich. 60 (1937). Buel v. United Railways, 248 Mo. 126 (1913). Drabbels v. Skelly Oil Co. 155 Neb. 17 (1951). Stemmer v. Kline, 128 N.J.L. 455 (1942). Berlin v. J.C. Penney Co. Inc. 339 Pa. 547 (1940). Gorman v. Budlong, 23 R.I. 169 (1901). Magnolia Coca Cola Bottling Co. v. Jordan, 124 Texas, 347 (1935). Lipps v. Milwaukee Electric Railway & Light Co. 164 Wis. 272 (1916), semble. Walker v. Great Northern Railway Co. of Ireland, 28 L.R. (Ir.) 69 (1891). The foregoing is the rule of the Restatement. Restatement: Torts, § 869. See also Winfield, "The Unborn Child," 8 Camb. L.J. 76 (1942).
Within recent years a body of contrary authority has been *181 built up, allowing recovery by a child for prenatal injury. Tucker v. Howard L. Carmichael & Sons, Inc. 208 Ga. 201 (1951). Damasiewicz v. Gorsuch, 197 Md. 417 (1951). Verkennes v. Corniea, 229 Minn. 365 (1949), 10 A.L.R. (2d) 634 and note. Woods v. Lancet, 303 N.Y. 349 (1951). Williams v. Marion Rapid Transit, Inc. 152 Ohio St. 114 (1949), 10 A.L.R. (2d) 1051 and note. Jasinsky v. Potts, 153 Ohio St. 529 (1950). Bonbrest v. Kotz, 65 Fed. Sup. 138 (1946). Montreal Tramways v. Leveille, [1933] 4 D.L.R. 337. This result is approved in Prosser, Torts (1941) 189, 190.
In November, 1950, the question came again before this court in Bliss v. Passanesi, 326 Mass. 461. In that case we sustained a demurrer to a declaration which alleged that the plaintiff's intestate, while a viable child in her mother's womb, was injured by the defendant's negligence, was born prematurely, and died after conscious suffering. Since that decision it is true that the highest courts of Georgia and New York have refused to follow the Dietrich case, the Court of Appeals of New York overruling an earlier decision following that case. As lately as 1950 we decided not to depart from the Dietrich rule. The plaintiffs attempt to distinguish the present case from our earlier decisions because in the present case the child has attained the age of more than six years and is still living. But we cannot think that a sound ground for a legal distinction. We are not prepared to overrule our earlier decisions, which began nearly seventy years ago. Mabardy v. McHugh, 202 Mass. 148, 151-152.
The cause of action of the father depends upon that of the child, and needs no separate discussion. Thibeault v. Poole, 283 Mass. 480. Mikaelian v. Palaza, 300 Mass. 354. Barboza v. Decas, 311 Mass. 10, 13-14. Reynolds v. Jacobucci, 317 Mass. 500, 505. Mendes v. Costa, 326 Mass. 608, 610-611.
Order sustaining demurrer affirmed.
Judgment for the defendant.

=== CASE 2209698 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:42.407851+00 ===

182 Cal. App. 2d 150 (1960)
ELAINE FOX HARTSOOK, Appellant,
v.
THE OWL DRUG COMPANY (a Corporation), Respondent.
Civ. No. 24207.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. One.
June 24, 1960.
Joseph Schecter, Robert F. Diekman and Toxey H. Smith for Appellant.
Crider, Tilson & Ruppe and Henry E. Kappler for Respondent.
WOOD, P. J.
This is an action for damages for personal injuries allegedly occurring when a plastic toy top, which plaintiff was spinning, allegedly exploded and cut plaintiff's nose and eye. In a nonjury trial, judgment was for defendant. Plaintiff appeals and contends, in effect, that the evidence was insufficient to support the finding that there was no breach of warranty.
Mrs. Fox testified, as follows: She is the mother of plaintiff. On July 5, 1948, while she (witness) was leaving her home for the purpose of shopping downtown in Los Angeles, her daughter, who was then 13 years of age, asked her to buy a toy (for the daughter). About 6 p.m. of that day, she (witness) went into the store of defendant at Sixth and Broadway Streets and told the clerk therein that she "would like to buy something for my daughter where she won't get hurt." The clerk referred to a display of toys and said, "How about these?" The witness asked if they were safe. (Those toys were plastic tops, known as "Blo-Yr-Top.") The clerk replied, "Yes." The witness bought one of those tops and paid 20 cents for it. The top was placed in a paper bag. She (witness) left the store, entered a bus, and went home. When she was in the kitchen of her home she told the daughter that she had bought a present for her. Then she (witness) "put the stuff away that I had, groceries, or whatever it was," and she said to the daughter, "I will show you how it works." She put the top on her (witness') "hands and spun it, and I had it humming, and when it stopped I handed it to her and she started to spinning and it just started to humming and it *152 exploded like a firecracker, and of course, injured her." The toy "shattered into pieces all over," and the daughter's nose and eye were cut. She took the daughter to a hospital. Also, she delivered some of the pieces of the top to the hospital so that the doctors could see what had cut the daughter.
It was conceded that the plaintiff lost the sight of her right eye.
Mrs. Fox was asked by counsel for plaintiff, as follows: "Did you do anything to the top or anything of that nature from the time you bought it until you were showing it to your child?" She replied, "No, sir."
A broken plastic toy, consisting of a string and 10 pieces of the toy, were received in evidence as Exhibit 2. The pieces of the toy which were delivered to the hospital were not returned to Mrs. Fox. An unbroken toy, which was of the same type as the broken toy, was received in evidence as Exhibit 3.
Plaintiff testified, as follows: When she was injured she was 13 years of age, and at the time of trial she was 23 years of age. On July 5, 1948, when her mother was starting to town, she (witness) asked her mother to get something for her because she had not had anything for the 4th of July. When her mother returned from town about 7 p.m. on July 5, 1948, she (mother) had a toy which she showed to plaintiff while they were in the kitchen. Her mother "took it [toy] in her hands and spun it until it hummed a little bit and then she handed it to me; I in turn took the toy, started spinning it and pulling and it was starting to hum, and it just blew up, exploded." The toy did not strike anything while her mother was demonstrating it; and it did not strike anything while plaintiff was spinning it. When the top exploded she (plaintiff) could see it "coming into" her face. She went to a hospital and a surgical operation was performed. She lost the sight of her right eye.
One of the attorneys for plaintiff testified that on July 13, 1948, plaintiff was one of his clients; shortly after Mrs. Fox talked to him about the injury to plaintiff, he wrote a letter to the Owl Rexall Drug Company (a copy of the letter was received in evidence as Exhibit 4); shortly after the letter was sent, he received a telephone call from a person who identified himself "as being from Owl Rexall Drug Company"; the man stated that he had received the letter and had checked the article mentioned and had found that it was an "outside product"; the man also stated that he (witness) should contact the manufacturer, and that defendant would not pursue *153 the matter any further because there was no liability on its part.
No witness was called by defendant.
Plaintiff was married on November 18, 1951. The complaint was filed November 3, 1953. A first amended complaint was filed January 24, 1957. The case was tried on May 21, 1958.
The court found: Plaintiff was 13 years of age on July 5, 1948. On that date a toy known as "Blo-Yr-Top" was purchased by plaintiff's mother from defendant for use of her daughter, the plaintiff. The defendant knew that the toy when sold in the usual course of trade would be used by children. On said date, after purchasing the toy, plaintiff was playing with it in a normal manner, without negligence on her part, when it broke and disintegrated. At the time of the breaking and disintegrating of the toy, a piece or pieces of it struck plaintiff in the face, causing the loss of sight of one eye. Within a reasonable time after the accident, i.e., on July 13, 1948, written notice was given to defendant on behalf of plaintiff of the alleged breach of warranty as to the toy. It was not true that there was a breach of warranty, express or implied, by defendant with respect to the toy. It was not true that the toy was defective at the time of the sale. It was not true that at the time of the sale the toy was not fit for the intended use thereof. The defendant sold the toy to be used as a toy and defendant warranted the performance thereof in its intended use as a toy by the terms printed on the toy as follows: "Whirl a few times then pull on string and listen to it whistle and sing"; but the court finds there was not any breach of warranty, either express or implied.
Appellant contends, in effect, that the evidence was insufficient to support the finding that there was no breach of warranty. She argues that there was evidence that the toy was defective at the time of the sale because the toy was fully accounted for from the time it was bought until the time it disintegrated; that the evidence was undisputed that the condition of the toy was not changed from the time of its purchase until the accident; that the mother and daughter testified that the toy did not strike anything and was not damaged; the mother demonstrated the toy and handed it to her daughter; the daughter pulled the string as it was designated to be pulled, and the toy was defective because it disintegrated.
At a hearing upon objections to proposed findings, the trial judge stated, in effect, that his decision was based on the *154 failure of plaintiff to account for the manner in which the article (toy) was cared for from the time it was bought until it was taken home. He also said that the mother went home on the bus and she carried other articles she had purchased, which articles apparently were groceries.
After the matter had been submitted for decision, a card was sent to the parties, whereon it was stated that judgment would be for defendant; and the writing thereon included a citation of the case of Trust v. Arden Farms Co., 50 Cal. 2d 217 [324 P.2d 853]. Appellant seems to be of the opinion that the decision of the trial court in the present case was based solely on the Trust v. Arden Farms case. That citation, which was a part of a memorandum announcing the decision, was preceded by the abbreviation "cf." It does appear, by reason of the citation, that the trial court regarded legal principles of the cited case as applicable in the present case, but the citation does not necessarily signify that the trial court based its decision solely on that case. It is to be noted that in the Trust v. Arden Farms case a judgment of nonsuit was affirmed; whereas, in the present case the judgment appealed from is a judgment on the merits. In other words, in the present case it appears that the trial court determined the facts, with respect to breach of warranty, in the light of legal principles involved in the cited nonsuit case.
In Trust v. Arden Farms Co., supra, a milk bottle, which plaintiff was handling, broke and injured plaintiff. The bottle of skim milk involved therein, and other bottles of milk, had been delivered in a container to the porch of plaintiff's home three days before the accident, and plaintiff had carried the container (and the bottles therein) into the house and had wiped the bottles and put them in the refrigerator. Bottles of older milk in the refrigerator were moved forward on the shelf and the bottles of fresh milk, except the skim milk, were placed behind them. The bottle of skim milk was placed at the front of the shelf. After the bottle of skim milk had been delivered, it was removed at least once by plaintiff and some of the contents had been used. In that case the court said, at page 222: "[I]t is clear that any of plaintiff's three children, having as they did access to the refrigerator at all times, may have struck the bottle of skim milk with another bottle and damaged it prior to the time of the accident, or it may in some other manner or fashion have been damaged." It was also said therein (p. 222): "[I]t is clear ... that there is a complete hiatus as to what, if anything, happened to the bottle *155 between the time it was placed in the refrigerator by plaintiff and the time the injury occurred." It was also said therein, at page 223: "There was no evidence that the bottle was defective when delivered by Arden to plaintiff, and therefore there is no basis for claiming any breach of warranty."
In the present case, as above shown, the judge stated that his decision was based on the failure of plaintiff to account for the manner in which the toy was cared for from the time it was bought until it was taken home. [1a] The burden was on plaintiff to prove the condition of the toy. The court found that the toy was not defective at the time of the sale. [2, 1b] The mother testified to the effect that when she arrived home she "put the stuff away" that she had with her, such as "groceries or whatever it was." The trial judge could reasonably infer from her testimony that she carried groceries and other things, in addition to the toy, while she was returning from defendant's store to her home, which return included traveling on a bus. Under such circumstances, the trial court could reasonably have concluded that the toy might have been struck and damaged by some other object prior to the time of the accident or in some other manner have been damaged. Ten years elapsed from the time of the accident to the time of trial. The trial court could reasonably find that plaintiff had not carried the burden of proving that, prior to the accident, the toy remained in the same condition it was in at the time it was purchased. [3] Even though no witness was called by the defendant, the court was not required to find according to the testimony on behalf of plaintiff. [4, 5] In Tidlund v. Seven Up Bottling Co., 154 Cal. App. 2d 663 [316 P.2d 656], it was said, at pages 666-667: "[T]he jury, in passing upon the credibility of a witness, is entitled to consider his interest in the result of the case, his motive, and the manner in which he testifies [citations], and the jury may disbelieve the testimony of the witness even though it is uncontradicted if there is any rational ground for doing so." A factual question was presented for the determination of the trial judge. The evidence was sufficient to support the findings.
Respondent asserts, in effect, that in any event since no privity of contract existed between plaintiff and defendant, there was no liability for the claimed breach of warranty. In view of the above conclusion, it is not necessary to determine this contention of respondent. *156
Also, in view of the above conclusion, it is not necessary to discuss other contentions on appeal.
The judgment is affirmed.
Fourt, J., and Lillie, J., concurred.

=== CASE 3784357 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2016-07-06 07:34:04.50854+00 ===

In this action the plaintiff in error, Mabel Weaver, recovered a judgment in the court of common pleas of Lucas county entitling her to participate *Page 466
in the state insurance fund. Upon prosecution of error proceedings in the Court of Appeals of Lucas county that court reversed the action of the court of common pleas, for the reason that the court of common pleas erred in admitting in evidence certain verbal statements as to the occurrence and nature of the alleged injury made to certain persons by Charles Weaver, the decedent, and also for the reason that the court of common pleas erred in refusing to charge the jury upon the request of the defendant as follows:
"Defendant requests that the court charge the jury that not only must the injury arise out of and be connected with the employment, but that the death must appear to be the proximate result of the injury, or if there was acceleration of death, that that acceleration must be the proximate result of the injury."
Upon both of these points the judgment of the Court of Appeals must be affirmed.
The statements in question in the cases where they are definitely fixed as to time were made the next day after the accident, or subsequently thereto. Under the statute in its present form they were admissible only if they constituted a part of the res  Hence these statements lacked the element of spontaneity essential to make them admissible under the rule. 22 Corpus Juris, 451.
With reference to the second ground for reversal, the trial court erred in not giving the charge requested. Section 1465-82, General Code, which governs this case, provides:
"In case the injury causes death within the period of two years, the benefits shall be in the amount and to the persons following * * *."
Under this provision the plaintiff in an appeal case from a denial of award by the Industrial Commission for death of a workman or employe has to establish that the injury was the proximate cause of the death, or was the proximate cause of the acceleration of *Page 467
death. West Side Coal  Mining Co. v. Industrial Commission,321 Ill. 61, 151 N.E. 593; Springfield District Coal MiningCo. v. Industrial Commission, 303 Ill. 455,135 N.E. 789.
Judgment affirmed.
MARSHALL, C.J., JONES, MATTHIAS, DAY, ALLEN and KINKADE, JJ., concur.
STEPHENSON, J., not participating.

=== CASE 2209746 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:43.158209+00 ===

182 Cal. App. 2d 364 (1960)
GEORGE MacLEOD et al., Respondents,
v.
CITY OF LOS ALTOS et al., Appellants.
Civ. No. 18661.
California Court of Appeals. First Dist., Div. One.
July 1, 1960.
Anthony A. Lagorio for Appellants.
MacLeod & Gunn for Respondents. *366
DUNIWAY, J.
The city of Los Altos and certain of its officials appeal from a judgment entitled "Permanent Injunction," by which appellants are enjoined from applying or enforcing, or attempting to apply or enforce, a certain ordinance against plaintiffs. The latter are officers of, and sue on behalf of, the Los Altos Democratic Council, a voluntary association affiliated with the Democratic Party, and organized as a non-profit association for political purposes. The matter was heard on a demurrer to the complaint and a notice of motion (order to show cause) for a preliminary injunction. By consent of the court and the parties, the hearing was converted into one on the merits, and certain stipulations were made for that purpose.
From the pleadings and stipulations the facts appear as follows: The plaintiffs desire to do "precinct work" and to solicit funds on behalf of the Los Altos Democratic Council and the Democratic Party, and this involves house to house canvassing and solicitation in the city of Los Altos. The city claims that such activities violate its Ordinance Number 18, adopted March 10, 1953, as amended by Ordinance Number 88, of January 17, 1956, and Ordinance Number 151, of April 1, 1958. It is stipulated that the city will not attempt to prevent the distribution of literature or the visiting of homes for the purposes of political discussion or persuasion, but that it will attempt to enforce the ordinance against plaintiffs if they undertake, in the course of such visiting, to solicit funds.
On October 2, 1956, and on August 6, 1957, plaintiffs asked the city council for permission to solicit, which was refused. No further application for a permit to solicit has been made to the city council, and no application for a permit was made to the chief administrative officer following the amendment to the ordinance of April 1, 1958.
The court wrote an opinion in which it held (1) that the ordinance does not apply to plaintiffs and (2) that if it does apply, it is unconstitutional. Since we agree with the court that the ordinance does not apply to plaintiffs, we refrain from discussing the constitutional question. [1] We should not undertake to determine the constitutionality of a statute or ordinance unless it is necessary to the decision of the case to do so. (Palermo v. Stockton Theatres, Inc., 32 Cal. 2d 53, 65-66 [195 P.2d 1].)
[2a] We agree with Judge Owens' reasoning as to the construction of the ordinance, and adopt portions of his opinion relating to that question: "In order to consider adequately these contentions, it is necessary first to advert to the *367 ordinance itself. The ordinance known as Ordinance No. 18 was enacted by the city of Los Altos on March 10, 1953 and is entitled 'An Ordinance Regulating the Practice of Soliciting of Business Within the City of Los Altos Including Door-to-Door Sales and Fixing Penalties for the Violation and Provision for the Enforcement Thereof.' The Sections of this ordinance as enacted on March 10, 1953 and which are pertinent hereto are as follows:"
"Section 1: Subject to Section 8 hereafter, the practice of being in and upon private residences in the City of Los Altos, California, by solicitors, peddlers, hawkers, itinerant merchants and transient vendors of merchandise for the purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise and/or for the purpose of disposing of and/or peddling or hawking the same is hereby declared to be a nuisance and punishable as such nuisance as a misdemeanor."
"Section 8: This Section of the Ordinance provides that any person convicted of or perpetrating a nuisance as described and prohibited herein or any person practicing unlawfully the solicitation of business as provided herein without having obtained a permit therefor and paid the license fees as required herein shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine of not less than $25.00 or more than $300.00 or imprisonment for not less than 5 days or more than 30 days in the Santa Clara County Jail or by both such fine and imprisonment."
"Section 9: This last Section reads as follows: Nothing in this ordinance contained shall prohibit or prevent the City Council of the City of Los Altos from granting a permit for any form of solicitation to any person or entity for a non-profit and community, or recreational, or religious, or charitable, or educational, or similar purpose, and deemed in the interest and welfare of the City of Los Altos and the residents thereof."
"This ordinance was subsequently amended on January 17, 1956, as indicated above but only in immaterial particulars. The ordinance was further amended on April 1, 1958. This amendment of April 1, 1958 referred solely to Section 9 as quoted above and amended Section 9 in these particulars: First, it transferred from the City Council to the City's Chief Administrative Officer the authority to grant or to withhold a permit. Second, it required the applicant for a permit to file an application form setting forth various detailed items of information. ... Third, the Chief Administrative Officer thereafter shall issue the permit whenever he finds certain facts to exist. ... *368"
"I. Is the ordinance applicable by its terms to the plaintiffs in their proposed activity? The ordinance in question is frequently referred to as a 'Green River' ordinance due to the fact that the first of its type was enacted in the City of Green River. Its intended purpose as appears from the preamble of the ordinance as quoted above is to regulate the practice of door-to-door solicitation of business for the purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise and of disposing of or peddling or hawking the same. ... It will be noted, however, that the only prohibitory language of the ordinance even as amended is that contained in Section 1 quoted above and that the prohibition therein expressly contained is limited to solicitation for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise. These are the acts which are expressly declared to constitute nuisances and punishable as misdemeanors if indulged in without first obtaining a permit and for which the penalty of Section 8 is imposed of either fine or imprisonment or both. The penalty imposed by Section 8 is limited to any person convicted of or perpetrating a nuisance as described and prohibited herein. It is clear that Section 1 neither makes any reference to nor prohibits any solicitation of a non-commercial nature and in particular of any solicitation of a political nature only. If it were intended to include within the prohibition of the ordinance solicitation for political purposes and to make such solicitation a misdemeanor, such intention can only at best be drawn as an inference or innuendo from the language of Section 9. This, however, is a penal ordinance. [3] It is axiomatic in our law that in a penal ordinance or statute in order to comply with the constitutional requirement of due process of law, the crime itself which is prohibited and punishable as such must be clearly defined. It cannot be left to inference, implication, innuendo or surmise. Even if Section 9 of the ordinance could be construed by some process of inference as adding to the list of prohibitory acts enumerated in Section 1 and also making the provisions of Section 8 applicable thereto, the language of Section 9 itself becomes so vague and uncertain as to leave a reasonable doubt whether it would include activities of a political nature such as the plaintiffs propose to indulge in. [2b] Section 9 after reference to 'religious, charitable or educational purposes' contains only the additional phrase 'or similar purpose.' Whether or not a solicitation for political purposes would be deemed a similar purpose to religious, charitable or educational purposes is a matter upon which there might well be *369 reasonable dispute. It is the opinion of this Court, therefore, that the ordinance here in question is not applicable to the activity proposed to be engaged in by the plaintiffs."
[4] It is urged that, under Penal Code, section 4, the ordinance is not to be strictly construed, but that all parts of it must be construed together, and with a view to the object to be obtained. (Cf. People v. Oviedo, 106 Cal. App. 2d 690, 693 [235 P.2d 612].) Our construction of the ordinance does not conflict with this rule. Appellants must rely upon section 9 of the ordinance, and it contains no independent prohibition. Construed with section 1, it can only be held, at most, to require a permit for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise by the organizations described. Plaintiffs do not propose to sell anything. It is still the rule that a penal statute must clearly prohibit the particular conduct to which it is claimed to apply, and this ordinance does not contain any such prohibition as applied to plaintiffs' activities. (Market Basket v. Jacobsen, 134 Cal. App. 2d 73 [285 P.2d 344].) [5] "A liberal construction does not mean enlargement of the plain provisions of the law." (Mulville v. City of San Diego, 183 Cal. 734, 739 [192 P. 702]; and see In re Twing, 188 Cal. 261, 264-265 [204 P. 1082]; De Mille v. American Fed. of Radio Artists, 31 Cal. 2d 139, 156 [187 P.2d 769, 175 A.L.R. 382].)
[6] But, say appellants, plaintiffs did not exhaust their administrative remedy under section 9, by applying for a permit. The short answer is that, because the ordinance does not apply to plaintiffs' activities, the administrative remedy set up by it has no application to them. Thus they had no administrative remedy to seek. Consequently, the cases on which appellants rely (United Insurance Co. v. Maloney, 127 Cal. App. 2d 155 [273 P.2d 579]; Abelleira v. District Court of Appeal, 17 Cal. 2d 280 [109 P.2d 942, 132 A.L.R. 715]) do not apply.
[7] Finally, it is contended that the injunction was improperly issued, by reason of the provisions of Code of Civil Procedure, section 526, and Civil Code, section 3423, which prohibit the issuance of an injunction "To prevent the execution of a public statute, by officers of the law, for the public benefit." These sections, however, do not apply when the activity sought to be enjoined is an attempt to apply a statute or ordinance to conduct not within its terms. (Financial Indem. Co. v. Superior Court, 45 Cal. 2d 395, 402 [289 P.2d 233], passim; Eaton v. Klimm, 217 Cal. 362, 371-373 [18 P.2d 678]; Staley v. Board of Medical Examiners, 109 Cal.App.2d *370 1, 5- 6 [240 P.2d 61]; Hughson Condensed Milk Co. v. State Board of Equalization, 23 Cal. App. 2d 281, 283-284 [73 P.2d 290]; Greenfield v. Board of City Planning Commrs., 6 Cal. App. 2d 515, 518 [45 P.2d 219]; cf. Bueneman v. City of Santa Barbara, 8 Cal. 2d 405, 407-408 [65 P.2d 884, 109 A.L.R. 895].) The Bueneman case invokes the well established rule that the enforcement of a statute or ordinance that is unconstitutional and hence void may be enjoined. That, however, is not the only type of case in which an injunction may issue to prevent the enforcement of an ordinance. The injunction issues in such a case for the reason that, the ordinance being void, the defendants are not enforcing a public statute, but are acting without authority. The appellants here are acting without authority also, not because of the claimed invalidity of the ordinance, but because it does not by its own terms, apply to the plaintiffs.
Affirmed.
Bray, P. J., and Tobriner, J., concurred.

=== CASE 3784359 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2016-07-06 07:34:04.730708+00 ===

The first question to be decided is whether it was erroneous for the Court of Appeals to overrule the motion of the defendant to dismiss the petition in error on the grounds that the state had no right or authority to prosecute such a proceeding in this case, and that the Court of Appeals was without jurisdiction to hear and determine the matter.
This phase of the controversy is greatly simplified by reason of the fact that the defendant makes no claim of former jeopardy under Section 10 of Article I of the Constitution of Ohio. This makes it unnecessary *Page 5
to do more than advert to Section 6 of Article IV of the Constitution which provides that: "The courts of appeals shall have * * * appellate jurisdiction * * * to review, affirm, modify or reverse the judgments of the courts of common pleas." This language contains no intimation of a distinction between civil and criminal cases, and is so simple, unambiguous and comprehensive as to require no construction; and of course under the Constitutional Amendments of 1912 the established judicial powers of the Court of Appeals may in nowise be delimited by statute. Chandler  Taylor Co. v. Southern PacificCo., 104 Ohio St. 188, 135 N.E. 620; Cincinnati Polyclinic v.Balch, 92 Ohio St. 415, 111 N.E. 159. Therefore the ruling of the Court of Appeals in this respect was manifestly correct.
The second question involves the contention of the defendant that Section 710-174, General Code, is violative of the due process clause of Article XIV of the Amendments to the federal Constitution in that it is vague, indefinite and uncertain especially because of the use of the term "insolvent" without providing a definition thereof. The defendant insists that this unfortunate statutory deficiency is fatal inasmuch as the case law of Ohio likewise fails to supply a satisfactory definition. This feature of the case is not discussed in the brief of the state.
It is of course true that at least two distinct meanings have been accorded to this term. Generally it is used broadly to denote the insufficiency of the entire property and assets of an individual to pay his debts. It is also employed in a more restricted sense to express the inability of a person to pay his debts as they become due in the ordinary course of his business. 22 Ohio Jurisprudence, 113; 14 Ruling Case Law, 628. Then in Volume 5 Ohio Jurisprudence at page 492, under the subject of banks the following statement appears: *Page 6
"As a matter of law, a banking company is considered solvent, when it has on hand sufficient securities and funds to pay all its debts and liabilities; and it is considered insolvent when its debts and liabilities exceed all its assets."
This is sometimes called the "bankruptcy" rule. In Ballentine's extremely useful law dictionary appears the following definition:
"It may be used to denote the insufficiency of the entire property and assets of an individual to pay his debts, which is its general meaning and its meaning as used in the present National Bankruptcy Act."
Likewise in Webster's New International Dictionary the first definition, given is: "Not having sufficient estate to pay one's debts."
A helpful discussion is found also in the annotation beginning on page 1160 of volume 81 A. L. R.
It seems that on at least two occasions the Legislature of Ohio has attempted a definition of the word. In the Uniform Sales Act in Section 8456, subsection 3, General Code, appears the following restricted definition:
"A person is insolvent within the meaning of this chapter who either has ceased to pay his debts in the ordinary course of business or can not pay his debts as they become due, whether he has committed an act of bankruptcy or not, and whether he is insolvent within the meaning of the federal bankruptcy law or not."
Then in Section 13108-1, General Code, in the penal code chapter on frauds the following broad definition is employed with reference to the receipt of money or other property by an insolvent broker:
"A person shall be deemed insolvent within the meaning of this act whenever the aggregate of his property shall not, at a fair valuation, be sufficient in amount to pay his debts."
Although neither of these statutory definitions is in *Page 7
anywise related to Section 710-174, General Code, and is therefore not decisive of the instant question, nevertheless it is at least interesting to note that the only definition found in the penal code provides for the use of the term in its broader and less restricted sense.
It seems that the only instance in which this court has spoken on the subject was in the early case ofMitchell v. Gazzam, 12 Ohio, 315. This was a chancery action in which the complainants asked an accounting and other equitable relief with reference to an allegedly fraudulent assignment made in contemplation of insolvency. Although this was in pre-syllabus days, nevertheless there is a headnote to the case. However, this headnote or syllabus makes no reference to the following language appearing in the opinion on page 336:
"Counsel have labored [to define] the meaning of the term insolvency. In the mercantile sense, it means a person unable to pay his debts according to the ordinary usages of trade. But in the broad sense used by the statute, it means a person whose affairs have become so deranged that he is unable to pay his debts as they fall due; and if, from such a deranged state of his affairs, and the sense of inability to meet his moneyed engagements, he should transfer his property to a trustee to pay his debts, we should regard such assignment as made in contemplation of insolvency, and within the meaning of the statute."
In any event, until such time as the Legislature may indicate that in Section 710-174, General Code, this word is employed in other than its usual and broader meaning, this court is required to follow the settled rule that words in common use will be construed in their ordinary acceptation and significance and with the meaning commonly attributed to them. 37 Ohio Jurisprudence, 542. As was well said by Judge Price in his opinion in the case of Beverstock v. Board of Education,75 Ohio St. 144, on page 149, 78 N.E. 1007, *Page 8
a statute cannot be held void for uncertainty if any reasonable and practical construction can be given to its language. Mere difficulty in ascertaining its meaning, or the fact that it is susceptible of different interpretations, will not render it nugatory. It is the duty of courts to endeavor by every rule of construction to ascertain the meaning of, and give full force and effect to, every enactment of the General Assembly not obnoxious to constitutional prohibition.
The lower courts were correct in their view that this statute is not vague, indefinite or uncertain and therefore void under the due process clause of Article XIV of the Amendments to the federal Constitution.
The third and final question requiring discussion relates to the defendant's contention that this entire matter is resjudicata as distinguished from former jeopardy. This view was sustained by the trial court in overruling the demurrer of the state to the defendant's plea in abatement, which the court treated as a plea in bar. However, the Court of Appeals held the principle of res judicata inapplicable.
The basis of the plea in abatement (plea in bar) is the alleged and conceded fact that an indictment similar to the instant one had been returned against the defendant more than a year previously, and a demurrer to all four counts of this earlier indictment had been sustained on the ground that the facts stated were insufficient to constitute an offense under the laws of Ohio. In the plea in abatement in the instant case it is further averred that the trial court in the earlier case held Section 710-174 inapplicable to a director of a bank; that therefore judgment was rendered therein dismissing the proceeding and discharging the defendant; and that this earlier judgment remains unmodified and unreversed.
It must be remembered that there are no common-law crimes in Ohio. 12 Ohio Jurisprudence, 48; Vanvalkenburg v. State,11 Ohio, 404; Mitchell v. State, *Page 9 42 Ohio St. 383. It is likewise ordinarily true that the General Assembly has provided its own definitions and procedure with the result that criminal procedure in this state is regulated entirely by statute. 12 Ohio Jurisprudence, 49; Winn v. State,10 Ohio, 345; Municipal Court of Toledo v. State, ex rel.Platter, 126 Ohio St. 103, 184 N.E. 1. Therefore the search for the answer to this question must be conducted accordingly.
In preempting these fields of both substantive and procedural criminal law the General Assembly in Section 13440-2, General Code, has provided the following five pleas that may be entered to an indictment: 1. Guilty; 2. Not guilty; 3. A former judgment of conviction or acquittal of the offense; 4. Once in jeopardy; 5. Not guilty by reason of insanity. The only one here relied upon by the defendant is the latter part of the third. Was there a "judgment of acquittal of the offense" in this case? This requires a study of Sections 13440-6 and 13440-7, General Code, which read as follows:
"If the defendant was formerly acquitted on the ground of variance between the indictment or information and the proof, or if the indictment or information was dismissed upon an objection to its form or substance, or in order to hold the defendant for a higher offense, without a judgment of acquittal, it is not an acquittal of the same offense.
"Whenever the defendant is acquitted on the merits, he is acquitted of the same offense notwithstanding any defect in form or substance in the indictment or information on which the trial was had."
The first of these sections provides that "it is not an acquittal of the same offense" "if the indictment * * * was dismissed upon an objection to its form or substance * * * without a judgment of acquittal." This is supplemented by the converse provision *Page 10
in the next section which makes it clear that the term "acquittal" means "on the merits" and after "trial * * * had." The question is thus reduced to whether the defendant was acquitted on the merits and after trial had.
The defendant contends that the trial court used the word "discharged" as synonymous with "acquittal," that there was a determination "on the merits," and that a "trial" was had. However, this court finds it is in disagreement with these contentions — especially the last one. According to the great weight of authority the word "trial" connotes something more than the determination of a preliminary matter; ordinarily it is considered as relating to the process by which the question of guilt or innocence is adjudicated. That this is the Ohio rule is indicated by Section 13442-8, General Code, which provides that the first step in a trial in a criminal case shall be the opening statement by counsel for the state. Other sections of the penal code employ the word in the same sense, and they are not thereby violative of the due process clause of Article XIV of the Amendments to the Constitution of the United States.
It is contended further by the state that under the circumstances of this case the defendant is estopped to assert the defense of res judicata, and a number of authorities are cited in support thereof. However, the views already expressed make it unnecessary to further prolong this already extended discussion by a consideration of this question.
But in conclusion there is another and peculiar phase of the history of this controversy that should be noted. As has been stated, the defendant in his plea in abatement averred that the judgment relating to the earlier indictment remains unmodified and unreversed. The correctness of this statement is difficult to determine because of the inevitable confusion resulting *Page 11
from the provisions of Sections 13446-2 and 13446-4, General Code, which purport to confer upon this court the power for a direct review of the decisions of the Court of Common Pleas without the usual preliminary intermediate step of a review by the Court of Appeals as provided by Sections 2 and 6 of ArticleIV of the Constitution of Ohio. In this instance the Prosecuting Attorney was apparently deceived into thinking that these statutes have abridged the power of the Court of Appeals to review the judgments of the Court of Common Pleas in criminal cases in which the element of former jeopardy is not involved. In any event he did not seek a review in the Court of Appeals but instead filed a bill of exceptions in this court which then proceeded to go through the formality of disagreeing with the views of the Court of Common Pleas. This action was reported in 126 Ohio St. 381, in which but two members of this court concurred in the view that this statute is constitutional. Nevertheless under the peculiar provisions of Section 2 of Article IV of the Constitution there were insufficient concurrences to hold the statute unconstitutional. Then a majority of the court held that a director of a bank is an officer thereof.
Was this a reversal of the Court of Common Pleas? These statutes provide that the decree of this court shallnot affect the judgment of the Court of Common Pleas in said
cause, but they also contain the further provision that the decree of this court shall determine the law to govern in asimilar case. Just what sort of process is this? It has been said that this is not an exercise of judicial power. Of course it could not well be argued otherwise inasmuch as this power is concededly controlled by the Constitution alone, except in the case of revisory jurisdiction of the proceedings of administrative officers. But if the power involved in these statutes is not judicial, what is it? Legislative? Certainly not the latter, because all courts insistently *Page 12
deny any indulgence in judicial legislation. Then what becomes of the axiom that the exclusive sources of law are the legislative and judicial processes? To escape the horns of this dilemma it has been said further that these statutes are valid, not as conferring jurisdiction, but as prescribing, a rule ofprocedure and practice. Manifestly this cannot possibly be other than a patently fallacious statement inasmuch as these statutes make no distinction whatsoever between substantive and procedural law; it is provided simply that the decision of this court shall determine the law to govern in a similar case. Of course courts have inherent power to promulgate procedural rules, but it is equally well settled that such is not the case with reference to substantive law. Although the purpose of these statutes is a laudable one, it is apparent that they are in conflict with Sections 2 and 6 of Article IV of the Constitution of Ohio and therefore void. Paragraph three of the syllabus in the case of State v. Cameron, 89 Ohio St. 214,106 N.E. 28, paragraphs one and three of the syllabus in the case of State v. Kassay, 126 Ohio St. 177, and paragraph one of the syllabus in the case of State v. McNary,126 Ohio St. 381, are overruled.
The court adheres to the view that under the provisions of Section 710-174, General Code, a director of a bank is an officer thereof.
The judgment of the Court of Appeals is affirmed.
Judgment affirmed.
STEPHENSON, MATTHIAS, DAY and ZIMMERMAN, JJ., concur.
WILLIAMS, J., concurs in the judgment and in all paragraphs of the syllabus excepting paragraph 12.
JONES, J., concurs in paragraphs 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 9, 11 and 12 of the syllabus, but dissents from the judgment. *Page 13

=== CASE 2209778 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:43.645849+00 ===

182 Cal. App. 2d 602 (1960)
6 Cal. Rptr. 320
ANNE ELIZABETH GOTTSDANKER, a Minor, etc., et al., Plaintiffs and Appellants,
v.
CUTTER LABORATORIES (a Corporation), Defendant and Appellant. JAMES RANDALL PHIPPS, a Minor, etc., et al., Plaintiffs and Appellants,
v.
CUTTER LABORATORIES (a Corporation), Defendant and Appellant.
Docket Nos. 18413, 18414.
Court of Appeals of California, First District, Division Two.
July 12, 1960.
*604 Belli, Ashe & Gerry for Plaintiffs and Appellants.
Max Thelen, Jr., Paul R. Haerle and Thelen, Marrin, Johnson & Bridges, as Amici Curiae on behalf of Plaintiffs and Appellants.
Moses Lasky, Robert S. Daggett, Brobeck, Phleger & Harrison, Keith, Creede & Sedgwick, Wallace E. Sedgwick, Scott Conley, James L. Gault and Sedgwick, Detert, Moran & Arnold for Defendant and Appellant.
*605 William Barclay Lex, Peart, Baraty & Hassard, Howard Hassard, Paul L. O'Brien, Arthur B. Hanson and John K. Worley, as Amici Curiae on behalf of Defendant and Appellant.
DRAPER, J.
Two children contracted poliomyelitis shortly after being inoculated with Salk vaccine manufactured by defendant. On the premise that defendant's vaccine caused the illness it was designed to prevent, an action for damages was brought in behalf of each child. The actions were consolidated for trial. Jury verdicts were in favor of the two children for a total of $139,000, and for their parents for $8,300 in special damages.
There is substantial evidence to sustain a finding that the vaccine contained live virus of poliomyelitis, and that the injected vaccine caused the disease in each child. The essence of plaintiffs' claim is not that the vaccine failed to prevent polio, but that it actually and directly caused it.
Three causes of action were submitted to the jury in each case. One was in negligence, one for breach of an implied warranty of merchantability and one for breach of implied warranty of fitness for the intended purpose. But only two forms of verdict were presented to the jury in each case, one for the plaintiff generally, without separation of the causes of action, and one for the defendant.
In returning its verdicts for plaintiffs, however, the jury drew a thoughtful and careful statement, setting forth that the jury had first considered the issue of negligence, and had "from a preponderance of the evidence concluded that the defendant, Cutter Laboratories, was not negligent either directly or by inference."
"With regard to the law of warranty, however, we feel that we have no alternative but to conclude that Cutter Laboratories came to market ... vaccine which when given to plaintiffs caused them to come down with poliomyelitis, thus resulting in a breach of warranty. For this cause alone we find in favor of plaintiffs."
In accordance with this jury statement, judgments were entered in favor of plaintiffs on the two causes of action for breach of implied warranty, and in favor of defendant on the counts for negligence. Defendant appeals from the judgments against it. Plaintiffs appeal from the judgments against them on the causes of action for negligence, asserting that the jury's written statement must be disregarded as surplusage, *606 leaving only the signed verdict forms in favor of plaintiffs on the complaints generally, and that the evidence is insufficient to support verdicts against plaintiffs on the issue of negligence.
Defendant's appeal squarely presents the question whether implied warranties of merchantability and of fitness apply under the facts of this case.
The vaccine administered to each child was purchased by a doctor from a pharmacy in a sealed bottle or ampule. In one case the hypodermic injection of the vaccine was made by a doctor, in the other by a nurse under a doctor's direction. Neither doctor was joined as a defendant. One pharmacy was joined, but later dismissed. Thus the judgments are against defendant pharmaceutical manufacturer only.
A principal question is whether defendant manufacturer can be liable upon implied warranty in the absence of direct sale from it to plaintiffs. [1] Historically, liability in implied warranty sounds in tort, and it can be reasoned that the true basis of such recovery now lies in tort, rather than contract (see Prosser on Torts, 2d ed., 493). Nonetheless, "privity of contract" (i.e., direct sale from defendant to plaintiff) remains a requirement for implied warranty liability in substantially all American jurisdictions. This rule is followed in California as to most manufactured products (Burr v. Sherwin-Williams Co., 42 Cal. 2d 682 [268 P.2d 1041]), although the modern trend is to modify the strictness of the requirement in some situations (Peterson v. Lamb Rubber Co., 54 Cal. 2d 339 [5 Cal. Rptr. 863, 353 P.2d 575]). [2] However, where the product is food for human consumption, a number of jurisdictions have recognized an exception to the privity requirement. In such cases, it is held that the manufacturer or initial seller may be held liable to the ultimate consumer even though there have been intermediate sales by one or more dealers. Although this is the minority rule, it is followed in some 15 to 18 states. (Prosser on Torts, 2d ed., 508-9; 1 Williston on Sales, rev. ed., 647-8.)
California clearly accepted this exception in 1939. (Klein v. Duchess Sandwich Co., Ltd., 14 Cal. 2d 272 [93 P.2d 799].) The court flatly rejected the contention that an implied warranty in food cases runs "only from an immediate seller to an immediate buyer." The court reviewed cases from other jurisdictions and pointed out that varying theories are advanced in support of the exception. Klein particularly emphasizes the public policy of requiring that only wholesome food be sold for human consumption. The rule continues *607 to be followed in California. (Vaccarezza v. Sanguinetti, 71 Cal. App. 2d 687 [163 P.2d 470].)
[3] In view of the established California rule that the consumer of a food product may recover from the manufacturer upon implied warranty, is there any reason to apply a different rule to the vaccine here involved? We think not. The vaccine is intended for human consumption quite as much as is food. We see no reason to differentiate the policy considerations requiring pure and wholesome food from those requiring pure and wholesome vaccine. Some significance may attach to the fact that Klein (p. 277) quotes a decision (Rachlin v. Libby-Owens-Ford Glass Co., 96 F.2d 597, 600) which states that the privity exception extends to "medicines and foodstuffs." Klein also relies upon the several pure food and drug acts as indicating the public policy which underlies the rule. We can conceive of no reason for applying the rule to foodstuffs which does not equally extend to drugs. The vaccine here involved is, like food products, designed solely for introduction into the body of a human being.
The fact that the entry is made by injection rather than ingestion in no way alters the premise that each is for human consumption  each enters the human system. In fact, the digestive system has means of rejecting or minimizing the effects of many toxic compounds taken orally. Such defenses are much less available as against harmful elements introduced into the system by hypodermic injection.
We find no decision directly upon the point. Defendant cites trial court decisions from other jurisdictions (Russo v. Merck & Co., 138 F. Supp. 147; Wechsler v. Hoffman-La Roche, Inc., 99 N.Y.S.2d 588; Dumbrow v. Ettinger, 44 F. Supp. 763) holding that blood plasma or drugs are within the privity requirement. But all these jurisdictions apply the requirement of privity in all implied warranty cases, without exception. Thus, these decisions are of no aid here, where the real question is whether the food exception reasonably should apply to vaccine.
In this jurisdiction which holds that the implied warranties run with food products to the ultimate consumer we find no reason to exclude drugs from the rule. We have no hesitance in holding that the absence of privity does not bar recovery on implied warranty from the manufacturer of the vaccine here in issue.
[4] Defendant, however, contends that even if privity is not required, there can be an actionable implied warranty *608 only if the plaintiff is himself a purchaser. It says that in the absence of a sale to and a purchase by the plaintiff, there is no "vehicle to carry an implied warranty" by the manufacturer. Upon this premise, it cites cases from other jurisdictions for the rule that the furnishing of blood by a hospital carries no implied warranty because it constitutes a rendition of service, and not a sale of the blood. (Perlmutter v. Beth David Hospital, 308 N.Y. 100 [123 N.E.2d 792]; Gile v. Kennewick Public Hospital District, 48 Wash. 2d 774 [296 P.2d 662, 59 A.L.R. 2d 761].) The latter case is not strong, because the true claim of plaintiff was that the hospital had been negligent in typing the blood of the decedent. Thus recovery was barred by the Washington statute exempting hospital districts from liability for negligence. Perlmutter, however, does stand for the proposition urged. Defendant next argues, by analogy, that the transaction between doctor and plaintiff in each of our cases is not a sale. We are more ready to accept the analogy than the basic argument. In any event, we assume that there was no sale of defendant's vaccine from the doctor who administered or supervised the inoculation to either plaintiff herein. However, we cannot agree that this disposes of the case.
It seems clear that the implied warranties of fitness and of merchantability are enforceable only against a seller. These warranties are based upon the code provision (Civ. Code, § 1735) adopted as a part of the Uniform Sales Act. But it is of the essence of the food exception to the privity rule (which we have held equally applicable to vaccines) that the sale need not be from the manufacturer to the consumer. While the manufacturer of foods or drugs is not liable as a warrantor unless he has made a sale, we see no reason to hold that he escapes liability because the ultimate consumer, whose use of the product is the essential consideration in its manufacture for the market, is not a purchaser under a contract of sale. It is significant that in the leading California case permitting warranty recovery without privity in food cases (Klein v. Duchess Sandwich Co., Ltd., supra, 14 Cal. 2d 272), the plaintiff was not the purchaser. Her husband had bought the sandwich which she ate. In another decision on this subject (Vaccarezza v. Sanguinetti, supra, 71 Cal. App. 2d 687), two of the three plaintiffs were minors, and their parents appear to have been the purchasers of the food there involved. While each of these cases involved family relationship of purchaser and consumer-plaintiff, this does not appear to have been *609 a controlling factor. In Klein, the court emphasized (p. 284) that "the warranty extended to every consumer," by italicizing the words "every consumer." The vaccine here used was manufactured for the express purpose of supplying doctors who would inject it into the bodies of persons seeking inoculation against poliomyelitis. Clearly it is the patient, and not the doctor, who is the ultimate consumer of the vaccine. [5] While a sale is essential to impose liability under the implied warranties, the initial sale to distributor or retailer of pharmaceuticals is sufficient to impose upon the manufacturer the responsibility of fulfilling the implied warranties which run to the benefit of the persons whom the manufacturer intended to be, and who in fact became, the "consumers."
[6] Defendant argues further, however, that distribution of its vaccine cannot, under the code, be deemed a sale. The section relied upon (Health & Saf. Code, § 1623) provides that "The procurement, processing, distribution or use of whole blood, plasma, blood products, and blood derivatives for the purpose of injecting or transfusing the same ... into the human body" is and shall be construed to be "the rendition of a service by each and every person, firm or corporation participating therein," and "shall not be construed to be, and is declared not to be, a sale... for any purpose ... whatsoever."
This section, adopted at the 1955 session of the Legislature, may well stem from the decision in Perlmutter v. Beth David Hospital, supra, 308 N.Y. 100 [123 N.E.2d 792], which was filed December 31, 1954. But if this be true, and if we accept defendant's contention that the code section is designed to bar the application of implied warranties to the products described in the section, defendant's case is not aided, for the evidence does not remotely suggest that the vaccine here used is within the compass of the code section. At most, it is claimed that horse serum, a component of horse blood, is used as part of a culture medium for the growth of cells of monkey kidney tissue, to which poliomyelitis virus is added, allowed to grow and multiply, and then is inactivated to form the vaccine. This is a far cry from the "whole blood, plasma, blood products, and blood derivatives" which the statute declares not to be the subject of sale.
The code section upon which defendant relies is contained in the chapter entitled "biologics." The definition of biologics *610 (Health & Saf. Code, § 1601), in addition to "whole blood and blood derivatives," includes "serum, vaccine, live vaccine, killed vaccine, tissue vaccine, autogenous vaccine, live virus, killed virus" and many others. It strains construction unreasonably to suggest that the Legislature, in choosing from this long list the products whose distribution would not constitute a sale, meant to include in the language of section 1623 a vaccine developed in part from a culture including serum. Much more apt language could be chosen from the legislative definition of biologics. The exclusion of this language from section 1623 is significant, and disposes of defendant's contention that the latter section prohibits consideration of the vaccine here in issue as the subject of a sale.
Even less tenable is defendant's contention that section 1623 is in some way designed to exclude biologics generally from application of the sales act and the implied warranties imposed by it.
[7a] Defendant argues that printed "directions" accompanying boxes of its vaccine constituted an express warranty, and thus negative the existence of any implied warranty. But "An express warranty ... does not negative a warranty ... implied under this act unless inconsistent therewith" (Civ. Code, § 1735, subd. (6)). Wholly aside from the question whether the directions constitute an express warranty within the statutory definition (Civ. Code, § 1732), they must be inconsistent with the implied warranties to have the effect contended for by defendant. [8] The mere making of an express warranty, however detailed, does not negate the implied warranties except to the extent that it is inconsistent with them (1 Williston on Sales (rev. ed.) 625-628). [9] We must bear in mind that "(a)n express warranty is generally executed for the protection of the buyer, not to limit the liability of the seller" (1 Williston, supra, 626). [7b] We find nothing in the "directions" inconsistent with the implied warranties of fitness and merchantability. The bulk of the printed material deals with the lack of preservatives in the vaccine, dosage, and means of administration, none of which in any way relate to the facts in issue in this case.
[10] Defendant relies upon the statement of the directions that "This vaccine is prepared in accordance with the requirements of the National Institutes of Health of the U.S. Public Health Service," and the further statement that "Local and other untoward reactions have been very minimal using this material." In the context of the directions as a *611 whole, it is impossible to find in this language a disclaimer that the vaccine is fit for its purpose and is merchantable. The word "minimum" which is used by the Public Health Service to modify the word "requirements" in its own statement is significantly omitted. The phrase "local and other untoward reactions" hardly is sufficient to suggest the presence of live polio virus. In fact, the directions themselves contain the statement "The virus is inactivated with formaldehyde." Thus the directions in no way imply the presence in the vaccine of live poliomyelitis virus. On the contrary, they affirmatively represent that the virus has been inactivated, and thus are completely consistent with the implied warranties here in issue.
We find no way to conclude from the directions that they were intended by defendant to negative the implied warranties that the vaccine was wholesome and free from active virus. A fortiori, there is no reason to conclude that the directions imparted to plaintiffs, their parents or their doctors any such impression. The directions do contain a clear disclaimer as to the efficacy of the vaccine, but that is not an issue here. Plaintiffs do not claim that the vaccine failed to protect them against poliomyelitis. They do assert that the vaccine itself caused the disease.
Defendant contends that there was no reliance upon its skill and judgment. Although this argument would seem to apply only to the warranty of fitness for a particular purpose, rather than to that of merchantability (see Civ. Code, § 1735) it cannot avail here. The issue of reliance was submitted to the jury and, on substantial evidence, determined adversely to defendant.
[11] Defendant strongly argues that public policy will best be served by denying recovery in warranty for "new" drugs. The argument is that development of medicines will be retarded if manufacturers are held to strict liability for their defects. While this argument might have merit if the warranty involved had to do with the mere failure of a medicine to cure or of a vaccine to prevent, it seems to be of but little weight where, as here, the warranty is limited to an assurance that the product will not actively cause the very disease it was designed to prevent. In any case, defendant's own argument is that the Legislature has indicated a full awareness of the problem by the statute (Health & Saf. Code, § 1623) providing that the distribution of blood and blood plasma is not a sale. If a sound public policy requires *612 extension of this exception to biologics generally, or to polio vaccine specifically, the argument properly is one for the Legislature. For the courts to extend the legislative exemption would, in view of the statutory recognition of the problem, amount to judicial legislation.
[12] Defendant asserts error in the refusal of the trial court to instruct as to the responsibility of a manufacturer to one unusually susceptible to poliomyelitis. But there is no evidence whatever to suggest, even remotely, any such susceptibility on the part of either plaintiff here. Thus, the instruction was properly refused.
The foregoing discussion disposes of the bases of all the points urged by defendants. Thus it is unnecessary to discuss in detail the many refinements and developments of those points raised in the briefs.
Defendant's vaccine contained live and active poliomyelitis virus. Thus the vaccine was not "wholesome"  it was neither merchantable nor fit for its intended purpose. The jury expressly found that the inoculation of plaintiffs with this vaccine caused them to suffer poliomyelitis. There is substantial evidence to sustain this finding.
No party suggests that on the facts of these cases the measure of damage under the negligence count differs from that under the causes of action for breach of warranty. In view of our affirmance of the judgments on the warranty theory, it is unnecessary to consider plaintiffs' appeal from the judgments adverse to them on the negligence issue.
Judgments affirmed.
Kaufman, P.J., and Good, J. pro tem.,[*] concurred.
The petitions of plaintiffs and appellants and of defendant and appellant for a rehearing were denied August 11, 1960, and their petitions for a hearing by the Supreme Court were denied September 7, 1960.
NOTES
[*]   Assigned by Chairman of Judicial Council.

=== CASE 9737300 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:21:13.150348+00 ===

KAUFMAN, P. J.
Plaintiff, Lloyd G. Hickey, Jr., a minor, through his guardian ad litem, brought this action for personal injuries sustained when he came in contact with a mowing machine operated by the defendant, Tosta, an employee of the defendant, Santos, on a field owned by the defendant, W. T. Nulty. At the close of the plaintiff’s case, the trial court granted a judgment of nonsuit in favor of the defendant Nulty.
The only issue on appeal is the propriety of the judgment of nonsuit in favor of the defendant Nulty, the landowner. Plaintiff argues that the trial court erred in granting the judgment of nonsuit as the plaintiff presented sufficient substantial evidence so that the applicability of section 339 of the Restatement of Torts became a question of fact for the jury and that the fact that the defendants, Santos and Tosta, were independent contractors does not affect the liability of the landowner. The defendant Nulty argues that as the employer of an independent contractor, the negligence of the other defendants cannot be imputed to him, and, that under the circumstances of this case, section 339 of the Restatement of *239Torts is completely inapplicable and only sections 413 and 416 are relevant.
The record here reveals the following: the accident occurred about 5 :40 p. m. on April 29, 1958, at which time, the plaintiff was 2 years and 9 months old. On the date of the accident, the defendant Nulty was the absentee owner of a 46-acre tract of unimproved land in the city of Concord in Contra Costa County. This was a portion of the defendant’s once larger holding, the balance of which has been subdivided for homes. When the adjoining land was subdivided the defendant filed a map showing that portions of the vacant land had been dedicated for streets. The remainder of the property had been sold by the defendant in 1955 but the title revested in him on March 18, 1958, on default of the buyers. The plaintiff and his parents lived at 4137 Lillian Drive in Concord, on one of the 40-odd homes built on the portion subdivided. Their home adjoined the defendant's unimproved holding; there were no fences.
The vacant land on which the accident occurred had been farmed in past years but had not been planted the year of the accident and bore a volunteer hay crop. Some time in March, 1958, Nulty made arrangements with the defendant Santos for the cutting of the volunteer crop. Nulty agreed to let Santos harvest the crop in return for a 25 per cent share. It is admitted, however, that Santos was not an agent ■ of Nulty but an independent contractor who used his own machines. It is not disputed that Nulty did not know exactly when Santos was going to cut the hay and that he did not warn Santos about the children in the vicinity.
Santos and his employee, Tosta, began to cut the hay about 11 a. m. with two tractors mounted with horizontal sickle bars, driven by a power take-off from the tractors. The hay was about 3 feet high. They soon became aware of the children in the area; a boy rode through the field on a bicycle and several other boys sold cold drinks to the two tractor drivers. Other children started from one of the homes into the field and were sent back. Some time in the afternoon, Santos gave a ride to his school-age nephew. On the day of the accident, Santos told the Concord police: “All day long, while we were cutting hay, we had to keep chasing children from field we were cutting. Several times we stopped mowing machines to tell children to go home.”
The tractors drove one behind the other in circles around the field, mowing strips of hay the width of the sickle bar. *240Some time in the process, they cut three legs off a cat. By the late afternoon, the entire field was mowed except for an area about 75 feet by 150 feet located behind the back yard of the plaintiff’s home. The accident occurred about 220-225 feet from the rear of the Hickey back yard where the hay was sparse. Santos testified: “. . . Joe was cutting hay ahead of me when he ran mowing machine into little boy laying in hay. Boy was laying down in uncut hay directly in path of mowing machine operated by Joseph Tosta ...” Tosta applied the brakes immediately and Santos picked up the boy and carried him to the nearest house which was his home. The boy’s right arm was cut off and was found some distance from the scene of the accident. There was a trail of blood behind the sickle.
The boy’s parents testified that they had lived in the house at the edge of the defendant’s property since July, 1957; that the children of the area played in the defendant’s field and had made paths in it on their way to school and church. There was no evidence that the defendant had notice of this fact or that he had been on the property between March 10, 1958, and the date of the accident. On the afternoon of the accident, they were in their back yard with the boy. They were aware that the mowing was in process and did not know that the boy was not in the yard with them until after the accident when Santos brought him through the hole in the hedge.
A nonsuit may be granted only where, disregarding conflicting evidence on behalf of the defendant and giving to the plaintiff’s evidence all the value to which it is legally entitled, therein indulging in every legitimate inference which may be drawn from that evidence, the result is a determination that there is no evidence of sufficient substantiality to support the verdict on any tenable theory of liability. (Reynolds v. Willson, 51 Cal.2d 94, 99 [331 P.2d 48].)
As a general rule, the owner of land is under no duty to keep his premises safe for trespassers. (Peters v. Bowman, 115 Cal. 345, 348 [47 P. 113, 598, 56 Am.St.Rep. 106].) The evidence in this case does not suggest that the plaintiff occupied any position other than that of a trespasser. It is argued, however, that when the evidence is viewed in accordance with the above stated rules relating to nonsuits, the liability of the defendant Nulty under the exception to the general rule, usually referred to as the attractive nuisance doctrine, is clear. The conditions necessary to bring this doctrine into play as *241stated in section 339 of the Restatement of Torts have been adopted as the law of this state with respect to the liability of a possessor of land for injury to a child trespasser. (King v. Lennen, 53 Cal.2d 340 [1 Cal.Rptr. 665, 348 P.2d 98] ; Garcia v. Soogian, 52 Cal.2d 107 [338 P.2d 433] ; Courtell v. McEachen, 51 Cal.2d 448 [334 P.2d 870] ; Reynolds v. Willson, 51 Cal.2d 94 [331 P.2d 48].)
Section 339 provides as follows:
“A possessor of land is subject to liability for bodily harm to young children trespassing thereon caused by a structure or other artificial condition which he maintains upon the land, if
“(a) the place where the condition is maintained is one upon which the possessor knows or should know that such children are likely to trespass, and
“(b) the condition is one of which the possessor knows or should know and which he realizes or should realize as involving an unreasonable risk of death or serious bodily harm to such children, and
“(c) the children because of their youth do not discover the condition or realize the risk involved in intermeddling in it or in coming within the area made dangerous by it, and
“(d) the utility to the possessor of maintaining the condition is slight as compared to the risk to young children involved therein. ’ ’
Whether there is a concurrence of all the foregoing conditions or factors is generally a question of fact (Copfer v. Golden, 135 Cal.App.2d 623 [288 P.2d 90]), since different inferences may be drawn from the evidence as to the existence of one or more of these required conditions. Plaintiff’s argument is, of course, that the jury should have been permitted to decide whether the defendant Nulty was liable. We cannot agree. Assuming arguendo that the boy because of his tender years, was in fact unaware of the danger, the evidence would nevertheless be insufficient to warrant the liability of the landowner.
Before liability may be imposed under section 339, evidence must be presented which would support a determination that the defendant knew or should have known that children who would not appreciate the danger involved were likely to trespass upon the property. (Rest., Torts, 339 (a) and (b).) In the instant case, there is no evidence that the defendant Nulty actually knew that children had been accustomed to play in his field. It has never been held that the landowner *242is required to police his premises or to make any inquiry to discover whether there is a likelihood that children will trespass. (47 Cal.L.Rev. 427, 451.)
Even if the defendant knew that children lived in an area adjacent to his field, he could reasonably assume that youngsters old enough to be allowed to venture unattended would be cognizant of the hazards presented by the mowing machines. Plaintiff attempts to argue that because of the great danger, the defendant Nulty owed a duty to the boy. However ‘‘ ‘ The presence of danger to an unattended infant is not necessarily a test of anything but the need of parental care. An infant is afraid of nothing and in danger of everything when left to his own devices. The primary duty of care is upon the parents of an infant. (Citing case.) Their neglect will not convert a situation admittedly dangerous to an infant into an attractive nuisance which would not be so classed as to older children. ’ ” (Wilford v. Little, 144 Cal.App.2d 477 at p. 482 [301 P.2d 282].)
While we do not impute the negligence of a parent to the child, it would be entirely reasonable for the defendant Nulty to believe that children of the age of Lloyd G. Hickey, Jr., who were so young that they could not appreciate the danger of the mowing machine, would not have the opportunity to roam the field alone. (Cf. Davis v. Goodrich, 171 Cal.App.2d 92 [340 P.2d 48].)
As to the fourth requirement of section 339, there is a question whether the presence of the mowing machines on the defendant’s land constituted an “artificial condition” which, if the other requirements were met would subject the defendant to liability. The question is one of first impression. In the earlier authorities, the doctrine of section 339 was severely limited to certain kinds of artificial conditions. (See Woods v. City & County of San Francisco, 148 Cal.App.2d 958 [307 P.2d 698], for an excellent summary.) The more recent cases, however, have extended its application to all kinds of conditions not previously considered within the scope of the doctrine. (See for example, King v. Lennen, 53 Cal.2d 340 [1 Cal.Rptr. 665, 348 P.2d 98] [swimming pool] ; Courtell v. McEachen, 51 Cal.2d 448 [334 P.2d 870] [burning embers] ; Helguera v. Cirone, 178 Cal.App.2d 232 [3 Cal.Rptr. 64] ; Woods v. City & County of San Francisco, 148 Cal.App.2d 958 [307 P.2d 698].) Our Supreme Court has stated several times that the question of liability must be decided in the light of all circumstances and not by arbitrarily *243placing cases in rigid categories on the basis of the type of condition involved. (King v. Lennen, 53 Cal.2d 340, 343 [1 Cal.Rptr. 665, 348 P.2d 98]; Garcia v. Soogian, 52 Cal.2d 107 [338 P.2d 433].)
The universal rule appears to be that the doctrine of section 339 does not apply to moving vehicles. (See Wilson v. City of Long Beach, 71 Cal.App.2d 235 [162 P.2d 658, 163 P.2d 501], and authorities collected in 3 A.L.R.2d 758*.) On the other hand, the doctrine has generally been held to apply to moving machinery on the premises. (See, for example, Woods v. City & County of San Francisco, 148 Cal.App.2d 958 [307 P.2d 698] ; Brown v. Reliable Iron Foundry, Inc., 174 Cal.App.2d 294, 298-299 [344 P.2d 633], and cases collected in 62 A.L.R.2d 898.) The instant ease appears to fall somewhere in the middle between these two lines of authorities. However, on the basis of the record before us, we are unable to say that the trial court improperly concluded that the doctrine relied upon was inapplicable.
The few authorities our research has uncovered support our view. In Preston v. Austin (1919), 206 Mich. 194 [172 N.W. 377], the minor plaintiff, five years of age, lived opposite the farm of the defendant. The plaintiff first watched the defendant fixing a mowing machine and conversed with him. After the conversation, the defendant drove his mowing machine to the northwest corner of the house where grass was growing while the plaintiff, of his own volition, got the mail from the mailbox and took it to the back door on the south side of the house. The defendant ran into the plaintiff with his machine and cut off his left foot completely. The defendant testified that he did not know the child was in the grass and did not see him until the machine struck him. At the close of the plaintiff’s case, the court directed a verdict in favor of the defendant on the ground that no negligence was shown and that the question of whether the defendant was in the exercise of due care was a matter of law under the evidence. On appeal, the plaintiff, like the plaintiff here, argued that *244the issue of due care was for the jury and that the principle of active negligence should apply. In affirming the judgment, the court said at 379 [172 N.W.] :
“We think that before the principle of active negligence can apply, some duty must rest upon the defendant which is violated by his conduct or act. There is no claim that the defendant knew that the plaintiff was down in the grass. From whatever angle we view the case, it ultimately brings us back to the one question: Was there any duty resting on the defendant, under the facts shown in the record, to keep a lookout for this child? We are of the opinion that this question should be answered in the negative. ’ ’
The case, however, preceded section 339 of the Restatement of Torts and the attractive nuisance doctrine was not discussed.
More recently, the Supreme Court of Tennessee held in Heaton v. Kagley (1955), 198 Tenn. 530 [281 S.W.2d 385], that the attractive nuisance doctrine did not apply in a situation where a 7 year old boy came onto an adjoining farm and climbed and rode a tractor-trailer unit and was knocked therefrom by a falling bale of hay, even though the farmer knew he was riding on the tractor along with the farmer’s son. In reversing the lower court (which had held the attractive nuisance doctrine applicable), the Supreme Court of Tennessee said at 387 [281 S.W.2d] :
“We know of no case holding that a hay field, or the operation of a tractor-trailer in hauling hay from the field, is such an attractive nuisance that the owner is charged with the duty of warning all children of the neighborhood to stay out; or carry on his farm work with such care and diligence that these children will not suffer any injury. One of the principal elements in determining if an object, place or condition is an ‘attractive nuisance’ is that the possessor should recognize it as involving an unreasonable risk of harm to children. He is liable ' only if he has reason to believe that there will be danger to them. ’ Prosser on Torts, p. 622. The operation of farm machinery by the owner upon private property has never been thought of as an attractive nuisance.”
The court then went on to say at 389: “We are unwilling to give our assent to the contention that a tractor, and other pieces of farm machinery, are, as a matter of law, an attractive nuisance. For us to do so would convert every hay field in the State, where a tractor or other mechanical equipment is being used, into a place of potential danger, and subject *245every owner of such premises to liability in damages for his failure to keep children away from his premises.”
We think this reasoning is particularly applicable here, particularly in the light of the fourth requirement of section 339, that “the utility to the possessor of maintaining the condition is slight as compared to the risk to young children involved therein.” The utility of farm machinery is beyond a question. The uncontroverted evidence showed that the defendant Nulty owned a 46-acre tract; and that the cost of fencing was about $l,500-$2,000 per mile. In all of the cases relied upon by the plaintiff, the fourth requirement was easily met. Here, we must draw the line at a situation where the protective measure would destroy or impair the usefulness of the property itself. (Puchta v. Rothman, 99 Cal.App.2d 285, 289, 290 [221 P.2d 744].)
Plaintiff, relying on Courtell v. McEachen, 51 Cal.2d 448 [334 P.2d 870], also argues that the defendant Nulty may be liable as the employer of a negligent independent contractor, under the exceptions set forth in sections 413 and 416* of the Restatement of Contracts. However, the very authority cited by the plaintiff points out at page 457 that these sections require knowledge of the employer himself concerning the existence of a risk to others, so that a showing of such knowledge must be made regardless of what the independent contractor may have known. As indicated above, no such showing was made here. It would appear, therefore, that the general rule is that the employer of an independent contractor is not responsible for the latter’s negligence in the operation of a vehicle (Clarke v. Hernandez, 79 Cal.App.2d 414 [179 P.2d 834] ; Pire v. Gladding McBean & Co., 55 Cal.App.2d 108 [130 P.2d 143, 981]), where the operations occur on his own land *246(Barrabee v. Crescenta Mutual Water Co., 88 Cal.App.2d 192 [198 P.2d 558]; Bedford v. Bechtel Corp., 172 Cal.App.2d 401 [342 P.2d 495] ; Rest., Torts, § 426), unless he exercises active control over the employees or equipment used by the independent contractor. (McDonald v. Shell Oil Co., 44 Cal.2d 785 [285 P.2d 902].) As indicated above, the uncontroverted evidence here showed that the defendant exercised no control over Santos or his equipment or employees.
Therefore, since the facts in this case, as shown by the plaintiff’s evidence, demonstrate the inapplicability of the doctrine of section 339 of the Restatement of Torts and no other basis of liability was suggested by plaintiff’s evidence, the nonsuit as to the defendant Nulty was properly granted.
Judgment of nonsuit affirmed.
The only two authorities to the contrary are (1) Skinner v. Knickrehm, 10 Cal.App. 596 [102 P. 947], where the attractive nuisance doctrine was held to apply to a house moving operation on the streets of Los Angeles on the ground that the property on which the accident occurred was left unattended and unguarded. This case was later disapproved and not followed in Wilson v. City of Long Beach, 71 Cal.App.2d 235 [162 P.2d 658, 163 P.2d 501]; (2) Middaugh v. Waseca Canning Co., 203 Minn. 456 [281 N.W. 818], 3 A.L.R.2d 770, which like the Skinner case involved children hitching rides on moving vehicles.
‘‘ § 413. One who employs an independent contractor to do work which the employer should recognize as necessarily creating, during its progress, conditions containing an unreasonable risk of bodily harm to others unless special precautions are taken, is subject to liability for bodily harm caused to them by the absence of such precautions, if the employer
‘‘ (a) fails to provide in the contract that the contractor shall take such precautions (as to which see § 416), or
“ (b) fails to exercise reasonable care to provide in some other manner for the taking of such precautions. ’ ’
‘‘ § 416. One who employs an independent contractor to do work, which the employer should recognize as necessarily requiring the creation during its progress of a condition involving a peculiar risk of bodily harm to others unless special precautions are taken, is subject to liability for bodily harm caused to them by the failure of the contractor to exercise reasonable care to take such precautions. ’ ’
Assigned by Chairman of Judicial Council.

=== CASE 2209775 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:43.59305+00 ===

182 Cal. App. 2d 176 (1960)
COUNTY OF CONTRA COSTA, Appellant,
v.
CENTRAL CONTRA COSTA SANITARY DISTRICT, Respondent.
Civ. No. 18688.
California Court of Appeals. First Dist., Div. One.
June 27, 1960.
Charles L. Hemmings, Chief Civil Deputy District Attorney, for Appellant.
John A. Bohn and Charles J. Williams for Respondent.
BRAY, P. J.
Plaintiff appeals from a judgment denying its prayer for reimbursement of cost of relocating and reconstructing a portion of defendant's sanitary sewer facility.
Question Presented
Priority of defendant's sewer line over plaintiff county's bridge and Contra Costa County Flood Control and Water Conservation District's easement for drainage.
Record
The developers of a subdivision in Contra Costa County known as Gregory Gardens constructed in 1950 a sewer line in Grayson Creek and in the fall of that year defendant sanitary district accepted it. In June, 1951, said developers recorded maps of Gregory Gardens Unit Number 5 and Unit Number 7. By these maps Harriet Drive, which crosses Grayson Creek, was offered to the county as a street. The offer was accepted by the board of supervisors and the Harriet Drive Bridge was constructed over the creek and the sanitary district's sewer. The two units are separated by the center line of Grayson Creek. The 20-foot strip of each unit respectively adjoining said center is marked on the map "drainage reserve." In 1957 the flood control district planned the deepening of Grayson Creek which necessitated the relocation of the sanitary district's sewer line at the bridge. At the request of the flood control district, the county relocated the sewer line and the *178 bridge.  [fn. 1] The cost of the sewer line restoration was $12,023.90. The county brought this action against the sanitary district for reimbursement of that amount.
Sanitary District's Prior Right
[1] Although plaintiff attempts to make a very complicated situation out of the case, it actually is a very simple one. It is merely a situation in which the sanitary district's right and easement to use Grayson Creek for its sewer line was prior in time to the rights of the two other public bodies and therefore prior in right. Plaintiff's main contention is that because the sanitary district's right was not of record and the county's right of way (in accepting roads offered for dedication on a map, the county accepts only a right of way (see Sts. & Hy. Code,  905)) appears on the maps, and the maps show strips marked "drainage reserve," these facts give prior rights to the county and the flood control district over the sanitary district's prior right, of which it is conceded both the county and the flood control district had full knowledge before they acquired whatever rights the maps gave them. As stated above, the situation is a simple one. The developers who owned the land built the sewer. They then transferred the sewer to the sanitary district which accepted it and maintained it thereafter. The fact that apparently no formal easement was granted does not affect the right of the sanitary district to maintain the sewer line as against subsequently acquired rights which, as here, were acquired with knowledge of the existence of the sewer line. (The court so found.) The county's right of way, and the flood control district's rights arising from the words "drainage reserve" on the map, are subject to the right of the sanitary district to maintain its sewer line, because the former's rights were acquired with knowledge of the sanitary district's rights and subsequently thereto. See Johnson v. Cella (1953), 122 Cal. App. 2d 72 [264 P.2d 98], where the plaintiffs without an easement of record were maintaining a water pipeline across property later purchased by the defendants with knowledge of the existence of *179 the line. The court held that the defendants therefore took title subject to the plaintiff's easement by implication.
Section 6518, Health and Safety Code, which plaintiff claims has some application to this case, does not apply. It deals with the requirement that a sanitary district laying its sewers in a public street must restore the street to proper condition, under the supervision of the county engineer or road commissioner, at the cost of the district. Here, the sewer was laid before the area became a street, and now, for the benefit of a flood control district there has to be a change in the location of the line.
Plaintiff also would apply here cases like Southern Cal. Gas Co. v. City of Los Angeles, 50 Cal. 2d 713 [329 P.2d 289], and Los Angeles County Flood Control Dist. v. Southern Calif. Edison Co., 51 Cal. 2d 331 [333 P.2d 1], which hold that where there is a relocation of a highway or flood control structures which necessitates a relocation of public utilities facilities, the cost of such relocation must be borne by the latter.  [fn. 2] [2] Obviously a sanitary district bears no resemblance to a privately owned public utility. It is a public corporation organized under the provisions of the Sanitary District Act of 1923 (Health & Saf. Code,  6400 et seq.) Moreover, the sanitary district's right to a sewer line in the street is due, first, to the fact that it was there when the county acquired the street, and secondly, to the rights given by section 6518, Health and Safety Code. A privately owned public utility, on the other hand, derives its right to streets under franchises which require it to move its facilities whenever required by the authorities at its own expense.
[3] As said by the Honorable Wakefield Taylor in his memorandum of decision, the sanitary district's right to maintain its sewer line "is a species of real property and neither the Flood Control District nor the County Board of Supervisors acting on behalf of said District and for its purposes has any right to appropriate or interfere with property already dedicated to a public use, without legal process and the payment of just compensation. The cost of relocation should not be borne by the taxpayers of the County generally nor by the taxpayers of the Sanitary District, but rather by *180 the people resident within the Flood Control zone benefited by the improvement."
The judgment is affirmed.
Tobriner, J., and Duniway, J., concurred.
NOTES
[fn. 1]  1. At oral argument the county's counsel frankly admitted that one of the reasons for the county relocating the sewer line which admittedly was done for the flood control district's benefit alone (and the court so found) was that it was believed that if the flood control district did the work, section 63-5, subdivision 13, West's Water Code--Appendix, would bar it from seeking reimbursement from the sanitary district, but that the county could require reimbursement.
[fn. 2]  2. Section 680, Streets and Highways Code, requires that a franchise holder must at its own expense relocate its facilities which are in a state's highway, when necessary for the improvement of such highway. There is no such requirement as to facilities of governmental bodies such as districts, etc.

=== CASE 2209776 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:43.594695+00 ===

412 Ill. 416 (1952)
107 N.E.2d 706
MOREY C. PIRES, Appellant,
v.
ROBERT L. BRACKEN et al., Appellees.
No. 32296.
Supreme Court of Illinois.
Opinion filed May 22, 1952.
Rehearing denied September 15, 1952.
*417 L.C. MILLER, and STANLEY H. GUYER, both of Rockford, for appellant.
JOHN P. DEVINE, of Dixon, and ARTHUR A. SULLIVAN, of Chicago, for appellee.
Judgment affirmed.
Mr. JUSTICE CRAMPTON delivered the opinion of the court:
Morey C. Pires instituted proceedings in the circuit court of Lee County to contest the election of Robert L. Bracken, Harry E. Wheat, and Leon A. Zick to the offices of circuit judges of the Fifteenth Judicial Circuit at an election held on June 4, 1951. On motion by defendants the amended complaint was dismissed. The plaintiff, having elected to stand upon his complaint as amended, appeals to this court.
The complaint as amended alleges that Wheat, Zick, and the plaintiff were the three Republican candidates, and that Bracken was the sole Democratic candidate; that three judges were to be elected; that after a canvass of the votes it was declared that Wheat received 10,256, Zick *418 received 10,639, Bracken received 8315, and plaintiff received 8252; and that commissions had issued to Wheat, Zick, and Bracken. It is then alleged that one or more persons in each of the 168 voting precincts marked the ballot by placing a cross in the circle before the name "Republican Party" and a cross in the square before the name of Robert L. Bracken, the Democratic candidate; that the ballots so marked were counted for Bracken but not for any of the Republican candidates; that such ballots should not have been counted for any candidate for circuit judge; and that by virtue of the counting of such ballots Bracken was wrongfully declared to have received more than 168 votes in excess of the number to which he was legally entitled.
The complaint further alleges that more than one voter in each precinct marked the ballot by placing a cross in the circle before the appellation "Democratic Party" and also placing a cross in the square before the name of one or two of the Republican candidates; that the ballots so marked were counted as casting one vote each for Bracken and the one or two Republican candidates before whose name or names a cross had been placed; that such ballots should have been counted only for the Republican candidates before whose names crosses had been placed; and that by reason of counting such a ballot as casting a vote for Bracken more than 168 votes were improperly counted as cast for him.
The relevant portion of the statute (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1949, chap. 46, par. 17-11) provides that the voter "shall prepare his ballot by making in the appropriate margin or place a cross (X) opposite the name of the candidate of his choice for each office to be filled, or by writing in the name of the candidate of his choice in a blank space on said ticket, making a cross (X) opposite thereto; and in case of a question submitted to the vote of the people, by making in the appropriate margin or place a cross (X) against the *419 answer he desires to give: Provided, however, if he shall desire to vote for all of the candidates of one political party or group of petitioners, he may place such mark at the appropriate place preceding the appellation or title under which the names of the candidates of such party or group of petitioners are printed, and the ballot so marked shall be counted as cast for all of the candidates named under that title: Provided, further, that the voter may place such mark at the appropriate place preceding the appellation or title of one party or group of petitioners and may also mark, at the appropriate place preceding the name or names of one or more candidates printed under the appellation or title of some other party or group of petitioners, and a ballot so marked shall be counted as cast for all the candidates named under the appellation or title which has been so marked, except as to the officers as to which he has placed such mark preceding the name or names of some other candidate or candidates printed under the title of some other party or group of petitioners, and as to such it shall be counted as cast for the candidate or candidates preceding whose name or names such mark may have been placed."
The law is clear in cases where only a single office is to be filled and only one candidate elected. In such cases, when a voter makes a cross in the circle of one ticket and in a square opposite a particular candidate's name on another ticket, the ballot should be counted for all candidates on the ticket having a cross in the circle, except the candidate opposing the one on the other ticket opposite whose name a cross is made in the square, and the ballot is counted as a vote for the candidate opposite whose name the square is marked with a cross. (Humphrey v. Perry, 310 Ill. 373, 378; People ex rel. Frazier v. Altenberg, 260 Ill. 191; Constant v. Shockey, 259 Ill. 496.) The specific marking controls the general, and the ballot cannot be counted for the candidate of the party whose circle is *420 marked, but, as to that office, only for the opposing candidate whose name is marked by a cross in the square.
In this case, however, three candidates were to be elected, and the ballot contained the names of three candidates on the Republican ticket and one on the Democratic ticket. In such cases it cannot be said that the latter is a candidate against any particular one of the Republican candidates. Each voter decides for himself whom he will regard as opposing candidates. (Whittam v. Zahorik, 91 Iowa, 23, 59 N.W. 57.) In the first group of ballots alleged in the complaint the voter marked the circle of the Republican Party, thereby indicating he intended to vote for the three candidates for circuit judge named on that ticket, except as that intention was affected by his marking the name of Bracken, the only Democratic candidate for circuit judge. The latter is clearly designated in the manner provided by law as a candidate for whom the ballot must be counted, but the voter has given no indication of a preference among the Republican candidates. Three of the four candidates were to be elected, and, as the voter marked the circle of the Republican party and did not mark any of the squares opposite the names of the Republican candidates, it cannot be determined for which two of the Republican candidates he intended to cast his ballot. The ballot was intended to be cast for the Democratic candidate, however, and that intention was expressed in the manner provided by law. It was proper, therefore, to count all such ballots for Bracken and not for any other candidate for circuit judge.
A similar result was reached in Whittam v. Zahorik, 91 Iowa, 23, 59 N.W. 57, wherein the statute contained provisions identical with those involved in the case at bar. In that case three justices of the peace were to be elected. The ballot contained the names of three Republican candidates and three Democratic candidates. Whittam, one of the Republican candidates, filed an action to contest the *421 election of Zahorik, one of the Democratic candidates. As to some of the ballots in dispute, each was marked with a cross in the circle preceding the party appellation "Democratic" and with a cross in the square preceding the name of Whittam, a candidate on the Republican ticket. Zahorik contended that in all such ballots more names were marked for the office than there were persons to be elected, and that the ballots therefore should not be counted for any of the candidates. In rejecting this contention the court said: "It is a case where it is impossible to determine the voter's choice for two of the places to be filled, not because he has marked more names than there are persons to be elected but because he has cast his ballot for three persons for places to which but two can be elected. His ballot was intended to be cast for the contestant, and that intention has been expressed in the manner provided by law. It should therefore be counted for him, but cannot be counted for any other candidate for the office of justice of the peace." In the case at bar plaintiff, in his brief, concedes the correctness of such a conclusion as to the first group of ballots in dispute, and admits that under the terms of the statute each such ballot would properly cast one vote for Bracken. He contends, however, that if the second type of ballot is properly counted as a vote for Bracken then a ballot of the first type should not be counted as a vote for him; that to count a ballot of each type as casting a vote for Bracken is inconsistent and contradictory, and results in inequality.
Before considering that contention we shall examine plaintiff's argument concerning the second group of ballots. In each of these ballots the voter marked a cross in the circle preceding the title "Democratic Party" and also marked the name of one or two candidates for circuit judge on the Republican ticket. Plaintiff insists that the language of the statute precludes counting any such ballot as a vote for Bracken. He points out that as to offices *422 where the voter has marked the name or names of some other candidate or candidates printed under the title of some other party, the ballot "shall be counted as cast for the candidate or candidates preceding whose name or names such mark may have been placed." Plaintiff then argues that this direction is exclusive; that under the present facts the statute says the ballot must be counted as casting one vote for every candidate on the Democratic ticket except for "the office" of circuit judge and as to "the office" of circuit judge the ballot shall be counted as cast for the Republican candidates whose names are marked; and that there is no warrant or authority to count the ballot for anyone else. The fallacy in this argument is the fact that there were three "offices" of circuit judge to be filled, rather than only one as assumed by the plaintiff. The word "office" is a term of variable import. It may be used either in a generic sense or in a specific or particular sense, and its meaning here must be determined with reference to the setting in which it appears. Having in mind the intent and subject matter of the law in question, we think the term is obviously to be read in the latter, or particular, sense. There were three "offices" of circuit judge to be filled, and three "officers" to be elected.
Each of the voters by whom the contested ballots were respectively cast had a right to vote once for each of the offices to be filled at that election. By placing a cross in the circle above the Democratic column the elector voted once for each nominee of that party except as to the offices to which he marked the name or names of a candidate or candidates in the Republican column, the circle of which was left unmarked. If the Democratic column had contained a complete ticket, none of the ballots in question could have been counted for a circuit judge candidate of that party, not because the voter failed to cast a vote for any such candidate but because it would be impossible to determine his choice for the remaining office or offices of *423 circuit judge to be filled at that election. This result would be required under the applicable statute, (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1949, chap. 46, par. 17-16,) which provides in part that "if for any reason it is impossible to determine the voter's choice for any office to be filled, his ballot shall not be counted for such office."
But the Democratic column did not contain a nominee for every office to be filled. Three circuit judges were to be elected, and there was only one Democratic candidate. By marking the circle at the head of the Democratic column, the voter cast a vote for only one of the offices of circuit judge. Two remained to be voted on, and none of the ballots in question contained marks at more than two of the names on the Republican ticket. In view of the fact that there were three offices of circuit judge to be filled, any one of such offices as to which the voter marked the name of a Republican candidate is not the identical office of circuit judge as to which a vote was cast by marking the circle of the Democratic Party. From what we have said, it follows that the exception specified in the statute has no application here. Each of the ballots in question, being marked in the Democratic Party circle and in the squares opposite the name or names of one or two of the candidates on the Republican ticket, was properly counted as a vote for Bracken, the Democratic nominee, as well as a vote for the one or two Republican candidates whose name or names were marked. See In re Election of Assessor in Gearhart Township, 192 Pa. 446, 43 Atl 972; Sigler v. Board of Canvassers, 79 W. Va. 785, 91 S.E. 991.
It is clear that this was the intention of the voter. By the cross in the Democratic Party circle the voter could express a choice of candidates as to only one of the three offices to be filled. Two offices of circuit judge yet remained, for which he was entitled to express a choice among the three candidates on the Republican ticket. On some of the ballots the right was fully exercised by marking *424 the names of two. On other ballots the right was only partially exercised, as the name of only one of the Republican candidates was marked. But in each such case the intention of the voter is clear and, as we have indicated, it was expressed in a manner permitted by the statute. Where the question is for whom a ballot should be counted, the intention of the voter, when it can be ascertained from his ballot, must control unless to give effect to such intention would destroy the secrecy of the ballot. (Cray v. Davenport, 333 Ill. 375; Patterson v. Johnston, 328 Ill. 101.) As there is no question here concerning secrecy of the ballot, it is clear that the present ones were properly counted as casting one vote each for Bracken and the designated Republican candidates.
Plaintiff's final contention is that the election is not equal, as required by the constitution, because the ballots of the second type, marked in the Democratic Party circle, were counted for the Democratic candidate, whereas those in the first group, marked in the Republican Party circle, were not counted for any Republican candidate. He argues that the present method of counting the ballots disenfranchises a large number of Republican voters who attempted to split their ballots, and at the same time gives full effect to the party vote of Democratic voters "who attempted to do the same thing, namely, to vote in the circle and to split his ticket on the office of Circuit Judge." The position is not well taken. As to the ballots in the first group, it was impossible to determine the voter's choice for two of the circuit judge offices to be filled, and for this reason the ballots could not be counted for such offices. Ballots in the second group, however, contained no such ambiguity or uncertainty. As to each such ballot the candidates for whom the votes were cast could be readily ascertained from an inspection of the ballot. This difference between the two types of ballot obviously justifies the difference in counting complained of by the plaintiff.
*425 We conclude that each of the ballots in question was properly counted, and the judgment of the circuit court of Lee County dismissing the amended complaint is therefore affirmed.
Judgment affirmed.
Mr. JUSTICE FULTON took no part in the consideration or decision of this case.

=== CASE 9737302 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:21:23.347532+00 ===

CANE, C.J.
A. MacDonell Richards appeals a judgment granting him a sixteen-and-one-half-foot-wide easement of necessity to his river bluff property; denying his right to run electric, telephone, and other utilities along the easement; and denying an easement of necessity to his river frontage property. On appeal, Richards argues that he is entitled to: (1) electric, telephone and other utilities along an easement of necessity to the river bluff property; (2) a fifty-foot-wide easement to the river bluff property; and (3) an easement of necessity to the river frontage property. We agree with the trial court that Richards is not entitled to an easement of necessity to his river frontage property. Regarding the river bluff easement, we hold that the reasonable use and enjoyment of a dominant estate requires utility installation as long as such installation *834does not overburden the servient estate. Accordingly, we remand to the trial court for its determination under this standard. Because this case is remanded, we also direct the trial court to reconsider whether the easement's width is sufficient in light of the dominant estate's future necessary and reasonable needs, including utility installation.
I. Background
In August 1946, Roman Peterson purchased property in Pierce County, Wisconsin, which we will refer to as parcels 1 and 2. In 1947, Peterson forfeited parcel 1 to Pierce County as a result of failing to pay real estate taxes. At a public auction in 1947, Pierce County purchased this parcel and later issued itself a tax deed for the property. In 1963, it conveyed the parcel to Richards by quitclaim deed, which stated: the "grantor herein having no ingress or egress privileges to said property."
Parcel 1 is approximately thirty-four acres, triangular in shape, has no access to a public road and, as a whole, is landlocked. No written easement exists for access to parcel 1 from any public road. Further, a railroad track runs along the Mississippi River and divides parcel 1 into two sections, one immediately adjacent to the Mississippi River (river frontage prop*835erty)1 and the other lying easterly of the railroad (river bluff property).2
The Petersons orally gave Richards access to the river bluff, and in exchange, Richards let the Petersons farm part of his land. To access an area known as Smith's Landing on the river, Richards drove down a second road on the Petersons' property. He drove his car part of the way and then walked the rest of the road, including traversing under a railroad overpass. When the Petersons sold parcel 2 to a developer in 1996, the developer told Richards that he "did not have access" over parcel 2 to reach parcel l.3
Richards' complaint requested two easements over parcel 2 to access both the river bluff and river frontage of parcel 1. The trial court granted Richards an easement of necessity for "ingress and egress" to the river bluff property, restricting its width to one rod (sixteen- and-one-half feet), but denied him the right to install utilities along the easement. Further, the trial court denied Richards' request for a second easement of necessity to the river frontage portion of parcel 1. Richards appeals.
*836II. Analysis
An easement is an interest in land in the possession of another. Atkinson v. Mentzel, 211 Wis. 2d 628, 637, 566 N.W.2d 158, 162 (Ct. App. 1997). Existing distinct from the ownership of the land, an easement is a "liberty, privilege, or advantage in lands, without profit." Stoesser v. Shore Drive Partnership, 172 Wis. 2d 660, 667, 494 N.W.2d 204, 207 (1993). An easement creates two distinct property interests: the dominant estate and the servient estate. Atkinson, 211 Wis. 2d at 637, 566 N.W.2d at 162. The dominant estate enjoys the privileges an easement grants, while the servient estate permits the dominant estate to exercise those privileges. Id.; see also Millen v. Thomas, 201 Wis. 2d 675, 678, 550 N.W.2d 134, 135 (Ct. App. 1996). With these general principles in mind, we turn to Richards' three arguments.
1. Utilities Along the Easement to the River Bluff Property
Richards contends that the reasonable use and enjoyment of his property requires that he be permitted to install electric, telephone, and other utilities along the easement of necessity to the river bluff property. The trial court denied the request for utility installation, noting:
[The] issue . . . [of] the electricity and telephone easement. . . wasn't raised before. ... In the ordinary course that might not make a difference whether I granted a telephone and electrical easement, but this is not the ordinary circumstance.... I am not so sure this isn't going to be a fluid situation for many years to come, so we might as well do it *837now rather than... in the future_And because of that fluid situation . . . regarding the utilities and the telephone, I don't see the necessity to'put that in there and to allow that. We are talking necessity. He has got a generator. That can serve its purpose and obviously does and has. And there is other ways in this day and age of dealing with the phone problem besides having a phone wire. Use a cell phone. ... So with technology I can't see that anybody has established it is a necessity to do this .. . especially when it is the fluid situation that it is [and the] way of necessity ... is going to be someplace else . .. the road there is going to be ... a public road.
Citing Atkinson, Richards contends that an easement of necessity includes all that is reasonably necessary for the full enjoyment of the easement and that at a minimum, the reasonable use and enjoyment of property requires utilities. In response, the Peter-sons distinguish Atkinson on its facts, arguing that unlike the broad written easement granted in Atkinson, the easement here was limited to "ingress and egress." Indeed, Richards acknowledges that Atkinson is factually distinct, but contends that its logic is "equally applicable" because as in Atkinson, the easement at issue is an access easement. As we will explain, we conclude that the reasonable use and enjoyment of the dominant estate requires utilities, as long as such installation does not overburden the servient estate.4
In Atkinson, we concluded that a written easement grant was not limited to physical ingress and egress, *838but extended to utility installation. Id. at 637-41, 566 N.W.2d at 162-64. The conveyance stated that the easement's purpose was to "provide access" and "shall allow access for all uses of said property other than retail sales"; it further described the easement as a "right of way." Id. at 638, 566 N.W.2d at 162. Holding that the easement extended to utility installation, we stated:
The easement language does not limit the easement to "ingress" and "egress." In fact, the easement does not even use those terms. Nor does the easement language limit use of the easement to simple "access" or "right of way." Rather, the easement provides "access for all uses of said property other than retail sales." We conclude that this modifying language broadens the access terms of the easement beyond strict physical ingress and egress.
Id. at 638-39, 566 N.W.2d at 163. Because we concluded that the easement's broad and unambiguous terms encompassed utilities, we did not address whether an easement of necessity was warranted. Id. at 641 n.6, 566 N.W.2d at 164 n.6.
Additionally, we suggested that had the grant limited the easement to ingress and egress, utility installation would not have been permitted. Id. at 638-39, 641, 566 N.W.2d at 163, 164. In this case, by contrast, we are dealing with a trial court's grant of an easement of necessity for ingress and egress and its ruling that its grant did not include utilities. Unlike cases in which our appellate courts have addressed whether a servient estate's express/written easement grant to the dominant estate included utility installation, here there is no question that the trial court intended to limit the easement to ingress and egress *839and exclude utility installation. Thus, the issue here is not whether a written easement grant includes utility installation, as in Atkinson, but whether the trial court erroneously denied utility access along the river bluff easement.
The general rule regarding the extent of a way of necessity is as follows:
The extent of a way of necessity is that which is required for the complete and beneficial use of the land to which such way is impliedly attached. A way of necessity is not limited to those purposes connected with the use of the dominant tenement existing at the time the easement was created, but is available for any and all purposes for which the dominant tenement may be adapted. The enjoyment of such a way is said to be limited only by the necessity for its use in connection with all lawful uses of the land to which it is appurtenant. In other words, a way of necessity is held to be coextensive with the reasonable needs, present and future, of the dominant estate; it varies with the necessity, insofar as may be consistent with the full reasonable enjoyment of the servient estate.
25 Am. Jur. 2d Easements & Licenses § 92 at 664 (1996) (footnotes omitted; emphasis added). Similarly, the Restatement notes:
Servitudes are implied under the rule stated in this section on the basis of necessity alone, without proof of a prior use of the properties consistent with the claimed servitude. To support implication of a servitude , . . the rights claimed must be necessary to the reasonable enjoyment of the property. "Necessary" rights are not limited to those essential to enjoyment of the property, but include those which are reasonably required to make effective use of the property. ...
*840What is necessary depends on the nature and location of the property, and may change over time. ... Until recently, access for foot or vehicular traffic tended to be the only rights regarded as necessary for the enjoyment of surface possessory estates. However, the increasing dependence in recent years on electricity and telephone service, delivered through overland cables, justify the conclusion that implied servitudes by necessity will be recognized for those purposes. Whether access for other utilities and services has also become necessary to reasonable enjoyment of property, depends on the nature and location of the property, and normal land uses in the community.
Restatement (Third) of Property § 2.15 cmt. d (1989).
When applying these general rules, courts have considered whether utility installation would create an unreasonable burden on the servient estate. For example, in Morrell v. Rice, 622 A.2d 1156, 1158 (Me. 1993), the trial court established an easement of necessity and also held that the easement included the right to install underground utilities. The Maine Supreme Court affirmed and held: "[I]n the absence of any evidence that underground utilities would present an undue burden to the Rices' land [the servient estate], the court did not err in concluding that the right to install such utilities was included in the easement." Id. at 1160. Further, Morrell reversed the trial court's decision to limit the easement's use solely as a single-family residence because the record did not justify that restriction. Morrell explained that an easement should benefit the dominant estate for any lawful and reasonable use and that no evidence existed that the only use would be for a single-family home. Id. at 1161. Further, the record did not indicate the extent of the burden to the servient estate if the land was used for other pur*841poses. Id. Whether the easement's use for a future purpose would unduly burden the servient estate would be decided in that use's context. Id.
Likewise, the district court in Galvin v. Gaffney, 24 F. Supp.2d 223, 233 (D.C. Conn. 1998), found an easement of necessity and held that it included the right to install underground utilities. In so holding, the trial court first noted that the use of the passway to provide utility services would be highly convenient and beneficial for the dominant estate's enjoyment. Id. (citing Restatement (Third) of Property § 2.15 cmt. d (1989)). Second, the trial court reasoned that a broad reading of the easement was supported under Connecticut law, as well as the law of other jurisdictions. Id. at 234 (collecting cases). Crucial to Galvins holding was whether the utility installation overburdened the servient estate, but the servient estate provided no evidence that any burden would result if the court were to include utilities along with the easement of necessity. Id. at 234-35 (citing Dowgiel v. Reid, 59 A.2d 115, 121 (Pa. 1948)).
Other courts addressing utilities and easements of necessity have also focused on the burden to the servi-ent estate. See, e.g., New York Cent. R. Co. v. Yarian, 39 N.E.2d 604, 606 (Ind. 1942) (allowing utility installation; "extent of a way of necessity is a way such as is required for the complete and beneficial use of the land to which such way is impliedly attached"); Beck v. Mangels, 640 A.2d 236, 249 (Md. App. 1994). Wisconsin has also focused on the actual burden that utility installation would pose on the servient estate. In Millen, 201 Wis. 2d at 685-87, 550 N.W.2d at 138-39, we recited the general rule that an easement for a specified purpose may not be enlarged such that an added burden is placed upon the servient estate.
*842Consistent with Atkinson, a way of necessity is coextensive with reasonable needs, present and future, of the dominant estate and varies with the necessity, insofar as may be consistent with the full reasonable enjoyment of the servient estate. In current times, the reasonable use and enjoyment of property, at a minimum, requires utilities, see Atkinson, as long as it does not overburden the servient estate. Accordingly, we reverse that portion of the judgment denying utility installation along the river bluff easement and remand to the trial court for its determination whether utility installation would overburden the servient estate, and if not, to determine a reasonable method for the installation of utilities.
2. Width of Easement of Necessity to the River Bluff Property
Next, Richards insists that the trial court erred by restricting the easement's width to sixteen-and-one-half feet based on Richards' prior use of the property as a "seasonal recreational place." Citing §80.13(5), Stats., he claims that he is entitled to a fifty-foot-wide easement of necessity to the river bluff property. The Petersons reply that because Richards conceded before the trial court that sixteen-and-one-half feet is a sufficient width for the easement, he invited that portion of the trial court's ruling. See Atkinson, 211 Wis. 2d at 642-43, 566 N.W.2d at 164 (stating general rule that we will not review invited error). Alternatively, the Petersons contend, Richards failed to follow the procedures in § 80.13 for obtaining a fifty-foot-wide road.
As a threshold matter, we first address whether Richards conceded that the one-rod width was sufficient. If a party makes an express concession, we have *843no obligation to review such "invited error." See id. at 642-43, 566 N.W.2d at 164. Here, we do not construe Richards' testimony as an express concession that the easement was sufficiently wide because although he testified that he did not need more than sixteen-and-one-half feet for "his own personal use," he also indicated that such width was "not optimum." Thus, we turn to the issue's merits.
In denying Richards' request for a wider easement, the trial court stated that it saw no reason to extend it beyond sixteen-and-one-half feet and noted that it certainly was inappropriate to make it the size of a town road. The trial court explained that if Richards wanted a town road, he needed to apply to the township. Further, the trial court explained that the sixteen-foot-wide road is not "unreasonably small" because it was sufficient for his use of the property as a "seasonal recreational place."
To support his argument that he is entitled to a fifty-foot-wide easement, Richards relies on § 80.13(5), Stats., which provides, in pertinent part:
Whenever land : . . which is accessible, or provided with a right-of-way to a public highway, is subdivided and the owner thereof sells and transfers a part thereof or sells a parcel of said land . . . which part or parcel would otherwise be landlocked . . . the seller shall in so subdividing said land . . . provide a cleared right-of-way at least 50 feet in width which shall be continuous from the highway to each part, parcel, lot or subdivision sold. In case the seller fails to do so[,] the town board may, pursuant to proceedings under this section, lay out a road from such inaccessible land to the public highway over the remaining lands of the seller without assessment to the latter of damages or compensation therefor. (Emphasis added.)
*844Richards declares, without analysis, that this statute clearly reflects the legislature's intent that fifty feet is a reasonable width for a private landowner to provide access to landlocked property. We are not persuaded.
It is within the trial court's discretion to determine the easement's burden on the servient estate. That use does not necessarily justify a fifty-foot-wide easement.5 Here, however, the trial court determined that a one-rod width was reasonable based on its conclusion that the easement should be restricted to conform to the land's previous use without utilities. To the extent the trial court focused on prior use to determine the easement's width, however, the trial court erred because the scope of ingress/egress ways of necessity may reasonably increase with the dominant estate's necessary and reasonable needs as those needs exist, present and future. See, e.g., 2 George W. Thompson, Commentaries on the Modern Law of Real Property § 366 at 420 (1980); 25 Am. Jur. 2d Easements & Licenses § 92 at 664 (1996); Restatement, supra, §2.15 cmt. d. Richards testified that he plans to build a retirement home on his property, and this future need must be considered. Because this case is remanded, we direct the trial court to reconsider, in its discretion, the easement's width given Richards' future necessary and reasonable needs, including installation of utilities.
*8453. Easement of Necessity to the River Frontage Property
Richards also contends that the trial court erred by denying his request for an easement of necessity to the river frontage property. He maintains that: (1) the trial court improperly focused on the easement's use; (2) public policy requires that we provide access to "tax forfeited properties"; (3) the trial court's decision deprives him of his riparian rights; and (4) the easement to the river bluff property is "no substitute" for access to the river frontage property because the properties constitute two distinct parcels, not one. In response, the Petersons contend: (1) an involuntary transfer, such as a tax forfeiture, cannot create an easement of necessity and that Richards knew that he had no ingress or egress rights to the property at purchase; (2) Richards is no longer landlocked; and (3) the easement would unreasonably intrude on their use of their property. Additionally, the Petersons argue that, in any event, Richards failed to join an indispensable party, the railroad.6
To establish an easement of necessity, the party seeking the easement has the burden to first prove two elements: (1) common ownership or unity of title of the two parcels; and (2) that the property is "landlocked," meaning that a piece of land is surrounded by land belonging to other persons so that it cannot be reached *846by a public roadway. Ludke v. Egan, 87 Wis. 2d 221, 229-30, 274 N.W.2d 641, 645 (1979). Whether these two elements exist presents a mixed question of fact and law. Under a mixed standard of review, we are bound by a trial court's factual findings unless they are clearly erroneous. See § 805.17(2), Stats.; see also Ludke, 87 Wis. 2d at 230, 274 N.W.2d at 645. In contrast, whether the facts found establish the two required elements of an easement of necessity is a question of law we review de novo. See State v. Smith, 170 Wis. 2d 701, 714, 490 N.W.2d 40, 46 (Ct. App. 1992) (noting that application of facts to a legal standard is a question of law).
The parties differ, however, regarding the proper standard of review for the trial court's decision whether to grant or deny a request for an easement of necessity once the two elements are established. Richards insists that once the two elements for an easement of necessity are established, a trial court must grant the easement and retains discretion only as to its location and scope, citing Atkinson.7 The Petersons, on the other hand, argue that whether an easement of necessity is required is a mixed question of law and fact, with the trial court retaining discretion whether to grant or deny the easement.
In the past, appellate courts have been unclear regarding the standard of review for a trial court's grant or denial of an easement of necessity, and we have located no Wisconsin case directly on point. Thus, *847the parties' disagreement is understandable. To resolve this dispute, it is helpful to understand the nature of relief sought when a court is requested to grant an easement of necessity. The Richards are requesting the court to declare a right to pass over another's property to gain access to their landlocked property. It is not a statutory or contractual right, but rather one the courts created to grant relief to a landowner who purchases landlocked property from a common grantor. Ludke, 87 Wis. 2d at 230, 274 N.W.2d at 645. Courts reason that a way of access is implied over the land the grantor retains. Id.
A request for an easement of necessity sounds in equity. As such, it requires a weighing of the factors or equities that affect the judgment, a function which requires the exercise of judicial discretion. See Mulder v. Mittelstadt, 120 Wis. 2d 103, 115, 352 N.W.2d 223, 228 (Ct. App. 1984). "The basis of all equitable rules is the principle of discretionary application." Id. We review decisions in equity for erroneous exercise of discretion.8 Lueck's Home Imp., Inc. v. Seal Tite Nat'l, *848Inc., 142 Wis. 2d 843, 847, 419 N.W.2d 340, 342 (Ct. App. 1987). Discretionary acts are sustained if the trial court "examined the relevant facts, applied a proper standard of law, and, using a demonstrated rational process, reached a conclusion that a reasonable judge could reach." Loy v. Bunderson, 107 Wis. 2d 400, 414-15, 320 N.W.2d 175, 184 (1982). We will sustain the trial court's findings of fact unless they are clearly erroneous. Section 805.17(2), STATS. We see no reason not to apply the same discretionary standard to this equitable decision.
Thus, even if a party meets the burden to establish that the elements exist for the equitable relief sought, a court of equity still retains the discretion to grant or deny relief. See Forest County v. Goode, 219 Wis. 2d 655, 684, 579 N.W.2d 715, 728 (1998) (A court sitting in equity retains the discretion to grant or deny an injunction, even though the party seeking the injunction proved the necessary elements for an injunction.). That is, once the elements are established, the court may deny the request for an easement of necessity if the court examines the totality of the circumstances and concludes that there are compelling equitable reasons to deny the easement. See id. at 685, 579 N.W.2d at 729. In an easement of necessity case, the burden on the servient estate may be one such equitable reason. When exercising its discretion in an easement of necessity case, a trial court may balance the burden on the servient estate against the benefit to the dominant estate and consider the equities of the case as a whole to determine whether to grant equitable relief.
*849With these standards in mind, we address whether the trial court properly denied Richards an easement of necessity to his river frontage property. In exercising its discretion, the trial court observed:
That is at most one thousand square feet. And it is not likely it is even one thousand square feet even most favorable looking at this to Mr. Richards. And in return for that access to what is less than one thousand square feet on that is only accessible on certain occasions, summertime primarily, and which he has never accessed before by car, he is asking the court to burden subservient estate here with a car access, and for a length of I assume almost a mile . . . and that seems to me inappropriate.
Further, the trial court found that Richards already had access to the river bluff portion of his property and that he was not entitled to an easement to each and every portion of his property.
Although the Petersons contend the river frontage parcel is not landlocked because Richards' property is one parcel, not two, and that he is therefore not entitled to more than one easement of necessity, we need not decide this issue because even if we assume that Richards met his burden of proof to establish that the two elements exist, the trial court reasonably exercised its discretion by denying the easement of necessity to the river frontage. At oral argument, Richards conceded that his river frontage property is only a "walking beach" and that no residence could be built on his river frontage. Here, the trial court weighed the burden to the servient estate against the benefit to the dominant estate when it determined that a mile-long easement over the Petersons' property to Richards' small piece of river frontage property, which is accessible primarily *850in summer and used only for walking, would overburden the servient estate.
Other equitable considerations support the trial court's exercise of discretion. At oral argument, Richards stressed that he is entitled to the river frontage easement because a 300-foot embankment and the terrain between his river bluff access and his river frontage property make it impossible to access his river frontage from the bluff. An easement of necessity, however, is not merely one of convenience and does not exist when one may reach the highway over his own land, even though such access might be difficult and expensive to establish. See Backhausen v. Mayer, 204 Wis. 286, 288, 234 N.W. 904, 905 (1931). The record contains no evidence that it would be impossible to construct an access route from river bluff to river frontage, and in any event, the trial court made no such factual finding. Additionally, Richards has not shown that the railroad would not allow him to traverse the railroad tracks located on his own property; therefore, he has not shown that he cannot reach the river frontage from the river bluff portion of his property, which gives him access to a public highway. Because it is possible that Richards could receive permission from the railroad to traverse the railroad and reach the river frontage over his own property, the trial court could reasonably conclude that it would be inequitable to burden the Petersons with a mile-long easement.
Finally, the requested easement over the Peter-sons' property necessarily includes a right to use a railroad underpass. The Petersons contend that the only right they could grant Richards concerning the railroad underpass is to water livestock, while Richards maintains that the right includes much broader *851rights than watering livestock. Thus, the parties dispute the nature and scope of the right to use the railroad underpass. Richards did not seek to join the railroad as a party, however. Under § 803.03(1), Stats., a party must be joined if in the parties' absence, complete relief cannot be accorded among those already parties or if the disposition of the action in the person's absence may as a practical matter impair or impede the absent parties' ability to protect that interest.
Here, because of Richards' failure to join the railroad as a party, disposition of his case will not effectively and completely adjudicate the dispute because the railroad has a fee simple interest in a portion of the requested easement. If one or more of the tests in § 803.03(1), Stats., are satisfied, the absentee must be joined as a party if subject to service of process. Because the railroad was not joined as a party to the dispute concerning the easement to river frontage, the trial court correctly refused to grant an easement crossing the railroad's property.
We also reject Richards' contention that the trial court's decision deprives him of his riparian rights. A riparian owner is one who holds title to land abutting a body of water. See Stoesser, 172 Wis. 2d at 665-66, 494 N.W.2d at 207. Riparian owners have certain rights called riparian rights, which are based on title to the ownership of the riparian land. Id. As the Petersons point out, Richards is in the exact position as any other riparian owner bordering the Mississippi River; Richards is subject to the railroad's property and must make accommodations with the railroad.
In summary, because the trial court reasonably exercised its discretion when deciding whether to grant or deny the requested relief for an easement of neces*852sity over the Petersons' and railroad property, we affirm the court's denial of an easement of necessity to the river frontage portion of Richards' property. But we reverse that portion of the judgment denying the use of utilities along the river bluff easement and remand the matter for further proceedings to determine a reasonable use of utilities and the width of the granted easement of necessity.
By the Court. — Judgment affirmed in part; reversed in part and cause remanded with directions. Costs denied to both parties.
One potential issue is whether Richards' possible river access means that he is not landlocked. Because neither the parties nor the trial court addressed the issue, and because the parties did not brief the issue on appeal, we will not address it. See Riley v. Town of Hamilton, 153 Wis. 2d 582, 588, 451 N.W.2d 454, 456 (Ct. App. 1989).
At oral argument, the parties conceded that the railroad owns the property over which the tracks run in fee simple.
The Petersons subsequently started foreclosure proceedings against the developer, and for purposes of our opinion, we will occasionally refer to parcel 2 as the "Petersons' property."
Our holding makes it unnecessary to address Richards' argument that the trial court's concern about fluidity does not justify denial of utilities. See State v. Blalock, 150 Wis. 2d 688, 703, 442 N.W.2d 514, 520 (Ct. App. 1989) (Cases should be decided on the "narrowest possible ground."); see also Sweet v. Berge, 113 Wis. 2d 61, 67, 334 N.W.2d 559, 562 (Ct. App. 1983).
Richards testified that a one-rod width makes construction of the easement difficult, may impair access by emergency vehicles, will make winter plowing difficult, and make two-way traffic impossible. At oral argument, Richards conceded that aside from his testimony, the record contains no evidence that one rod is insufficient for these purposes.
In their brief, the Petersons also argue that the statute of limitation bars this action. Because they abandoned this contention at oral argument, we do not address it. Further, our disposition of this issue makes it unnecessary to address each of the parties' arguments. See Sweet, 113 Wis. 2d at 67, 334 N.W.2d at 562.
Richards' reliance on Atkinson for the appropriate standard of review is misplaced because in Atkinson, unlike here, we were faced with a review of a written easement grant, so our review was de novo. Atkinson v. Mentzel, 211 Wis. 2d 628, 566 N.W.2d 158 (Ct. App. 1997).
Wisconsin law has applied the erroneous exercise of discretion standard to a wide range of decisions in equity. See, e.g., Consumer's Co-op v. Olsen, 142 Wis. 2d 465, 472, 419 N.W.2d 211, 213 (1988) (piercing of corporate veil is equitable remedy reviewed under erroneous exercise of discretion standard); Pouwels v. Cheese Makers Mut. Cas. Co., 255 Wis. 101, 106, 37 N.W.2d 869, 872 (1949) (reformation of insurance policy to correct a mutual mistake is discretionary with a court of equity); Depies-Heus Oil Co. v. Sielaff, 246 Wis. 36, 41, 16 N.W.2d 386, 388 (1944) (whether to grant specific performance sounds in equity and is within trial court's discretion); Singer v. Jones, 173 Wis. 2d 191, 195, 496 N.W.2d 156, 158 (Ct. App. 1992) (erroneous exercise of discretion standard applied to trial *848court's ultimate decision to grant equitable relief of a constructive trust).

=== CASE 9737303 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:21:23.353059+00 ===

HOOVER, J.
(concurring). I concur with the result, but write separately to express my concern over the court's statement that a request for an easement of necessity sounds in equity. I tend toward the conclusion, without, finally determining, that these cases do not turn upon equitable principles. This case may be resolved without extending the analysis to reach the majority's conclusion, and whether an action to declare a way of necessity is equitable was not squarely briefed. Because the issue was not fully addressed in the briefs, I would prefer to see this case resolved on a narrower issue.1 I would simply decide section three of the majority opinion on the basis that Richards failed to prove unity of title with the railroad2 and Peterson properties. Alternatively, I specifically join in the majority's determination that the railroad was a necessary party and that failure to join it prevented *853Richards from proving that the river front property is truly landlocked, assuming access from the bluff.3
By characterizing an action to establish an easement of necessity as equitable, the majority provides trial courts with discretion to deny the easement even when the elements necessary to establish the way have been met. Thus, if the trial court finds both unity of title to the parcels and that the subject property is landlocked, it then weighs the benefit of conferring a way to the dominant estate against the burden such an easement would impose on the servient estate. If the benefit does not overcome the burden, the property may remain landlocked.
In my view, the flaw in the majority's analysis is its reliance upon Ludke for the proposition that easements are established in equity.4 See Ludke v. Egan, 87 Wis. 2d 221, 274 N.W.2d 641 (179). Ludke does not say this.5 No Wisconsin case does. What they do say is: "an easement of necessity is created by the sale of a landlocked parcel over the seller's land." Ruchti v. Monroe, *85483 Wis. 2d 551, 556, 266 N.W.2d 309, 312 (1978) (emphasis added); "[a] way of necessity typically arises where an owner [severs] a landlocked portion of his property by conveying such parcel to another. Backhausen v. Mayer, 204 Wis. 286, 234 N.W. 904 (1931). The way is implied over the land retained by the grantor." Ludke, 87 Wis. 2d at 229-30, 274 N.W.2d at 645. "The Ludke property was originally part of the Micke farm and when it was sold as a landlocked parcel of real estate, a way of necessity thereby came into being." Id. at 231, 274 N.W.2d at 646 (emphasis added).
These authorities, along with others, suggest that the easement, assuming no evidence of a contrary intent,6 arises by operation of law at the moment a common owner isolates a parcel through a sale.
A way of necessity is an easement founded on an implied grant or implied reservation. [Citing, inter alia, Miller v. Hoeschler, 126 Wis. 263, 105 N.W. 790 (1892), overruled in part on other grounds by Prah v. Maretti, 108 Wis. 2d 223, 321 N.W.2d 182 (1905).] It arises where there is a conveyance of a part of a tract of land of such nature and extent that either the part conveyed or the part retained is shut off from access to a road ....
25 Am. Jur. 2d Easements and Licenses § 36, at 606-07 (1996).
A way of necessity results from the application of the presumption that whenever a party conveys *855property, he conveys whatever is necessary for the beneficial use of that property and retains whatever is necessary for the beneficial use of land he still possesses. Such a way is of common-law origin, and is presumed to have been intended by the parties.
25 Am. Jur. 2d, supra § 37, at 607-08 (emphasis added); see also 25 Am. Jur. 2d, supra § 2, at 571: "An easement is not a lien or an equity."
Certainly, the trial court has discretion to declare the location and scope of an easement of necessity once the elements for its existence have been proven. But once proven, there is a compelling argument to be made that the court's discretion is limited to location and scope. It cannot deny what exists in the land. It seems likely that the court's authority merely defines, but does not weigh, the burden that the grantor placed upon the retained parcel by landlocking property. As indicated, however, because the briefs did not fully and specifically explore the matter, I am not prepared to make this pronouncement any more than I can embrace the majority's conflicting conclusion.
An appellate court should decide cases on the narrowest possible grounds. State v. Castillo, 213 Wis. 2d 488, 492, 570 N.W.2d 44, 46 (1997).
Bear in mind that it is the railroad's property, owned in fee simple, that immediately landlocks Richards' property.
Richards asserted at oral argument that the area between the bluff and the railroad's property cannot be traversed. While this may be a matter of fact, it is not a fact of record. I also note that the issue of access from the Mississippi River was not raised in the trial court.
In response to this concurrence, the majority has withdrawn its express reliance on Ludke for the proposition that an easement of necessity sounds in equity. See Ludke v. Egan, 87 Wis. 2d 221, 274 N.W.2d 641 (1979). Because the proposition itself has not been withdrawn, one might infer that the majority continues to rely on that decision, albeit tacitly. While not necessarily a satisfying inference, it would seem preferable to concluding that the majority makes this pronouncement of new law without any supporting evaluation whatsoever.
Indeed, neither the word "equity" nor "equitable" appears in Ludke.
In some jurisdictions, a way of necessity is implied regardless of the grantor's true intent, whereas in others the implication will not be made where it is shown that it was not intended. See 25 Am. Jur. 2d Easements and Licenses § 37 (1996). This issue does not appear to have been addressed in Wisconsin.

=== CASE 2209799 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:43.904085+00 ===

182 Cal. App. 2d 656 (1960)
6 Cal. Rptr. 568
THE PEOPLE, Respondent,
v.
JACK ESPARZA, Appellant.
Docket No. 2999.
Court of Appeals of California, Third District.
July 13, 1960.
*657 A. Richard Backus for Appellant.
Stanley Mosk, Attorney General, Doris H. Maier and John Foran, Deputy Attorneys General, for Respondent.
PEEK, J.
Defendant appeals from a judgment entered upon a jury's verdict which found him guilty of violating section 11500 of the Health and Safety Code.
The particular sale which formed the basis of the charge was made by one Jose Rodriquez to Henry Lopez who was employed by the State Bureau of Narcotic Enforcement. In order to gain information, Lopez posed as a narcotic buyer. He knew the defendant to be a user and dealer in narcotics, and on the date in question he proposed that defendant sell him a "spoon of heroin." The defendant replied that he did not have any for sale, but he knew where he could get some. After this conversation both men proceeded to the Reno Café, located at 4th and "K" Streets in Sacramento. Upon entering this establishment, Lopez went to the restroom, and defendant approached Rodriquez. When Lopez came back to the bar the defendant was nowhere to be seen, and he left the café to search for him. Shortly thereafter Lopez found the defendant who explained that he departed because he saw two members of the Sacramento police force at the Reno Café. After a short period of time the officers left, and the defendant and Lopez returned to the café. Upon entering, defendant motioned Lopez over to Rodriquez and stood next to them while Lopez paid Rodriquez $50 and received the heroin. No words were exchanged between Rodriquez and Lopez. After the sale Lopez offered the defendant $5.00, but the latter refused, saying that he would rather have a small portion of the heroin. While this discussion was being carried on, an unidentified party came up to the defendant and asked to make a purchase, and the defendant again answered that he had none but that he had "... just finished scoring for this man [Lopez]."
Defendant took the stand in his own behalf, admitted taking $5.00 from Lopez but denied that he made any contact with *658 Rodriquez except to point him out to Lopez, and he only did this because in his opinion Lopez looked as though he needed a "fix."
It is defendant's first contention that the evidence is insufficient to support the implied finding of the jury that he aided and abetted the sale made by Rodriquez to Lopez. [1] All persons connected in the commission of a crime, whether they directly commit the act constituting the offense or aid and abet in its commission are principals in any crime so committed. (Pen. Code, § 31.) As principals such persons are equally guilty with the direct perpetrator. (Pen. Code, § 971.) "... [W]hether or not a person who is shown to have been present at the time and place of the commission of a crime has aided and abetted therein is one of fact for the jury to decide from all the circumstances proved." (People v. Perez, 169 Cal. App. 2d 473, 475 [337 P.2d 539].) [2] Here the evidence as summarized is amply sufficient to support such finding by the jury.
Defendant's second contention, that he was unlawfully entrapped by Lopez into the commission of the crime charged, is equally without merit.
[3] "...`Where the doing of an act is a crime, regardless of the consent of anyone, the courts are agreed that if the criminal intent originates in the mind of the accused and the offense is completed, the fact that an opportunity was furnished, or that the accused is aided in the commission of the crime in order to secure the evidence necessary to prosecute him therefor, constitutes no defense. [Citations.] If the officer uses no more persuasion than is necessary to an ordinary sale, and the accused is ready and willing to make the sale, there is no entrapment.' ... [4] `It is not the entrapment of a criminal upon which the law frowns, but the seduction of innocent people into a criminal career by its officers is what is condemned and will not be tolerated.'" (People v. Price, 172 Cal. App. 2d 776, 778-779 [342 P.2d 437]; see also People v. Braddock, 41 Cal. 2d 794, 802 [264 P.2d 521]; People v. Beccera, 175 Cal. App. 2d 53 [345 P.2d 269]; and People v. Dalton, 172 Cal. App. 2d 15 [341 P.2d 793], where comparable contentions were made under similar facts.) Here, as in the Beccera case, the question being one of fact was properly submitted to the jury, and its verdict was an implied finding against the defense of entrapment.
The judgment is affirmed.
Van Dyke, P.J., and Schottky, J., concurred.

=== CASE 9737304 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:21:27.564347+00 ===

Bobbitt, J.
This original action for mandate and prohibition arises out of the assumption of jurisdiction under the provisions of the Indiana Election Code (Acts 1945, ch. 208, Art. 27), §§29-5401 to 29-5417, Burns’ 1949 Replacement, by the Martin Circuit Court and the Judge thereof of a primary election recount and contest proceedings, and the ordering of a recount and appointing commissioners to recount the votes cast in Martin County, Indiana, in the primary election held on May 6, 1952 for the nomination on the Democratic ticket for the office of joint representative in the Indiana General Assembly of and from Dubois and Martin Counties.
The proceedings in the trial court were instituted by one Frank J. Seng who, according to the certificate of the canvassing board, received a lesser number of votes for said nomination than did the relator herein who was certified by said board as the nominee. Upon the petition of relator we issued a temporary writ prohibiting further proceedings and ordering respondents to show cause why said temporary writ should not be made permanent.
*116The sole question presented is: Are the recount sections of the Indiana Election Code (Acts 1945, ch. 208, Art. 27, supra) in so far as they purport to authorize a recount of the votes cast in the primary election for the nomination of joint representative in the General Assembly of Indiana unconstitutional in that they violate Art. 4, §10 of the Indiana Constitution?—i.e., Can the Legislature confer upon the courts jurisdiction of a recount and contest proceeding in a primary election, involving candidates for nomination for the Indiana General Assembly ?
By instituting the recount proceedings in the court below, the petitioner Seng sought the intervention and invoked the jurisdiction and authority of the judicial branch of the government. State ex rel. Watson v. Pigg, Judge (1943), 221 Ind. 23, 46 N. E. 2d 232; State ex rel. Claffey v. Goett (1946), 224 Ind. 391, 68 N. E. 2d 497.
Art 4, §10 of the Indiana Constitution provides in relevant part as follows: “Each House, when assembled, shall . . . judge the elections, qualifications, and returns of its own members. . . .” Said article does not provide or say that each House, when assembled, shall judge the nomination, election, qualifications, and returns of its own members, or the qualifications and returns of nominees for members of the Legislature.
An examination of the Debates in Indiana Convention 1850 fails to disclose any mention of primary elections or nominations in discussions or resolutions pertaining to the election and seating of members of the General Assembly. It seems clear to us that the word “election” as used in said Art. 4, §10, refers only to “general” and not “primary” elections.
*117*116There can be no question of eligibility, qualifications, or returns of a member before the Legislature for de*117termination until a nominee, who was duly elected in the general election, presents himself for admission to one of its bodies.
This is not an action to determine either the election, eligibility, qualifications, or returns of relator as a member of the Legislature. The sole question here presented is the right of the petitioner Seng to have the court, through the appointment of recount commissioners, determine his rights, if any, to the nomination on his party’s ticket for the office of joint representative from Dubois and Martin Counties.
This is not, as in State ex rel. Acker v. Reeves (1951), 229 Ind. 126, 95 N. E. 2d 838, and in State ex rel. Beaman v. C. Ct. Pike Co.; Gibson Co. (1951), 229 Ind. 190, 96 N. E. 2d 671, a proceeding to test the title to an office but is one to test the right to be a candidate (nominee) for an office—the right to stand for election.
The primary election is the initial step in our election system looking to the nomination of candidates whose names are to appear on the official ballot in the general election. It takes the place of party nominating conventions. 18 Am. Jur., Elections, §146, pp. 275, 276. It is a separate and distinct step (election) to determine the nominees of political parties for various offices to be voted for in the general election. The results of the primary election as finally determined are final and conclusive in the determination of this question.
Nomination in a primary election is in no sense an election to an office. Martin v. Schulte (1933), 204 Ind. 431, 182 N. E. 703. Relator herein is not yet elected a member of the Legislature. If nominated he is then only placed in a position to be elected as a member if he gets the required number of votes in the November (general) election.
*118A successful prosecution of the proceedings in the trial court would result in the substitution of Seng’s name for that of relator on the ballot in the general election, but it would not result in his being seated as a member of the House of Representatives in the Indiana General Assembly unless he is subsequently duly elected in the general election, and his election, qualifications, and returns are approved by the House when he presents himself for admission thereto. These circumstances sufficiently establish the fact that in passing upon the recount petition filed herein the trial court is not attempting to judge the election, qualifications, or returns of a member of the Legislature. This can only be done by the Legislature.
State ex rel. Acker v. Reeves (1951), 229 Ind. 126, 95 N. E. 2d 838, supra; State ex rel. Beaman v. C. Ct. Pike Co.; Gibson Co. (1951), 229 Ind. 190, 96 N. E. 2d 671, supra.
All the court is asked and required to do in the proceeding herein, is to determine which of two persons was nominated as the candidate of a political party for the office of joint representative. It is not requested or required to judge or pass upon the election, qualifications or returns of a member of the Legislature, and any judgment rendered by the trial court herein would be a binding judgment, finally fixing the rights between the relator and Seng as to which of the two was nominated and as to whose name should appear on the ballot to be voted for in the general election.
Seng does not, and could not, seek an order of the court directing the House to recognize him as the duly elected member of that body. He seeks only a determination of his rights to have his name placed upon the ballot in lieu of relator’s in order that he might stand for election in the general election to be held in No*119vember, and the procedure which he has undertaken to follow is his only available remedy. The Legislature has properly provided this remedy and the trial court should be permitted to exercise its jurisdiction to administer it.
A “primary election” is the statutory vehicle for choosing candidates by political parties, for the various offices to be filled in the general election, and, while an integral part of our election system, is not an “election” within the meaning of Art. 4, §10, of the Indiana Constitution. The Legislature may, therefore, confer upon the courts jurisdiction of recounts and contests involving nomination for members of the Legislature in primary elections. Kelso v. Cook (1916), 184 Ind. 173, 110 N. E. 987; Leu v. Montgomery (1914), 31 N. D. 1, 148 N. W. 662; State ex rel. Cloud v. Election Board (1934), 169 Okla. 363, 36 P. 2d 20, 94 A. L. R. 1007. See also: Davis v. Stahl (1941), 287 Ky. 629, 154 S. W. 2d 736; People ex rel. Lindstrand v. Emmerson (1929), 333 Ill. 606, 165 N. E. 217, 62 A. L. R. 912; Tucker v. Bagby (1932), Tex. Civ. App., 52 S. W. 2d 801.
Relator relies upon the cases of Lucas v. McAfee (1940), 217 Ind. 534, 29 N. E. 2d 403, 588; State ex rel. Acker v. Reeves, supra; and State ex rel. Beaman v. C. Ct. Pike Co.; Gibson Co., supra, in support of his contention that the trial court is without jurisdiction to entertain a petition for recount of votes involving the nomination in a primary election for the office of a member of the General Assembly. These cases correctly state the law as it applies to questions involving the election, qualifications, and returns of members of the Legislature when such questions arise out of general elections. The Acker and Beaman cases were concerned only with this question and are clearly dis*120tinguishable from the case at bar. For the reasons above stated, the doctrine of the Lucas case, wherein the trial court was prohibited from considering the qualifications of a candidate for nomination for State Senator, should not be extended to prohibit a recount of votes for the nomination for a legislative office in the primary election.
The temporary writ of prohibition is dissolved and a permanent writ denied.
Draper, J., dissents with opinion, in which Gilkison, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9737305 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:21:27.569335+00 ===

DISSENTING OPINION
Draper, J.
The problem presented should be approached with diffidence, keeping in mind the fact that the purpose of the constitutional provision is to maintain inviolate the integrity of the legislative branch of the government, free from any encroachment by the executive or judicial branches, and to safeguard the untrammeled functioning of the legislative branch without interruption, confusion or embarrassment.
The fact that the Debates in Indiana Convention 1850 discloses no mention of primary elections furnishes no assistance and is certainly not controlling. Primary elections were practically unheard of at that time. As said in United States v. Classic (1940), 313 U. S. 299, 85 L. Ed. 1368, 61 S. Ct. 1031:
“We may assume that the framers of the Constitution . . . did not have specifically in mind the selection and elimination of candidates for Congress by the direct primary any more than they contemplated the application of the commerce clause to interstate telephone, telegraph and wireless communication which are concededly within it. But in determining whether a provision of the Constitution applies to a new subject matter, it is *121of little significance that it is one with which the framers were not familiar. For in setting up an enduring framework of government they undertook to carry out for the indefinite future and in all the vicissitudes of the changing affairs of men, those fundamental purposes which the instrument itself discloses. Hence we read its words, not as we read legislative codes which are subject to continuous revision with the changing course of events, but as the revelation of the great purposes which were intended to be achieved by the Constitution as a continuing instrument of government.”
That the statutory provisions under consideration are wholly ineffective to authorize the pursuit of such proceedings in connection with general elections of legislative candidates, as distinguished from primary elections, is well settled in this jurisdiction. State ex rel. Acker v. Reeves (1951), 229 Ind. 126, 95 N. E. 2d 838; State ex rel. Beaman v. C. Ct. Pike Co.; Gibson Co. (1951), 229 Ind. 190, 96 N. E. 2d 671. This court concluded in those cases that by Article 4, §10 of our Constitution sole and exclusive jurisdiction to determine the results of a general election of legislative candidates is vested in the House of the General Assembly, and that the statutory provisions under consideration are, to the extent they provide otherwise, unconstitutional and void.
Primary elections are no longer “family affairs.” The days when a political party could frame its own rules and devise its own machinery for the selection of nominees for public office are long since past. The enormous growth of city populations and the complexity of modern political life furnished such opportunities for fraud, corruption and close control that primary elections have generally been provided for, regulated and controlled by statute. It is now well *122established that a primary election is an integral part of our election system, and not merely a means whereby each political party determines for itself who its candidates will be at the general election. The right of a qualified voter to register his choice of candidates at such an election is a fundamental constitutional right. State ex rel. Buttz v. Marion Cir. Ct. (1947), 225 Ind. 7, 72 N. E. 2d 225, 170 ALR 187; United States v. Classic, supra; Smith v. Allwright (1948), 321 U. S. 649, 88 L. Ed. 987, 64 S. Ct. 757; State v. Zimmerman (1946), 249 Wis. 237, 24 N. W. 2d 504.
A question involving the qualifications of a legislative candidate who appeared to have been nominated in a primary election arose in Lucas v. McAfee (1940), 217 Ind. 534, 540, 29 N. E. 2d 403, 588. In that case Lucas was declared nominated in the Democratic primary election to be one of the two candidates for the Indiana Senate from Lake County. He received more votes than did McAfee, who thereupon filed an action for recount and contest in which he relied on the provisions of Burns’ 1933, §49-303 which prohibits any person from holding office if he has been convicted of a crime, and on §29-2301, which provides that an election contest may be had on the ground that the contestee had theretofore been convicted of an infamous crime.
This court there held that by Article 4, §10 of our Constitution exclusive jurisdiction to determine the qualifications of a candidate for the General Assembly was vested in the respective Houses of the Legislature; that the courts have no jurisdiction thereof; and the fact that the controversy arose out of a primary election contest was immaterial. We there said:
“The controlling circumstance in this case is that the appellee McAfee has undertaken to in*123voke the jurisdiction of a court to determine the qualifications of a person seeking a seat in the state Senate. The fact that the controversy arose out of a primary election contest is immaterial so far as the substantial issue is concerned. The answer would necessarily be the same however the question arose. ... As to these particular officers, the specific terms of the Constitution transcend the statutes and deprive the courts of jurisdiction of the subject-matter.”
In denying a petition for rehearing, the court said that only the Legislature could determine controversies of fact arising out of the application of the law, and continued:
“The appellee McAfee contends that when such controversies arise in connection with a general election, they- are for the respective Houses of the General Assembly, but that when they arise out of primaries, they are for the courts. We cannot agree with this conclusion.”
While the matter of a recount was not then before this court, the principle which ruled that case seems to be of assistance here. The courts may not engage in a proceeding which has for its purpose the determination of the qualifications of a contestant in a primary election. If, as that case expressly holds, the constitutional provision prohibits a judicial inquiry into the qualifications of a legislative candidate at a primary election, there would seem to be no valid reason why the same provisions would not prohibit judicial inquiry into the eligibility of such candidate for legislative office insofar as the purity of such primary election or the votes cast thereat are concerned.
An election is an integrated process. The primary election is an essential forerunner of the general election. It is an indispensable and inseparable part and parcel thereof. It is an element without which an *124election would be incomplete. A general election cannot be held unless candidates have been nominated. If, as it appears, the primary election is an integral part of our election machinery, and so is essential to the completeness thereof, it is difficult to see how the judicial branch of our government may isolate any one component part from another part, and exercise an authority as to one which in its very nature must vitally affect and perhaps dominate the whole. In some jurisdictions opposition in the general election is so feeble that the candidate nominated in the primary, or perhaps in a “run-off” primary, is always elected. In some of the counties of this state nomination is generally tantamount to election.1 If the nomination of legislative candidates, particularly in those counties, can be finally determined in a proceeding in which the authority of the judicial branch has been invoked and exercised, the right to judge the election of such candidates would seem to have been effectively removed from the domain of the legislative branch, in which it is exclusively placed by Article 4, §10 of our Constitution.
I do not understand the petitioner below as even contending that the courts can do so. He insists that the appropriate House of the General Assembly is the final judge regardless of what part has been given to the courts to play, and the legislature has the power, he says, “to either adopt or reject the findings of the *125recount commission or any determination made by the 'coyrt in the event of a judicial determination.” (emphasis supplied)
If that be true, and I think it is true, the effect of the legislation under consideration would be to impose upon the judicial department of government the investigation of a matter not resulting in a binding judgment, not finally fixing the rights of parties, and not ultimately determining a state of facts; an activity in which the judicial branch is not required to engage. Dinan v. Swig (1916), 223 Mass. 516, 112 N. E. 91.
Judgments of courts are not “tentative.” They are not, or at least should not be, idle ceremonies or futile proceedings. Under Art. 3, §1 of our Constitution, which marks the separation of the legislative, the executive and the judicial departments of the government, it does not lie within the power of the legislative branch to set aside, vacate, annul or ignore the final judgment of a court acting within its jurisdiction.
It seems to me that a fair recognition of and adherence to the equal division of governmental functions would require courts to leave all questions involving the elections, qualifications and returns of legislative candidates entirely to the legislature. In the Beaman case, supra, we said only last year that “if the effect of said Art. 27 is not an adjudication of the election and returns of members of the Legislature it approaches so near thereto that it may interfere with the constitutional right of each house of the Legislature to judge the elections and returns of its members.” I think it would be appropriate to say the same in this case.
I do not, of course, mean to intimate that the votes cast for legislative candidates at a primary election may not be reexamined, their validity redetermined *126and their number retabulated. I do think that such a proceeding is beyond the scope of the legitimate activity of the courts while they are acting judicially.
Gilkison, J., concurs.
NOTE.—Reported in 107 N. E. 2d 666.
Dubois and Martin Counties are involved here. Under the legislative apportionment acts of 1879, 1885, 1891 and 1921, the counties of Dubois and Martin constituted a joint representative district entitled to one representative in the General Assembly, and in every general election held since 1879 in which a joint representative for such joint district was elected, 23 in number, the nominee of the Democratic Party was elected.

=== CASE 2209807 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:43.991366+00 ===

182 Cal.App.2d 422 (1960)
THE PEOPLE, Respondent,
v.
RAUL RAMIREZ ZAVALETA, Appellant.
Crim. No. 6925.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. One.
July 5, 1960.
Patrick E. Duggan for Appellant.
Stanley Mosk, Attorney General, and William E. James, Assistant Attorney General, for Respondent.
LILLIE, J.
Defendant was charged with possession of heroin in violation of section 11500, Health and Safety Code, and two prior felony convictions--grand theft from the person and possession of narcotics. He pleaded not guilty, denied the prior convictions and personally waived his right to a jury trial. The matter was heard by the court which found him guilty and that he had been previously convicted as charged; from the judgment and sentence he appeals.
The People's case consisted of the testimony of the two police officers who arrested defendant. On March 26, 1959, around 10 a.m., Officers Dorrell and Fesler went to a warehouse where defendant was employed. After speaking to the foreman, the latter called defendant from a box car which had been pulled up alongside of the building. Defendant walked over to the officers where he was shown their identification cards and told "(W)e are police officers. We would like to talk to you." Defendant then said "(J)ust a minute," turned and started to walk back toward the box car. Officer Dorrell took hold of defendant's arm and said "(W)e would like to talk to you now." The officer did not pull or shove the defendant who then turned back around; the officer let go of his arm. Defendant then walked towards the door, together with the two officers, through the warehouse, outside under a roofed portion of a platform. Although Sergeant Fesler thought that as defendant turned around Officer Dorrell suggested to him that they go outside "to get away from the other people inside there," the officers did not "walk" him outside the warehouse, did not in any way physically touch him as they walked out together, did not tell him to go outside, and said nothing to him while walking before they reached the outside of the warehouse. Standing on the outside platform, Officer Dorrell asked him if he was using narcotics, which defendant denied; then if he was selling them, and defendant said "no." The *425 officer then said to him "(W)ell, then, you don't mind if we look through your pockets, do you?" and defendant answered "(N)o, go ahead and search me if you want to. I don't have anything on me." Whereupon Officer Dorrell searched him and found in defendant's right hand shirt pocket three capsules of heroin. Defendant told the officers the capsules contained heroin and he had bought them for his own use for $20; but denied having an outfit. They then told him he was under arrest and handcuffed him. Asked if he had an automobile, defendant answered in the affirmative and pointed to a Buick parked 100 or 150 feet away. They took the keys from defendant and opened the trunk, removing a tinfoil wrapped object and held it up to the defendant who said "(T)hat's my outfit." At the police station, Officer Fesler unwrapped the package and found a hypodermic needle, eye dropper and one capsule of heroin. Defendant said he had forgotten about the capsule.
Defendant testified that the officers "grabbed" him by the arm and "walked" him outside during which time an officer had "ahold" of his arm; that the officers did not force him outside, they "took" him outside and he did not resist; that when the officers asked if they could search him he answered "No, you cannot search me," but they removed his three-quarter apron and did so; and that after finding the narcotic in his pocket they handcuffed him.
Appellant urges reversal of the conviction on the ground that any consent he might have given to the officers was in submission to unlawful authority and involuntary; the search, seizure and arrest were illegal; and his constitutional rights were violated by the trial court in its use of the probation report in determining the truth of the charge of his prior felony convictions.
[1] The question of consent to the search of defendant's person--whether it was given, and if so, whether it was voluntary--arising out of the testimony of the police officers and that of the defendant, was one of fact for the determination of the trial court (People v. Gorg, 45 Cal.2d 776 [291 P.2d 469]; People v. Michael, 45 Cal.2d 751 [290 P.2d 852]; People v. Fischer, 49 Cal.2d 442 [317 P.2d 967]); and its finding, when supported by substantial evidence, is binding upon the appellate court (People v. Hood, 149 Cal.App.2d 836 [309 P.2d 135]). As was his duty, the trial judge resolved the conflict; determined the issue adverse to defendant by accepting *426 the testimony of the police officers as true and rejecting defendant's version of what occurred; and, in finding him guilty, impliedly held that defendant voluntarily consented to the search of his person, after which he was legally arrested for possession of heroin. That consent was given and that the same was voluntary, is borne out by the evidence and all inferences reasonably deducible therefrom; and that the search made pursuant thereto was reasonable, and the resultant arrest legal, are clearly supported by the decisions in this state (People v. Burke, 47 Cal.2d 45 [301 P.2d 241]; People v. Michael, 45 Cal.2d 751 [290 P.2d 852]; People v. Gorg, 45 Cal.2d 776 [291 P.2d 469]).
The officers specifically sought out, at his place of employment, defendant who had only several years before in this county suffered a prior felony conviction for possession of narcotics; and went to the warehouse for the purpose of talking with him. [2] There appears to be nothing unreasonable about police going to a person's home or even to his place of business, to interview him (People v. Michael, 45 Cal.2d 751 [290 P.2d 852]; People v. Jaurequi, 142 Cal.App.2d 555 [298 P.2d 896]). The questions were courteously asked of defendant and no threats or force were used. All defendant had to do under these circumstances, if he did not wish to have the officers look through his pockets was to say so. [3] As stated in People v. Michael, 45 Cal.2d 751 [290 P.2d 852], it is not necessary for a person to forcibly resist either an officer's assertion of authority or his request to conduct a search--a simple objection is sufficient; but if he freely consents to a search his constitutional rights are not violated and the search and seizure of the evidence pursuant to the consent are not unreasonable (p. 753).
In the Michael case, supra (45 Cal.2d 751), the officers, who identified themselves as such, were admitted to defendant's home by her mother and, pursuant to their query whether she had any narcotics, defendant and her mother produced narcotics and hypodermic equipment, whereupon defendant was arrested. The court, taking into consideration the fact that four officers at the door may be a disturbing experience to a distraught or timid woman, nevertheless said at page 754: "Under these circumstances, to hold as a matter of law that the evidence was produced in response to an unlawful assertion of authority would seriously hamper officers in the reasonable performance of their duties." Similarly, in People v. Jaurequi, 142 Cal.App.2d 555 [298 P.2d *427 896], the officer asked defendant "how his habit was getting along and how his marks were" (p. 560), and defendant responded by displaying his arms, from which the officer concluded he had been using narcotics and arrested him. Citing People v. Michael, 45 Cal.2d 751 [290 P.2d 852], the court held that it was not unreasonable for officers to seek inter views with suspects and, if during such inquiries the accused voluntarily reveals evidence against himself, he may not later assert that he acted only in response to an implied assertion of unlawful authority (p. 560).
In the case at bar, when the officers identified themselves and Officer Dorrell told defendant they wanted to talk to him, defendant did not indicate a refusal to do so but wanted them to wait "a minute," and started back to the box car, where he no doubt would have removed the narcotic from his pocket. [4] Then after walking outside with the officers, the latter simply asked defendant if he was using or selling narcotics. After defendant said he was not, it was then they asked if he minded if they looked through his pockets, to which, with the same bluff and bravado with which defendant in the Jaurequi case displayed his arms to the officers, he said "(N)o, go ahead and search me. I don't have anything on me." This clearly supports a consent freely and voluntarily given in response to a resonable inquiry. The evidence shows no conduct from which force, compulsion, or threats can be inferred. The inquiries of defendant were courteously made and, other than the fact they were police officers, their request was not accompanied by any assertion, official or otherwise, of a right to search. Appellant's claim that he permitted the search of his person only because they were police officers and didn't want to resist and therefore his consent was in response to an implied assertion of unlawful authority, is, under the circumstances at bar, wholly without merit (People v. Michael, 45 Cal.2d 751, 754 [290 P.2d 852]). Even in cases in which the accused is in custody, or under arrest, the courts have held that his official detention alone is not sufficient to make his consent to search involuntary per se (People v. Fischer, 49 Cal.2d 442 [317 P.2d 967]).
[5] Nor is there anything in the record to justify any finding that defendant was in custody or under arrest, or in any way detained at the time he was asked if the officers could "look through his pockets"; and it was only after the search of his person revealed the narcotics that he was arrested for *428 their possession and handcuffed. When the officers told defendant they wanted to talk to him, he did not refuse, but sought to delay it for "a minute" until he could dispose of the heroin then on his person. It was only then the officer placed his hand on defendant's arm; but he immediately dropped it when defendant turned back to talk to them as requested. They at no time thereafter until his arrest had physical contact with him. They walked to the outside of the warehouse for privacy (suggested to avoid embarrassment of being questioned in defendant's place of employment where his superior or fellow workers might overhear the conversation), not for the purpose of restraining defendant's freedom, for the officers could as well have questioned him inside as outside the building. It is apparent from the evidence, and the lower court so found, that no arrest took place in the warehouse after the officers announced to defendant they wanted to question him; that defendant voluntarily accompanied the officers to the platform outside the warehouse; that while walking there they asserted no authority over him, made no threats and had no physical contact with him; that they simply questioned him and in response to a reasonable inquiry--would he mind "if they looked through his pockets," he told them "(N)o, go ahead"; that the consent to search his person was voluntarily and freely given and the arrest, upon finding the narcotics in his possession, was lawful. Although appellant claims that he cooperated only because they were officers, it is obvious that defendant had sufficient previous contact with the law to know that he had the right to object to an unreasonable search and seizure without force or resistance. He not only made no objection, but affirmatively told the officers to "go ahead" and search. Under the circumstances, his position that he can now avoid the result of his voluntary act on the theory that he acted only in response to an implied assertion of unlawful authority is wholly untenable.
In People v. Hood, 149 Cal.App.2d 836 [309 P.2d 135], defendant, at the officers' request, accompanied them in his car to the police station to be "checked out on a robbery case." At the station the officer asked defendant if he could search his car and defendant said "(Y)es, go ahead." The officer found therein a billy club and then placed him under arrest. Determining that defendant was not in custody before the request to search his automobile was made, and that the same was the result of a voluntary consent, the court stated, at page 839: "The record shows clearly that the defendant voluntarily *429 accompanied the officer to the police station and that he was not under arrest until after the billy club was located." Factually, this situation on the issue of arrest and search seems to be weaker than the one at bar for there the officers actually transported the defendant to the station as a suspect. Also in People v. Burke, 47 Cal.2d 45 [301 P.2d 241], an officer who had gained entrance to defendant's apartment to interview him asked defendant if he had any narcotics in his home; defendant said "no," and the officer then asked, "(Y)ou don't mind then if we search your apartment do you?"; defendant answered "(N)o, go ahead." The court stated at page 49: "It was not necessary here, however, for the People to show that the search and seizure was reasonable as incident to a proper arrest, for they showed that defendant freely consented to the search of his apartment which disclosed the evidence which defendant has since claimed was illegally obtained." Even had the officers arrested defendant inside the warehouse, his subsequent voluntary consent resulted in a reasonable search and seizure to which defendant cannot now with merit object (People v. Melody, 164 Cal.App.2d 728 [331 P.2d 72]).
Appellant finally contends that he did not waive his right to a trial by jury on the issue of the prior felony convictions; and that the trial court's finding thereon was predicated on a "hearsay probation report," denying him a fair trial.
The information charging defendant with possession of heroin in violation of section 11500, Health and Safety Code, also alleged that he had been previously convicted of two felonies--grand theft from the person and possession of narcotics. Upon arraignment defendant pleaded not guilty to the main or new charge and denied that he had been previously convicted of the felonies alleged. When the matter was called for trial, the lower court said to defendant: "Mr. Zavaleta, do you want a court trial or a jury trial in this case?" and the defendant answered "(C)ourt." Defendant's counsel, who was present, then joined in the jury waiver as did the deputy district attorney. Before the trial began at 2 p.m. the same day, the court again said: "There was a jury waiver in this matter, wasn't there?" and defendant's counsel said "Yes, your Honor."
[6, 7] The prior felony conviction allegation does not constitute a separate and distinct charge requiring, on a denial thereof and a plea of not guilty to the main offense, a trial separate from that on the issue of guilt in the latter; but constitutes *430 only one of the issues in the trial of the new or main offense charged in the pleading (People v. Ysabel, 28 Cal.App.2d 259 [82 P.2d 476]; People v. Collins, 117 Cal.App.2d 175 [255 P.2d 59]); thus, when on his plea of not guilty defendant waived his right to a trial by jury, the waiver went not only to the not guilty plea on the possession charge, but to the denial of the previous convictions as well. The court having heard and determined the issue of defendant's guilt on his plea of not guilty, the issue relative to the prior felony convictions was properly heard and determined by the same trier of fact (Pen. Code,  1025); "(M)oreover, no objection was made at the trial to the inclusion of the prior conviction along with the new offenses. Hence, it is not a subject for review (People v. Acosta, supra, p. 3)" (People v. Collins, 117 Cal.App.2d 175, 183 [255 P.2d 59]).
Relative to the probation report, its use by the trial court on the issue of the truth of the allegation charging the prior felony convictions was stipulated to by defendant's counsel. After cross-examination of defendant during the trial, in which he admitted that on March 15, 1951, he had been convicted of grand theft from the person in the Superior Court of Los Angeles County, for which he went to prison, and on February 15, 1955, he had been convicted of possession of narcotics in violation of section 11500, Health and Safety Code, in the Superior Court of Los Angeles County, for which he served a term in the state prison, all as alleged in the information; and after finding defendant guilty as charged, the trial judge then said "Now, may it be stipulated that the priors may be determined from the probation officer's report?" Defense counsel not only made no objection to the procedure suggested but immediately entered into the stipulation to permit its use, in the presence of defendant, who remained silent; and such stipulation was entirely proper (People v. Cohen, 94 Cal.App.2d 451 [210 P.2d 911]). [8] It has long been established that counsel may stipulate to evidence which may be received (People v. Mathews, 163 Cal.App.2d 795 [329 P.2d 983]) even though it might otherwise be inadmissible (People v. Ah Ton, 53 Cal. 741); and the probation report, concededly of a hearsay nature, may be the proper subject of such a stipulation. [9] In the absence of any claim that the stipulation was entered into by mistake, inadvertence, fraud or misrepresentation and that defendant should be relieved of the same, we find no merit to objection raised at this time. In any event, it does not appear to us how *431 defendant could have been prejudiced by the court's use of this report in view of his admission in open court on cross-examination that he had been convicted of the two felonies named in the information and for them, served time.
[10] Inasmuch as no appeal lies from the sentence as such (People v. Otterman, 154 Cal.App.2d 193 [316 P.2d 85]) the attempted appeal therefrom is dismissed; and for the foregoing reasons the judgment is affirmed.
Wood, P. J., and Fourt, J., concurred.

=== CASE 2209808 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:44.014161+00 ===

329 Mass. 174 (1952)
107 N.E.2d 11
BOARD OF HEALTH OF WAREHAM
vs.
MARINE BY-PRODUCTS CO.
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Plymouth.
April 7, 1952.
July 3, 1952.
Present: QUA, C.J., LUMMUS, RONAN, SPALDING, & WILLIAMS, JJ.
Gerald P. Walsh, for the plaintiff.
Harry Bergson, for the defendant.
QUA, C.J.
This bill alleges that it is brought by the members of the board of health of Wareham "on behalf of the inhabitants of said town." The board had authority to institute a suit for the town. Taunton v. Taylor, 116 Mass. 254, 262. But the suit should have been in the name of the town, and an amendment to make it so would be advisable, though the point is not now raised. Worcester Board of Health v. Tupper, 210 Mass. 378, 382-383.
The case is here by report of the trial judge of his action in entering an interlocutory decree sustaining the defendant's demurrer to the bill. G.L. (Ter. Ed.) c. 214, § 30.
The material allegations of the bill are in substance these: The defendant owns a plant at South Wareham "designed for the processing and manufacture of certain by-products from fish or fish products." On September 20, 1950, the board, acting under G.L. (Ter. Ed.) c. 111, served a notice on the defendant stating that, after hearing the complaints of residents and hearing representatives of the defendant on September 13, and after discussing the results of its own investigation, the board "found that a nuisance still exists by reason of the emanation of foul and offensive odors caused by the cooking or dehydrating of trash fish used in the manufacture of fish meal and fish oil by Marine By-Products Co. at its plant in South Wareham, Massachusetts; ... that said foul and offensive odors have injured and are injuring the residents of certain areas on [sic] the town of Wareham in the enjoyment and comfort of their homes"; and that therefore by authority of G.L. (Ter. Ed.) c. 111, § 143, "you are hereby ordered to cease the further operation *176 of the business of Marine By-Products Co. at South Wareham, Massachusetts, within ten (10) days from the receipt by you of this order." The bill then goes on to allege that no special authorization under G.L. (Ter. Ed.) c. 111, § 148, to continue the trade or employment pending appeal proceedings had been given to the defendant. The bill further alleges that upon subsequent investigation the board learned that in fact the defendant was operating its plant processing fish or fish products in wilful violation of the order and causing offensive, noxious and foul odors to be emitted which have injured and are injuring the residents of the town and interfering with their enjoyment and comfort in their homes in surrounding areas. The prayers are for injunctive and other relief.
General Laws (Ter. Ed.) c. 111, § 143, as appearing in St. 1948, c. 480, § 1, under which the order of the board purports to have been made, provides, "No trade or employment which may result in a nuisance or be harmful to the inhabitants, injurious to their estates, dangerous to the public health, or may be attended by noisome and injurious odors shall be established in a city or town except in such a location as may be assigned by the board of health thereof ... and such board of health may prohibit the exercise thereof within the limits of the city or town or in places not so assigned, in any event. Such assignments... may be revoked when the board shall think proper."[1] There are in the same section provisions for appeal by any person aggrieved to the department of public health, and in § 147, as amended by St. 1948, c. 480, § 2, there are provisions for appeal to a jury in the Superior Court. There are also provisions for enforcement of the orders of the board. §§ 146, 187.
The principal contention of the defendant is that the order of the board of September 20, 1950, as appearing in the bill, is invalid as matter of law. It is contended that *177 this is so for two reasons, (1) that the board made no determination that the trade carried on by the defendant was in and of itself an offensive trade, and (2) that the order that the defendant cease the operation of its entire business at South Wareham exceeded the authority of the board, since the order contains no statement that the business of the defendant there carried on was confined to the offensive trade, if there was one.
We cannot adopt either proposition.
We do not pause to discuss the question to what extent, if at all, a board of health acting under § 143 is bound to make express findings of facts required to support its order. It is to be noted that under that section it is not necessary that the trade shall actually be a nuisance or offensive. It is enough if it "may be attended by noisome and injurious odors" (emphasis supplied), and it is enough if the odors may be injurious to the "estates" of the inhabitants. It does not require much imagination to assume that any business of manufacturing fish meal and fish oil "may be attended by noisome and injurious odors." Waltham v. Mignosa, 327 Mass. 250, 251-252.
But quite apart from these considerations, we are of opinion that the order of the board, properly construed, does contain statements of all necessary facts. Boards of health are likely to be composed of laymen not skilled in drafting legal documents, and their orders should be read with this fact in mind. They should be so construed as to ascertain the real substance intended and without too great attention to niceties of wording and arrangement. Taunton v. Taylor, 116 Mass. 254, 261. Caires v. Building Commissioner of Hingham, 323 Mass. 589, 597. In the order before us the prohibited "trade or employment" was "the business" of the defendant at South Wareham. Immediately preceding the prohibitory command reference was made to the fact that the defendant was manufacturing fish meal and fish oil at its plant in South Wareham, and that in connection with such manufacture offensive odors had emanated. It is not going too far as matter of construction to say that this *178 manufacture was the "business" intended to be prohibited. The next question is whether this business was stated to be one which might result in a nuisance or might be attended by noisome and injurious odors. At this point the order goes beyond any requirements and, instead of contenting itself with stating that the business might result in a nuisance or be attended by noisome and injurious odors, asserts that, by reason of the cooking or dehydrating of trash fish used in the manufacture, a nuisance actually exists, and that foul and offensive odors attendant upon that manufacture are actually injuring residents "in the enjoyment and comfort of their homes." This is injury to their "estates."
Whether it might be possible to manufacture fish meal and fish oil without cooking or dehydrating trash fish and without being offensive is beside the point. The board is not expected to be composed of experts in all processes of manufacturing and to separate out the causes of the nuisance or offence. It is empowered by § 143 to prohibit the exercise of the trade or employment as a whole whenever by any of the methods employed it has become or may become a nuisance or otherwise offensive as set forth in the statute. If the defendant carries on or desires to carry on any business at its plant at South Wareham other than the manufacture of fish meal and fish oil, such other business is not affected by the order. We think the order is valid under G.L. (Ter. Ed.) c. 111, § 143, as appearing in St. 1948, c. 480, § 1, under which the board purported to proceed.
These conclusions are consistent with previous decisions in which the same or predecessor statutes were involved, although in those decisions the same problems were not raised in the same way. Belcher v. Farrar, 8 Allen, 325. Taunton v. Taylor, 116 Mass. 254. Lexington v. Miskell, 260 Mass. 544. Swansea v. Pivo, 265 Mass. 520. Ryder v. Board of Health of Lexington, 273 Mass. 177. Revere v. Blaustein, 315 Mass. 93. Waltham v. Mignosa, 327 Mass. 250. Compare Belmont v. New England Brick Co. 190 Mass. 442, where action of the board was held unreasonable because of lack of relationship between the prohibited trade and injury to *179 the public. The case last cited was distinguished in Lexington v. Miskell, 260 Mass. 544, 546.
We think also that the bill sets forth with sufficient particularity acts committed by the defendant in violation of the order of the board.
The interlocutory decree sustaining the demurrer is reversed, and an interlocutory decree is to be entered overruling the demurrer.
So ordered.
NOTES
[1]  It would seem that a prohibition of an employment or trade at a particular place would in itself constitute a revocation of any such assignment for that place. See Revere v. Riceman, 280 Mass. 76, 80, 82-83.