=== CASE 2210919 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:59.664879+00 ===

301 N.E.2d 795 (1973)
CITY OF INDIANAPOLIS THROUGH THE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
Nola I. MEDENWALD, Defendant-Appellee.
No. 2-273A41.
Court of Appeals of Indiana, Third District.
October 16, 1973.
Gary R. Landau, William L. Soards, Bowen, Myers, Northam & Soards, Indianapolis, for plaintiff-appellant.
Clark & Clark, Pete A. Pappas, Indianapolis, for defendant-appellee.
SHARP, Judge.
This is an appeal by Plaintiff-Appellant, City of Indianapolis Through The Department of Transportation, from a judgment of the Superior Court of Marion County, Room No. 7, which was entered in favor of Defendant-Appellee Medenwald in the amount of $40,000.00, as the result of an eminent domain proceeding instituted by the Appellant City.
The subject property is located on West Tenth Street, with the I-465 Interchange to the west of the property and Lynhurst Drive to the east of the property. The property taken represents 55,670 square feet of frontage on West Tenth Street. Appellee-Medenwalt has several buildings and a house towards the rear of the property. Medenwald operates a poodle grooming business and kennel in the rear buildings.
On August 28, 1969, Appellant City filed its Complaint for Appropriation of Real Estate. Trial to the Court was commenced on June 28, 1972. Pursuant to the sustaining of Appellee's motion for on-site inspection, the Court inspected and viewed the subject property on August 18, 1972. On September 11, 1972, the Court entered judgment for the Appellee for $40,000.00 plus $3,251.33, which was denominated as interest. Following the trial court's overruling of Appellant's Motion to Correct Errors, this appeal was perfected.
On Appeal, Appellant contends that the trial court erred in admitting over Appellant's objection, the testimony of two of Appellee's witnesses, Mr. Posner and Mr. Burford, in which they testified, inter alia, that their after value of the subject property was based upon impairment of the right of ingress and egress to the property. Appellant relies primarily upon the recent cases of State v. Ensley, 240 Ind. 472, 164 N.E.2d 342 (1960), and State v. Cheris, Ind. App., 287 N.E.2d 777 (1972).
In this case there was substantial evidence of probative value which is not excludable under Ensley-Cheris to sustain the *796 decision of the trial court. If there was no such evidence to support that decision, we would have no choice but to reverse. Since there is such evidence, we are not compelled to reverse the decision of the trial court.
Mr. Posner testified that the value of the 55,670 square feet taken was $1.00 per square foot; that the highest and best use of the property taken was commercial; and that after the take, due to the limited direct access from one direction only, he felt that he was "not led to believe that the market would view the property after the taking as a commercial apartment site."
Mr. Burford testified that the value of the 55,670 square feet of land taken was $1.50 per square foot.
It is apparent from the record that a concrete and metal divider was erected by the Appellant in the middle of West Tenth Street in front of the subject property.
Testimony was elicited at the trial to the effect that, due to the barrier, traffic going west on West Tenth Street could not turn directly into the subject property, but must go to the I-465 Interchange and then approach the property from the west. Also, due to the median strip, vehicles could only enter from the eastbound lane of West Tenth Street.
It is elementary that on appeal, the decision of the trial court will not be overturned if there is sufficient evidence of probative value to support it, unless it is contrary to law.
It must also be noted that when a cause is tried to the Court, a presumption arises that the trial court judge separated evidence from the improper evidence and only considered the proper evidence in arriving at his judgment, and the judgment of the trial court is afforded the same weight and presumptions as a jury verdict. Masters, Executor v. Stewart, 101 Ind. App. 243, 198 N.E. 800 (1935); Dean v. State, 254 Ind. 190, 258 N.E.2d 636.
Considering the evidence and the permissible inference therefrom, in a light most favorable to the Appellee, it is apparent that there is sufficient evidence of probative value to support this judgment.
In response to Appellant City's objection:
"MR. CAPLIN: Your Honor, to which we are going to object. They are offering evidence for the purpose of damage. They are bringing up a point of circuitous travel which is not compensatory by law."
the trial court stated:
"THE COURT: I don't consider any inconvenience to customers as a consideration in this case. Now, if this testimony is for the purpose of showing that there was ingress and egress from Tenth Street then I am interested. Up until now it was my impression there wasn't any. I may have missed something along the way, so if you are on the matter of ingress and egress, I'll listen to that."
Appellee testified her damages were $415,000.00. Mr. Posner testified the damages were $270,400.00. Mr. Posner also testified that by using the "Market Data Approach", and comparables, the before value was $1.00 per square foot, and that the after value was $1.00 per square foot. With 55,670 square feet taken, his estimate of damages was $55,670.00. Mr. Burford testified that the value of the property taken was $1.50 per square foot, or $83,505.00. Appellant's witnesses testified the damages the Appellee sustained as a result of the take were $12,900.00 and $8,650.00, respectively. Comparables given by expert witnesses for both Appellant and Appellee varied from 14¢ per square foot to $3.63 per square foot. Appellant's witnesses testified that the median strip actually enhanced the value of the property due to the safety factor and also a deceleration lane which would now be used to enter the property. The judgment amounted to 71¢ per square foot.
*797 In Ensley, supra, the Court instructed the jury that a limitation on the right of ingress and egress was a proper element of damages.
In Cheris, supra, in reversing an award for the landowners, we stated, "The award of damages to the landowners was based on the theory that their right of access had been substantially impaired due to the construction of the median... ."
We cannot say as a matter of law that such was the case here. There was sufficient evidence before the trial court to support its verdict of 71¢ per square foot and the same is not contrary to law.
We, therefore, affirm the decision of the trial court.
HOFFMAN, C.J., and STATON, J., concur.

=== CASE 2210924 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:59.716768+00 ===

260 Cal.App.2d 1 (1968)
THE PEOPLE, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
JESSE RESENDEZ, Defendant and Appellant.
California Court of Appeals.
Mar. 12, 1968.
Frank P. Rosen for Defendant and Appellant.
Thomas C. Lynch, Attorney General, William E. James, Assistant Attorney General, and Walter R. Jones, Deputy Attorney General, for Plaintiff and Respondent.
FOURT, J.
Jesse Resendez appeals his conviction for a lewd and lascivious act committed upon a child under the age of 14. (Pen. Code,  288.)
Appellant was charged by information with a violation of Penal Code, section 288 and a prior felony conviction for rape. He admitted the prior conviction. The first jury was unable to reach a verdict and a mistrial was declared, but at his second trial the jury found him guilty as charged. The court ordered a probation report, appointed two psychiatrists to examine appellant for sexual psychopathy (Welf. & Inst. Code,  5504), and later obtained additional psychiatric and probation reports. Upon the basis of the information before it, the court then found appellant to be a probable mentally disordered sex offender and committed him to Atascadero State Hospital for 90-day observation. The report from the superintendent at Atascadero found appellant to be a mentally disordered sex offender but concluded that he was not capable *5 of benefiting from care and treatment at a state hospital. The court thereupon resumed criminal proceedings, denied probation, and sentenced Resendez to state prison for the term prescribed by law.
The record discloses the following: Catherine Marie Clark, aged nine at the time of these events, was a neighbor of the Resendez family and frequently played with appellant's children. She lived with her mother, grandparents, two sisters and a brother in a house situated on the front of a city lot, while appellant resided with his wife and three children in a dwelling at the rear of the same lot. On Saturday morning, February 27, 1965, Catherine went to play with appellant's daughters. Although Mrs. Resendez and the two older girls were not home, Resendez, clad in regular street clothes, invited Catherine to come in. He then gave his youngest daughter, Rita, a quarter and told her to go outside. When Rita obeyed, Resendez took Catherine in his arms and kissed her on the mouth saying, "You're my girl, aren't you?" Then, while Catherine waited in the living room at his request, Resendez went into the bedroom; he returned attired in pajamas and again kissed and caressed her. Soon, however, he was startled by a noise from outside and hastened to dress again in shirt and trousers, telling Catherine to go out and play.
That afternoon, Catherine went with her mother, brother and sisters, to take her music lesson and returned around 4:30 p.m. She started to play volley ball with her sister and brother and two of appellant's children in the yard between the houses. Resendez, however, saw Catherine, who was then clad in a red shift dress over panties and slip, and once more summoned her into his house where he was alone. When she entered he kissed her on the mouth again and repeated "You're my girl, aren't you?" First he sat on a chair in the corner of the living room with her, searched inside her panties, and inserted his finger in her "private parts" which hurt her a little. Thereafter, he took her into the bathroom where he sat on the toilet seat with Catherine standing before him and repeated the procedure cautioning Catherine, "You won't tell anybody, will you, now." When Catherine promised not to tell, because she was "scared stiff" appellant unzipped his trousers and displayed his penis to Catherine, who could not avoid looking but refused to touch, although appellant grasped her hand in an effort to force her to do so. *6 Thereupon, appellant kissed her again, admonished her once more not to tell anyone, and let her go.
Catherine was reluctant to enter the house when, after she had returned to the volley ball game, appellant once more summoned her. Fearing harm if she failed to respond, Catherine ultimately gave in, Resendez freely kissed and fondled her while they were alone together in the house. Appellant repeated this procedure twice, but when he called her on the third occasion around 5:30 p.m. and his daughter urged her to obey, Catherine instead ran into her own home where she began to help her mother set the table.
A few minutes later Catherine's brother entered and told their mother that Catherine had been rude to Resendez by failing to obey his summons. When Catherine's mother chided her for being rude, Catherine responded only "I know what he wants and I'm scared." Catherine's mother sent her brother outside so that she might question the little girl alone and Catherine cried as she related to her mother the events of the afternoon. Her mother did not immediately call the police because she promised Catherine that she would say nothing if Catherine told her story, and she did not want the police to come for appellant while his children were present. That evening, although Catherine remained hysterical, her mother went to work as usual around 8 p.m. and told her employer about the incident. Her employer called the police, who interviewed Catherine and her mother and prepared their report on the following Monday.
Resendez' sister Leonora Jiminez testified that she and her family visited appellant on February 27, 1965, at approximately 2:30 p.m. and remained there until 6:45 p.m. Catherine's grandmother, however, testified that she saw his sister and family arrive at around 11:30 in the morning on that day and that all departed leaving appellant alone about 4 p.m.
Appellant denied Catherine's entire story and stated that she was inside his home only once on the afternoon of February 27, 1965. Appellant was sitting on the toilet reading a paper when she ran into the bathroom and, surprised, he yelled at her and "whacked her one." She left then, but he called her back a few minutes later to apologize. Appellant's wife testified that she left the house around noon on that day and did not return until after 7 p.m. No one answered when she called home around 3 p.m. but when she called again around 6 p.m. her brother-in-law (the husband of Leonora Jiminez) answered the phone. She also claimed that appellant *7 was extremely fond of children and customarily hugged and kissed them. Appellant's 10-year-old daughter recalled that appellant's sister had visited their home on the afternoon in question and added that Catherine had a reputation for telling lies. Another of Catherine's 10-year-old acquaintances testified that Catherine later claimed that she had sexual intercourse with appellant but this witness confirmed that Catherine had a reputation for telling lies.
A neighborhood service station attendant testified that he overheard Catherine tell other children she liked boys, had three or four boy friends, and knew all about sex. The physician who examined Catherine following the incident found her hymen intact but sufficiently stretched to permit him to insert his small finger up to the first joint.
Appellant contends that (1) the evidence is insufficient to sustain his conviction; (2) the trial court erred in limiting the scope of the cross- examination of Catherine's mother; (3) the verdict should have been vacated on the grounds of misconduct by the jury; and (4) the court abused its discretion in failing to schedule further hearings on the issue of sexual psychopathy after the filing of a report by the Department of Corrections.
[1a] With respect to appellant's first contention, our review of the record discloses ample evidence to support appellant's conviction. [2] Before a conviction can be reversed on the grounds of insufficiency of the evidence, "... 'it must be made clearly to appear that upon no hypothesis whatever is there sufficient substantial evidence to support the conclusion reached in the court below.' " (People v. Newland, 15 Cal.2d 678, 681 [104 P.2d 778]; People v. Butts, 236 Cal.App.2d 817, 832 [46 Cal.Rptr. 362].) [1b] The circumstances of the case clearly fall within the prohibitions of Penal Code, section 288.  [fn. 1] Catherine was but nine years of age; the acts alleged were patently of a "lewd and lascivious character"; and the intent to arouse sexual passions or desires is manifest from the acts described. The primary issue confronting the jury was the respective credibility *8 of the two principals and the determination of credibility is the province of the trier of fact. (People v. Horton, 191 Cal.App.2d 592, 599 [13 Cal.Rptr. 33]; People v. Moten, 207 Cal.App.2d 692, 695-696 [24 Cal.Rptr. 716].)
[3a] Appellant further contends, however, that we are entitled to reverse the judgment if we find, as a matter of law, that the testimony of the complaining witness is inherently improbable (People v. Robinson, 87 Cal.App.2d 772, 774 [197 P.2d 776]), and he asserts that certain discrepancies between Catherine's testimony at the preliminary hearing and the two subsequent trials demonstrate such improbability. [4] Only when testimony contains statements of fact generally regarded as physically impossible or is otherwise transparently false in relation to common knowledge, may it be declared inherently improbable. (People v. Headlee, 18 Cal.2d 266, 267 [115 P.2d 427]; People v. Robinson, supra; People v. Ogden, 41 Cal.App.2d 447, 457 [107 P.2d 50].) We may not reverse appellant's conviction merely upon a suspicion or notice of unusual circumstances in the case. (People v. Horton, supra, 191 Cal.App.2d 592, 599; People v. Penrice, 195 Cal.App.2d 360, 363 [15 Cal.Rptr. 733].) [3b] Although discrepancies indeed exist in Catherine's testimony concerning surrounding circumstances, we are constantly aware that this child was subjected to the gruelling strain of the courtroom and the precise, detailed interrogation and cross-examination which was conducted at the preliminary hearing and again at each of the two trials. It is not surprising that she became confused as to details, but it is significant that not once was she diverted from the initial account of the lewd acts which she rendered to the police within a short time after the incident. Her testimony that she was alone with appellant on February 27, although corroborated by her grandmother's observation that Resendez was alone after 4 p.m. on the afternoon in question, conflicted with appellant's testimony and that of his sister that relatives visited his home that day and stayed until evening.
"In these sex cases, because of the nature of the charged acts, it is seldom that direct corroborating evidence can be produced by either side, and the case must usually rise or fall on the credibility of the prosecuting witness and of the accused. That is peculiarly a jury question. If ... [Catherine's] story is true, appellant is guilty of the offense charged and should be punished. If appellant's story is true, he is innocent. The jury saw these two witnesses. It was properly *9 instructed that such charges are difficult to disprove, and that the testimony of young girls who testify to such acts should be examined with care. In spite of these admonitions, it has found that ... [Catherine] told the truth and that appellant did not. This finding is binding on an appellate court. The evidence is sufficient to sustain the conviction." (People v. Goldberg, 110 Cal.App.2d 17, 22 [242 P.2d 116].)
[5a] Appellant next contends that the court improperly restricted the defense cross-examination of Catherine's mother. Catherine had already testified that after the day upon which she first told her mother the story which she later repeated to the police, she did not discuss the matter further with her mother. Defense counsel nonetheless inquired of her mother on cross-examination: "Now, this particular case, have you ever discussed this with Cathy other than the time that she came in and complained to you about Mr. Resendez on February 27?" The prosecution objected that this question was beyond the scope of the direct examination and the court sustained the objection over defense counsel's assertion that he intended to demonstrate bias and prejudice on the part of the mother.
[6] The scope of cross-examination must be limited to matters which were elicited from a witness on direct examination (People v. Watson, 46 Cal.2d 818, 826 [299 P.2d 243]) but the court has liberal discretionary power in this respect (People v. Serpa, 67 Cal.App.2d 327, 333 [154 P.2d 6]) and in cases involving sex offenses the latitude of cross-examination is frequently expanded. (People v. Clark, 63 Cal.2d 503, 504 [47 Cal.Rptr. 382, 407 P.2d 294].) It remains the duty of the court, however, to insure that cross-examination is kept within reasonable limits and not abused. (People v. Pacheco, 220 Cal.App.2d 320, 324 [33 Cal.Rptr. 735].) [5b] The court was entitled to require defense counsel to call the witness as his own (People v. Melone, 71 Cal.App.2d 291, 299 [162 P.2d 505]) unless the opportunity for impeachment was reasonably present. (People v. Montgomery, 47 Cal.App.2d 1, 19 [117 P.2d 437].) Under the circumstances of the instant case, not only could a negative response to the question be anticipated, but it is not immediately apparent how the testimony of the complaining witness would be illuminated by the proposed line of questioning of the mother, unless defense counsel hoped to elicit some expression of the mother's fear or malice toward appellant. The proposed inquiry was, in any event, ambiguous and imprecise. Defense counsel was not, *10 under the circumstances, unduly restricted in his examination of this witness. It is to be noted that he thoroughly explored the relationship between Catherine's mother and appellant both before and after the charges were brought; he elicited comment from the mother concerning prior disagreements and her expression of hostility toward appellant, his wife and family, including implied threats she had made against appellant, i.e., that she wanted to see him put away. The court committed no error or abuse of discretion in imposing a reasonable restriction on defense counsel's cross-examination of this witness.
[7a] Appellant further contends that he was entitled to a new trial on account of misconduct by the jury. He asserts that a new trial should be granted where a juror gives false answers to questions asked him during his selection for jury service. (People v. Castaldia, 51 Cal.2d 569, 573 [335 P.2d 104]; Gackstetter v. Market Street Ry. Co., 10 Cal.App.2d 713, 723 [52 P.2d 998].) In the instant case one of the jurors filed an affidavit and subsequently testified that another juror, Edith Robinson, told the jury during its deliberations that the same thing had happened to her. When she was 15 her stepfather had caressed her sexually and inquired, much as appellant had done, whether it felt good or hurt; Mrs. Robinson therefore believed appellant was guilty. The entire jury was present at the time these remarks were made and several of them took exception to the comments as improper. Mrs. Robinson had denied on voir dire that any event of a similar nature had happened to her or to any close friend or relative. She did so only because she had forgotten the incident, which had occurred at a time when she was considerably more mature than nine-year-old Catherine. The court, after hearing this testimony, rejected any further testimony by the jurors and denied appellant's motion for a new trial.
[8] As a general rule in California, testimony or affidavits of jurors may not be used to impeach a verdict (People v. Sutic, 41 Cal.2d 483, 495 [261 P.2d 241]) unless the jurors resorted to a determination by chance (Code Civ. Proc.,  657, subd. 2) or the bias or disqualification of a juror was concealed by false answers on voir dire. (Kollert v. Cundiff, 50 Cal.2d 768, 773 [329 P.2d 897]; People v. Lessard, 58 Cal.2d 447, 454 [25 Cal.Rptr. 78, 375 P.2d 46].) It is the well established policy of the courts that the stability of judgments must be preserved and a juror should be permitted to impeach a verdict only when the plainest principles of justice would *11 otherwise be violated. (Winningar v. Bales, 194 Cal.App.2d 273, 280 [14 Cal.Rptr. 908].) Mrs. Robinson did not intentionally conceal, but had forgotten the earlier incident in her life which precipitated no legal proceedings and differed substantially from the subject case. She was then a developed adolescent whose stepfather during a moment of sexual excitement pressed her to him, fully clothed, and asked whether it felt good, but he did not feel beneath her garments.
[9] "... Jurors in a criminal action subscribe to an oath to render a true verdict according to the evidence. ... Under the oath which they take they cannot without a violation thereof receive impressions from any other source. However, the crucial question is whether it can be proved as a fact or may be presumed as a conclusion of law that the verdict of the jury may have been influenced by information or impressions received from sources outside of the evidence in the case." (People v. Lessard, supra, 58 Cal.2d 447, 454.) [7b] The mention of the inquiry, "Does it feel good" stimulated Mrs. Robinson's recollection and in the heat of jury deliberation she commented accordingly, not to influence the verdict improperly, but merely to shed additional light on the issue of credibility. No individual comes to jury duty with his mind a blank slate, and it is in the balanced wisdom of group experience applied to collective deliberation that the strength of the jury system theoretically lies. In fact, free expression during jury deliberation is to be encouraged and, "To allow verdicts to be defeated because of improper remarks of a juror in the course of their deliberations upon the issues under consideration would be calculated to discourage free discussion which is deemed essential to the development of a full knowledge and a ripe judgment of the jury." (Maffeo v. Holmes, 47 Cal.App.2d 292, 295 [117 P.2d 948].) Mrs. Robinson's remarks do not disclose a biased or prejudiced mind against appellant, were disapproved by the rest of the jury, showed no immediate influence on the balloting, and apparently had no substantial influence upon the ultimate verdict; hence we find no miscarriage of justice. (Cal. Const., art. VI,  13.)
Finally, we reject appellant's contention that the trial court's refusal to conduct further hearings on his mental condition after it received the report from the superintendent of Atascadero State Hospital was improper. Following appellant's conviction, he was committed for observation as a probable mentally disordered sex offender, and following *12 observation the hospital report found him to be a mentally disordered sex offender, but indicated that he would not benefit from hospital treatment, and he constituted a danger to the health and safety of others.
[10] It is significant that in establishing proceedings to determine and treat sexual psychopathy "... the primary purpose of the Legislature was to protect society against the activities of sexual psychopaths [citation], and that it was not intended to make sexual psychopathy a mitigating circumstance." (People v. McCracken, 39 Cal.2d 336, 346 [246 P.2d 913].) [11] When the court receives a report from Atascadero that the individual, although a mentally disordered sex offender, is not amenable to treatment, "... the court has the alternative of imposing a criminal sentence or of instituting proceedings, including a full court hearing, looking toward the commitment of the individual to a mental hospital for care and treatment. ..." (People v. Fuller, 226 Cal.App.2d 331, 334-335 [38 Cal.Rptr. 25].) The failure of the court to exercise its discretion to commit such an individual to treatment with the Director of Mental Hygiene (Welf. & Inst. Code,  5512) does not constitute an abuse thereof in view of the unfavorable diagnostic report. (People v. Schaletzke, 239 Cal.App.2d 881, 886 [49 Cal.Rptr. 275].)
[12] Appellant contends that he did not receive adequate clinical observation while detained at Atascadero to enable the superintendent to reach a reliable diagnosis. We note, however, that the court on July 6, 1966, after receiving the superintendent's report, resumed criminal proceedings, appointed additional psychiatric experts and received further independent confirmation of appellant's mental condition before determining the proper disposition of his case. Thereafter, although it is questionable whether appellant was entitled to a probationary determination in view of his admission of a prior felony conviction for rape (see Pen. Code,  1203; Welf. & Inst. Code,  5500.5; People v. Foster, 67 Cal.2d 604 [63 Cal.Rptr. 288, 432 P.2d 976]), the court received additional evidence at a hearing regarding probation and sentence before determining that appellant should be sentenced to prison for the term prescribed by law. Appellant was conceded the benefit of virtually every precaution prior to sentencing, and we find no abuse by the trial court of the judicial discretion with which it is vested.
The judgment is affirmed.
Wood, P. J., and Lillie, J., concurred.
"Any person who shall wilfully and lewdly commit any lewd or lascivious acts including any of the acts constituting other crimes provided for in part one of this code upon or with the body, or any part or member thereof, of a child under the age of fourteen years, with the intent of arousing, appealing to, or gratifying the lust or passions or sexual desires of such person or of such child, shall be guilty of a felony and shall be imprisoned in the State prison for a term of from one year to life."
NOTES
[fn. 1]  1. Penal Code, section 288.

=== CASE 2210930 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:59.791325+00 ===

260 Cal.App.2d 773 (1968)
67 Cal. Rptr. 463
CAPELL ASSOCIATES, INC., Plaintiff and Appellant,
v.
CENTRAL VALLEY SECURITY COMPANY, et al., Defendants and Respondents; SECURITY TITLE INSURANCE COMPANY, Defendant and Appellant.
Docket No. 11525.
Court of Appeals of California, Third District.
April 5, 1968.
*774 Lally, Martin, Chidlaw & Viets, Lolly, Martin & Chidlaw and Thomas W. Martin for Plaintiff and Appellant.
McDonough, Holland, Schwartz, Allen & Wahrhaftig and Milton L. Schwartz for Defendant and Appellant.
Darrah & Darrah, Guard G. Darrah, Richard E. Saulque and William A. Sitton for Defendants and Respondents.
PIERCE, P.J.
Plaintiff Capell Associates, Inc. (Capell), an owner of land, sold part of it by contract of sale to S.J. *775 Torre for $221,400 with no down payment. Torre assigned the contract to Golf Club Estates, a corporation. The contract of sale contemplated a subdivision development with subordination of Capell's purchase money deed of trust to deeds of trust for "construction" loans. Defendant Security Title Insurance Company (Security) was the escrow holder. It was instructed by Capell regarding the provisions of the purchase money deed of trust it was to receive, with Capell as beneficiary, before Capell's deed was to be recorded. Particularly, it was instructed as to the provisions therein regarding subordination to construction loan deeds of trust. Security inadvertently prepared and, after execution, recorded a purchase money deed of trust violating those instructions. Golf Club Estates borrowed from Sacramento Savings and Loan Association (Savings and Loan). The construction loans were secured by deeds of trust. Homes and other improvements were built with part of the proceeds. The homes remained unsold. The purchase money promissory note became in default. The construction loans were also in default. Savings and Loan foreclosed and bought in the property at trustee's sales.
Capell filed two actions for declaratory relief and for money damages against all of the parties named above and a number of other defendants. The actions were consolidated for trial. Plaintiff obtained a judgment against Security for a sum which, with interest, exceeded $300,000. All other defendants were absolved.
A negligent breach of contract by Security as escrow holder in violating Capell's instructions is admitted. However, on Security's appeal we accept its contention that Capell suffered no compensatory loss caused by Security. We, therefore, reverse the trial court's judgment and direct that it award Capell nominal damages only.
[1a] Capell's appeal has not been supported by meaningful argument. Hence, this reviewing court cannot disturb the trial court's findings and judgment that defendants (other than Security) did not proximately cause Capell any damage.
STATEMENT OF FACTS
The key to the solution of the problem of this case is primarily the contract of sale dated November 16, 1959, between Capell as seller and Torre as buyer. We summarize pertinent provisions of the agreement. The property agreed to be sold was 20 acres, and descriptions in the record show that *776 it adjoins Northridge Country Club in Sacramento County. As stated, the purchase price was $221,400. The entire purchase price was to be evidenced by a promissory note payable in two equal installments, one payable in 18 months, and the last on or before 3 years from the date of the note. The note was non-interest bearing except upon default. One David Rhame, a defendant, was to be a comaker of the note. The entire property was to be deeded and the note was to be secured by a purchase money deed of trust. The agreement recites that the 20 acres were being purchased "for the purpose of an individual dwelling subdivision to consist of eighty-two (82) residential lots...." The deed of trust was to contain a provision that "after the new subdivision has been placed of record ... the trustors, or their successors in interest, may from time to time, borrow from a ... savings and loan association on the security of each of said lots severally in connection with a construction loan or loans obtained for the purpose of construction on each thereof street improvements and off-site subdivision improvements and a dwelling house with usual appurtenances, each such loan is to be evidenced by a promissory note in an amount not exceeding Fifteen Thousand ($15,000.00) Dollars, bearing interest at eight per cent (8%) per annum, and each of said loans is to be secured by a Deed of Trust on the lot on which the said improvement is to be constructed. Each and every one of the said Deeds of Trust, when duly recorded, shall constitute a lien and charge on the land respectively covered thereby, prior and superior to the lien and charge of the [purchase money] Deed of Trust ..., which said latter Deed of Trust shall automatically become subordinate to the lien and charge of the said Deeds of Trust for construction loan purposes."
The paragraph following contained a provision for partial releases and reconveyances of lots for payments on account of the purchase price on the basis of the release of one lot for each $2,700 paid. Lots covered by construction loans were to be released first. Security was named as exclusive escrow agent of the parties. A subdivision map was to be filed on or before February 29, 1960. Assignment of the contract by the buyer was permitted (and contemplated at the outset).
On May 9, 1960, Capell's attorney sent to Security a copy of the agreement described, a duly executed grant deed to the property from Capell to Torre, a promissory note form, and a purchase money deed of trust form. The title company was *777 instructed to record the deed when it had for delivery an executed note and deed of trust corresponding to the forms enclosed. The deed of trust called for was substantially the same as that contemplated under the November 16, 1959 agreement. In referring to the construction loan deeds of trust to be accepted, and to which the purchase money deed of trust would be subordinated, the form recited: "[I]t being further understood that as to each of said notes given in connection with a construction loan obtained for the purpose of the above specified, the full face amount thereof shall conclusively be deemed to have been used or applied to construction purposes." (Italics ours.)
On May 12, 1960, Torre and Rhame did send to Security: (1) a signed promissory note for $221,400 in favor of Capell, and (2) an executed deed of trust with Capell as beneficiary. The note conformed to the duplicate which Capell's attorney had furnished; the deed of trust (which, in fact, had been prepared by Security) did not. Its substantial difference was that it permitted automatic subordination of its lien to the subsequently recorded liens of blanket construction loan deeds of trust, whereas, as has been noted, the instructions called for a form of deed of trust permitting automatic subordination only to construction loan deeds of trust on individual lots. Nevertheless, on May 17, 1960, Security recorded the deed and immediately thereafter and on the same day recorded the executed deed of trust.[1]
In May Torre and Rhame conveyed the real property (theretofore granted by Capell) to Golf Club Estates, a corporation. The latter took subject to, and assumed, the $221,400 purchase money deed of trust. There was no consideration for the transfer which, as stated, had been contemplated by all parties at the outset.
On May 20, 1960, Savings and Loan loaned Golf Club *778 Estates $539,800, evidenced by two promissory notes for $269,600 and $270,200, secured by two deeds of trust covering 20 and 22 lots respectively of the subdivision. The notes bore interest at the rate of 8 percent per annum, interest commenced to accrue from the date of each note, May 20, 1960. During the period from said May 20, 1960, to February 1, 1961, monthly interest was payable. From March 1, 1961, through May 1, 1961, interest and minimal principal installments were to be paid. On May 20, 1961, the entire balance of each note matured.
The deeds of trust, of course, were "blanket" on 20 and 22 lots respectively. For internal control purposes, however, Savings and Loan denominated the $270,200 loan on its books as "Building and Loan Agreement No. 6031," and then broke this down to 22 subloans (carried as No. 6031-A through No. 6031-V), each such subloan representing funds allocated for construction on a single lot. The $269,600 loan, No. 6032, was similarly handled.
On November 25, 1960, a second lending transaction occurred. Savings and Loan loaned Golf Club Estates $133,300. But this time the procedure directed by Capell's instructions was adopted, i.e., 11 separate notes secured by 11 deeds of trust, each covering one lot, were taken.
On February 20, 1961, Capell, according to the record, discovered the incident of the "blanket" deeds of trust under the first loan transaction. There were negotiations. Savings and Loan agreed to cancel the two original deeds of trust and substitute forty-two therefor, each covering a single lot. It, of course, required that Capell subordinate the lien of its purchase money deed of trust to the substituted deeds of trust to be taken. Capell refused.
On March 2, 1961, there was a third construction loan transaction. Savings and Loan loaned $332,050 to Golf Club Estates. The amount was evidenced by 29 separate promissory notes, each on a single lot. (These lots, of course, had not been covered by previous deeds of trust. The same is true of the lots securing the November 25, 1960, transaction. Thus, Savings and Loan, after the March 2, 1961, transaction, had deeds of trust on all 82 lots within the subdivision.)
On March 1, 1961, the first group of construction loans became delinquent. Golf Club Estates had not made a single payment of either interest or principal on any of the loans. The loans would have become delinquent earlier but for the fact that Savings and Loan had applied some of the "loan *779 money" called for under the several loans to satisfy overdue interest. The fact that Golf Club Estates had not made any payments must be attributed to the fact that not a single house built on the subdivision had been sold. This was true up to and through May 10, 1963, the date of the last of the trustee's sales to be described.
Commencing on June 6, 1961, Savings and Loan filed notices of default under all of its deeds of trust. Ultimately all of the 82 lots were sold at four trustee's sales. In the case of each of these sales, each lot was offered for sale and could be bid for and purchased separately. Capell did not appear at or bid for any of the lots at any of said sales. Savings and Loan bid at each sale an amount equal to the unpaid principal of the construction loan allocated to the particular lot offered plus costs.
The two consolidated actions, insofar as they sought relief against Security, are based upon the same act, the recordation by Security of the wrong deed of trust. Both prayed for $221,400 damages plus interest, $221,400 being the amount of Capell's unpaid purchase price. The theory of one cause of action was a tort liability for negligence, the other liability for breach of contract. The trial court found in favor of Capell on both theories and assessed damages in the full amount prayed for.
THE QUESTION IS ONE OF CAUSATION
Security cannot, and does not, claim that it was not at fault in recording the wrong deed of trust. It does not question that if it is liable at all for compensatory damages suffered it is liable both under the theory of negligence and of breach of its contract as escrow holder. (Amen v. Merced County Title Co. (1962) 58 Cal.2d 528, 532 [25 Cal. Rptr. 65, 375 P.2d 33]; Spaziani v. Millar (1963) 215 Cal. App.2d 667, 682 [30 Cal. Rptr. 658].) It does not contend that substantial compliance by Security would bar recovery by Capell. It concedes that the substantial compliance rule related to the terms and conditions of an escrow does not apply in California. (Love v. White (1961) 56 Cal.2d 192, 194 [14 Cal. Rptr. 442, 363 P.2d 482].) [2] It contends correctly, however, and the brief of Capell concedes, that whether the action be in tort or contract compensatory damages cannot be recovered unless there is a causal connection between the act or omission complained of and the injury sustained. As applied to a case such as this, it is necessary for plaintiff to show by a preponderance of the evidence *780 that defendant's negligence contributed in some way to plaintiff's injury so that "but for" defendant's negligence the injury would not have been sustained. (Gentleman v. Nadell & Co. (1961) 197 Cal. App.2d 545, 551 [17 Cal. Rptr. 389], and see cases collected in 1 Witkin, Summary of Cal. Law (7th ed.) § 276, p. 305; 2 Witkin, Summary of Cal. Law (7th ed.) § 284, p. 1484; Rest.2d Torts, § 432, p. 430.) As the rule is stated by Witkin, in the work last cited, on page 1484: "... If the accident would have happened anyway, whether the defendant was negligent or not, then his negligence was not a cause in fact, and of course cannot be the legal or responsible cause. The `but for' rule determines cause in fact."
[3a] The trial court found that Security's act was the proximate cause of Capell's loss of his property. Security argues that cannot be because if the authorized purchase money deed of trust had been recorded, the lender would merely have taken 42 promissory notes secured by 42 deeds of trust on separate lots, the same amount of money would have been loaned and borrowed, on the same terms, applied to the same purposes (all of which were authorized under Capell's instructions) and the same result  disastrous as it turned out to be  would have obtained.
We cannot negate that argument. Everything in the record to which our attention has been directed points to the fact that that is precisely what Savings and Loan would have done. Nothing in fact or reason indicates anything to the contrary. Savings and Loan treated the loans in every respect as though 42 separate deeds of trust had been taken instead of two. Each lot carried a separate subloan number; each subloan had its own loan-in-process account card; initial loan balances, subsequent accruals and disbursements were entered on the separate cards with net balances maintained individually; separate appraisals were made on each lot to determine loan amounts; separate physical inspections were accomplished as to each lot to determine what loan progress disbursements were proper; fees and charges were not arbitrarily prorated but were made on a lot-by-lot valuation basis. As stated, when the lots were sold they were offered for bid and sale separately.
We have stated above that in the agreement of November 16, 1959, between Capell and Torre, lies the key to Capell's loss. Analysis will demonstrate this. The agreement had been *781 preceded by negotiations. The parties had originally agreed to a purchase price of $180,400 ($2,200 per lot for 82 lots) of which $82,000 ($1,000 per lot) was to be a down payment and the balance ($98,400) was to be secured by the subordinated purchase money deed of trust. By the November 16, 1959, agreement the plan was changed. Capell instead of risking $98,400 decided to invest as "risk" capital the entire purchase price. The inducement was a prospective gain of $41,000. That was accomplished by increasing the purchase price from $180,400 to $221,400. The risks expressly assumed by subordination were these:
(1) Capell agreed to give priority to "construction" loans up to $1,230,000. ($15,000 per lot for 82 lots.) Note that the total principal of all construction loans actually made was less than that ($1,005,150).
(2) It waived all control over the ratio between houses completed and houses sold. It retained no right to stop or slow down construction if the houses did not sell. Indeed, we must conclude that Capell wanted construction to proceed as rapidly as possible. We assume this both from its waiver of control and from the fact that its "risk" investment bore no interest.
(3) It placed no conditions upon the terms of repayment of construction loans. Interest on each loan was to be at the rate of 8 percent per annum up to $15,000 per lot. Date of maturity was not controlled nor was there any condition against the "bookkeeping" application of loan "payments" to unpaid accrued interest; nor against the lending of additional sums secured by priority deeds of trust in the event of the delinquency of earlier loans. There was no provision contemplating "take out" loans.
(4) Capell exacted no obligation upon the buyer to put any of his own money into the enterprise after the subdivision map was filed.
(5) It furnished a loose definition of "construction." Loans were to be for dwelling houses and usual improvements, for streets and other off-site improvements, but Capell also instructed Security that it was not to question expenditures. The purchase money deed of trust stated that the "full face amount" of each construction loan "shall conclusively be deemed to have been used for or applied to construction purposes." (Italics ours.)
Capell states theoretical instances of the superiority of the *782 lien of individual deeds of trust (from the subordinating owner's standpoint) over the lien of blanket deeds of trust. No doubt they exist in cases where the subordinating owner has maintained controls to protect his equity. Capell argues that a tighter control over expenditures can be asserted. Here Capell had relinquished all control over expenditures. It argues that the blanket deeds of trust impaired the "release and reconveyance" clause (one lot covered by a construction loan deed of trust to be released by the buyer for each repayment of the construction loan with interest plus payment to Capell of $2,700). But no such payments by Golf Club Estates were ever made. Nor were they able to make them.
The controlling reason that no payments could be made was that no houses were sold. The cause of this, according to the record, was overbuilding in the area in 1960 plus an unexpected cutback in employment at Aerojet-General Corporation. During the period involved in this litigation there was never any market recovery. All houses remained unsold.
Both parties are critical of Savings and Loan's lending policies but are confronted with the following finding by the court: "The purposes for which the loans by Sacramento Savings And Loan Association were made and the use made of the proceeds of such loans did not proximately cause plaintiff damage." (Italics ours.) No showing has been made to us that substantial evidence does not support that finding. We are bound by it.
Since no other cause is suggested, a depressed market (with concomitant nonsale of houses) remains the sole proximate cause of Capell's loss. The construction loans coincided with, but were not a contributing cause of, the loss by Capell of its "equity" in the subdivision.
In Karras v. Title Ins. & Guar. Co. (1953) 118 Cal. App.2d 659 [258 P.2d 866] (hearing denied) the vendor's escrow instructions required a note from one Herndon. The escrow holder after accepting that note released it improperly, accepting in its stead a note executed by Ryan. In the trial court judgment was against the escrow holder. The court said (on p. 667): "As we have stated, the court erred in finding that defendant would not be liable for returning the Herndon note. However, a further question arises which was not determined below. Have the plaintiffs proved any damage? ... There is no evidence in the case that the Herndon note was collectible.... Nor is there any evidence that the Ryan note given for it, is not collectible.... Obviously, ... if the *783 Ryan note is collectible, plaintiffs have not been damaged by defendant's action." (See also Southall v. Security Title Ins. & Guar. Co. (1952) 112 Cal. App.2d 321, 323 [246 P.2d 74], hearing denied; Security-First Nat. Bank v. Clark (1935) 8 Cal. App.2d 709, 715 [48 P.2d 167], hearing denied.) In the last cited case the court said on page 715: "... If the San Diego bank had not deviated from the letter of instructions but had demanded a contractor's bond from Clark instead of the deed to the other property accepted as security, we are not satisfied from the record that the Los Angeles Bank would be in any better situation to protect itself than without the contractor's bond. No evidence of a substantial detriment or injury by noncompliance with the letter of instruction appears from the record."
Collins v. Home Savings & Loan Assn. (1962) 205 Cal. App.2d 86 [22 Cal. Rptr. 817] (hearing denied) is Capell's anchor authority. That case has one similarity to this. There, as here, blanket construction loan deeds of trust were taken when deeds of trust on individual lots were intended. There the analogy ends. In Collins plaintiff did not sue the escrow holder. It was a battle drawn between the seller as plaintiff and the lender and purchasers as defendants. The facts were quite different from the facts here. The borrower made a down payment to the seller and represented that the balance of the purchase price, approximately $250,000, to be secured by a purchase money deed of trust, would be subordinated only to a $75,000 "partial construction" loan and other construction loans for house building purposes only. Total construction loans were not to exceed 80 percent of Veterans Administration fixed values and were to bear 7 percent interest. Actually the purchasers borrowed $2,134,860 under three blanket construction loans. The loans bore 6 percent interest PLUS 13 1/2 percent as a lender's fee for making the loans (called "points"). The loans were expended partially for off-site developments  not contemplated by the sales agreement. (On the contrary purchasers had represented they already "had adequate financial resources for the construction of off-site improvements.") The $75,000 referred to above had not been a partial construction loan. It was paid by the lender to the borrowers and used by them as all or a part of the down payment to seller. The sum of $158,607.36 was also paid by the lender to the borrowers as a "contractor's fee" for "supervising" the construction work. When the escrow holder (not a party) had realized that *784 the escrow instructions called for construction loan deeds of trust on individual lots, it called for a new subordinating agreement and one was signed by plaintiff-seller.
The subdivision was a failure. There was a foreclosure. Houses had been sold to individuals. On page 93 of 205 Cal. App.2d, the court recites that the trial court had held: "`[I]t is more equitable to grant a recovery to plaintiffs in damages for such amount [the purchase money balance], instead of setting aside the trust deed sales and involving the said lot purchasers.'"
The holding in the appellate court in Collins was that the second subordination agreement was ambiguous. Parol evidence established that the seller had only intended to subordinate to construction loans as indicated above. In affirming the trial court the Court of Appeal mentions the blanket deeds of trust. Their existence played no significant part in the holding.
The distinguishing differences between Collins and the case before us are obvious. This is not a controversy between lienholders over the priority of liens. Here the trial court expressly negated unauthorized application of construction loans as a cause of Capell's loss. In Collins the misapplication was not only unauthorized, it was fraudulent.
Capell argues, and Security concedes, that Capell had the right to condition the delivery of its deed upon any requirement that it deemed desirable; that therefore the substitution of a provision in the purchase money deed of trust permitting blanket construction loan deeds of trust made recordation of Capell's deed improper and gave Capell a right of action. (See e.g., Greenzweight v. Title Guar. & Trust Co. (1934) 1 Cal.2d 577 [36 P.2d 186]; Promis v. Duke (1929) 208 Cal. 420 [281 P. 613]; Los Angeles City High School Dist. v. Quinn (1925) 195 Cal. 377, 383 [234 P. 313]; Todd v. Vestermark (1956) 145 Cal. App.2d 374 [302 P.2d 347].) Capell undoubtedly had a right to sue either for a rescission or to quiet its title. This right could have been exercised as early as February 20, 1961. It elected, however, NOT to rescind the transaction, but on the contrary to affirm its contract of sale and to seek money damages against the escrow holder. In doing so it brought itself within the rule that it must prove damages proximately caused by the wrongful act. (Karras v. Title Ins. & Guar. Co., supra, 118 Cal. App.2d 569; Security-First Nat. Bank v. Clark, supra, 8 Cal. App.2d 709.) This it did not do. Its only loss was that flowing from its own improvidence  its *785 mistaken gamble on the success of a real estate subdivision venture  which events proved had been doomed to failure from the very inception of the transaction.
[1b] Capell has appealed from the judgment in favor of the defendants other than Security "to preserve its legal claim for damages against them" in the event of reversal of the judgment against Security. As stated above, the trial court found that Capell suffered no loss as the proximate result of any acts by said defendants. Capell's brief on its "contingent" appeal states: "Plaintiff concurs in and supports the trial court's judgment herein. The Court's findings against plaintiff and in favor of the defendants other than SECURITY are consistent with its finding in favor of plaintiff and against SECURITY as the proximate cause of its damage." Capell declares, however, in its brief that certain funds were diverted, or more accurately withheld, by Savings and Loan to satisfy unpaid interest and other sums were expended for "land draws, fees and expenses." We are given no transcript references or specific argument which could possibly justify this court in a holding that the trial court's findings and judgment in favor of the lender, borrower or other defendants were improper. Moreover, as we have noted above, the purchase money deed of trust form submitted by Capell expressly provided that, as regards the construction loans to which its lien was to be subordinated, the full face amount of each promissory note would conclusively be deemed to have been used as applied to construction purposes. Such a carte blanche instruction by Capell reasonably could lead to the conclusion that Capell wanted Savings and Loan to disburse the full amount of the authorized $1,230,000.
[3b] Capell is not entitled to compensatory damages. There was a breach of contract, therefore it is entitled to nominal damages. (Civ. Code, § 3360; Sweet v. Johnson (1959) 169 Cal. App.2d 630 [337 P.2d 499].) It might or might not have been entitled to recover costs in the trial court. (Code Civ. Proc., § 1032, subd. (d).) Costs, of course, were actually awarded under the judgment on the trial court's theory of compensatory damages. (Code Civ. Proc., § 1032, subd. (a).) Under the law only the trial court is given authority to make the determination as to the award of costs in the trial court under Code of Civil Procedure section 1032, subdivision (d). Capell is not entitled to costs on appeal.
Judgment in favor of Capell and against Security is *786 reversed with directions to the trial court to give judgment to plaintiff for nominal damages only plus (if the trial court in its discretion so decides) costs incurred by plaintiff in the trial court.
Judgment in favor of all other defendants and against Capell is affirmed.
Friedman, J., and Regan, J., concurred.
A petition for a rehearing was denied May 1, 1968, and the petition of the plaintiff and appellant for a hearing by the Supreme Court was denied May 29, 1968.
NOTES
[1]  Pertinent language in the recorded deed of trust provides: "... agrees that there may hereafter be placed and recorded on the within described property a Deed of Trust or Deeds of Trust to secure a loan or loans for the purpose of the construction of residences on any lot or lots in said subdivision. Provided that no default is of record under the terms of this note secured hereby and provided that no more than one (1) such deed of trust be recorded on each subdivided lot and further provided that such construction loans be made by a bona fide lender not to exceed in the principal the sum of $15,000.00, with interest not to be in excess of 8% per annum. Said construction loan deed of trust, or deeds of trust, when made shall automatically become and remain prior and superior to the lien of this deed of trust without any further agreement of the parties."

=== CASE 2210933 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:59.821824+00 ===

381 Mich. 393 (1968)
162 N.W.2d 143
PEOPLE
v.
LANG.
Calendar No. 8, Docket No. 51,795-1/2.
Supreme Court of Michigan.
Decided November 11, 1968.
Frank J. Kelley, Attorney General, Robert A. Derengoski, Solicitor General, and George E. Mason *394 and Stewart H. Freeman, Assistant Attorneys General, for the people.
John Alexander Lang, in propria persona.
KELLY, J.
On February 14, 1966, defendant, represented by his court-appointed counsel, was arraigned in the Clinton county circuit court on a charge of felonious assault.[*]
The reading of the information was waived and defendant's attorney informed the court of defendant's intention to stand mute. A plea of not guilty was entered.
February 23, 1966, in the Clinton county circuit court, defendant, through his attorney, informed the court of his desire to change his plea of not guilty to a plea of guilty.
There follows the questions the court asked and the answers defendant gave previous to the court's acceptance of such plea:
"The Court: * * * Do you have any questions concerning the charge that has been made against you, Mr. Lang?
"Mr. Lang: No, sir.
"The Court: You fully understand the nature of the charge and what it means.
"Mr. Lang: Yes, sir.
"The Court: You understand that you have been charged with the crime of felonious assault, but without intending to commit the crime of murder and without intending to inflict great bodily harm.
"Mr. Lang: Yes, sir.
"The Court: I don't recall if I have already gone through this with you, but we will go through it again. First of all I might say, you understand that *395 you don't have to say anything at this time if you don't want to.
"Mr. Lang: Yes, sir.
"The Court: Now there are three possible pleas that you may enter. You may plead guilty if you think you did that which is set forth in the information, charging you with this crime.
"If you think that you did not do it, then you would plead not guilty or you may stand mute, that is say nothing, and in which case the court would cause a plea of not guilty to be entered for you. I believe you have already at one hearing stood mute, is that correct?
"Mr. Lang: Yes.
"The Court: And I entered a plea of not guilty. Now I understand that today you wish to change your plea. Is that correct?
"Mr. Lang: Yes, sir.
"The Court: Now you know that if you plead not guilty or stand mute you would be entitled to a trial by either a jury or by this court, at your election? If you plead guilty, and your plea is accepted by the court, it would be the court's duty to sentence you at a later date. I will also tell you that the maximum consequence of a plea of guilty or a conviction after trial, would be imprisonment for a term of up to four years. The minimum penalty is discretionary with the court, and the offense charged is subject to the probation law. That does not mean that you would necessarily be placed on probation, but merely that the court could place you on probation if it deemed it advisable.
"How do you wish to plead?
"Mr. Lang: Guilty, Your Honor.
"The Court: Do you plead guilty because you are guilty?
"Mr. Lang: Yes, sir.
"The Court: To what offense are you pleading guilty?
"Mr. Lang: Felonious assault, sir. * * *
*396 "The Court: You know, Mr. Lang, I can't accept your plea unless you actually committed the crime of felonious assault. Now I don't want you pleading guilty to something you don't think you are guilty of. I wasn't there.
"Mr. Lang: Well if he said I did, I must have sir, but I was pretty drunk, so I 
"The Court: You mean there is no doubt in your mind that you threatened him with a pistol, is that right?
"Mr. Lang: No, no, I don't.
"The Court: You don't have any doubt of that?
"Mr. Lang: No, sir, I don't. * * *
"The Court: And you are pleading guilty because you feel you are guilty; you're not just pleading guilty to get this over with. It that correct?
"Mr. Lang: No, sir, I feel that I am guilty.
"The Court: All right. Has anyone forced you to plead guilty?
"Mr. Lang: No, sir.
"The Court: Has anyone forced you to tell the court what you have told here today?
"Mr. Lang: No, sir.
"The Court: Has anyone mistreated you while you have been in jail?
"Mr. Lang: No, sir.
"The Court: Has anyone promised you anything to persuade you to plead guilty?
"Mr. Lang: No, sir.
"The Court: Has anyone promised you the court would give you a light or easy sentence if you pleaded guilty?
"Mr. Lang: No, sir.
"The Court: Has anyone promised you that you would be placed on probation if you pleaded guilty?
"Mr. Lang: No, sir.
"The Court: Now you understand you may still have a trial, either by a jury or by the court, if you want to?
"Mr. Lang: Yes, sir.
*397 "The Court: Do you want to?
"Mr. Lang: No, sir.
"The Court: Is everything you have told the court today concerning this case told of your own free will and accord?
"Mr. Lang: Yes, sir.
"The Court: The court now determines that the plea of guilty to the charge as offered is made freely, with understanding, and voluntarily. The court also finds that said plea was not offered because of undue influence, compulsion or duress, and no promise of leniency was made.
"The plea of guilty is accepted and ordered entered upon the records of this court.
"The bond will be continued, and I will sentence you on March 14th at 1:30.
"Mr. Lang: Yes, sir."
On March 14, 1966, defendant was sentenced to serve 1-1/2 to 4 years in the State prison of southern Michigan. On October 17, 1966, defendant appeared before the parole board on the expiration of his minimum term and the case was continued for 18 months. On November 4, 1966, defendant filed a petition and motion to withdraw his plea of guilty, set aside his conviction and be granted a new trial.
In denying defendant's motion, the trial court stated:
"While it does not appear in the petition, it would appear from Mr. Lang's covering letters and from paragraph 3 of his response to the prosecuting attorney's answer to the petition, that the motivating factor in this matter is the fact that the parole board denied him parole on the basis of his minimum sentence. Mr. Lang takes the position that this is a `nonjudicial increase in his minimum sentence, without proper cause shown from his postconviction record, is a substitution of the judgment of the parole board for that of the sentencing judge and violates *398 the "separation of powers" doctrine of the State and Federal Constitutions.' * * *
"The court has reviewed the transcripts relating to this case and is of the opinion, as it was when the plea was accepted, that the provisions of GCR 785.3 (2) were complied with. At the time of entering the plea, Mr. Lang was 39 years of age, was represented by competent counsel, had the benefit of a preliminary examination, had the experience afforded by six prior felony convictions, and requested a change of plea from not guilty to guilty. It seems rather preposterous for Mr. Lang to now claim that he didn't know the nature of the crime with which he was charged and that his plea was not understandingly made.
"So far as the action taken by the parole board is concerned, the court can find no basis for finding that its action was illegal, unconstitutional, or beyond the scope of its authority.
"The court finds that the grounds on which the petition to withdraw the plea of guilty is based are without merit and that there is no reason for the court to exercise its discretion and allow a withdrawal of the plea.
"The petition is denied."
On May 12, 1967, the Michigan Court of Appeals denied defendant's application for delayed appeal.
In People v. Vasquez (1942), 303 Mich 340, 342, this Court stated:
"We have always adhered to the rule that after sentence has been imposed, the withdrawal of a plea of guilty rests in the sound discretion of the court. People v. Williams, 225 Mich 133; People v. Kobrzycki, 242 Mich 44; People v. Skropski, 292 Mich 461."
The record before us indicates no abuse of discretion on the part of the trial judge in denying defendant-appellant's petition and motion to withdraw *399 his plea of guilty, set aside his conviction and grant a new trial.
Affirmed.
DETHMERS, C.J., and BLACK, O'HARA, ADAMS, and T.E. BRENNAN, JJ., concurred with KELLY, J.
T.M. KAVANAGH, J., concurred in the result.
NOTES
[*]  CL 1948, § 750.82 (Stat Ann 1962 Rev § 28.277).  REPORTER.

=== CASE 9737532 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:28:00.544052+00 ===

Holbrook, P. J.
Represented by a retained attorney, defendant was arraigned on a charge of statutory rape1 in the Ionia circuit court on October 3, 1961. Following a reading of the information a plea of not guilty was entered and trial set for the next term of court. On December 7,1961, defendant again appeared before the court with his attorney and changed his plea to guilty. The plea was accepted and defendant on December 19, 1961, was placed on 3 years probation.
On June 20, 1962, a bench warrant was issued charging defendant with violation of probation for' contributing to the delinquency of a 15 year old girl. At a probation revocation and sentencing proceeding on July 6, 1962, defendant appeared in court without an attorney, admitted the probation violation, and was sentenced to a prison term of 7-1/2 to 15 years. Although not indigent, defendant has prepared all of his post conviction pleadings. Habeas *125corpus was denied defendant by the Michigan Supreme Court on January 20, 1964, and January 4, 1965, and certiorari was denied by the United States Supreme Court on October 18, 1965. Lott v. Michigan, 382 US 879 (86 S Ct 164, 15 L Ed 2d 120).
Defendant sought a writ of habeas corpus in this Court in 1966 (also treated as an application for delayed appeal) which was denied on May 26, 1966. Defendant also filed a delayed motion to set aside his plea of guilty in the Ionia circuit court, which motion was denied on April 11, 1966. Because defendant had not in his previous appeals raised issues relating to the lower court’s acceptance of his guilty plea and the lower court’s failure to grant his request for counsel at the probation revocation and sentencing proceeding, defendant’s application for delayed appeal was granted by this Court on July 10, 1967.
On appeal defendant asserts that his guilty plea was not accepted in conformity with Court Rule No 35A (1945), now GCR 1963, 785.3. Our review of defendant’s arraignment, and supplemental arraignment at which the guilty plea was accepted, shows full compliance with the applicable court rule.
At the probation revocation and sentencing proceeding, defendant asked “to see an attorney.” In response, the court explained that a probation violation was not of the same nature as a criminal charge.- Without making further references to. eounsel, defendant admitted the violation as charged after which the court immediately sentenced defendant. The lower court’s failure to grant his request to see an attorney is asserted by defendant as a violation of his constitutional right to counsel.
The recent United States Supreme Court case of Mempa v. Rhay (1967), 389 US 128 (88 S Ct 254, 19 L Ed 2d 336), dealt with “the question of the extent of the right to counsel at the time of sentencing where the sentencing has been deferred subject to *126probation.” On taking note of tbe critical nature of Sentencing in a criminal case, the Supreme Court decided that counsel must be afforded at a probation revocation proceeding which includes sentencing.
We find the Mempa Case to be decisive herein. Defendant Lott requested counsel, and while the lower court’s explanation refusing defendant’s request may have been correct as to a revocation of probation proceeding,2 Mempa requires counsel at a combined probation revocation and sentencing proceeding such as took place in the instant ease unless presence of counsel is intelligently and understandingly waived. Furthermore, Mempa is consistent with our decision of People v. Dye (1967), 6 Mich App 217, requiring the presence of counsel, absent waiver, at the sentencing stage of a criminal proceeding. Also, see People v. Jones (1967), 6 Mich App 221; People v. Theodorou (1968), 10 Mich App 409.
The plea of guilty was properly accepted. The judgment of sentence is vacated and the cause remanded for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
McIntyre, J., concurred with Holbrook, P. J.
CLS 1961, § 750.520 (Stat Ann 1954 Rev § 28.788).
People v. Wood (1966), 2 Mich App 342 and cases'cited therein.

=== CASE 2210945 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:59.967032+00 ===

301 N.E.2d 370 (1973)
Fred D. JACKSON, Defendant-Appellant,
v.
STATE of Indiana, Plaintiff-Appellee.
No. 2-1272A144.
Court of Appeals of Indiana, Third District.
September 26, 1973.
*371 James B. Melson, Fredrick R. Spencer, Anderson, for defendant-appellant.
Theodore L. Sendak, Atty. Gen., A. Frank Gleaves, III, Deputy Atty. Gen., Indianapolis, for plaintiff-appellee.
HOFFMAN, Chief Judge.
Defendant-appellant Fred D. Jackson was charged by affidavit with the crime of carrying a pistol without a permit. He pleaded not guilty and was tried without the intervention of a jury. Upon a finding of guilty, appellant was sentenced to a determinate period of imprisonment of one year.
Appellant Jackson filed a motion to correct errors which was overruled by the trial court and this appeal followed.
The evidence most favorable to the State discloses that shortly after nine o'clock P.M. on September 24, 1971, the Anderson Police Department received from an unknown source information to the effect that Fred D. Jackson "was carrying a gun." A police officer, without obtaining a warrant, proceeded to an establishment known as the "Lost World Tavern" and found Jackson sitting behind the steering wheel of an automobile which was in an adjoining parking lot. At this time he was joined by two other police officers. They approached "the driver side of the vehicle" and requested Jackson to step out of the automobile. When Jackson complied, the officers "observed a butt of a pistol sticking out of his pocket." Thereupon, the defendant was asked if he had a permit to carry the weapon. Upon stating that he did not, the gun was confiscated and Jackson was placed under arrest for public intoxication and advised of his rights.
The only issue which we will consider is whether the trial court erred in admitting into evidence, over defendant's objection, a pistol taken from his possession at the time he was arrested for public intoxication.
Jackson contends that the fruits of warrantless searches and seizures made pursuant to information supplied by unknown informants of unknown reliability are inadmissible.
In Bowles v. State (1971), 256 Ind. 27, 267 N.E.2d 56, our Supreme Court ruled that police responding to a "tip" from an informer of previously untested reliability did not, absent extrinsic facts either from the informer or other reliable sources, have probable cause for arrest.
It has also been held that a police officer who has reason to believe that he is dealing with an armed and presently dangerous individual may make a reasonable search for weapons although he may lack probable cause to arrest. Terry v. State of Ohio (1968), 392 U.S. 1, 88 S.Ct. 1868, 1881, 20 L.Ed.2d 889. However, such a search must be based upon more than a mere "hunch" or suspicion. Sibron v. State of New York (1968), 392 U.S. 40, 88 S.Ct. 1889, 20 L.Ed.2d 917. A police officer must be able to point to definite facts from which he could reasonably infer that the individual he is confronting is armed and dangerous. Terry v. State of Ohio, supra.
A "tip" from an unknown informer of unknown reliability may create, at most, mere suspicion. We therefore find that the officers were not justified in their "seizure" of Jackson absent anything whatsoever to corroborate the information which they received.
Evidence obtained through unreasonable searches and seizures is not admissible. Mapp v. Ohio (1961), 367 U.S. 643, 81 S. *372 Ct. 1684, 6 L.Ed.2d 1081, 84 A.L.R.2d 933; State v. Buxton (1958), 238 Ind. 93, 148 N.E.2d 547.
It is our conclusion that the trial court erred in admitting the pistol in question into evidence.
The judgment of conviction entered by the trial court is therefore reversed.
Reversed.
SHARP and STATON, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 2210947 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:59.992237+00 ===

12 Mich. App. 107 (1968)
162 N.W.2d 339
INDEPENDENCE TOWNSHIP
v.
ROY.
Docket No. 2,421.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided June 26, 1968.
Paul M. Mandel, for plaintiff.
Anthony Renne, for defendants.
BURNS, J.
An Oakland county circuit judge, sitting without a jury, found the defendants guilty of operating or maintaining a junk yard without a license in violation of Independence township ordinance No 8 (1952), as amended.
Defendants operated a gasoline service station and a towing service. One witness testified that he saw between 40 and 50 cars stored on defendants *109 lot. Many of the cars did not have license plates or wheels, and were partially dismantled or badly damaged. Defendants admitted keeping automobiles on their premises for a period in excess of 15 days after which time they would apply to the secretary of state for title. Upon receiving title to the cars they would sell parts from the automobiles and eventually haul the remains to a scrap iron dealer.
Defendants' activities clearly became subject to the township's junk yard licensing ordinance when in 1963 the ordinance was amended by adding the following:
"A `junk yard' as used herein is defined to be any establishment or premises where worn out or discarded material is bought, kept, sold and/or stored; any premise upon which two or more unlicensed used motor vehicles which cannot be operated under their own power are kept or stored for a period of 15 days or more shall be deemed to be a `junk yard' within the meaning of this ordinance."
Defendants claim that the amendment was outside the scope of the enabling statute, CL 1948, § 445.451 (Stat Ann 1964 Rev § 19.731). In Toebe v. City of Munising (1937), 282 Mich 1, 15, 16, the Court employed the following observation from 1 Dillon, Municipal Corporations (5th ed), § 237, pp 448, 449:
"`It is a general and undisputed proposition of law that a municipal corporation possesses and can exercise the following powers, and no others: First, those granted in express words; second, those necessarily or fairly implied in or incident to the powers expressly granted; third, those essential to the accomplishment of the declared objects and purposes of the corporation,  not simply convenient, but indispensable.'" (Emphasis in the original source.)
The State legislature has not defined "junk yard", and, therefore, the township possessed the implied *110 power to define the term. Blumlo v. Hampton Township Board (1944), 309 Mich 452.
We do not pass on the question whether Const 1963, art 4, § 24, applies to municipal ordinances since we are of the opinion that the definitional amendment to the ordinance in question did not embrace more than one object as argued by the defendants.
Defendants' assignments of error that the ordinance was not a valid exercise of the township's police power and not related to the health, safety and welfare of the public, that the ordinance was in fact a zoning ordinance, that it discriminated against the defendants, that it attempted to license parking on private property, and that it was an attempt to legislate in a field pre-empted by the State, are all answered negatively in Netzel v. Township Board of Waterford Township (1934), 267 Mich 220, and Jourden v. Wyoming Township (1960), 358 Mich 496, and do not require additional comment. The remaining issues submitted by the defendants are without merit.
Affirmed.
HOLBROOK and PETERSON, JJ., concurred.

=== CASE 9737534 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:28:04.342471+00 ===

Hale, C.J.
These three cases include two bills for declaratory and other relief: one brought by members of the fire department of the city of Taunton (the firemen’s case), and one brought by members of the police department of the city of Taunton (the policemen’s case). The city of Taunton and its mayor are defendants in each of these cases.2 The third case is a bill brought by the city and its mayor for review (G. L. c. 30A, § 14) of a decision of the Labor Relations Commission (Commission) and was reported to this court to be argued with the policemen’s case, as both cases arise out of the same controversy.3
All three cases arise out of a refusal by the city of Taunton to pay increases in wages for the year 1972 which were called for by separate collective bargaining agreements executed in 1971 by the city of Taunton and Local 1391, International Association of Firefighters, AFL-CIO, and by the city and the Taunton branch of the Massachusetts Police Association. The firemen’s case and the policemen’s case were each submitted to the Superior Court on a case stated and were argued together. A decree was entered in each declaring, among other things, that the collective bargaining agreements were “in direct conflict with G. L. c. 44, § 33A,4 insofar as they relate to wages,” and that *488“[t] he city ordinances of 1971, purporting to implement the collective bargaining contracts for increased wages for policemen and firemen effective January 1, 1972, are invalid insofar as they relate to said wages.” The firemen and policemen appealed from the decrees.
The following facts appear from the case stated in the firemen’s case. On August 24, 1971, the then mayor of the city of Taunton and Local 1391 of the International Association of Firefighters, AFL-CIO, the collective bargaining representative of the city’s firemen, executed a contract intended to take effect as of January 1, 1971, and to terminate December 31, 1972. It contained detailed provisions governing wages, hours, and working conditions. The parties agreed to new wage schedules for the years 1971 and 1972, which reflected wage increases for 1971 over the schedule theretofore in effect and additional increases for 1972. On September 18, 1971, a supplemental appropriation was passed to fund the 1971 increases. On September 22, 1971, an ordinance was adopted by a two-thirds vote of the municipal council which purported to replace the lower wage schedule previously in effect with the new wage schedules for 1971 and 1972 and to repeal “all ordinances and parts thereof inconsistent [tjherewith.” The 1971 increases were paid that year retroactive to January 1. The 1972 budget submitted by the new mayor, a defendant in this case (1971 was an election year), included “inadvertently” an appropriation for firemen’s wages sufficient to implement the 1972 wage increases. The budget was passed by the council and approved by the mayor. The city refused to pay the 1972 increases; its contention, accepted by the trial judge, is that neither the collective bargaining agreement nor the September, 1971, ordinance could provide *489increases for the following year which would comply with G.L.c.44, § 33A.
The facts in the policemen’s case are not significantly different from those in the firemen’s case. The collective bargaining agreement executed by the city of Taunton and the Taunton branch of the Massachusetts Police Association was also to cover the two-year period commencing January 1,1971, and provided on its face for wage increases for the year 1971 and additional increases for 1972. It was executed on August 24,1971 (the date the agreement in the firemen’s case was executed), and on that date an ordinance was passed which purported to incorporate the 1971 and 1972 increases and to repeal inconsistent ordinances. On September 18, 1971, a supplemental appropriation to fund the 1971 increases was voted, and those increases were paid retroactive to January 1,1971. In 1972 the new mayor refused to include the 1972 increases in the budget, and the mayor and the city have since refused to implement those increases.5
1. General Laws c. 44, § 33A, as amended through St. 1960, § 301, provided in pertinent part that “no ordinance providing for an increase in the salaries or wages of municipal officers or employees shall be enacted . . . unless it is to be operative for more than three months during the financial year in which it is passed. ...” The present dispute is as to the validity of those portions of the ordinances adopted in 1971 which purported to grant additional pay increases which were not to go into effect until January 1,1972.
We observe that the judicial interpretation of § 33A leaves unclear whether it is the “increase in the salaries” or the “ordinance” which must be “operative” for more than three months. See Clements v. Treasurer of Cambridge, 324 Mass. 73, 74 (1949) (“The ordinance was obnoxious to that statute, because the increases were not to be operative *490during the year 1948”); Booker v. Woburn, 325 Mass. 334, 336 (1950) (“. . .the increase was not to be operative for more than three months ...”); Foley v. Lawrence, 336 Mass. 60, 63 (1957) (“.. . the ordinance ... could not have been operative for more than three months in the then current fiscal year”); Brucato v. Lawrence, 338 Mass. 612, 616-618 (1959); Doherty v. Woburn, 345 Mass. 523, 526 (1963).
The purpose of the three-month requirement in § 33A is “to prevent city councils . . . from imposing in one year upon the taxpayers of later years the burden of salary increases not to take effect until these later years.” Brucato v. Lawrence, supra, at 618. If § 33A required only that a portion of a pay increase be “operative” for more than three months in the year of the ordinance’s passage, then pay increase ordinances could surely derogate from the policy of promoting fiscal responsibility in municipal government by providing for insignificant salary increases in the year of passage and substantial salary increases in following years. To achieve the statutory purpose, we construe the second sentence of § 33A to require that both the ordinance and all salary increases provided therein must be in effect for more than three months during the financial year in which the ordinance is passed. It follows that the additional increases which were not to take effect until 1972 and which were voted by the outgoing 1971 council were invalid.
2. The plaintiffs also argue that the collective bargaining agreements made pursuant to G. L. c. 149, §§ 178G-178N, nevertheless impose upon the defendants an obligation to pay the 1972 salary increases. We disagree. Nothing in c. 149 exempts a salary increase under a collective bargaining agreement from the requirements of G. L. c. 44, § 33A. To the contrary, c. 149, § 1781, provides that “[ijn the event that any part or provision of any such agreement is in conflict with any law, ordinance or by-law, such law, ordinance or by-law shall prevail so long as such conflict remains . . ..” We are of opinion that § 33A is such a “law” and that we are not here presented with a situation in which the Legislature has authorized a municipality to adopt a *491new system of compensating its employees which is so inconsistent with the provisions of § 33A that the two provisions cannot stand. Cf. Brucato v. Lawrence, 338 Mass. 612, 618-619 (1959).
3. In the third case the Labor Relations Commission found that the mayor failed to bargain in good faith with the Taunton branch of the Massachusetts Police Association by reason of his having refused to submit a request for an appropriation funding the wage increases for 1972 included in the collective bargaining agreement with the policemen. The Commission ordered that the mayor, among other things, take whatever “steps may be necessary to fund and put into effect the wage increases agreed to in the collective bargaining agreement signed on August 24, 1971.” The questions raised in the report are fully answered in our decision in the policemen’s case.
Accordingly, in both the firemen’s case and the policemen’s case the decree of the Superior Court is affirmed. The case of City of Taunton & another v. Labor Relations Commission & others is remanded to the Superior Court for proceedings not inconsistent with this opinion.
So ordered.
This case was initially heard by a panel comprised of the Chief Justice and Justices Goodman and Grant and was thereafter submitted on the record and briefs to the other Justices, all of whom took part in this decision in accordance with the provisions of Rule 1:18 of this court.
The policemen’s case has also joined members of the municipal council as defendants.
The plaintiffs in the policemen’s case (together with the Commission) were made defendants in the third case.
Section 33A, as amended through St. 1960, c. 301, read: “The annual budget shall include sums sufficient to pay the salaries of officers and employees fixed by law or by ordinance. Notwithstanding any contrary provision of any city charter, no ordinance providing for an increase in the salaries or wages of municipal officers or employees shall be enacted except by a two thirds vote of the city council, nor unless it is to be operative for more than three months during the financialyear in which it is passed; provided, however, that in any year other than a regular municipal election year, ordinances may be enacted by a two thirds vote *488during the months of November and December providing for an increase in the salaries and wages of officers and employees, to become effective as of January first of the next ensuing year. No new position shall be created or increase in rate made by ordinance, vote or appointment during the financial year subsequent to the submission of the annual budget unless provision therefor has been made by means of a supplemental appropriation ...” (emphasis supplied). This section has been further amended by St. 1969, c. 849, § 61, which deleted the election year proviso. This change became effective July 1,1973. See St. 1971, c. 766, § 29.
The plaintiffs in the policemen’s case have filed a “Motion to Augment the Record on Appeal.” By this means the plaintiffs seek to have placed before us facts not in existence at the time the trial judge rendered his decision. The motion is denied.
Statute 1955, c. 358, excepted from this provision wage increases in non-election years made in December, and St. 1960, c. 301, added November. See 1955 Senate Doc. No. 675, Report of the Special Commission on Budgetary Procedure in Cities. See also St. 1950, c. 370, and St. 1969, c. 849, § 61.

=== CASE 9737535 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:28:04.347347+00 ===

Goodman, J.
(dissenting). General Laws c. 149, § 178H, declares that “[e]mployees shall have, and be protected in the exercise of, the right... to bargain collectively ... on questions of wages, hours and other conditions of employment....” The provision is parallel to G. L. c. 150A, § 3,1 guaranteeing the right to collective bargaining to employees in the private sector and implementing *492the policy in G. L. c. 150A, § 1 (third unnumbered paragraph).2 This suggests a similar flexibility in negotiating wage patterns in the public sector and an intent to stabilize labor relations by contract — at least for a period up to three years, the maximum duration of a collective bargaining agreement with municipal employees permitted by G. L. c. 149, § 1781. See Kerrigan v. Boston, 361 Mass. 24, 27-28 (1972), interpreting § 1781 in the light of the National Labor Relations Act (49 Stat. 449, as amended, 29 U. S. C. §§ 151 et seq.) and the State Labor Relations Law (G. L. c. 150A, §§ 1 et seq.).3 Section 1781 provides that “the municipal employer shall be represented by the chief executive officer ... or his designated representative” and that the parties if they reach an agreement “shall execute a written contract incorporating any agreement reached.” The Legislature was, of course, aware of the complex body of law governing municipal wages and contracts and municipal finance generally and accordingly provided that “[i]n the event that any part or provision of any such agreement is in conflict with any law, ordinance, or by-law, such law, ordinance, or by-law shall prevail” but only “so long as such conflict remains.” Section 1781 also provides that “Li]f funds are necessary to implement such written agreement, a request for the necessary appropriation shall be submitted to the legislative body Land further] [i]f such request is rejected, the matter shall be returned to the parties for further bargaining.”
*493The majority opinion accepts the contention of the city of Taunton that, by reason of G. L. c. 44, § 33A, an ordinance cannot validly implement a two-year collective bargaining agreement which provides for increases in wages in both years — at least as to the increase for the financial year following the passage of the ordinance. The specific proviso relied on is “ [N]o ordinance providing for an increase in the salaries or wages of municipal officers or employees shall be enacted . . . unless it is to be operative for more than three months during the financial year in which it is passed” (see emphasized part of fn. 4 of the majority opinion, hereafter referred to as the three-month provision).
The majority holds that the wage increases for 1972 were invalid because they were not “operative” during 1971, the financial year in which the ordinances providing for them were passed. With all respect, it seems to me that this provision, as a matter of grammatical construction, reads to require that the ordinance rather than the increase must be “operative” for more than three months during the financial year in which it is passed, and that the ordinances passed in August and September, 1971, to implement the policemen and firemen contracts were operative as the increases for that year. Thus it cannot be said of these ordinances, as of the city council’s increase in Brucato v. Lawrence, 338 Mass. 612, 618 (1959), that it had “no effect by way of expenditure in that year”4 (emphasis supplied). The 1971 ordinances funded by supplemental appropriations for that year are consistent with the three-month provision of § 33A “to make each council take immediate responsibility in the year of council action for some of the fiscal and tax burden of any salary increases voted by it” (emphasis supplied). Brucato v. Lawrence, supra. Similarly in Hackett v. Worcester, 346 Mass. 634,637 (1964), it was contended that the proviso in § 33A (see majority *494opinion, fn. 4) that “ordinances may be enacted . . . during the months of November and December [in a non-election year] providing for an increase in the salaries and wages ... to become effective as of January first of the next ensuing year” (emphasis supplied) prohibited increases which went into effect by stages during the ensuing year. The Supreme Judicial Court held that “the ordinance as a whole” became effective on January 1, although none of the step increases began on that date.
This construction of the three-month provision harmonizes the municipal finance law with the collective bargaining provisions of G. L. c. 149, § 1781, which permits three-year contracts. On the construction adopted by the majority, municipalities in which wage scales are established by ordinance are barred from presently negotiating binding increases which are not to take effect until the second or third year of a contract period. Either the parties must negotiate wages every year or attempt somehow to arrive at a flat increase for two or three years which would average out so that neither party would be disadvantaged. This would be a gamble which responsible negotiators might well be reluctant to take. Wages are ordinarily the major element in the negotiation of a labor contract and the hope for such stability in this volatile area5 as might result from collective bargaining agreements for two or three years could well be frustrated.6
Indeed, the interpretation accepted by the majority would appear to make the three-month provision inconsistent with the provisions in G. L. c. 41, § 108A, permitting a “city by ordinance” to establish a salary plan to “provide *495for the attainment of.. . maximum salaries by periodical step-rate increases based on length of service.” The three-month provision in G. L. c. 44, § 33A, has been in effect since 1947 (St. 1947, c. 298, § 1) and has been reconsidered from time to time. 8 I have found nothing to indicate that § 33A has ever been thought to affect G. L. c. 41, § 108A, which was also originally enacted in 1947 (St. 1947, c. 540, § 2) and permitted a city as part of a salary plan “to establish minimum and maximum salaries.”9 There would seem to be no real distinction between an ordinance providing for increases in subsequent years in accordance with a pattern set by a salary plan under G. L. c. 41, § 108A, and an ordinance providing for increases for subsequent years in accordance with a pattern set by an executed collective bargaining agreement made pursuant to G. L. c. 149, § 1781. It would be anomalous to permit less flexibility in collective bargaining agreements than in salary plans.
The conclusion of this dissent is also supported by the contract provisions relating to municipalities. These provisions would seem to be at least as relevant to the establishment of wages pursuant to G. L. c. 149, § 1781, since that provision contemplates the bilateral negotiation of collective bargaining contracts rather than the unilateral action implicit in the establishment of wages by ordinance. The municipal contract provisions also permit contracts extending over a period of years. See, e.g., G. L. c. 40, § 4 (unnumbered paragraphs lst-4th, 7th-9th, 11th, 14th-21st). And this has not been thought to be inconsistent with G. L. c. 44, § 31 (“No department. . . shall incur a liability in excess of the appropriation made for the use of such department”). “There is no requirement under such a contract that the whole expense, for all the years in which *496service is to be provided..., be appropriated at the inception of the contract.” Salisbury Water Supply Co. v. Salisbury, 341 Mass. 42, 49 (1960), and cases cited. See Callahan v. Woburn, 306 Mass. 265 (1940); Norton Teachers Assn. v. Norton, 361 Mass. 150, 155 (1972). See also Lynn Redevelopment Authy. v. Lynn, 360 Mass. 503, 506 (1971). Cf. Ellis v. Board of Selectmen of Barnstable, 361 Mass. 794, 800 (1972).
The majority interpretation appears to be based primarily on the fear that ordinances may be enacted to provide token increases in the year of passage and substantial increases in following years. “We are not faced with that issue in this case, because there is no suggestion that the . . . [ordinances are] not bona fide.” Belfer v. Building Commr. of Boston, 363 Mass. 439, 444 (1973). This is not a case where “a collective bargaining agreement is used as a method of evading a well-defined statutory policy.” Kerri-gan v. Boston, 361 Mass. 24, 31, fn. 3 (1972). “While this court sits,” I am confident that it can deal adequately with any such evasion. I would further observe that we are here interpreting not a criminal statute in which we are concerned with aberrant conduct, evasive in its essence (see Model Penal Code Proposed Official Draft, § 1.02 [1962]) but with a civil statute, part of an integrated whole, designed to guide the ordinary management of municipal affairs by officials presumably acting in good faith. A preoccupation with marginal conduct in this context distorts the entire statutory scheme.
The majority does not reach the defendants’ contention that the 1972 increases were also invalid because there was no supplemental appropriation made for them. This contention is based on the provision that “[n]o . . . increase in rate [shall be] made by ordinance [or] vote . . . during the« financial year subsequent to the submission of the annual budget unless provision therefor has been made by means of a supplemental appropriation” (the supplemental appropriation provision). The answer to this contention is found in Doherty v. Woburn, 345 Mass. 523, 526-527 (1963), in which the Supreme Judicial Court had before it *497an ordinance passed December 30, 1958 (a non-election year; see majority opinion, fn. 4, following the part emphasized) increasing salaries in 1959. The court held that the ordinance was valid because “[t]he increased salaries provided by each ordinance [including the one passed on December 30,1958] were to be paid from appropriations of the 1959 financial year and action on each ordinance was completed prior to the submission of the 1959 budget. There was no occasion for any supplemental appropriation. See Brucato v. Lawrence, 338 Mass. 612, 617.” See also Rock v. Pittsfield, 316 Mass. 348, 349 (1944), in which the court said of substantially the same provision:9 “After the submission of the annual budget, increases in salaries are forbidden unless provision therefor is made by means of a supplemental budget. G. L. (Ter. Ed.) c. 44, § 33A. ... But we know of no statute that restricts the power of the city council of Pittsfield to enact an ordinance in one year making an increase in salary to take effect at the beginning of the succeeding year.” See James v. Mayor of New Bedford, 319 Mass. 74, 77 (1946); Clements v. Treasurer of Cambridge, 324 Mass. 73, 74 (1949). See also Fitchburg Teachers Assn. v. School Comm. of Fitchburg, 360 Mass. 105, 108 (1971).
In the policemen’s case the city of Taunton makes the additional argument (with which the majority also need not deal) based on the fact that the supplemental appropriation was made on September 18, 1971, subsequent to the passage of the ordinance on August 24, 1971. (In the firemen’s case the supplemental appropriation, also passed on September 18, 1971, preceded the ordinance incorporating the increases and passed on September 22, 1971.) The city of Taunton argues that the ordinance was in violation of the supplemental appropriation provision of G. L. c. 44, § 33A, as to the 1971 increases as well as to the *4981972 increases and therefore totally inoperative in 1971. However, that provision, unlike the three-month provision, requires a supplemental appropriation to effect the increase, not to validate the ordinance. Since that provision does not prohibit wage increases passed by ordinance from being effectuated by appropriations made the following year, I see no reason why it should prohibit wage increases from being effectuated by appropriations made subsequently in the same year. See Rock v. Pittsfield, 316 Mass. 348, 349 (1945); James v. Mayor of New Bedford, 319 Mass. 74, 77 (1946); Clements v. Treasurer of Cambridge, 324 Mass. 73, 74 (1949). See also Fitchburg Teachers Assn. v. School Comm. of Fitchburg, 360 Mass. 105, 108 (1971). The adoption of the ordinance “did not constitute ‘expenditure of public money’ or the incurring of ‘liability’ ” (Doherty v. Woburn, 345 Mass. 523, 527-528 [1963]) until the supplemental appropriation was made. Since a “supplemental appropriation was passed by the city council to meet the salary increase” (cf. Foley v. Lawrence, 336 Mass. 60, 62 [1957]) on September 18, 1971, the ordinance effecting the policemen’s increase, like the one effecting the firemen’s increase, was operative for at least three months during that year.
Thus I submit that the collective bargaining agreements were not in conflict with any law, and that the conflict with the ordinances setting lower salaries in effect prior to the 1971 ordinances prevailed only “so long as such conflict remain[ed]” (G. L. c. 149, § 1781), i.e., until the repeal of the earlier ordinances which was accomplished by the 1971 ordinances. As the Supreme Judicial Court said in Rock v. Pittsfield, 316 Mass. 348, 350-351 (1944), “We think that the ordinance was valid, and that the salary increase took effect on January 1 [1972].... It then became the duty of the mayor to provide in the budget for payment of the salaries as increased by the ordinance. G. L. (Ter. Ed.) c. 44, § 33A. . . .10 The duty to provide for the increased *499salaries arises upon general principles, and not exclusively upon the terms of § 33A.” See Doherty v. Woburn, 345 Mass. 523, 528 (1963); Barnard v. Lynn, 295 Mass. 144, 147 (1936); Rhyne, Municipal Law, § 8-18.
I would order a decree entered declaring that the collective bargaining agreements and the ordinances are both valid; that the 1972 wage schedules provided in the collective bargaining agreements and ordinances are binding on the city of Taunton; and that the policemen and firemen covered by those agreements and ordinances are owed compensation based on such wage schedules with interest. Doherty v. Woburn, supra, at 528.
“Employees .. . shall have the right... to bargain collectively through representatives of their own choosing....”
The stated purposes of this provision are “... [toj remov[el certain recognized sources of industrial strife and unrest,... [to| encouragje] practices fundamental to the friendly adjustment of industrial disputes arising out of differences as to wages, hours or other working conditions, and... [toj restor[e| equality of bargaining power between employers and employees.”
For a view emphasizing the differences between private and public sector collective bargaining, see Wellington and Winter, The Limits of Collective Bargaining in Public Employment, .78 Yale L. J. 1107, and Wellington and Winter, Structuring Collective Bargaining In Public Employment, 79 Yale L. J. 805. See also 1971 House Doc. No. 5235, Second Interim Report of the Special Legislative Study Commission on Collective Bargaining, p. 14; Rehmus, Constraints on Local Governments In Public Employee Bargaining, 67 Mich. L. Rev. 919.
Also in both Clements v. Treasurer of Cambridge, 324 Mass. 73,74 (1949), and Booker v. Woburn, 325 Mass. 334-336 (1950), the.increases had no effect during the years in which the ordinances were respectively passed. There was therefore no need in those cases to distinguish between the operation of the ordinance and the operation of the increase.
See 1971 House Doc. No. 5235, Second Interim Report of the Special Legislative Study Commission on Collective Bargaining, at page 9: “When 200,000 different workers break State anti-strike laws in 251 concerted actions in one year (1968), there can remain little doubt that the problem is here and now.”
It has been suggested that “[tjhe difficulties [of coordinating the budget-making process with collective bargaining] can be minimized by . . . negotiating collective bargaining contracts for longer terms than are currently settled upon.” Rehmus, Constraints on Local Governments In Public Employee Bargaining, 67 Mich. L. Rev. 919,925.
The more explicit present language was enacted by St. 1948, c. 351, which rewrote the section.
The provision considered by the court read: “The budget shall include sums sufficient to pay the salaries of officials fixed by law or by ordinance, but no new position shall be created or increase in rate made during the financial year subsequent to the submission of the annual budget, unless provision therefor is made by means of a supplemental budget.” The difference between the phrase “is made” and the present phrase “has been made” (see St. 1943, c. 62) is stylistic and immaterial, particularly in view of the cases cited in this connection.
Section 33A requires that “[tjhe annual budget shall include sums sufficient to pay the salaries of officers and employees fixed by law or by ordinance” (see first sentence of fn. 4 of the majority opinion).

=== CASE 2210921 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:59.689486+00 ===

260 Cal.App.2d 190 (1968)
THE PEOPLE, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
JOSEPH FINLEY ARMSTRONG, Defendant and Appellant.
Crim. No. 2881.
California Court of Appeals. Fourth Dist., Div. One.
Mar. 18, 1968.
Peter B. Clarke, under appointment by the Court of Appeal, for Defendant and Appellant.
Thomas C. Lynch, Attorney General, William E. James, Assistant Attorney General, and Michael J. Smolen, Deputy Attorney General, for Plaintiff and Respondent.
COUGHLIN, J.
Defendant was convicted of the offense of lewd and lascivious conduct upon the body of a child under the age of 14 years, a violation of Penal Code, section 288.  [fn. 1]*192 Imposition of sentence was suspended and proceedings were commenced under the statute providing for the commitment, care and treatment of mentally disordered sex offenders, viz., Welfare and Institutions Code, section 5500 et seq. The proceedings were conducted in three stages, each by a different judge, resulting respectively in (1) an order dated April 9, 1964, pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code, section 5512, declaring defendant a probable mentally disordered sex offender, hereinafter referred to as a MDSO, and committing him for observation; (2) an order dated June 30, 1964, also pursuant to section 5512, finding him to be a MDSO who would not benefit by care or treatment in a state hospital and was a danger to the health and safety of others, and committing him for an indeterminate period to the Department of Mental Hygiene for placement in the state institution provided pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code, section 5518; and (3) an order dated March 27, 1967, pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code, section 5519, recommitting him to the Department of Mental Hygiene as a dangerous MDSO not amenable to treatment.
Defendant appeals from the latter order contending it is in error because, among other things, the proceedings under stages (1) and (2) denied him due process of law, and the orders of commitment to a state hospital for observation and to the Department of Mental Hygiene for an indeterminate period for placement in a state institution were void.
[1] We reject defendant's contention respecting the invalidity of the order under stage (1), upon the ground he personally consented to placement for observation and thus waived any objection to the order. (In re Cruz, 62 Cal.2d 307, 312-313 [42 Cal.Rptr. 220, 398 P.2d 412]; see also People v. Berry, 257 Cal.App.2d 731, 737 [65 Cal.Rptr. 125].)
On the other hand we conclude the proceedings in stage (2) were fatally defective, and the order adjudging defendant a MDSO who would not benefit by treatment and was dangerous, and committing him to the Department of Mental Hygiene for an indefinite period, was void.
Pertinent parts of Welfare and Institutions Code, section 5512 setting forth the stage (2) proceeding provide, in the event the superintendent of the hospital to which the person had been committed for observation reports to the committing court he is a mentally disordered sex offender but will not benefit by care or treatment and is a danger to the health and safety of others, the court shall cause the person to be *193 returned to the court in which the criminal charge was tried; the latter court shall resume the proceedings and impose sentence or, if satisfied the person is a dangerous MDSO not amenable to treatment, may recertify him to the superior court; and if the superior court, "after hearing" finds the person to be a dangerous MDSO not amenable to treatment, it may commit him for an indeterminate period to the Department of Mental Hygiene for placement in a state institution.
[2] In the case at bench the superintendent of the hospital to which defendant had been committed for observation, reported he was a dangerous MDSO not amenable to treatment. Thereupon the matter was "remanded" to a department of the superior court "for further hearing and disposition in accordance with law." The judge of that department contemporaneously considered the dual questions whether to sentence defendant to prison or place him with the Department of Mental Hygiene for an indeterminate period. Defendant's contention these proceedings must be bifurcated and the hearings conducted by different judges is without merit. Such a procedure is not required by the statute; where the court consists of only one judge would be impossible; and under circumstances such as in the instant case would serve no useful purpose. (Gen. see People v. Howerton, 40 Cal.2d 217, 219 [253 P.2d 8].)
At the stage (2) hearing in question defendant was present and represented by counsel; no witnesses testified; the court determined the issues upon information contained in a supplemental probation officer's report which incorporated a report by letter from the superintendent of the state hospital where defendant had been under observation; defendant was not confronted by nor given the opportunity to cross-examine the author of this letter; defense counsel argued the insufficiency of the letter-report to establish defendant was a dangerous person; the judge expressed his belief defendant was in need of treatment and it would be better to send him to "a state institution for that purpose, rather than state prison"; and, on this basis, the written commitment order found defendant "to be a mentally disordered sexual offender, constituting a danger to the health and safety of others not amenable to hospital treatment at the present time." This hearing did not satisfy the statutory or constitutional due process requirement in the premises.
The stage (2) proceeding prescribed by Welfare and Institutions *194 Code, section 5512 provides for a "hearing"; requires the court to make certain findings as a condition to further commitment, i.e., that the person is a dangerous MDSO not amenable to treatment; and directs that at the hearing the person charged shall be entitled to present witnesses on his behalf, to be represented by counsel, and to cross-examine witnesses who testify against him.
Thus, the issue for determination is whether the type of hearing contemplated by the statute requires the presentation of evidence in the manner and of the kind ordinarily required as a basis for judicially determined findings of fact.
It is noteworthy with respect to a hearing following a report by the superintendent recommending continued treatment in the hospital, the statute expressly provides:
"Upon such hearing the court may accept the report of the superintendent of the hospital ..., if verified, in lieu of the examination by and testimony of court-appointed psychiatrists, or may consider the report as additional evidence." (Former Welf. & Inst. Code,  5512.) The omission of a similar provision from that part of the statute prescribing the hearing following a report the person charged is a dangerous MDSO not amenable to treatment indicates a legislative intent the report of the superintendent, absent a stipulation to the contrary, may not be considered as evidence in the proceedings, and the findings the court is required to make must be based on the testimony of witnesses. (See City & County of San Francisco v. Pacific Tel. & Tel. Co., 166 Cal. 244, 251 [135 P. 971]; In re Dees, 50 Cal.App. 11, 19 [194 P. 717]; see also People v. Bennett, 245 Cal.App.2d 10, 24 [53 Cal.Rptr. 579].)
[3] Where uncertain, a statute will be interpreted to give it meaning consistent with constitutional requirements. (County of Madera v. Gendron, 59 Cal.2d 798, 801 [31 Cal.Rptr. 302, 382 P.2d 342, 6 A.L.R.3d 555]; Erlich v. Municipal Court, 55 Cal.2d 553, 558 [11 Cal.Rptr. 758, 360 P.2d 334].) [4] Compliance with the constitutional guarantee of due process of law requires the hearing in proceedings to determine whether a person is a dangerous MDSO not amenable to treatment, and for this reason should be committed for an indeterminate period to the Department of Mental Hygiene as prescribed by Welfare and Institutions Code, section 5512, must afford such person "all those safeguards which are fundamental rights and essential to a fair trial, including the right to confront and cross-examine the witnesses against him." (United States v. Maroney, 355 F.2d 302, 312; Specht *195 v. Patterson, 386 U.S. 605 [18 L.Ed.2d 326, 87 S.Ct. 1209, 1212].) The subject statute must be interpreted accordingly.
In the case of In re Kramer, 257 Cal.App.2d 287, 291 [64 Cal.Rptr. 686], the court pertinently observed:
"Courts and attorneys must recognize that sex psychopathy proceedings may have consequences much more serious than the prison term prescribed in the Penal Code. If the court finds the person is a danger to others but will not benefit by treatment in a state hospital, the court may, in its discretion, commit him for placement in an institution under the jurisdiction of the Department of Corrections (i.e., a state prison), there to remain until he is no longer a danger to others. For a prisoner who has been officially declared to be both dangerous and not treatable, the prospects of proving a recovery are bleak. The practical effect of the civil commitment may be life imprisonment without possibility of parole. A decision to impose such a commitment should be arrived at only after proceedings which are appropriate to the gravity of the issue."
[5] A hearing, such as that under review in the case at bench, in which the only evidence in support of the findings required to commit a person for an indeterminate period to the Department of Mental Hygiene for placement in a state institution is the written report of a hospital superintendent, does not comply with the statutory or constitutional requirements in the premises, unless the parties stipulate to such a procedure. The commitment order of June 30, 1964 which was the product of such a hearing is void (People v. Succop, 67 Cal.2d 785, 789 [63 Cal.Rptr. 569, 433 P.2d 473]; People v. McDonald, 257 Cal.App.2d 846, 849 [65 Cal.Rptr. 530]; People v. Berry, supra, 257 Cal.App.2d 731, 737; In re Kramer, supra, 257 Cal.App.2d 287, 289; People v. Harvath, 251 Cal.App.2d 780, 783 [60 Cal.Rptr. 15]; People v. Loignon, 250 Cal.App.2d 386, 390 [58 Cal.Rptr. 866]); and must be set aside. (People v. Berry, supra, 257 Cal.App.2d 731, 738; People v. Loignon, supra, 250 Cal.App.2d 386, 390.)
[6] Jurisdictional to a valid recommitment order under Welfare and Institutions Code, section 5519 is a prior valid commitment order under Welfare and Institutions Code, section 5512. (People v. McDonald, supra, 257 Cal.App.2d 846, 849-850; People v. Loignon, supra, 250 Cal.App.2d 386, 790-791.)
The recommitment order of March 27, 1967 which is the *196 subject of this appeal, lacking a prior valid commitment order, must be reversed.
Defendant has urged other contentions which, in light of our conclusions aforesaid, we need not consider.
The recommitment order appealed from is reversed; the commitment order of June 30, 1964 is set aside; and the proceedings are remanded to the trial court with instructions to take such further action therein, in harmony with the views expressed in this opinion, as may be proper under the law and the facts in the premises.
Brown (Gerald), P. J., and Whelan, J., concurred.
NOTES
[fn. 1]  1. Defendant was charged in three counts with the offenses of lewd and lascivious acts upon the body of three children. It does not appear whether he was convicted of more than one of these offenses.

=== CASE 9737539 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:28:07.727903+00 ===

T. G. Kavanagh, P. J.,
(dissenting). In addition to the 3 areas of error indicated in my brothers’ opinion, I find 2 more.
1. Denial of defendant’s motion for the disclosure of the rebuttal witness.
2. Limiting the requested Lyles instruction. [Lyles v. United States (1957), 103 App DC 22 (254 F2d 725).]
*87I cannot subscribe to the evaluation of the 3 errors listed in the majority opinion as “harmless” any more than I could so characterize the 2 indicated above or the sum of them as “non prejudicial.”
I do not think the defendant had a fair trial. I will not comment further on the errors described in my brothers’ opinion beyond saying that I agree they were errors.
The court’s denial of the defense motion for the disclosure of the witness to be called by the state on the question of sanity in my view prevented the defense from properly preparing cross-examination and accordingly was prejudicial error.
I do not share the conviction that permitting the defense psychiatrist to testify as to his opinion of defendant’s sanity cured the error of limiting his examination on that subject to a hypothetical question. The whole purpose of G-CB 1963, 605 is subverted by this device, in my opinion.
But the most glaring error which I perceive is the court’s refusal to give the Lyles instruction.
In People v. Cole (1967), 8 Mich App 250 the trial court refused (as here) to instruct on the effect of CL 1948, § 766.15c (Stat Ann 1954 Bev § 28.933 [3]),* refused to allow defense counsel to state the law in his argument, and refused to answer a direct inquiry on this point by the jury during its deliberations. A majority of our Court’s panel in that case approved. I disagreed there. I disagree here.
I believe a defendant who pleads not guilty by reason of insanity is entitled to have the requested instruction on the statute given to the jury so that the jury will not be moved by fear based on its ignorance of the law, which fear seemed so obvious *88to me in Cole. In Cole we could see the flower. Here we can see the root. Our task, as I perceive it, is to extirpate the noxious weed of ignorance however it appear,
I would reverse and remand for a new trial.
Repealed by PA 1966, No 266, effective March 10, 1967. Por current provisions see PA 1927, No 175, ch 7, §§ 27a, 27b, as added by PA 1966, No 266 (MOLA §§ 767.27a, 767.27b, Stat Ann 1968 Cum Supp §§ 28.966[11], 28.966[12]).

=== CASE 2210965 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:00.219124+00 ===

301 N.E.2d 663 (1973)
STATE of Indiana, by and through the State HIGHWAY Commission of Indiana, et al., Defendants-Appellants,
v.
BLACKISTON LAND COMPANY, Inc., Plaintiff-Appellee.
No. 1-772A33.
Court of Appeals of Indiana, First District.
October 11, 1973.
*664 Theodore L. Sendak, Atty. Gen., John T. Carmody, Robert A. Zaban, Deputy Attys. Gen., Indianapolis, for defendants-appellants.
Evan E. Steger, G. Daniel Kelley, Jr., Ice, Miller, Donadio & Ryan, Indianapolis, Robert H. Kempf, Jr., Meranda & Kempf, Jeffersonville, Richard W. George, Bloom & Bloom, Fort Wayne, for plaintiff-appellee.
ROBERTSON, Presiding Judge.
Defendant-appellant State Highway Commission (State) brings this appeal from an adverse judgment in an inverse condemnation proceeding brought by plaintiff-appellee Blackiston Land Company (Blackiston).
On September 8, 1964, the State entered a strip of land owned by Blackiston. The land was adjacent to and abutted State Highway 131 in Clark County. The purpose of the entry was to enlarge the roadway from two lanes to four. Blackiston approved of the entry subject to its right to receive just compensation for the land. An agreement on compensation was never reached, and on December 22, 1970, Blackiston filed its complaint for inverse condemnation. The Clark Superior Court rendered judgment on the jury's verdict of $60,000 for damages and compensation for the property appropriated by the State, with interest of $17,800. In addition, Blackiston was awarded his reasonable expenses in the sum of $36,685 which broke down as follows: attorney fees $26,800, appraisal fees $9,700, and investigation fees $185. Also, court costs of $3,931 were awarded to Blackiston.
On appeal the State raises three issues:
1. Whether, in an adverse condemnation proceeding, the value of the property which serves as the measure of compensation should be determined as of the date the State entered and took possession of the land, or the date on which notice was served on the State pursuant to the inverse condemnation action.
2. If the value is determined as of the date of service on the State, does interest on the damages accrue from the date of service or from the date on which the State entered the land.
3. Whether or not Public Law 97, Acts of 1971, the same being IC 8-13-18.5-1 to 8-13-18.5-20, Ind. Ann. Stat. §§ 3-1771 to 3-1790 (Burns 1972 Supp.), should apply to actions filed prior to the effective date of its enactment.
The basis for the dispute on the first issue is the significant increase in the value of the land in question between 1964, the date of entry, and 1970, when condemnation proceedings began. The trial court used December 29, 1970, as the date the appraisers were to use in establishing the land value. Blackiston urges this to be the correct date, and in support cites the following section of the Eminent Domain Act 1905:
Lands taken without condemnation  Assessment of damages.  Any person having an interest in any land which has heretofore been or may hereafter be taken for any public use without having first been appropriated under this or any prior law may proceed to have his damages *665 assessed under this act, substantially in the manner herein provided. (Emphasis added)
IC XX-XX-X-XX, Ind. Ann. Stat. § 3-1711 (Burns 1968) (hereinafter referred to as section 3-1711)
The emphasized language is a reference to that part of the Act which provides for the assessment of damages in a direct, as distinguished from an inverse, condemnation proceeding. In addition to providing for the appointment of appraisers and the factors to be considered by them in their assessment of damages, this section states:
... For the purpose of assessing compensation and damages, the right thereto shall be deemed to have accrued at the date of the service of the notice . .. and its actual value, at that date, shall be the measure of compensation for all property to be actually taken and the basis of damages to property not actually taken but injuriously affected... .
IC XX-XX-X-X Ind. Ann. Stat. § 3-1706 (Burns 1968) (hereinafter referred to as section 3-1706)
Taken together, sections 3-1711 and 3-1706, Blackiston contends, require that the value of the property be established as of the date on which notice is served on the State.
We are of the opinion that the proper interpretation of section 3-1711 is that urged by Blackiston. The language requiring that damages be assessed "substantially in the manner as herein provided" encompasses the date as of which those damages are to be measured, that date being found in section 3-1706.
The State's reliance on Oregon State Highway Comm. v. Stumbo (1960) 222 Or. 62, 352 P.2d 478, annotated 2 A.L.R.3d 1028 (1965) is misplaced as that case was decided in a state without a statute prescribing an assessment date in either a direct or an inverse action.
We do not feel that this ruling works an unfair hardship on the State. It was well within its power to dictate the date on which damages were assessed. Had the State instituted condemnation proceedings at any time between 1964 and 1970 the assessment date would have been the date of service of notice on the landowner, Blackiston, as provided in section 3-1706.
As for the second issue, the State contends the trial court erred when, after setting the date for assessment of damages at the 1970 service of notice date, it allowed interest on those damages from the 1964 date of entry by the State. According to the State, logic requires the running of interest to commence on the same date on which the property is evaluated, that being the date of service of notice.
Neither logic nor the applicable statute requires such a result. The State has failed to recognize the purpose for awarding interest in an eminent domain proceeding. It is not, as suggested by the State, to compensate the landowner for the loss in value of his property. Rather, it is a means of measuring the loss caused the landowner due to the deprivation of the use of his land, and should be allowed for the period of time between the entry or physical taking by the condemnor and the payment of just compensation therefor. See Keefer v. Penn-Harris-Madison School Corp. (1971), Ind., 267 N.E.2d 838; State v. Geiger & Peters, Inc. (1964), 245 Ind. 143, 196 N.E.2d 740. The interest award is an essential element of the just compensation demanded by Article I, section 21, of our State Constitution when private property is taken for public use. State v. Stabb (1948), 226 Ind. 319, 79 N.E.2d 392. See generally 3 Nichols on Eminent Domain § 8.63 (1965).
The statute which requires interest to be computed in the manner used by the trial court provides in part as follows:
Sixth. In any trial of exceptions, the court or jury shall compute and allow interest *666 at the rate of 4% per annum on the amount of a defendant's damages from the date plaintiff takes possession of the property. ... (Emphasis added)
IC XX-XX-X-X Ind. Ann. Stat. § 3-1707 (Burns 1968)
This statute, of course, applies to a direct condemnation proceeding, as evinced by the reference to the date when plaintiff takes possession. On its face, it would not apply to an inverse proceeding in which the person taking possession is the defendant, not the plaintiff. However, section 3-1711 enters the scene with its "substantially in the manner herein provided" language, which results in the landowner, in an inverse condemnation proceeding, receiving interest on his damages from the date the State took possession of the property. Hence, the trial court did not err in making an award of interest in the instant case to run from September 8, 1964, the date on which the State entered possession.
Although no previous Indiana case has reached the result reached here  interest being computed from a date prior to the date of evaluation of the property  cases from other jurisdictions have. See Desert Waters, Inc. v. Superior Court (1962), 91 Ariz. 163, 370 P.2d 652; City of San Rafael v. Wood (1956), 144 Cal. App.2d 604, 301 P.2d 421; Andrews v. State (1959), 19 Misc.2d 217, 188 N.Y.S.2d 854.
The final issue raised by the State concerns the trial court's action awarding Blackiston its reasonable costs in the amount of $36,685, pursuant to the following statute:
"(c) The court rendering a judgment for the plaintiff in a proceeding brought under [Burns § 3-1711] ... in awarding compensation for the taking of property by an agency ... shall determine and award or allow to such plaintiff, as a part of such judgment ... such sum as will in the opinion of the court or the agency reimburse such plaintiff for the reasonable costs, disbursements, and expenses, including reasonable attorney, appraisal, and engineering fees, actually incurred because of such proceeding."
IC 8-13-18.5-13, Ind. Ann. Stat. § 3-1783 (Burns 1972 Supp.) (hereinafter referred to as section 3-1783)
This statute was enacted as a part of Acts 1971, P.L. 97, § 1, p. 445, which became effective on September 2, 1971. The State contends that the trial court erred in applying this statute to an action brought under section 3-1711 nine months earlier on December 22, 1970.
We uphold the trial court on this issue, also. Section 3-1783 is a statute pertaining to costs and the rule has been long established that the law which governs as to costs is that in force at the time judgment is rendered. Free and Another v. Haworth (1862), 19 Ind. 404. Other jurisdictions have similarly made awards of fees and costs in eminent domain proceedings pursuant to a statute which took effect after the initiation of the proceedings. See State Dept. of Mental Health v. Cholewinsk (1967), 27 Conn.Sup. 286, 236 A.2d 339; Chicago & W.I.R. Co. v. Guthrie (1901), 192 Ill. 579, 61 N.E. 658.
In response to the State's assertion that the manner in which the trial court made the award of expenses was improper due to no hearing being held or prior notice being given, suffice it to say that the record shows that notice of Blackiston's request for expenses was given the State, and that no objection was made by the State to the statement of costs filed in the trial court by Blackiston.
Two ancillary issues remain for disposal. The first is Blackiston's Motion for An Award of Attorneys Fees and Leave to Submit a Bill of Costs, based upon the additional expenses of defending the appeal. Blackiston's motion is granted with the Bill of Costs being submitted to *667 the trial court for a determination of reasonableness pursuant to section 3-1783. Secondly, Blackiston's Motion to Dismiss or Affirm is overruled. While the grounds specified therein may contain some merit the posture of the appeal is such that an opinion on the merits by the court was possible.
Judgment affirmed.
LOWDERMILK and LYBROOK JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9737540 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:28:11.222353+00 ===

Lowdermilk, J.
This appeal comes to us without a copy of the affidavit in appellants’ brief or in the transcript.
Defendants-appellants Michael L. Marine (Marine) and David Endress (Endress) were charged by affidavit with the offense of assault and battery with intent to kill one Bernard Fogle with a machete or corn knife and a shotgun.
The facts most favorable to the State are that Bernard Fogle and a companion were riding in the companion’s car in Lawrenceburg and saw Marine walking down the street. Fogle yelled at Marine, who came to the car and reached inside and put his hands on top of Fogle’s head and jabbed his thumbs in Fogle’s eyes, while telling him to get out of the car. Fogle did so and Marine drew back his fists, but Fogle *74beat him to the punch, hit him in the mouth, knocked him flat on his back and then got back in the car and rode away with his companion.
Marine returned to his home where he doctored his injured lip and then, with three friends, drank beer at his home and awaited the arrival of Endress who would get off work at 2 :00 o’clock A.M.
While drinking beer Marine indicated his anger toward Fogle and stated he would “get him” and that he would “cut” Fogle and he had a machete in his hands at home at that time.
Endress arrived at Marine’s home and upon learning of the events said he had a shotgun in his car.
At about 3:30 A.M. Marine and Endress drove, in Endress’ car, to the home of George Tschaenn, who lived next door to Fogle, with Marine taking the machete with him. The shotgun was in the rear of Endress’ car.
Marine and Endress requested Tschaenn to go next door to Fogle’s home and see if he v/as home. He was not home and they waited in the front yard at Tschaenn’s home. During this interval Marine told Tschaenn he was “going to get” Fogle.
Shortly thereafter Fogle was brought home by a Mr. Henry in Henry’s car and he got out and walked over to the defendants. He did not make any gestures toward the defendants-appellants, yet Marine pulled out the machete and En-dress got the shotgun out of the car. Marine swung the machete at Fogle, missed and Fogle backed up. Marine continued in pursuit and Fogle threw his arm up for protection and was struck in the arm with the machete, severing tendons and muscles and causing severe loss of blood. This was followed immediately by Endress hitting Fogle in the head with the butt of his shotgun.
*75Fogle immediately retreated, ran to the police station for help, and was hospitalized.
Defendants-appellants were arrested, advised of their constitutional rights, questioned and after the questioning Endress shouted at the police, “I should have shot him.”
Defendants-appellants rely on the theory of self defense and assert it was proven that the evidence was insufficient to support the jury’s verdict.
There is evidence in the record that Fogle was a fighter and had had several fights.
Trial was had to a jury, which found Marine and Endress guilty as charged and they were duly sentenced pursuant to statute. Defendants-appellants then timely filed their motion to correct errors.
The first and last specifications of error are that the verdict is not sustained by sufficient evidence. We shall treat these together under Rule AP. 8.3(A) (7).
Defendants-appellants rely on many cases, including King v. State (1968), 249 Ind. 699, 234 N.E.2d 465, which case sets out the necessary elements of self defense as follows:
“Where one has taken the life of another human being, and thereafter contends that he did so in self-defense, he can only be successful in his contention if:
(1) he acted without fault,
(2) he was in a place where he had a right to be, and
(3) he was in real danger of death or great bodily harm, or in such apparent danger as caused him in good faith to fear death or great bodily harm.
Bullard v. State (1964), 245 Ind. 90, 195 N.E.2d 856; Hightire v. State (1966), 247 Ind. 164, 213 N.E.2d 707. The burden is upon the State to show that defendant does not meet one or more of these requirements. Dorak v. State (1915), 183 Ind. 622, 109 N.E. 771. Whether the State has borne its burden of showing that the homicidal act was not carried out in self-defense is a question of ultimate fact to be decided by the jury. Robinson v. State (1962), 243 Ind. 192, 184 N.E.2d 16.
*76After the jury has made this determination in favor of the State and against the defendant, this Court, on appeal: ‘. . . has upon it a duty to consider, not to weigh, the evidence in the case for the purpose of determining whether there is any substantial evidence of probative value from which a jury reasonably could have inferred that the appellant was guilty of the offense charged’ Robinson v. State, supra, 243 Ind. at 197. See also Easton v. State (1967), 248 Ind. 338, 228 N.E.2d 6; Baker v. State (1956), 236 Ind. 55, 138 N.E.2d 641.”
See, also, Hughes v. State (1937), 212 Ind. 577, 10 N.E.2d 629.
In their brief appellants state:
“. . . Counsel will admit that the men went to the Tschaenn house at least partially for vengeful reasons, but as prosecution witness Tschaenn testified, they were leaving when Fogle arrived looking for trouble and found it.”
The record does not disclose that Fogle was looking for trouble; he was unarmed and arriving at home after a shift of work.
It is true that the jury must look at the situation from the defendant’s viewpoint (Lee v. State (1973), 156 Ind. App. 569, 297 N.E.2d 890) yet the jury need not believe the defendant’s testimony of what his viewpoint was. In Lytel v. State (1968), 251 Ind. 413, 241 N.E.2d 366, the court said:
“. . . However, the jury had a right not to believe her story from other circumstantial evidence in the case, and this Court does not determine the credibility of the witnesses. . . .”
See, also, Lee v. State, supra; Cammack v. State (1970), 254 Ind. 637, 261 N.E.2d 862.
In the light of this rule, having considered and having not weighed the evidence in the case before us, we are of the opinion there was substantial evidence of probative value from which the jury reasonably could have inferred that the de*77fendants-appellants were not acting in self defense and were guilty of the offense charged.
We have found that there was substantial evidence of probative value to support the verdict and it necessarily follows that the court did not commit any error in the overruling of the motion for a directed verdict at the close of the State’s evidence or at the close of all the evidence.
Defendants-appellants’ next specification of error is that the court committed prejudicial error in permitting the witness, George Tschaenn, to testify after two witnesses had been heard, as the State had failed to provide the defense with Tschaenn’s name as a State’s witness as a result of an order on a discovery motion requesting the witnesses to be named.
The record discloses that counsel for defendants-appellants knew George Tschaenn and was friendly to him and knew he was a witness to the alleged crime and wondered why he had not been listed as a witness for the State.
When Mr. Tschaenn was called to the stand defendants-appellants timely objected for the reason his name had not been submitted on the list of witnesses and the State suggested at that time that the court grant a continuance. The court offered to grant a continuance, granting all the time necessary for defendants-appellants to interview the witness and make any other preparation necessary for their defense, but defendants-appellants refused this proposal by the court and objected to Mr. Tschaenn’s testifying for the sole reason that his name was not on the list of witnesses and elected to proceed with the trial without the benefit of a continuance.
The facts of this case are very similar to Johns v. State (1968), 251 Ind. 172, 240 N.E.2d 60, relied upon in Luckett v. State (1972), 259 Ind. 174, 284 N.E.2d 738, 745, wherein Justice Hunter stated:
*78“. . . However, this court made it abundantly clear in Johns v. State, supra, that the proper course of action for a defendant in such cases is to move for a continuance. Also, see Pinkerton v. State (1972), [258] Ind. [610], 283 N.E. 2d 376. Here, not only did the appellant fail to seek a continuance, he expressly refused one. ... It appears that the one day continuance offered by the trial court would have been sufficient to assure fundamental fairness to the appellant under the facts of this case. As we stated in Pinkerton v. State, supra:
‘As we have said many times, although the defendant is entitled to a fair trial, [he] is not entitled to a perfect one. We fail to see where the trial court failed to compensate properly for the failure of the State, and we think that the defendant merely seeks to take unrealistic advantage of error that has caused [him] no harm.’ . . .”
See, also, Gregory v. State (1972), 259 Ind. 295, 286 N.E.2d 666, 670.
It appears to us the defendants-appellants’ refusal to take advantage of the offered continuance is parallel to the cases cited and quoted in the Luckett case and that defendants-appellants were seeking to take unrealistic advantage of error that caused them no harm. Defendants-appellants cannot now be heard to complain, as there was no prejudicial error.
Defendants-appellants’ next assigned error is that the State called a witness who had been in the courtroom listening to the testimony of a defense witness in violation of a motion for separation of witnesses which had been sustained by the court. Counsel cites no authority, as required by Rule AP. 8.3(A) (7). We shall, however, waive this oversight and write on the same. This objection is taken care of by the case of McCoy v. State (1960), 241 Ind. 104, 170 N.E.2d 43, wherein complaint was made that an 11 year old boy was permitted to testify in violation of a separation order. The court said:
*79*78“. . . In the absence of any procurement or connivancy by the party using such a witness who has violated the order *79of the court, it is well established that it is within the discretion of the court to permit such a witness to testify. [Cases cited omitted.]
It has even been held to be prejudicial error to refuse to permit such a witness to testify where the party calling such a witness is not at fault for such violation. [Cases cited omitted.]”
It being discretionary with the court and this court having determined there was no abuse of discretion, no error was committed.
Defendants-appellants’ next claimed error is to the court’s giving of Instructions F7, F15, FIG and F17. Counsel says said instructions are set out verbatim in the summary of the argument and the argument against their inclusion is sufficient in that section of the brief. He assigned further reasons that said instructions were bad.
Unfortunately, the transcript of the record did not include any of the instructions in the cause; neither did it include any written objections to said instructions hereinabove enumerated, and therefore the instructions are not before this court and cannot be passed upon by this court in this appeal. Further, the instructions were not set out specifically in the brief and followed by the argument applicable thereto, in violation of Rule AP. 8.3(A) (7).
The next specification of error set out in the motion to correct errors was that the court erred in refusing to permit a defense witness, Cornett, to testify that he observed the witness Fogle beating an elderly man some four years before the incident at issue.
The witness was offered to show the vicious and aggressive nature of the prosecuting witness, Fogle. It is axiomatic that the admission of a prosecuting witness’ vicious propensities four years before he is involved in an altercation resulting in a criminal prosecution is discretionary with the trial court because of the lapse of *80time. In Kelley v. State (1948), 226 Ind. 148, 78 N.E.2d 547, the court said:
. . To show error that will cause a reversal of a cause it is necessary to show to this court that the trial court abused its discretion in the reception of evidence. . . .”
The same rule would apply to the exclusion of evidence. Further, this testimony offered and rejected was only cumulative of other evidence of the prosecuting witness’ vicious propensities and the court’s refusal to admit the same is not error.
Finding no reversible error, it necessarily follows that the judgment of the trial court is not contrary to law.
Judgment affirmed.
Robertson, P.J. and Lybrook, J., concur.
Note.—Reported at 301 N.E.2d 778.

=== CASE 9737541 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:28:11.226847+00 ===

On Petition for Rehearing
Lowdermilk, J.
Appellants, in their petition for rehearing, attach a copy of the affidavit on which they were tried, which was duly authenticated by the Clerk and the Judge.
Under Rule AP. 15 (C), Certiorari, the affidavit should have been made a part of the record by having been brought into the transcript by certiorari.
Although the affidavit should have been made a part of the transcript, we shall not be technical on this point for the reason that this is a criminal case and it is our desire in this, as well as in all cases, that the correct result be reached.
Appellants state that the original opinion herein contravenes a decision of this court, decided August 4, 1973, namely, Allison v. State (1973), 157 Ind. App. 277, 299 N.E.2d 618, in which the court held that aggravated assault was not necessarily an included offense in the charge of assault and battery with intent to kill; that only assault and battery should be included.
*81We agree with Judge Sullivan’s opinion in Allison, supra, but will call appellants’ attention to the fact that the case of Thomas v. State (1970), 254 Ind. 600, 261 N.E.2d 588, discussed the matter of aggravated assault and battery being an included offense in assault or assault and battery with intent to kill. In Thomas, the court said:
“. . . This Court has previously stated that aggravated assault is an included offense in assault and battery with intent to kill. ...”
The pertinent parts of the affidavit in that case charged the defendant as follows:
“. . . did then and there unlawfully and feloniously and in a rude, insolent and angry manner, shoot and wound, with a certain 38 caliber revolver then and there loaded with gunpowder and a slug, DOROTHY THOMAS in the back, with felonious intent then and thereby to kill and murder the said DOROTHY THOMAS, a human being.”
In discussing the affidavit as it applied to the two separate statutes, Justice Givan said:
“It is inconceivable that a person could commit an assault and battery with intent to kill another person as charged in this case without also intentionally and knowingly inflicting great bodily harm or disfiguring the assaulted person. We hold that if the facts are present to warrant a conviction on assault and battery with intent to kill in this case they would certainly be present to warrant a conviction on aggravated assault.
We, therefore, hold that aggravated assault and battery is an included lesser offense of the crime of assault and battery with intent to kill as charged in this case. It would not, of course, be an included offense if the charging affidavit merely alleged an assault with intent to kill without alleging bodily injury.”
The Allison case supra, had this to say concerning the affidavit:
“However, it is possible for aggravated assault and battery to be a lesser included offense if the element of ‘great bodily harm’ or ‘disfigurement’ is properly alleged in the charging affidavit. . . .”
*82The pertinent part of the affidavit in the case at bar is that the defendants:
. . did then and there unlawfully and feloniously, and with intent to kill another human being, to wit: one Bernard Fogle, did then and there and thereby perpetrate an assault and battery upon the said Bernard Fogle by attacking him with a machette or corn knife and a shotgun then and there severly injurying [sic] the said Bernard Fogle, . . (Emphasis supplied.)
Comparing the affidavit in the case at bar with that in Thomas v. State, supra, we necessarily hold that said affidavit sufficiently alleges great bodily harm and would, therefore, include aggravated assault and battery and no error was committed by finding the defendants guilty of the offense of aggravated assault and battery.
Specifications 2 and 3 of the petition for rehearing have, we think, been sufficiently covered and properly ruled on in the original opinion and therefore require nothing further. Petition for rehearing denied.
Robertson, P.J. and Lybrook, J., concur.
Note.—Reported at 303 N.E.2d 287.

=== CASE 2210973 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:00.318513+00 ===

162 N.W.2d 237 (1968)
Arthur H. KOHOUT, et al., Appellants,
v.
SHAKOPEE FOUNDRY CO., Respondent.
No. 40716.
Supreme Court of Minnesota.
September 20, 1968.
Rehearing Denied November 27, 1968.
*238 Thomas O. Kachelmacher and Kurt F. Walther, Minneapolis, for appellants.
Eugene A. O'Brien, Minneapolis, for respondent.
OPINION
OTIS, Justice.
This is an action brought by 62 employees of a now defunct corporation to recover vacation pay in the sum of $10,249 and statutory penalties amounting to $17,986.80. The case was tried without a jury. The court held that the claims were barred by the statute of limitations. Plaintiffs appeal from judgment in favor of defendant.
The issues are (1) whether a 2-year or a 6-year statute of limitations applies; (2) on what date the claims for vacation pay accrued; and (3) on what date the statutory penalties accrued.
The reciprocal rights and obligations of the plaintiffs and defendant are governed by a collective bargaining agreement which expired June 1, 1962. Unable to negotiate a new contract, plaintiffs went on strike July 27, 1962, after which date defendant has not resumed business and plaintiffs have not returned to work.
Subsequent to October 14, 1962, defendant company closed down permanently and sold its equipment. Plaintiffs thereafter, on October 26, 1962, gave formal notice they were ending the strike, and on November 14, 1962, asked to resume their employment on the same terms as those under which they were working when the strike began.
Formal demands for vacation pay were made on defendant in October 1962 and again in August and September 1964.
This action was commenced on September 25, 1964.
1. Plaintiffs contend that their claims are governed by Minn.St. 541.05(1), which provides for a 6-year statute of limitations "[u]pon a contract or other obligation, express or implied, as to which no other limitation is expressly prescribed." Defendant, on the other hand, relies on Minn.St. 541.07(5), which imposes a 2-year statute of limitations as follows:
"For the recovery of wages or overtime or damages, fees or penalties accruing under any federal or state law respecting the payment of wages or overtime or damages, fees or penalties * * *." (Italics supplied.)
The question is whether the words "accruing under any federal or state law" apply only to "penalties" or whether that phrase applies likewise to "wages."[1] No case has been called to our attention construing this provision of the statute.
Prior to its amendment by L.1953, c. 378, Minn.St. 541.07(5) read in part as follows:
"For the recovery of wages, overtime, damages, fees or penalties accruing under *239 any federal or state law respecting the payment of wages, overtime, damages, fees or penalties * * *."
What the legislature intended by omitting the commas and adding the words "or," we are at a loss to understand. By the insertion of the disjunctive "or" between "wages," "overtime," and "damages" and by inserting a comma only after "damages," a plausible argument can be made for finding a legislative intention to make "wages" and "overtime" more remote from the qualifying phrase "accruing under any federal or state law," leaving that phrase applicable only to "damages, fees or penalties." Possibly this amendment was prompted by an observation made by Judge Gunnar H. Nordbye in Peterson v. Parsons (D.Minn.) 73 F.Supp. 840, 843, that whether wages owing under a contract, and not under a statute, are governed by the 2-year statute of limitations "may not be entirely clear."
Counsel has suggested no rational basis for distinguishing between common-law wage claims and those created by statute in the matter of when they should be asserted after they have accrued. None occurs to us. The 2-year limitation as to wages first appeared in L.1945, c. 513, toward the end of World War II. We can only speculate that the statute may have been prompted by the pending renegotiation of great numbers of government contracts. The original law contained the following provision:
"Causes of action accruing prior to the date hereof, and barred by the provisions hereof, shall be commenced within six months after passage of this act, provided that nothing contained herein shall affect any action or suit for the recovery of wages, overtime, damages, fees or penalties pending at the time of the passage of this act."
The fact the legislature expressly preserved actions for wages then pending, without reference to whether they arose by statute, may be a legislative recognition that ordinary wage claims would thereafter be affected by the 2-year limitation.
While we are not entirely free from doubt in the matter, in the absence of some valid reason for treating common-law wage claims differently from those arising under a statute, we hold they are both governed by the 2-year limitation prescribed by Minn. St. 541.07(5).
2. The trial court held that plaintiffs' claims were barred because they were not asserted within 2 years of June 1, 1962. We agree that plaintiffs' vacation pay had been earned on that date, but we are of the opinion that under the terms of the collective bargaining agreement, plaintiffs were not necessarily entitled to receive vacation pay on June 1. The provisions of the contract which we regard as decisive are sections 4 and 5 of article XV. Section 5 reads thus:
"Vacations shall be scheduled and taken accordingly between June 1 and October 1, except the third week of vacation which may be scheduled at a different time, unless some other time shall be mutually agreed upon between an individual employee and the Employer."
Section 4 provides:
"Pay for the vacation period shall be paid in advance and to be given to the individual on his last day of employment before the commencement of his vacation."
As we view the matter, under section 5, plaintiffs were required to "take" their 1- or 2-week vacations before October 1, 1962. Under section 4, defendant was obliged to pay them before the vacation began. Since, as we compute it, September 24, 1962, was the last date on which any employee could begin his vacation and "take" it before October 1, it would seem to follow that the last date on which defendant was obliged to pay any employee for his vacation was September 23, 1962. This action was not brought until September 25, 1964. Consequently, *240 we hold that except as to those who earned a third week,[2] claims for vacation pay accrued more than 2 years prior to the commencement of this action and are barred by Minn.St. 541.07(5). As to those entitled to a third week of vacation after October 1, 1962, the case is remanded for a determination of when the third week was customarily taken and paid for, and a computation of any amounts earned and not thus barred by the statute of limitations.
3. The penalties which plaintiffs seek are authorized by Minn.St. 181.13, as follows:
"When any person, firm, company, association, or corporation employing labor within this state discharges a servant or employee from his employment, the wages or commissions actually earned and unpaid at the time of such discharge shall become immediately due and payable upon demand of such employee, at the usual place of payment, and if not paid within 24 hours after such demand, whether such employment was by the day, hour, week, month, or piece or by commissions, such discharged employee may charge and collect the amount of his average daily earnings at the rate agreed upon in the contract of employment, for such period, not exceeding 15 days, after the expiration of the 24 hours, as the employer is in default, until full payment or other settlement, satisfactory to the discharged employee, is made."
Defendant asserts that the right to penalties accrued on July 27, 1962, since that was the last day on which any employee worked for defendant. It further argues that if the claims for vacation pay are barred, the claims for penalties are also barred. No authority is cited for this proposition, and we are aware of none.
As we read Minn.St. 181.13, the penalties therein provided do not vest until the employee has made a demand for wages earned and unpaid at the time of his discharge. It is not necessary for us to determine the date of discharge beyond holding that on any theory it did not occur until after September 25, 1962. The first demand made by plaintiffs for vacation pay was on October 26, 1962. Subsequent demands were made in 1964. Hence, it is clear that the demands were made within 2 years of the time this action was commenced. Consequently, we hold that plaintiffs are entitled to penalties under § 181.13, notwithstanding the fact that their claims for vacation pay may be barred. Upon a remand the court will also determine the amount of statutory penalties to which plaintiffs are entitled.
Reversed and remanded for additional findings.
NOTES
[1]  Vacation pay has been held to be wages in In re Wil-Low Cafeterias, Inc. (2 Cir.) 111 F.2d 429.
[2]  The record shows eight such employees.

=== CASE 9737542 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:28:14.155996+00 ===

RAWLINGS, Justice.
Charged by county attorney’s information with the crime of breaking and entering, defendant entered a plea of guilty, was sentenced to imprisonment in the Dallas County Jail for six months, later moved for arrest of judgment, and from trial court’s ruling adverse to defendant on that motion, he appeals. We affirm.
The information filed September 30, 1967, charged defendant with breaking and entering Mary’s Lounge, Woodward, Iowa, in violation of section 708.8, Code, 1966.
October 30, 1967, defendant appeared in court with retained counsel, waived arraignment, time to plead, and for sentence, then entered a written plea of guilty to the offense charged.
Among others the following questions were thereupon put by trial court to which defendant gave these answers:
“THE COURT: Do you know the maximum penalty for this crime, which could be not to exceed ten years at the State Reformatory or penitentiary? MR. HEL-LICKSON: Yes, sir.
“THE COURT: Under our law; you have been advised of that? MR. HEL-LICKSON: Yes, sir.
“THE COURT: Have any threats been made to you or any promises made to you to induce you to enter a plea of guilty to this charge, Mr. Hellickson? MR. HEL-LICKSON: No, sir.
“THE COURT: You are aware of the fact that you have a right to plead not guilty; that you would be given a speedy trial before a jury and be represented by your attorney, if you • want to do that? MR. HELLICKSON: Yes, sir.”
Judgment of conviction was then entered.
November 20, 1967, with aid of court appointed counsel, defendant appeared before the sentencing judge and orally moved for arrest of judgment. In so doing he also asked leave of court to withdraw his guilty plea and permission to plead not guilty.
Defendant was the only witness called to testify with regard to his motion. His *392testimony, is in substance, that subsequent to arrest he was confined alone in an upstairs cell in the Dallas County Jail for six days, and while there was told by the sheriff and deputy that if he cooperated and signed something, they would take him downstairs to be with the other fellows; someone told him by cooperating he would be permitted to enter the armed services; he was in fact allowed to take preparatory physical and mental examinations but found to be overweight ; that the sheriff said, “ * * *
if you were to cooperate that there would be leniency involved in regards to a bench parole”; he signed some statement but denied ever admitting guilt of the offense charged; his retained attorney instructed him, at time of sentencing, to answer in the negative when questioned as to whether any promises had been made to him; at time of arraignment and sentencing he was confused and did not know a guilty plea was being entered.
Trial court found defendant to be a person of normal intelligence, the sentence could have been more severe, and the record as a whole reveals no good and sufficient •basis upon which to arrest judgment.
I. The state moved for dismissal of this appeal on the ground an adjudication upon a motion in arrest of judgment is not an appealable order. We directed submission of that motion with the appeal. It will be accordingly considered.
Section 788.1, Code, 1966, provides: Motion in arrest’ defined — grounds. A motion in arrest of judgment is an application to the court in which the trial was had, on the part of the defendant, that no judgment be rendered upon a verdict against him, or on a plea of guilty, and shall be granted when upon the whole record no legal judgment can be pronounced.”
Section 788.2, Code, 1966, was repealed by section 255, chapter 400, Acts of the Sixty-Second General Assembly, and the following enacted in lieu thereof: “The motion may be made at any time before or within ninety days after judgment.” Defendant’s motion in arrest was filed within the aforesaid statutory period.
It is apparent we are not here concerned with the matter of right to appeal from an adjudication upon a pre-sentence motion for arrest of judgment. In that regard see State v. Davis, 47 Iowa 634; State v. Alverson, 105 Iowa 152, 74 N.W. 770; and Annos. 98 A.L.R.2d 737, 741.
Actually, the issue here presented is whether an appeal lies from a post-sentence arrest of judgment order.
Section 793.2, Code, 1966, states: “Time of taking — from final judgment only. An appeal can only be taken from the final judgment, and within sixty days thereafter.”
We had occasion to construe that statute in State v. Klinger, 259 Iowa 381, 144 N.W. 2d 150. There, defendant attempted to appeal from a pretrial order overruling his motion to suppress certain evidence. Holding it was not an appealable adjudication this court said in part, loc. cit., 259 Iowa 383, 144 N.W.2d 151: “ ‘Final judgment in a criminal case means sentence. The sentence is the judgment. * * * In criminal cases, as well as civil, the judgment is final for the purpose of appeal “when it terminates the litigation on the merits” and “leaves nothing to be done but to enforce by execution what has been determined.” [citations].’ Berman v. United States (Hughes, Ch. J.), 302 U.S. 211, 212, 213, 58 S.Ct. 164, 166, 82 L.Ed. 204, 205. To like effect is Northern v. United States, 6 Cir.,Tenn., 300 F.2d 131, 132.”
But Klinger, supra, correct as it is, does not reach the questions presented in the case at bar and is not here determinative.
Of course, an appeal may be taken'from final judgment in a criminal case, or it can be waived. And if appeal is taken from final judgment no further proceedings can thereafter be initiated in the trial court. State v. Young, 255 Iowa 447, 450, 122 N.W.2d 847.
*393Furthermore no appeal lies from an order denying an arrest of judgment motion on a ground which could have been reviewed on appeal from the judgment. See People v. Thomas, 52 Cal.2d 521, 342 P.2d 889, 892.
In the instant case defendant chose not to appeal from sentence, electing to exercise his statutory right to later seek arrest of judgment upon the premise his guilty plea was not knowingly and voluntarily entered. This, if true, did not appear on the record.
Under these circumstances the judgment left something more which could be done other than to enforce its execution.
Admittedly, some authorities hold, and we agree that as a general rule, in the absence of a permissive statute, and there is none in this jurisdiction, an order entered upon a motion in arrest of judgment is not appealable. See 24 C.J.S. Criminal Law § 1651, page 1011, and section 1654, page 1014. This means that ordinarily where the grounds for the motion in arrest of judgment appeared in the record at time final judgment was entered no appeal lies from a ruling on the motion. However, as there disclosed, the foregoing rule is subject to some exceptions.
For example several courts have held a post-sentence adjudication on such a motion, based upon a claim the judgment is void or unauthorized, is appealable. State v. Pill, 5 Ariz.App. 277, 425 P.2d 588, 589; People v. Thomas, 52 Cal.2d 521, 342 P.2d 889, 893; and State v. Aim, 261 Minn. 238, 111 N.W. 2d 517, 519.
In the same vein, it has also been held appeal may be taken from an order entered pursuant to post-sentence motions serving substantially the same purpose as one in arrest of judgment where the grounds of that motion would not appear on the record had appeal been taken from the judgment imposing sentence. See in this regard People v. Thomas, supra; People v. Zolotoff, 48 Cal.App.2d 360, 119 P.2d 745, 747; People v. Miller, 140 Cal.App. 241, 35 P.2d 229, 230; and Ard v. State, Fla., 108 So.2d 42, 45.
As heretofore disclosed that is the precise situation presented in the case now before us. Stated otherwise an appeal by defendant from judgment imposing sentence would have been an exercise in futility.
We now subscribe to those exceptions to the general rule above set forth. This inferentially means a defendant may, by motion in arrest of judgment, with the aid of extrinsic evidence, establish a violation of constitutional or fundamental rights which are not apparent but inhere in the whole record, as a result of which no legal judgment could be pronounced.
Lending some degree of cogency to this view is State v. Bastedo, 253 Iowa 103, 111 N.W.2d 255. That case involved an unchallenged appeal by defendant from adverse ruling by trial court on defendant’s post-sentence motion in arrest of judgment. In affirming we said, loc. cit., 253 Iowa 106, 111 N.W.2d 256: “Where a right of review is given a person accused of a crime by statute, such a right is substantial and the accused therein may challenge his conviction as having been obtained by duress, coercion, fraud or undue influence.”
Resultantly the state’s motion to dismiss defendant’s appeal is hereby overruled.
II. Incidentally that does not open the door to successive appeals.
A defendant may not move for arrest of judgment, appeal from an adverse adjudication thereon, and upon affirmance later seek relief by habeas corpus on the same grounds previously asserted. See section 663.1(4), Code, 1966; Harms v. Bennett, 256 Iowa 1320, 1322-1323, 130 N.W.2d 734; Kotek v. Bennett, 255 Iowa 984, 986-987, 124 N.W.2d 710; and State v. Pill, 5 Ariz. App. 277, 425 P.2d 588, 589.
III. In support of the claim trial court erred in overruling his motion de*394fendant asserts, inter alia, his plea of guilty was based on an involuntary confession and the plea is accordingly tainted.
Apparently defendant alludes to some pre-arraignment written statement given by him, but a search of the whole record fails to disclose existence of any such document. It was never presented or mentioned at time the guilty plea was entered. Neither was it produced or seen by trial court or anyone else at time of hearing on defendant’s arrest of judgment motion.
So this court is now asked to speculate upon the content of some conjectural document. We do not propose to so do.
Moreover, the record discloses that at time of hearing on the subject motion defendant stated, to the best of his knowledge, no paper had ever been signed by him admitting he was guilty of the crime charged.
Just as in State v. Kulish, Iowa, 148 N. W.2d 428, 432, it is apparent trial court based its judgment in the case at bar on defendant’s guilty plea, not on any purported statement or confession.
We find neither relevancy nor merit in the aforesaid claim.
IV. However, defendant also contends his guilty plea was involuntary, having been entered by him as a result of undue influence or coercion.
It is, of course, understood that if, upon the whole record, a plea of guilty was not voluntarily entered, having been procured by undue influence, coercion or fraud, no valid judgment may thereupon be entered. State v. Rife, Iowa, 149 N.W.2d 846, 848.
Also on that subject this court said in State v. Kulish, supra: “A plea of guilty freely and voluntarily entered in open court is a waiver of trial and defense and a submission without contest. It waives all defenses except that the indictment or information charges no offense, and, of course, the right to challenge the plea itself.”
V. Be that as it may our task on this appeal is to determine only whether there is substantial evidence supporting the findings and conclusion reached by the trial court. See State v. Bastedo, supra, loe. cit., 253 Iowa 107, 111 N.W.2d 255. This review is accordingly limited.
As previously revealed, the state offered no evidence in resistance to the arrest of judgment motion. But this does not mean defendant’s testimony stands alone or un-controverted.
At the outset, we presume regularity of proceedings by all public officers and courts unless the contrary is made to appear. Section 622.56, Code, 1966, and State v. Snook, Iowa, 146 N.W.2d 252, 254.
And, as aforesaid the record discloses, at time of sentence defendant affirmatively acknowledged there had been no threats or promises made which induced him to so plead. It thus becomes apparent defendant was willing to falsify when to his advantage.
Upon the basis of the foregoing alone, trial court’s order overruling defendant’s motion in arrest of judgment finds substantial support in the record.
VI. It is also evident there is no merit in the claim made by defendant to the effect he was coerced into pleading guilty.
Actually most, if not all, of the matters asserted by him, supra, elicited for the most part by leading questions, relate to a suggested statement by him while confined in jail.
Had defendant confessed guilt to the sheriff or anyone else in authority, as the result of any promises, threats or inducements allegedly made while he was so restrained, that confession would undoubtedly have been subject to suppression on proper motion. But at no time did defendant even infer his ultimate guilty plea was *395induced by any claimed statements or representations made to him while incarcerated. His guilty plea was clearly entered on advice of retained counsel, not as the result of urging or inducement by any public officer.
This court dealt with a similar situation in State v. Rife, Iowa, 149 N.W.2d 846, 848, and there said: “The decision how to plead, of course, is one for the defendant. The ultimate decision must be his, but of course before he can do so intelligent!y he is entitled to advice on the law of the crime charged and enlightened on the probable outcome of the trial, as well as the punishment he may receive. Since the plea of guilty effectively waives all defenses and objections, inadequacy of advice at the pleading stage cannot be later cured. An experienced appraisal of the available evidence frequently indicates that the chance of a successful defense is negligible. A defense attorney may then be serving his client best by advising him to plead guilty and strive for the most lenient treatment possible. To counsel this strategy is not to advise inadequately even if the expectation of leniency is subsequently disappointing. Monroe v. Huff, 79 U.S.App.D.C. 246, 145 F.2d 249.” See also Herold v. Haugh, 259 Iowa 667, 672-674, 145 N.W.2d 657, and State ex rel. Drysdale v. Tahash, 278 Minn. 361, 154 N.W.2d 691, 695-696.
We are satisfied trial court’s order overruling defendant’s motion is supported by substantial evidence.
VII. Even though defendant’s motion be deemed an application for leave to withdraw his guilty plea, the rule is clear that if an accused, with full knowledge of the charge against him, and of his rights and consequences of a plea of guilty, then enters such a plea, the court may, absent abuse of discretion, refuse to permit its withdrawal. See in this regard section 777.15, Code, 1966; State v. Krana, Iowa, 159 N.W.2d 413, 416; and State v. Machovec, 236 Iowa 377, 380-383, 17 N.W.2d 843.
In any event, defendant’s motion in arrest of judgment, having been properly overruled, it follows any application for leave to withdraw his guilty plea must be deemed not timely. See section 777.15, Code, 1966, and State v. Rinehart, 255 Iowa 1132, 1137, 125 N.W.2d 242, and citations.
Here again we find no reversible error on the part of trial court in overruling defendant’s motion, however it may be construed.
Affirmed.
All Justices concur, except BECKER, J., who concurs specially.

=== CASE 9737543 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:28:14.160052+00 ===

BECKER, Justice
(concurring specially.)
I concur in the result.
Division II of the majority opinion is unnecessary. In light of the penchant of federal courts to reexamine prior proceedings in criminal cases in depth, Division II is ill-advised. We have recently quoted Sewell v. Lainson, 244 Iowa 555, 566, 57 N.W.2d 556, 562 with approval:
“Since the federal courts have announced the principle that in habeas corpus proceedings they will examine the records and will go behind the records in courts of the various states to determine whether the petitioner’s rights under the constitution of the United States have been denied him and so lack of jurisdiction in the state court appears, we think it incumbent upon us to make the same examination for ourselves.”
No determination of the scope of habeas corpus proceedings should be attempted here. This is especially true in light of Fay v. Noia, 372 U.S. 391, 83 S.Ct. 822, 9 L.Ed. 2d 837.
I would therefore delete Division II of the majority opinion.

=== CASE 2210993 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:00.54426+00 ===

162 N.W.2d 408 (1968)
Roy M. HUTCHINSON and Barbara M. Hutchinson, Appellees,
v.
Donald J. MAIWURM and Barbara J. Maiwurm, Appellees,
City of Fort Dodge, Iowa, and Fort Dodge Airport Commission, Appellants.
No. 52986.
Supreme Court of Iowa.
November 12, 1968.
*409 Donald J. Mitchell, City Atty., and Alan Loth, Fort Dodge, for appellants.
Johnson, Burnquist & McCormick, Fort Dodge, for appellees Hutchinson.
Kirchner & Kirchner and William L. Peters, Fort Dodge, for appellees Maiwurm.
STUART, Justice.
Condemnor has appealed from a judgment on a jury verdict in favor of condemnee. Thirty-one assigned errors are argued in seven divisions. For convenience we will refer to the parties in the singular. The following sketch shows the relative positions of the land here involved.  In 1960 plaintiff and another person purchased tract 1 containing a little more than two acres of land west of the Fort Dodge airport and separated therefrom by a road and other property. On tract 1 is a dog kennel, a garage, a house and fences. A dog boarding, training and supply business with resident manager is operating thereon. In November 1964 plaintiff bought his partner's interest. At that time the tract was mortgaged for $16,500. He paid $3000 for the partner's equity in the real estate. Therefore, the value placed on tract 1 at that time was $22,500.
Plaintiff tried to purchase tract 2 consisting of about 2¼ acres when he acquired tract 1. The owner would not sell until December 1964. In January 1965, plaintiff contracted to buy tract 2 for $6000. It was unimproved and was purchased for use in connection with the kennel business on tract 1.
On March 30, 1965 defendant filed an application for condemnation to acquire the fee title to tract 2. Tract 1 was not condemned. The appraisal commissioners awarded plaintiff $6497. Plaintiff brought an action in three counts. Count I was in mandamus to require defendant to condemn tract 1 as well as tract 2. Count II sought to enjoin defendant from condemning tract 2 on the ground that it was not being taken for the public use. Count III was an appeal from the condemnation award seeking damages of $60,000 for a partial taking of a single unit composed of tract 1 and tract 2.
*410 Counts I and II were submitted separately to Judge Harris who dismissed both counts. Count III was tried to a jury. Witnesses for plaintiff, basing their evidence on a partial taking and the difference in before and after values, placed the damages within a range of $31,500 to $60,000. Witnesses for defendant, basing their evidence on the value of tract 2 as a separate unit placed the damages within a range of $5850-$6000. The jury returned a verdict for $31,500.
I. Defendant contends Judge Harris' ruling on count I is res judicata on the question of the unity of tracts 1 and 2 and the trial court erred in permitting evidence on that point, in instructing on damages from a partial taking, and in refusing to grant a new trial on these same grounds.
The evidence offered in the jury trial on the unity of these two tracts was basically the same as that presented in the mandamus action. In the mandamus action, the trial court said: "[T]he court is asked to issue a writ of mandamus compelling the defendants to include Tract 1 in the proceedings. Plaintiffs urge that, because all the property was acquired for the same purpose by them, it is one tract and must be considered and condemned together. Particular note is made of the fact that both plaintiffs and defendants have submitted this issue to the Court for determination. It seems to be the rule, at least in the reverse situations, that this question is normally to be determined by the jury in connection with the award. See Hoeft v. Iowa, 221 Iowa 694, 266 N.W. 571 [104 A.L.R. 1008], and especially the cases there cited. The Supreme Court points out the criteria for the determination, at least in the reverse situation, and is swayed by the fact that the properties had been purchased at different times and had not been actually used together in a single operation. Attention is invited to 29A C.J.S. [Eminent Domain § 140] 591 as follows: `There is no single rule or principle * * * for determining the unity of lands for (this) purpose. * * * While generally there must be unity of title, contiguity of use and unity of use, under certain circumstances the presence of all these unities is not essential. Usually unity of use is given the greatest emphasis, and has been called the controlling factor.'
"The facts in the instant case do not square with any of the three, unity of title, contiguity of use or even unity of use."
Res judicata may be either direct or collateral. If the second suit is between the same parties and involved the same cause of action a judgment on the merits in the earlier case constitutes a complete bar to all matters which might have been litigated as well as the matters litigated. Jordan v. Stuart Creamery, Inc., 258 Iowa 1, 5, 137 N.W.2d 259, 261, and citations.
Count I was an action in mandamus to compel the condemnor to take all plaintiff's property consisting of tracts 1 and 2. Count III was an action to recover damages to all plaintiff's property because of the taking of tract 2. It clearly appears that we are not concerned in these two counts with the same cause of action and we are dealing with collateral estoppel.
If the second suit between the same parties involves a different cause of action, any determination of law or fact necessary or essential to the judgment in the first suit is conclusive of that issue in the second suit. Jordan v. Stuart Creamery, Inc., 258 Iowa 1, 6, 137 N.W.2d 259, 262; In re Estate of Ramsay, 240 Iowa 50, 60, 35 N.W.2d 651, 656; King City, Mo., etc. v. Southern Surety Co., 212 Iowa 1230, 1238-1239, 238 N.W. 93, 97; Yates v. United States, 354 U.S. 298, 336, 77 S.Ct. 1064, 1 L.Ed.2d 1356; Hurley v. Beech Aircraft Corp., 355 F.2d 517, 522; Nelson v. Swing-A-Way Manufacturing Co., 8 Cir., 266 F.2d 184, 186-187; Louisiana-Mississippi P. Const. Corp. v. Thornton, 5 Cir., 213 F.2d 388, 390-391; Berry v. City of Santa Barbara, 248 Cal.App.2d 438, 56 Cal.Rptr. 553, 558; Leitch v. Hine, *411 393 Ill. 211, 220, 66 N.E.2d 90, 95; Abeles v. Wurdack (Mo.), 285 S.W.2d 544, 547; State v. Nance, 77 N.M. 39, 43, 419 P.2d 242, 245; Willis v. Willis, 48 Wyo. 403, 419, 49 P.2d 670, 674.
As pointed out above, the trial court in ruling on the mandamus action found there was not sufficient unity of title, unity of use or contiguity of use to consider tracts 1 and 2 as a unit. The tests used by the trial court are the tests used in determining unity for the purpose of valuing the tracts as a whole in attempting to arrive at the before and after values in a condemnation matter. 29A C.J.S. Eminent Domain § 140, p. 591.
It therefore appears that the specific issue in the second suit was adjudicated in the first. However, such findings or conclusions in count I are not conclusive as to the same issues in count III unless they were essential to the judgment entered in count I.
"It is frequently laid down as a general rule that a judgment is not binding or conclusive as to facts or questions of law, although put in issue and actually tried and expressly determined by the court in the former action, where such matters were immaterial or unessential to the determination of the real and decisive issue." Anno: 133 A.L.R. 840. Jordan v. Stuart Creamery, Inc., 258 Iowa 1, 6, 137 N.W.2d 259, 261-262; E. I. du Pont de Nemours and Co. v. Union Carbide Corp., 7 Cir., 369 F.2d 242, 245; Cambria v. Jeffery, 307 Mass. 49, 50, 29 N.E.2d 555; Abeles v. Wurdack, (Mo.) 285 S.W.2d 544, 547; State v. Nance, 77 N.M. 39, 43, 419 P.2d 242, 245; Willis v. Willis, 48 Wyo. 403, 424, 49 P.2d 670, 676.
It is the application of these well established principles to the facts in the particular case which poses the difficulty.
Count I was primarily based on the allegation that the taking of tract 2 completely destroyed the usefulness of tract 1 and sought to compel its condemnation. "Unless the injury to the remaining land is so severe as to render it useless for any purpose, the condemnor taking part of the lands is not bound to pay the full value of the entire tract, even if, by reason of injury to such land, the owner has abandoned all use of the property." 27 Am.Jur.2d 128, Eminent Domain, § 311. Thus, the unity required to compel the condemnor to take both properties is quite different and much more difficult to establish than unity which would permit evaluation of the whole for the purpose of establishing severance damages.
It was not necessary for the trial court to determine the unity of these two tracts according to the requirements for unity for evaluation purposes. He could very well have concluded there was not sufficient unity for the mandamus action without using the tests he did use. The conclusions of law which were essential to the determination of the mandamus action were: "The court cannot say that the defendants exceeded their statutory jurisdiction in condemning the property or in limiting it to tract 2" and "defendants are clearly acting within the scope of their authority and can neither be restrained from acting nor compelled to expand upon their action as the plaintiffs request".
Does the fact that the test used in reaching these conclusions applied to count III rather than count I, make his findings in count I binding on the court and jury in count III?
We have not been cited any cases factually similar and have found none in our own research on this question. A. W. Scott in an article entitled Collateral Estoppel by Judgment in 56 Harv.L.Rev. 1, 29, cautions us that "The doctrine of collateral estoppel, which applies where the cause of action is different, has a much more limited application. In its limited application it is based upon a sound public policy. Care must be exercised in its application to see that it works no injustice." It does not seem just to hold the findings *412 in this mandamus action binding in the condemnation action.
Analogous cases convince us this is not a proper place to apply collateral estoppel.
Schofield v. Rideout, 233 Wis. 550, 290 N.W. 155, 133 A.L.R. 834, was an action to compel the reconveyance of a one-half interest in real estate and for an accounting for rent. Plaintiff claimed the conveyance had been made for the purpose of sale under an agreement to deliver plaintiff one-half of purchase price. The trial court in a former action decided that such agreement had been made but that defendant had used due diligence in trying to sell the property and had not breached the agreement. In this action defendant claimed as a defense that there was no such agreement and the conveyance was for consideration. The trial court held the finding there was such agreement in the prior case res judicata. The Wisconsin Court said:
"The rule is well established that a finding in a former case does not create an estoppel if the fact found did not necessarily determine that case. The judgment must rest upon the fact found or the fact is open to relitigation. (Citing authorities)
"The judgment in the former case rested on the finding that there was no breach of the agreement found by Judge Reid. That finding was the only finding that was essential to support the judgment. The judgment would have been supported had Judge Reid not made the findings as to the agreement and consideration, but merely said that if an agreement was made as plaintiff claimed the plaintiff was not entitled to recover because the defendant Rideout had used due diligence to sell and nothing had so far occurred to render him liable on plaintiff's own theory." 233 Wis. at 555, 290 N.W. at 157-158, 133 A.L.R. at 837-838.
In Willis v. Willis, 48 Wyo. 403, 49 P.2d 670, plaintiff claiming to be a common law wife brought an action for divorce and alimony. The court held for defendant and found, among other things, that plaintiff was a servant for pay. She claimed this finding was res judicata in a subsequent action to recover wages. The court said: "Whether or not the plaintiff was a servant for pay was in no sense within the scope and purpose of the action, and could at most have a bearing only as evidence whether or not the marriage existed. It is certain that it was not necessary to decide that point. Nor was it a material fact. It was not vital to the case; it was not the point upon which the case turned. The judgment in the divorce action can be wholly correct, whether that fact existed or not. * * * It was a matter wholly collateral and incidental in the divorce action, and defendant's admission in that connection could not, accordingly, constitute an estoppel in the case at bar, but could be used only as evidence in establishing plaintiff's cause of action herein." 48 Wyo. at 426-427, 49 P.2d at 677.
In Abeles v. Wurdack (Mo.), 285 S.W.2d 544, plaintiff brought an action to recover on quantum meruit for the reasonable value of his services in obtaining a purchaser of stock. A previous suit for commission based on express contract had resulted in a judgment against him. The court therein found expressly there was no contract and that "plaintiff was neither the procuring nor the inducing cause of that sale". The Missouri court held this and other findings were not res judicata in the suit on quantum meruit.
Karameros v. Luther, 279 N.Y. 87, 17 N. E.2d 779, was an action to declare a 1931 marriage null and void. One defense was that the issue was res judicata. In a previous separation action which was dismissed for failure to prove a cause of action, the trial court found the parties were duly married in New York in 1931 although that issue had been withdrawn by consent. The court said: "The question of the marriage, however, as it turned out was not a material *413 issue, and, therefore, the finding in that case is not binding on the court in the case at bar, where the question of marriage is the material issue. * * * [T]here was no necessity for any determination of the validity of the marriage." 279 N.Y. at 92, 17 N.E.2d at 781.
In State v. Nance, 77 N.M. 39, 419 P.2d 242, defendant and another had been sentenced to the prison on pleas of guilty to armed robbery. As a result of a habeas corpus action, they were returned to stand trial on the same offense. The trial judge in the habeas corpus matter had concluded: "the statements made by the petitioners to the authorities were not voluntary statements". It is claimed this conclusion is res judicata on second trial and the statements should have been excluded. The New Mexico court said: "Thus, the questions of whether statements were made by these defendants to officers and whether such statements were voluntary were not ultimate facts in that proceeding without which the judgment would lack support in an essential particular. The petitioners were successful in the habeas corpus proceeding because the court found that they had not been afforded effective counsel at trial. Any finding that their confessions were involuntary was gratuitous and not necessary to the decision. We conclude that the question of whether the statements or confessions of these defendants admitted in evidence in the case now before us was not made res judicata by the judgment in the habeas corpus proceeding." 77 N.M. at 44, 419 P.2d at 245.
On the strength of these authorities, we hold the findings and conclusions in the mandamus action were not binding upon the court in the appeal from the condemnation award.
II. Defendant argues that even if we hold the prior determination was not res judicata, under the law of this case, there was insufficient evidence of unity of use to make a question for the jury. The trial court instructed the jury:
"9. Before you may apply plaintiffs' measure of damages, plaintiffs must prove by a preponderance of the evidence that at the time of the condemnation Tracts 1 and 2 in fact constituted one entire parcel used together by plaintiffs. If plaintiffs have done so, then you should apply their measure of damages. But if plaintiffs have not done so and it appears that although Tracts 1 and 2 were contiguous they were separate parcels, then you most apply defendants measure of damages.
"10. Further on this question, plaintiffs must establish that Tracts 1 and 2 were, at the time of the condemnation, in effect one parcel and so used by plaintiffs. In this connection you may consider what the evidence shows as to the uses to which the two tracts were being put at the time and the length of such uses; whether such uses were sufficient to combine the two tracts into one parcel; the location of the tracts, their previous and then character, the personal property thereon or want thereof, the improvements on the tracts or want thereof, the ownership of the tracts, the length of time of such ownership, and their physical combination or separation; whether one tract was dependent on the other in plaintiffs' operations; whether one tract was used for separate and distinct purposes from the other; whether the tracts had such relation of adaptation, convenience, and actual and permanent use as to make enjoyment of one tract reasonably and substantially necessary to the enjoyment of the other in the most advantageous manner in plaintiffs' business at the time; whether the two tracts were of such character and so located that the market value of either would be reduced if the other were taken; and any further evidence directly bearing on the issue whether the two tracts were in fact one entire parcel or two distinct parcels.
"10-A. Further on this issue, Tracts 1 and 2 would not be one entire parcel merely because plaintiffs may have intended to combine them someday in the future, if they were not in fact combined as one parcel *414 on the condemnation date as I have already explained.
"If plaintiffs used Tract 2 for training dogs prior to plaintiffs' purchase of that tract, such prior use of a neighbor's land would not alone combine the two tracts into one parcel either at the time or thereafter. But such prior use, if it did occur, may be considered by you for the bearing you deem it may have, if any, on whether plaintiffs did in fact combine the two tracts into one parcel after they did purchase Tract 2.
"Prior to January 26, 1965, Tracts 1 and 2 were separate parcels of land, and they are presumed to have remained such thereafter unless and until plaintiffs have proved by a preponderance of the evidence that they had in fact combined the two tracts into one parcel at the time of condemnation."
The instructions are in accord with the general rule in Iowa and most other states. Westbrook v. Muscatine N. & S. Ry. Co., 115 Iowa 106, 111, 88 N.W. 202, 203; Hoyt v. Chicago, M. & St. P. Ry. Co., 117 Iowa 296, 299-300, 90 N.W. 724, 726; Cole Investment Co. v. United States, 9 Cir., 258 F.2d 203, 205; City of Menlo Park v. Artino, 151 Cal.App.2d 261, 265, 311 P.2d 135, 141; Peck v. Superior Short Line Railway Co., 36 Minn. 343, 345, 31 N.W. 217, 218; Barnes v. North Carolina State Highway Commission, 250 N.C. 378, 385, 109 S.E.2d 219, 225; Deercreek Local Board of Education, etc. v. Payne, 86 Ohio App. 319, 322, 88 N.E.2d 226, 228; 29A C.J.S. Eminent Domain § 140, p. 591; Anno: 6 A.L.R.2d 1199; Rezzolla, Unity of Use and Unity of Ownership in Eminent Domain, 70 Dick. L.Rev. 139; But cf. In re Elgart's Appeal, 395 Pa. 343, 346, 149 A.2d 641, 643.
Plaintiff did not appeal from these instructions and they have become the law of the case. In re Estate of Stevens, 223 Iowa 369, 372, 272 N.W. 426, 428; Pfannebecker v. Chicago, R. I. & P. R. Co., 208 Iowa 752, 756, 226 N.W. 161, 162. Plaintiff concedes he has the burden of proving unity, but claims the evidence was sufficient to create a jury question under these instructions.
Plaintiff bought tract 2 to use in connection with the dog supply and kennel business conducted on tract 1. He only had possession about 2½ winter months prior to the condemnation on March 30, 1965. At that time the properties were separated by a fence. He had used the lot to train dogs prior to his ownership without permission or objection of the owner. There is no evidence he so used the property between January and March. The former owner had removed an old building and plaintiff's employees had taken out some underbrush and cut a few trees. He had contacted a dirt mover, a building contractor and the finance officer of the bank preparatory to building kennels and a storage building on tract 2 prior to condemnation.
We do not believe the evidence of the use of tract 2 on the date of condemnation was sufficient to raise a jury question of the unity of its use with tract 1 under the instructions given. The only actual use to which tract 2 had been subjected during plaintiff's ownership was the clearing of brush and the cutting of trees. Such action bore no peculiar relationship to the business plaintiff was conducting on tract 1.
The decision is made more difficult by the fact that the evidence clearly established plaintiff's intention to use tract 2 as part of the dog kennel and dog supply operation, and it undoubtedly would have been so used in a short time. We need not decide whether these circumstances would justify a departure from the general rule. See West Virginia Pulp & Paper Co. v. United States, 4 Cir., 200 F.2d 100, 103; Baetjer v. United States, 1 Cir., 143 F.2d 391, 395; David Bradley Mfg. Co. v. Chicago & Southern Traction Co., 229 Ill. 170, 82 N.E. 210, 212, because the instructions clearly required present, actual and permanent use. Proof of such use was lacking.
We therefore hold there was no evidence from which the jury could find tract 2 was used together with tract 1 at the time *415 of the condemnation and the trial court erred in submitting the issue of severance damages to the jury.
III. Three of the remaining divisions assign error in the admission of evidence of before or after values based on allegedly improper factors. We need not discuss them in view of our holding in Division II that the evidence was not sufficient to make a jury question of severance damages. The questions do not occur when tract 2 is valued as a separate unit.
Since the case is reversed for other reasons we need not consider whether the award made was excessive.
For the reasons stated in Division II the trial court is reversed and the case is remanded for new trial.
Reversed and remanded.
All Justices concur except RAWLINGS and BECKER, JJ., who dissent from Division II and the result.

=== CASE 9737544 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:28:18.799329+00 ===

Sharp, J.
This case involves an action for divorce brought by Appellee-wife against Appellant-husband in the Superior Court of Tippecanoe County.
The facts are lengthy, but may be summarized as follows:
Appellant and Appellee were married in 1952. Two sons were born to the marriage, Mark in 1958 and Michael in 1955. Michael, at the time of this decree, was about to enter college. Appellant has a bachelor of science degree with a major in English and Theater and approximately three years toward a bachelor of science degree in electrical engineering.
At the time of their marriage, Appellant was an enlisted man in the United States Army. During the 9 y% months following his discharge from the army in 1953, Appellant worked 21/2 months, mostly as an electrician. For the next four years, he was a civilian instructor at an army base, earning $5,000.00 per year. From 1958 to 1963, he was a full-time student at Purdue University. From 1963, when Appellant quit before completing his degree requirements, until 1967 Appellant did not work or attempt to find work. In 1967 Appellant started his present job as a part-time clerk (26 hours per week) with a consulting engineer’s firm for $2.50 per hour. (Approximately $3,380.00 per year.)
Appellee has been continuously employed since their marriage. She is a teacher and has progressed in salary to over $13,000.00 per year. Appellee was awarded the residence which is valued at approximately $25,000.00 which has encumbrances of over $20,000.00. It is readily apparent from the detailed findings entered by the trial court that the work ethic was not a predominant part of the Appellant’s philosophy.
Appellant raises only one question in his appeal: Whether the trial court erred in ordering the defendant to satisfy attorney fees to the plaintiff-wife’s attorney in the sum of *675$1,800.00 payable in full forthwith and in the event not paid forthwith, bearing interest at the rate of 8%. This was entered in the final decree awarding a divorce to the Appellee-wife.
The record which the Appellant has brought here is absent any evidence whatsoever even though his arguments involve factual questions. The record here contains only the pleadings, the findings and judgment of the trial court. All of the factual inferences therein must be considered in the light most favorable to the Appellee. This is especially true here where the sufficiency of the evidence to support such findings has not been asserted. This record in this case is quite similar to that in Stypczynski v. Kaiser Jeep Corporation (1973), 156 Ind. App. 78, 294 N.E.2d 830, where we held the record inadequate to permit us to determine the basic issue. While the inadequacy of the record here makes the determination of the issue raised most difficult, we prefer to reach the merits rather than decide cases on points of appellate procedure.
The outcome here turns on whether the trial court abused its discretion in the determination of the amount and manner of payment of attorney fees for the Appellee-wife’s attorney. The scope of this inquiry may be further narrowed since nowhere in Appellant’s Brief does the Appellant show or attempt to show specifically that $1,800.00 is an unreasonable fee in light of services on behalf of the plaintiff-wife — only that it is unreasonable to require the defendant to pay such fees in full forthwith or with interest.
In oral argument and in his brief, the Appellant took the position that it was an abuse of discretion for the trial court to allow any attorney fees to the wife’s attorney. The law is clear on the subject of review of attorney fees on appeal. In Northup v. Northup (1972), 154 Ind. App. 469, 290 N.E.2d 501, 504, this court said:
*676“The award of the trial court as to attorneys’ fees will be disturbed on appeal only where a clear abuse of discretion is shown. McDaniel v. McDaniel (1964), 245 Ind. 551, 562, 201 N.E.2d 215; Dunn v. Deitschel (1930), 204 Ind. 269, 169 N.E. 529; Hardiman v. Hardiman (1972), [152] Ind. App. [675], 284 N.E.2d 820; Mathews v. Mathews (1972), [151] Ind. App. [70], 278 N.E.2d 325; Stigall v. Stigall (1972), [151] Ind. App. [26], 277 N.E.2d 802.”
Appellant would show that the trial court acted mistakenly, not being duly advised in the premises. Appellant contends in one breath that the court:
“Failed to take into account the financial situation of the parties, particularly the property, income and earning ability of the wife and the total impoverishment of the defendant accomplished by its decree ...”
and then follows:
“The trial court had just heard a full disclosure of property of the parties piece by piece, and was aware that it had taken everything from the defendant and given it to the plaintiff. It was further aware of the defendant’s limited income.”
It is apparent from the record that the trial court in a most complete and orderly fashion inventoried the assets and liabilities of the parties well in advance of making the Special Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law as requested by defendant-appellant.
Appellant cites in support of his position the case of O’Connor v. O’Connor (1969), 253 Ind. 295, 253 N.E.2d 250, 254, where our Supreme Court of Indiana held:
“There may be instances where the financial situations of the parties are such that any allowance against the husband would be unreasonable and unjustified. There must therefore be read into the language of the statute a proviso to the effect that the court shall make the order provided for if a timely and proper application or petition is presented and the facts justify an allowance.”
*677The practical effect of this decision in O’Connor was to allow the wife, the unsuccessful party, to recover her attorney fees. We do not deem O’Connor as authority here to demonstrate an abuse of discretion in awarding attorney fees to the wife’s attorney when granting her a divorce. The decision in O’Connor has furnished the trial court with additional discretion where the court feels that any allowance against the husband would be reasonable or justified. Such action by a trial court under the authority of the “proviso” to be read into the statute clearly operates against the strict construction of IC 1971, 31-1-12-11, Ind. Ann. Stat. § 3-1216 (Burns 1968 Repl.). Tested by O’Connor, the record here fails to disclose a situation where the award of any allowance against the husband would be unreasonable and unjustified. The ability of an able-bodied and well-educated male to work and earn are certainly a part of the “financial situations” of the parties that a trial court may properly consider in the exercise of its discretion in regard to the award of attorney fees. One of the underlying premises of O’Connor is the common law duty of the husband to support his wife. Neither O’Connor nor certain recent statutory revisions of the divorce laws have eroded that duty which remains a viable part of our law.
It is imperative to recall that the Appellant-husband too sought affirmative relief by filing a cross-complaint and that the plaintiff-wife was forced to defend that cross-complaint of defendant-appellant, wherein the defendant-husband sought $10,000.00 in alimony from the wife in addition to division of the property. The trial involved 4% days of trial time plus pre-trial pleadings, hearings and other professional services.
This case does not involve people of wealth but rather people whose obligations consume their income as it is received by them. While the income received by the wife might appear by some standards to be substantial, it is quickly consumed by income tax, deductions for insurance, by payments on two *678mortgage on the residence, on utility bills, real estate taxes and the like, not to mention the expenses of maintaining food and clothing for herself and two teenaged boys and auto upkeep.
The divorce in and of itself has relieved the Appellee from certain burdens, more particularly that of supporting a “dependent” husband, in addition to herself and the two children. In this regard, the trial court found that the child support ordered paid by Appellant-husband in the final decree “will pay less than 20% of the cost of supporting and educating the children” and that the Appellee-wife “will consequently bear more than 80% of said cost.” It must certainly come as a shock to the defendant this late in life to be required to face some aspect of responsibility whether by way of the modest support order or by way of the attorney fees ordered against him. It must certainly concern him that his part-time job may no longer be sufficient to help him meet the full requirements of adult life.
The trial court had a right to consider the total circumstances of the parties in regard to its total decree. This trial court did so admirably in a long, hard fought and protracted trial. The trial court has broad discretion in regard to the award of attorney fees when granting a divorce to a wife. In exercising such discretion, the trial court is not strictly limited to the present economic circumstances of the parties but may consider the ability of the parties to engage in gainful employment and to earn adequate income to comply with the court’s order. The record which we have is replete with inferences that the Appellant has such present ability and has chosen not to use such. We do not deem the reference to “economic situations” by our Supreme Court in O’Connor to restrict the broad discretion of the trial court in cases such as this. We do not deem that “economic situations” is meant to be technical, narrow term. We do not believe the trial court went beyond the proper *679boundaries of “economic situations” in its decision here. In short, the trial court did not violate the proper boundaries of its discretion.
We are very reluctant to interfere with the exercise of discretion by the trial court in this case and decline to do so. The Appellant has failed to demonstrate reversible error and we therefore affirm the decision of the trial court.
Judgment affirmed.
Hoffman, C.J., concurs.
Staton, J., concurs in result with an opinion.

=== CASE 9737546 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:28:21.878241+00 ===

Wilkie, J.
Defendant frontally attacks his conviction as being founded on a jury verdict supported by insufficient evidence.
“. . . On an appeal in a criminal case the test of the sufficiency of the evidence for a conviction is ‘whether the evidence adduced, believed and rationally considered by the jury, was sufficient to prove the defendant’s guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.’ ” 1
*15The facts as detailed in the testimony of the complaining witness, a twenty-two-year-old single woman, are as follows:
On the evening of Sunday, October 8, 1967, she had gone alone to the Attic, a tavern and nightclub in downtown Milwaukee. While there she saw the defendant who asked her, at about one a. m., if he could come up to her apartment. She said that he could. Just before she left the Attic, she again talked to the defendant. She asked him if he still planned to come to her apartment. He said that he did, but wanted to talk to a few friends and would be over later. The complainant then left with some of her friends at about 1:45 a. m., and arrived at her apartment about two a. m. The defendant arrived at the apartment about thirty minutes later and was let in by the complainant. No one else was present during the time that the defendant and the complaining witness were together in the apartment.
According to the complainant, the defendant prepared and smoked two marijuana cigarettes in her presence. She testified “I had one drag off of it.” She admitted that she had smoked marijuana on previous occasions. She further testified that defendant finished smoking the marijuana cigarettes at about 3:30 a. m. and that between that time and six a. m. he and she just sat on the floor and talked with one another. According to complainant, her difficulties began at about six a. m. when the defendant attempted to kiss her — she backed away, but he tried to kiss her again while they were still on the floor so she moved to the couch which was on the other side of the room. She testified that the defendant followed her to the couch and tried again to kiss her. She continued to refuse at which point the defendant pushed her down on the couch and “pounced” on top of her. He then started kissing her and unbuttoning her jacket and blouse. After he succeeded in unbuttoning *16the jacket and part of the blouse he picked her up and started carrying her to the bedroom.
Complainant testified that while they were going through a small hallway on the way to the bedroom, she attempted to kick the defendant, but could not because of the narrowness of the hallway. She claimed that when they arrived in the bedroom the defendant pinned her down on the bed and unbuttoned the rest of her blouse and unsnapped her bra. The bra had been broken before and the elastic was temporarily fastened together with a bent safety pin. She then got off the bed but the defendant came up behind her and put his hand over her mouth and nose so that she couldn’t breathe. She stated:
“I finally got his hand away from my face, and I got up and started walking away from him. I thought I’d walk to the other side of the bedroom and into the other room, but he was blocking the door, and he came up from behind me and put his arm around my neck with his inner part of the elbow, right here, (indicating) and started pulling my head back and started choking me and started to remove the rest of my clothes.”
She claimed that he removed her slacks and pantyhose after which he pushed her back on the bed; she tried to push him away but he kept choking her. She testified that at this point defendant picked up an empty brandy bottle from the complainant’s nightstand and threatened to strike her with it. She testified:
“I was scared. I was afraid he was going to hit me, and I started struggling with him again and in the process of this he started taking off some of his clothes. I don’t know how he got them all off, but he did, and eventually he got down to where he had only his undershorts on, and those he took off approximately down to his knees or so, and then he started having sexual intercourse with me.”
Thus both parties were naked during the act.
The complainant testified that during the attack she cried and yelled at the defendant, but did not scream. She also testified that she did not bite the defendant and *17that she did not know whether she scratched him. She testified:
“I yelled at him. I told him to stop. If that’s considered screaming, then I screamed, but as far as screaming out loud like someone would do when you are terrified, I didn’t come out to that point, but I yelled at him loud enough that could be interpreted as screaming. It depends on what you interpret as screaming, and I interpreted it as screaming.”
The entire act, from the first kiss attempt to the completion of sexual intercourse, occurred between the hours of six and seven a. m., and lasted about forty-five minutes.
She testified that after the act was completed, the defendant stayed at the complainant’s apartment for another hour and forty-five minutes. She claimed that after they were dressed they went into the living room and sat down on the couch at which time the defendant started to explain why he had done what he did. He said that he had done wrong and asked her to phone the police. When she dialed the phone to call the police she claims he took the phone from her and slammed the receiver down. She testified that he still wanted to talk to her at that time and asked her to promise not to tell her boyfriend or the police. She claims that he left at about 8:50 a. m.
The complaining witness also testified that she was not of previous chaste character, and was unable to state how many different males (although admitting to “very few”) she had had intercourse with prior to October 9, 1967. Also, according to Dr. Crosby, her regular doctor, she was taking birth-control pills for acne.
Defendant took the stand in his own defense and testified in detail as to his version of the events of the early morning in question. He said he had met complainant at the Attic and that she had invited him to *18her apartment to smoke some marijuana. He testified to preparing three marijuana cigarettes with marijuana furnished by the complainant. He stated that at about 3:45 a. m. he started to make love to complainant. He described in detail his account of the activities which led up to the act of intercourse, including certain erotic and unnatural acts performed and requested by the complainant. He testified that after having relations with her, he had pushed her off the bed, spit in her face three times, called her a number of names, and threatened to tell her boyfriend and others about the preceding events. He testified that he had left her apartment between 4:30 and 4:45 a. m. He further testified that complainant’s entire attitude up to and including the time the parties engaged in intercourse had been one of complete cooperation with him. Thus, the act of intercourse is admitted. The only issue at the trial was and is whether the admitted intercourse between the defendant and complaining witness was or was not forcible and against her will.
Sec. 944.01 (2), Stats., provides:
“In this section the phrase ‘by force and against her will’ means either that her utmost resistance is overcome or prevented by physical violence or that her will to resist is overcome by threats of imminent physical violence likely to cause great bodily harm.”
Many cases have construed the “utmost resistance” requirement of the above statute. In several recent cases 2 this court has reemphasized that the term “utmost resistance” is relative, not absolute. This standard was spelled out in McLain v. State.3
*19“. . . the term ‘utmost resistance’ is a relative rather than a positive term. What would be ‘utmost resistance’ on the part of a weak and nervous person, with a temperament easily frightened, might be the veriest sham on the part of a robust person in good health, whose nerves and courage are normal.”
A further clarification of this principle is found in B— v. State,4 wherein this court stated that:
“. . . In the McLain Case there was an endeavor to make it clear that while the utmost resistance was required in all cases, this requirement was relative, not positive, and that what constitutes the utmost resistance in a particular case must depend largely upon the facts of that case, such as the temperament of the victim, the relations of the parties, her state of health, her physical strength, her age, her experience, her courage, her nervous condition at the time, and perhaps other circumstances naturally affecting her powers of resistance. So reading the McLain Case, we do not think it can be said that there is any direct conflict between its doctrine and the doctrine of the Brown Case, but simply that it supplements the Brown Case and removes the erroneous idea which is likely to be gathered therefrom, namely, that the measure of resistance required is absolute and fixed in all cases and must be so great that, while it fails to defeat the purpose of the ravisher, the failure is only by the narrowest possible margin.” (Emphasis added.) 5
Thus it appears that “utmost resistance” is measured by a subjective test of what resistance an individual victim is capable of exerting. In State v. Schmear 6 we stated that “While the law requires the utmost resistance as evidence of the woman’s will, the law does not require the useless or the impossible.” 7 And in State v. Waters,8 *20we stated that “The strict physical-resistance requirement is relaxed somewhat if it would be useless to resist.” 9
In applying these well-established standards to assess complainant’s resistance in the instant case, we must first observe that we must reject defendant’s own testimony, as the jury was privileged to do, and examine complainant’s own testimony to see whether it is sufficient to show the proper degree of resistance.
Considering the various elements relevant to the question as specified in B— v. State,10 it first appears that as to complainant’s health and physical strength there is nothing in the record to indicate that she was anything but normal.
Furthermore, complainant was a woman of considerable experience. By her own testimony she was not a virgin at the time of the alleged rape, and in fact she was unable to say how many different males she had had sexual intercourse with prior to October 9, 1967. “The law recognizes that a woman of previous unchaste character is more likely to consent to an act of sexual intercourse than is a woman who is strictly virtuous.” 11 Her unchaste character, the fact that she went on her own to the Attic that evening, and the fact that she permitted the defendant to come to her apartment at 2:30 a. m. and smoke marijuana, are all factors bearing on the “temperament of the victim,” and “her experience” factors listed in B— v. State. She certainly was not “mild, timid, socially inexperienced” as was the victim in State v. Hoffman.12
The record does not establish that the complaining witness was lacking in courage. Not only was she courageous enough to invite the defendant to her apartment at such an hour, but she claims to have kicked, struggled, *21and yelled, and to have told defendant to leave her alone. Thus it appears that although she claims to have been threatened and choked there is no indication that she was so intimidated that she was afraid or unable to resist.
The evidence does not show that complainant was hysterical or in a highly emotional state during and following the alleged attack. Although she testified that she was crying and was afraid, her testimony also indicates that she was reasonably well aware of most everything that was going on around her. She was able to testify with some degree of certainty as to the time of day when each stage of the attack took place. She stated that defendant began making advances about six a. m., that the act was completed sometime around seven, that she attempted to call police at eight, and that defendant left the apartment at 8:50 a. m. She was able to remember the precise language that the defendant allegedly spoke during the attack, and she was able to give a detailed account of the moments just preceding penetration — she stated that one side of his body was pinning her down on her left side and that he “eventually took his left knee and put it between my two legs trying to spread my legs apart, and he was putting his hand under me . . . .” Yet she was “fuzzy” as to how defendant was able to hold her down, against her struggles, and at the same time completely undress himself, including his socks.
In State v. Hoffman,13 this court, describing the type of fear rendering one incapable of resistance, stated:
“It therefore clearly appears that ‘the fear’ which renders the utmost resistance unnecessary is a ‘fear of death or great bodily harm,’ a ‘fear of great personal injury,’ or ‘serious personal injury,’ a fear that ‘so overpowers her that she dares not resist,’ a ‘fear and terror so extreme as to preclude resistance,’ a fear which *22renders her mind ‘well nigh incapable of continuing her resistance to repel him/ The fear therefore must not only be real but so great as to terrify her and render her practically incapable of resistance.”
Applying this standard to the facts in the instant case, the situation here is similar to that in Hoffman, wherein the court stated:
“. . . From the testimony of the complaining witness it appears that she was fully cognizant of everything that was going on, fully able to relate every detail thereof, and that she was in no reasonable sense dominated by that fear which excused the ‘utmost resistance’ within her power.” 14
In our opinion, certain parts of complainant’s testimony are incredible. She stated that she was threatened with a brandy bottle (none was seen by any other witness, none was produced) ; the two sat on the floor and just talked for two and a half hours; no clothes were torn (other than the loosely clipped repaired bra), or buttons broken; and that she yelled and cried out (no screams or noises were heard by the residents of the two adjacent apartments, even though these residents were up and around and could have heard any such sounds, if uttered). Also her testimony regarding the bedroom struggle appears to contain some inconsistencies. For example she stated that:
“I finally got his hand away from my face, and I got up and started walking away from him. I thought I’d walk to the other side of the bedroom and into the other room, but he was blocking the door, and he came up from behind me and put his arm around my neck with his inner part of the elbow, right here, (indicating) and started pulling my head back and started choking me and started to remove the rest of my clothes.”
It is difficult to understand how the defendant could be both in front and behind the complainant at the same time.
*23We conclude, after a careful examination of the entire record, that the evidence is insufficient to sustain the conviction, that no jury could find the defendant guilty of this charge beyond a reasonable doubt.
Mention should be made of the testimony of Dr. Allen R. Crosby, who was complainant’s physician before this incident and who examined her in the afternoon of October 9th. He stated that upon examining the complainant he found a tear, a little less than one-half inch, in the mucous membrane of the introitus. He explained that when a woman is sexually excited, she secretes a lubricant from various glands which makes intercourse easy. Intercourse without lubrication could result in pain and tear the mucous membrane. Thus, although this injury could be consistent with complainant’s allegation of rape, at most it would only establish that penetration occurred before the complainant was sufficiently aroused. Thus, the injury does not point conclusively to rape.
Defendant raises a number of other questions involving possible errors in the conduct of the trial. In view of the fact that we have concluded that this case should be reversed because of insufficiency of evidence, it is unnecessary to consider these questions. However, we deem it advisable to consider two points urged by the defendant.
During the interrogation of Dr. Crosby, the following questions and answers appear in the record:
“Q. Doctor, the tear to the introitus that you found in ... in your opinion would that be consistent with a history given to you by the patient that she was raped?
“Mr. Staudenmaier: I object to that as not proper in form and doesn’t incorporate the records and test of certainty.
“The Court: Overruled.
“The Witness: Yes, sir, I would call that consistent with her charge of rape.
“By Mr. Spindler:
“Q. Now, Doctor, do you have an opinion to a reasonable medical certainty as to whether or not the usual *24act of sexual intercourse would cause a tear to the in-troitus? A. Yes, sir.
“Mr. Staudenmaier: I object to that as invading the province of the jury.
“The Court: Overruled.
“By Mr. Spindler:
“Q. What is your opinion, Doctor? A. Well, you see, when a woman, a female, is sexually excited, she secretes a lubricant which comes from various glands. It’s this secretion that makes intercourse easy and pleasurable. When a woman is not sexually excited, which of course is the case when you do vaginal examinations, it’s a difficult thing to do, regardless of whether or not they have had children, so we find it necessary for doing ail sorts of examinations to use a lubricant on the instrument and the hand as well. It’s difficult without lubrication to even insert two fingers in the vagina. The male penis is approximately the size of three fingers. To force any instrument in without lubrication could easily result in pain and tear in the mucous membrane such as I mentioned before.”
The first question was not couched in terms of the proper standard for opinion evidence. It would have been preferable to ask for an opinion couched in terms of a reasonable degree of medical certainty.15 In view of our disposition of this case it is not necessary to decide whether permitting this inadequately phrased question was prejudicial.
We think defendant incorrect in his further claim that these two questions and their related answers were improper and prejudicial because the testimony directly invaded the province of the jury. Defendant relies on Noonan v. State.16 In that case the state’s medical wit*25ness was permitted to testify that upon examination of the prosecuting witness, he found her uterus, vagina, and other reproductive organs inflamed. He was then permitted to testify, over objection, that the inflammation, in his opinion, was “produced by her having connection — a violent, not a free connection.” 17 This court reversed, stating:
“. . . The question and the answer which it elicited were clearly incompetent. The witness was competent to state what effects might result from a rape, but it was going far beyond the range of authorized expert testimony to allow him to give an opinion that the inflammation he discovered was produced by rape. On his cross examination this witness was constrained to admit, what any person of ordinary intelligence knows without the aid of expert testimony that there are other adequate causes which might have produced such inflammation. It was for the jury to determine whether the inflammation which the witness testified to was the result of a rape, or of some other cause; and the extent to which expert testimony affecting that question could properly be resorted to, would be to show what effects upon the sexual organs of the female might result had she been ravished. But the testimony admitted was a usurpation of the province of the jury, and beyond all question its admission was error.” 18
However, as the state points out, the present case is distinguishable from Noonan in that the questions here asked by the state elicit only the opinion that the tear found on the complainant was consistent with her allegation of rape. The doctor did not say that the tear was caused by the rape. In answer to the state’s second question, he appears to explain the physiological process involved in normal relations. The implication is that normal relations could not cause the tear, although he did not say this specifically.
By the Court. — Judgment reversed.
State v. Stevens (1965), 26 Wis. 2d 451, 463, 132 N. W. 2d 502; and cases cited therein.
See e. g., State v. Schmear (1965), 28 Wis. 2d 126, 135 N. W. 2d 842; State v. Waters (1965), 28 Wis. 2d 148, 135 N. W. 2d 768; Gray v. State (1968), 40 Wis. 2d 379, 161 N. W. 2d 892.
(1914), 159 Wis. 204, 206, 149 N. W. 771.
(1918), 166 Wis. 525, 166 N. W. 32.
Id. at pages 533, 534.
Supra, footnote 2.
Id. at page 130.
Supra, footnote 2.
Id. at page 155, and cases cited therein.
Supra, footnote 4.
Kaczmarzyk v. State (1938), 228 Wis. 247, 249, 280 N. W. 362.
(1938), 228 Wis. 235, 245, 280 N. W. 357.
Id. at page 240. See also Loescher v. State (1910), 142 Wis. 260, 263, 126 N. W. 469; Bohlmann v. State (1898), 98 Wis. 617, 620, 74 N. W. 343.
Supra, footnote 12, at page 244.
Hintz v. Mielke (1961), 15 Wis. 2d 258, 267, 112 N. W. 2d 720; Hallum, v. Omro (1904), 122 Wis. 337, 344, 99 N. W. 1051; Mallare, Wisconsin Civil Trial Evidence, p. 133, sec. 4.46. See also Casimere v. Herman (1965), 28 Wis. 2d 437, 445, 137 N. W. 2d 73; Unruh v. Industrial Comm. (1959), 8 Wis. 2d 394, 402, 99 N. W. 2d 182.
(1882), 55 Wis. 258, 12 N. W. 379.
Id. at page 260.
Id. at pages 260, 261.

=== CASE 9737547 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:28:21.883102+00 ===

*26Robert W. Hansen, J.
(concurring in fart; dissenting in part). Not so long ago, a Waukesha county court conviction on a charge of forcible rape was reversed by the circuit court on appeal. On the appeal to this court,1 the state contended that the circuit court had “. . . improperly assumed a fact-finding function and improperly substituted its discretion for that of the trial court.” This court found that the “. . . circuit court reviewed the record and concluded, de novo, that ‘the facts are not as a matter of law sufficient to constitute the crime of rape/ ” and that the circuit judge “. . . did not have the authority to review the record and come to an independent conclusion, . . .” The facts in the Waukesha case and legal issues raised differ, but the decision is relevant here because it spells out the limits of the scope of review as to sufficiency of evidence in criminal cases:
“ ‘This limitation upon the scope of review must rest, in part at least, upon a recognition that the trier of the fact who saw and heard the witnesses is in a better position to determine credibility and weight of evidence than a court which merely reads the transcript of the testimony.’ ” 2
In the case before us, the jury found the defendant guilty. The trial court found that “. . . there is without any question certainly credible evidence to support and sustain the verdict . . .” He denied motions after verdict and imposed a substantial prison sentence. Thus, both jury and judge found credible the testimony of the prosecutrix that the act of intercourse was against her will.
The majority of this court is not impressed by the testimony of the prosecutrix. The majority opinion acknowledges her testimony that she “kicked, struggled and yelled,” that she was “threatened and choked,” that she *27was “crying and afraid,” but these statements are referred to only as “claims” although it would appear that the jury and trial judge accepted them as more than that.
As to the testimony of the prosecutrix, the majority opinion concluded: “In our opinion, certain parts of complainant’s testimony are incredible.” One example: “She stated that she was threatened with a brandy bottle (none was seen by any other witness, none was produced) . . . .” Since this was not a drama acted out before an audience, it is difficult to imagine who such corroborating witnesses might be. This court finds “incredible” testimony that both jury and trial judge found credible. This comes close to taking over the fact-finding function. I cannot join in finding the evidence insufficient to sustain conviction on the basis of its incredibility. The jury and trial judge who saw and heard the witnesses are in a better position to determine credibility and weight of evidence than the court which has merely read the transcript of the trial.
Appellant on this appeal sought in the alternative a reversal and dismissal or an exercise of the discretionary power granted under sec. 251.09, Stats., and the ordering of a new trial in the interest of justice. The writer would reverse and order a new trial in the interest of justice.
At the trial the doctor, an osteopath, appearing for the prosecution, was asked whether a tear to the introitus that he had found “. . . would that be consistent with a history given to you by the patient that she was raped?” Defense counsel objected on the grounds that (1) the question was not proper in form; (2) that it did not incorporate the records; and (3) that it did not meet the test of requiring an opinion to a reasonable degree of medical certainty. The majority opinion finds the question to have been “inadequately phrased.” We would apply the cases cited in the majority opinion to find it improperly phrased. The trial court erred in overruling *28the objection. It was properly objected to. Because of the significance of the doctor’s testimony in the case, this error should entitle the defendant to a reversal and new trial in the interest of justice. No error is claimed or found in the trial court’s permitting the medical witness to give an opinion in a field outside the area of his primary specialization and experience. However, such circumstance gives special reason to require the proper phrasing of an expert opinion question and the incorporation into it of the proper standard of certainty. This is particularly true where heavy reliance for qualifying the witness as an expert appears to have been placed on training received in medical school, rather than on experience as a treating or examining physician.3
Under the circumstances here present, we find special reason for holding that the defendant was entitled to have the expert opinion questions properly phrased.
Ordering a new trial in the interest of justice would remove a perhaps unavoidable but certainly unfortunate factor that may well have adversely affected the entire credibility of defendant’s testimony. Here the defendant was charged and tried, not only with the crime of rape, but with illegal possession of marijuana. There is dispute as to where the marijuana came from, but it is not disputed that both the prosecutrix and defendant smoked or “took a drag” of the illegal cigarette. Only the defendant was criminally charged in connection with the marijuana aspect of this case. Midway in the trial, the defendant changed his plea on the marijuana charge from not guilty to guilty. Asked on oral argument whether this development might not have eroded the credibility of defendant’s testimony (denying the forcible rape) with *29the jury, counsel for the state frankly conceded that it probably impelled the jury to disbelieve the defendant’s denial of guilt on the rape charge. It is obvious that this may have happened. The basic issue in this entire case is one of credibility. As the trial court summarized the evidence, “There was definitely evidence of force in the testimony of the complaining witness and very definite evidence of no force in the testimony of the defendant.” The jury had to decide who was to be believed. In retrospect, probably only in retrospect, it appears at least possible that the trial of defendant on both the rape and marijuana charges developed here to affect the fairness of the trial. Although both prosecutrix and defendant puffed the illegal cigarette, in the jury’s mind, the marijuana smoke likely clouded or blurred only the defendant’s account of what happened. Regardless of whether this alone would warrant directing a new trial, the possibility that the jury found the defendant guilty of rape in part because of his midtrial plea of guilty to the marijuana charge would be eliminated on a new trial.
I would reverse in the interest of justice and order a new trial.
State v. Waters (1965), 28 Wis. 2d 148, 135 N. W. 2d 768.
State v. Waters, id. at page 152.
From decision of trial court on motions after verdict: “. . . certainly every doctor who graduates from medical school is somewhat of an expert of many things which, he hasn’t actually seen or treated ... or had extensive experience with . . . Accordingly, I believe generally speaking he is entitled to give an opinion on a broad background of medical experience, I mean medical training.”

=== CASE 9737548 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:28:23.372064+00 ===

Reardon, J.
The defendant was indicted on September 29, 1967, for murder in the first degree of David Martin Sidlauskas on April 24, 1966, and after a twelve day trial was, on February 20, 1968, convicted and sentenced to life imprisonment. He appealed to this court, assigning as error the admission of eyewitness identification testimony and the exclusion of evidence implicating another person in the crime. We affirmed the judgment. Commonwealth v. Geraway, 355 Mass. 433 (March 7, 1969).
On November 10, 1970, the defendant filed a motion for a new trial alleging, inter alla, that newly discovered evidence revealed a “conflict of interest on the part of the law firm that represented petitioner at trial so severe that it resulted in a denial of the right to effective counsel as guaranteed in the 6th Amendment of the Constitution of the United States, and the right to equal protection of the law, as guaranteed in the 14th Amendment.”
After an evidentiary hearing the trial judge denied the motion. 1 The defendant excepted to the denial and claimed an *170appeal under the provisions of G. L. c. 278, §§ 33A-33H.
We summarized the factual framework of the trial in our opinion cited above. In essence, the case against the defendant consisted of certain eyewitness testimony given by two persons who identified him as a man they had seen in a yellow car near the site where the victim’s body was discovered on the day of the murder, and the testimony of six other witnesses to admissions by the defendant that he had perpetrated it. It appeared at the hearing on the motion that four of these latter witnesses, and members of their immediate families, were represented, or had been represented, in various civil and criminal matters by the firm of Crane, Inker & Oteri. These witnesses were Carol Davies (sometimes referred to as Miss Kennedy), the defendant’s ex-wife; her brother, Edward Kennedy; her sister, Michelle LeClair; and one William Dennett, a friend of the defendant.
The relationships between several members of this firm, the defendant, and certain witnesses at his trial can be summarized as follows. On May 9, 1967, Mr. Oteri, a member of the firm, wrote to the defendant, then incarcerated in Indiana, notifying him of one murder indictment against him, and the possibility of another, and suggesting a meeting “in order that we can prepare to defend against this charge.”* 2 Two days later Mr. Oteri again wrote to the defendant and indicated that he had asked Mr. Inker of his firm to be counsel “with me functioning as his associated counsel,” and instructed the defendant to ask the Chief Justice of the Superior Court to appoint Mr. Inker as counsel. Mr. Oteri noted, “We are prepared to represent you through the trial, *171and any subsequent appeal . . . even though you have no money.”3 Mr. Inker was thereafter appointed counsel and represented the defendant at his trial and through his subsequent appeal.
Mr. Oteri testified that “I had William Dennett a number of times on various criminal charges in Massachusetts and he would call me at times when he would be arrested outside of Massachusetts and I would attempt to counsel him as to what he should do.” His representation of Dennett included at least one case in May, 1966, shortly after the Sidlauskas murder. Although Mr. Oteri testified initially that “I don’t have any memory of ever talking to Dennett after he went to Michigan and became involved with the district attorney’s office in certain testimony that I think he gave against Mr. Geraway,” he later testified that he did remember talking to Dennett in Michigan and consulting with him about a case in that jurisdiction involving checks. In a communication to Boston police Lt. Ingenere on March 14, 1967, Dennett referred to Mr. Oteri as his counsel.
Carol Davies, the defendant’s ex-wife, testified that in March, 1967, she and her sister, Michelle LeClair, and her mother were questioned by Lt. Ingenere about the two murder cases involving the defendant and that she first told the lieutenant she knew nothing. The questioning by the lieutenant continued for about a week. During that period Carol Davies called Mr. Oteri “a few times” to ask his advice about the questioning and was advised by him to tell the lieutenant what she knew. Thereafter she told Lt. Ingenere that the defendant had made certain statements about the Sidlauskas murder, and she testified to that effect at the defendant’s trial.
Michelle LeClair also gave evidence of questioning by Lt. Ingenere, and further said that she engaged in a discussion with her sister Carol as to whether she should answer his questions, that she was with Carol when she called Mr. Oteri, *172and that when they saw Mr. Oteri in the court house he advised her to tell what they knew. She testified that prior to getting advice from Mr. Oteri to testify she had not told Lt. Ingenere anything, and that her decision to answer his questions was at least partially influenced by Mr. Oteri’s advice.
Edward Kennedy, a brother of Carol and Michelle, gave evidence that he also was questioned by Lt. Ingenere about the defendant’s involvement in a murder case about March, 1967. Mr. John P. White, Jr., of the firm of Crane, Inker & Oteri represented him on the first day of the interrogation. Later in that week Edward Kennedy consulted Mr. Oteri. Before talking with Mr. Oteri, Kennedy told Lt. Ingenere that he did not know anything about the subject of the interrogation. Later he said that the defendant had said something relative to the murder. He also testified that the police at the interrogation suggested they might involve him in a current armed robbery investigation, and that at the time of the defendant’s trial armed robbery charges were in fact pending against Kennedy. He was subsequently acquitted on these charges. At the hearing on the motion, Edward Kennedy testified that what he ultimately told Lt. Ingenere concerning the defendant’s statement that “I whacked a guy” was untrue.
In addition to counseling these witnesses, the firm of Crane, Inkér & Oteri represented various members of their immediate family during the time it was representing the defendant. The firm represented Dennett’s child and wife (as guardian and next friend) in a tort case which began about 1965 and was not finally disposed of until April 8, 1968. A judgment for $4,500 was eventually entered on a case in which the ad damnum was $250,000.
Beginning in January, 1967, the firm represented Russell Kennedy, the brother of Carol Davies, Edward and Bernard Kennedy, and Michelle LeClair on a homicide charge. This case was disposed of in June of 1967, but the firm continued rendering services relative to it until the summer of 1968. According to statements made by both Mr. Oteri and Edward Kennedy, the whole Kennedy family was involved in retain*173ing Mr. Oteri and discussing various matters with him and attempting to raise money for a fee in conjunction with the charge against Russell Kennedy. According to the testimony of Edward Kennedy, this fee was to consist of a payment of $500 to $800, plus an agreement to retain the firm for any civil cases which the family might have.
The firm also represented Bernard Kennedy on an assault and battery charge in April, 1967.
In that same month the firm represented Edward Kennedy and his wife Maureen in a tort suit on behalf of their son Stephen, a case which was settled in 1970 on the payment of certain sums. The firm handled another tort suit involving Sheila, another child of Edward and Maureen Kennedy, in 1968, and on this case money was recovered in December, 1969.
It would thus appear from virtually undisputed testimony that Mr. Oteri, as well as other members of the firm, was closely associated with William Dennett at least through the time of the police investigation of the Sidlauskas murder, and served as counsel for many members of the Kennedy family in both civil and criminal matters around the time of the defendant’s trial.4 Since it appears there was a significant possibility suggested by the evidence that Dennett in fact committed the murder, that various members of the Kennedy clan were in serious trouble with the police during this period, and that the firm was handling several tort cases for close relatives of the witnesses, the situation was replete with potential constraints, both ethical and economic, on the firm’s representation of the defendant.
The questions raised by the foregoing recitation are made even more acute in that the defendant himself repeatedly questioned the firm’s interest in representing him. He wrote to Mr. Oteri more than a few times asking why the firm wanted to represent him since he had no money to pay them. To his repeated questions he received no written response. *174He also specifically inquired whether the firm was representing Dennett and therefore would not be able to give him its undivided loyalty. Mr. Inker finally replied specifically in a one line letter: “We never heard of Billie Dennett.” However, there was a file maintained for Dennett in the firm and his name was apparently in the firm’s card index of clients.
We accept the findings of the trial judge as true. Thus, although the firm considered as a single entity was involved in a serious conflict of interest, Mr. Inker’s lack of knowledge of that conflict (finding No. 5) and the competence and vigor with which he conducted the defence (finding No. 8) indicate, as does our independent examination of the trial transcript, that there was slight, if any, possibility of prejudice to Geraway. Although there is doubt whether Federal constitutional principles require that a new trial be granted where a nonprejudicial conflict exists, see Glasser v. United States, 315 U. S. 60 (1942); Hayman v. United States, 205 F. 2d 891 (9th Cir. 1953); Lollar v. United States, 376 F. 2d 243 (D. C. Cir. 1967); Zurita v. United States, 410 F. 2d 477 (7th Cir. 1969); United States ex rel. Williamson v. LaVallee, 282 F. Supp. 968 (E. D. N. Y. 1968), and no State constitutional claim has been argued to us, the requirements of justice would be best served by ordering a new trial under our power set forth in G. L. c. 278, § 33E. The web of circumstances and overlapping relationships here, highlighted by Geraway’s insistent inquiries about the possibility of a conflict, go far beyond cases of simple dual representation as, for example, Commonwealth v. Smith, 362 Mass. 782.
The defendant was entitled to the undivided loyalty of counsel as defined in the new American Bar Association Code of Professional Responsibility and Canons of Judicial Ethics, Ethical Consideration (EC) 5-14: “Maintaining the independence of professional judgment required of a lawyer precludes his acceptance or continuation of employment that will adversely affect his judgment on behalf of or dilute his loyalty to a client. This problem arises whenever a lawyer is asked to represent two or more clients who may have differing interests, whether such interests be conflicting, inconsis*175tent, diverse, or otherwise discordant” (emphasis supplied). At the very least, if there exists even the possibility of a conflict of interest a lawyer is under an obligation to reveal it to his client. DR 5-105(C). See A. B. A. Standards Relating to The Prosecution Function and The Defense Function. § 3.5,
р. 211. In this case not only was Mr. Inker a partner of the firm that represented four of the six witnesses to the defendant’s alleged admissions but, when questioned about a possible conflict by the defendant, he flatly and specifically denied the existence of the relationship as to one of them.
It is conceivable that the foregoing facts were produced by utterly inadequate office management; it is tragic that any such inadequacy serves to produce the result of this opinion, causing as it will additional heavy expense to the county in which an otherwise faultless trial was held in which there was strong evidence of the defendant’s guilt. The situation serves to point up the necessity of the institution by counsel of adequate checking arrangements to prevent a situation similar to that which obtained here.
As was stated in Commonwealth v. Cox, 327 Mass. 609, 614 (1951), which also involved a trial free from error, G. L. с. 278, § 33E, “consigns the facts as well as the law to our consideration, gives us the power and the duty exercised by a trial judge upon a motion for a new trial, and requires us to consider the whole case broadly to determine whether there was any miscarriage of justice.” We conclude that in this case such a miscarriage occurred.
Following our opinion in Commonwealth v. Geraway, 355 Mass. 433, a rescript affirming the judgment below was docketed in the office of the clerk of the Superior Court for Norfolk County on March 10, 1969. General Laws c. 278, § 33E, states in part: “[I]f any motion is filed in the superior court after rescript, no appeal shall lie from the decision of that court upon such motion unless the appeal is allowed by a single justice of the supreme judicial court on the ground that it presents a new and substantial question which ought to be determined by the full court.” It is apparent, however, that what is now before us was not before us when we carried *176out a review under c. 278, § 33E, and decided Commonwealth v. Geraway, supra. We thus have not had the opportunity to engage in a complete review under that section and no good purpose would therefore be accomplished by a remand to the single justice under § 33E.
In view of the foregoing we are of opinion that this is an appropriate occasion for the exercise of our power to order a new trial for reasons required by justice. The rescript is withdrawn, the judgment is reversed, the verdict is set aside, and the case is to stand for further proceedings on the indictment.
So ordered.
In his findings, rulings and order relative to the defendant’s motion, the judge stated as follows: “1. Attorney Munroe Inker was trial attorney for the defendant herein at the trial of this indictment. 2. At all material times, before and during the said trial, Mr. Inker was a partner in the law firm of Crane, Inker and Oteri. 3. Before and during the said trial the said firm, or certain attorneys associated with the firm, represented as attorneys one William Dennett and certain members of the Kennedy family of Roxbury in certain legal matters. These legal matters were not related to the within murder indictment. 4. Said William Dennett and certain members of the said Kennedy family testified at the trial of said indictment, all were called by the Commonwealth as witnesses, and all testified to facts which were substantially adverse to the interests of the defendant. 5.1 find that Mr. Inker, at all times material to his representation of the defendant, was unaware that the firm of Crane, Inker and Oteri or any of its members or associates were acting as attorneys or had ever acted as attorneys for any of the witnesses who testified at the trial of this indictment. 6.1 find that Mr. Inker was not affected in his judgment or conduct in his representation of Mr. Geraway by the legal representation of the said witnesses by other attorneys in the said law firm. 7. No credible evidence appeared before me that any attorney associated with the firm of Crane, Inker and Oteri ever informed Mr. Inker of the firm’s representation of the said witnesses, and no credible evidence appeared before me that any attorney associated with the said law firm and who was aware of the firm’s representation of said witnesses ever influenced or attempted to influence the judgment or conduct of Mr. Inker in the defense of the indictment. I find that Mr. Inker was not informed by anyone of the firm’s representation of the witnesses, and I find that no such member or associate *170of the firm ever influenced Mr. Inker or attempted to influence Mr. Inker in his conduct of the Geraway defense. 8. I find that Mr. Inker’s legal representation of Mr. Geraway in the preparation for trial and the trial of this indictment was competent and skillful. 9. I find that Mr. Geraway was found guilty at the trial of this indictment by a jury which had heard a great weight of clear and convincing evidence of his guilt. 10. It is ORDERED that the within motion for a new trial is denied.”
The extent of Mr. Oteri’s prior professional relationship with the defendant was unspecified, although the defendant suggested it began in May of 1966, two to three weeks after the murder of Sidlauskas, when the wife of William Dennett retained Mr. Oteri to represent the defendant on an unrelated charge. It is quite apparent from Mr. Oteri’s testimony, and from the fact that his letter indicated that it was a response to one from the defendant, that he and the defendant had been acquainted with each other for some time prior to this.
Mr. Oteri could not represent the defendant as his counsel as he was a member of the bar for less than ten years and hence, not eligible for appointment as his counsel. See Rule 95 of the Superior Court (1954).
Mr. Inker himself testified that Dennett told him, when being interviewed by Mr. Inker prior to the defendant’s trial, that Mr. Oteri had “helped his kid.” Furthermore, Mr. Oteri testified that he probably discussed the possibility of a conflict of interest with Mr. Inker, as well as other aspects of the case.

=== CASE 9737549 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:28:23.378751+00 ===

Tauro, C.J., and Braucher, J.,
dissenting. We do'not agree that “a serious conflict of interest,” in the words of the majority, was shown by evidence, as required by Commonwealth v. Smith, 362 Mass. 782, 784 (1973). In our view any “potential constraints” on the representation of the defendant by his counsel rest in speculation and conjecture. The findings of the trial judge, accepted as true by the majority, show that counsel was not in fact “affected in his judgment or conduct” in his representation of the defendant, that his representation of the defendant was “competent and skillful,” and that the defendant was found guilty “by a jury which had heard a great weight of clear and convincing evidence of his guilt.” Justice therefore does not require a new trial, and the result of the majority opinion by three justices (two of the seven justices having disqualified themselves), which we agree is “tragic,” is an unwarranted application of G. L. c. 278, § 33E. We would not disturb the conviction.
This appeal was argued to us primarily on the basis that the defendant was denied his constitutional right to the effective assistance of counsel. The decision of the trial judge on that issue was reviewable on appeal. Earl v. Commonwealth, 356 Mass. 181, 184 (1969). Compare Commonwealth v. Underwood, 358 Mass. 506, 510-512 (1970). The majority opinion does not clearly dispose of that issue. We think that the issue should be decided, and that there was no *177such denial. On the basis of the record, which we have reviewed in its entirety, and the detailed findings by the judge, this conclusion is inescapable.
1. Where an attorney represents interests that conflict with those of the defendant, it is clear that the defendant has been denied the effective assistance of counsel guaranteed to him by the Sixth and Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution. Glasser v. United States, 315 U. S. 60, 75-76 (1942). Assuming without deciding that the knowledge of Mr. Inker’s law firm associates can be imputed to Mr. Inker,1 we are confronted with a situation where the defendant is represented by an attorney who simultaneously is representing some of the prosecution witnesses in unrelated civil matters and who has represented in the past some of the prosecution witnesses in unrelated criminal matters. We cannot accept the defendant’s contention that such a fact situation automatically presents a conflict of interest on his counsel’s part.
Both State and Federal courts have agreed that such dual representation by defence counsel may be perfectly proper. “Oné attorney can certainly represent clients, all of whom know each other, in unrelated matters and still render adequate professional service to all. . . . An attorney can represent or know all the culprits and still render effective representation” (emphasis added). Wirth v. United States, 348 *178F. Supp. 1137, 1141 (D. Conn. 1972). See Olshen v. McMann, 378 F. 2d 993 (2d Cir. 1967), cert. den. 389 U. S. 874 (1967). The mere fact of dual representation standing alone does not create a Sixth Amendment violation. A conflict of interest must first be established. Lugo v. United States, 350 F. 2d 858 (9th Cir. 1965). United States v. Burkeen, 355 F. 2d 241 (6th Cir. 1966), cert. den. sub nom. Matlock v. United States, 384 U. S. 957 (1966). As we noted recently in Commonwealth v. Smith, supra, “[a] conflict of interest such as to deny to a defendant the effective assistance of counsel must be shown by evidence.” 362 Mass, at 784 (1973). See United States v. Lovano, 420 F. 2d 769, 773 (2d Cir. 1970); Layne v. United States, 312 F. Supp. 140 (S. D. N. Y. 1970); People v. Wilkins, supra, at 56. All of these decisions require a clear showing of an actual conflict of interest which places the defence attorney in a position where his loyalties to one client will impinge upon his commitment to another. (See Canon 6 of the American Bar Association Canons of Professional Ethics: “. . . a lawyer represents conflicting interests when, in behalf of one client, it is his duty to contend for that which duty to another client requires him to oppose.”) Therefore, we must examine the types of dual representation that occurred at the defendant’s trial in order to determine whether there is any evidence in the record to support Geraway’s claim that his attorney (Mr. Inker) could not effectively defend him because of conflicting loyalties.
(a) Mr. Inker (treating Mr. Inker and firm members as one) was simultaneously representing some of the prosecution witnesses (the Kennedys) in unrelated civil matters. Since this aspect of Mr. Inker’s dual representation was simultaneous with his defence of Geraway, Mr. Inker owed an ongoing duty of individual loyalty to both Geraway and the Kennedys. However, there is nothing in the record to suggest that the Kennedys’ interests in completely unrelated civil tort suits conflicted with Geraway’s interests in defending himself against the Commonwealth’s criminal charge. The only possible contention of conflicting loyalties on Mr. *179Inker’s part is based on mere conjecture and speculation that Mr. Inker would be inhibited in his cross-examination of the Kennedys because he would not want to lose them as clients in potentially lucrative but unrelated civil tort suits. Such speculation is not sufficient proof of an actual conflict of interest (see Commonwealth v. Smith, supra, at 784 [1973], especially where a careful examination of the trial transcript reveals that Mr. Inker vigorously cross-examined the Kennedys when they testified at Geraway’s trial.2
(b) The more serious allegation of a conflict is based on the fact that Mr. Inker (or members of his firm) had represented a prosecution witness (Dennett) in unrelated criminal cases in the past. The potential conflict of interest that may arise in this situation was described by Judge Waterman in Olshen v. McMann, 378 F. 2d 993, 994 (2d Cir. 1967): “Unlike the situation in Glasser v. United States, 315 U. S. 60 . . . appellant’s counsel here did not simultaneously represent at trial codefendants with competing interests. Nor was a con*180flict of interest created here, as in United States v. Hayman, 342 U. S. 205 . . . through counsel’s simultaneous representation of an accused standing trial and a principal witness for the prosecution who had been convicted on a related charge and was awaiting sentence thereon. Where, as here, the possible conflict arises from a prior representation of a prosecution witness, the primary, if not the only, factor which might deter counsel from staging an effective defense would be his reluctance to divulge or to make use of the knowledge derived from the confidential communications of his former client.”
Thus, we are faced with a potential conflict similar to the one alleged in Commonwealth v. Smith, 362 Mass. 782 (1973). In that case, Smith alleged that his attorney’s ability to give him effective assistance of counsel was impaired by a conflict of interest arising from the fact that Smith’s attorney had represented the prosecution’s chief witness (Reed) on an unrelated criminal proceeding five days before Smith’s trial commenced. The nature of the dual representation in the Smith case presents a far more compelling possibility of conflicting interests than in the instant case, yet no conflict was found.
Smith and Reed were both arrested for a heroin transaction which occurred on December 26, 1969. Reed pleaded guilty and received a suspended sentence. Smith was represented on this charge by a Mr. Crowley commencing February 10, 1970, and continuing through Smith’s trial. Before Smith’s trial, Reed was arrested again for unlawful possession of heroin. On June 11, 1970, the court appointed Smith’s attorney (Mr. Crowley) to represent Reed on this new offence. Reed was tried, convicted, and sentenced on June 11, 1970. On June 15, Reed withdrew an appeal from his conviction. On June 16, 1970, Smith went to trial and Reed appeared as the prosecution’s chief witness. In denying Smith’s claim that he did not receive effective assistance of counsel, we noted that, since Mr. Crowley’s representation of the Commonwealth’s witness had ended with Reed’s sentencing prior to Smith’s trial, there was no fear that Smith’s *181attorney would be hindered in cross-examining Reed because of Smith’s attorney’s desire to reduce the witness’s (and his client’s) chance for a favorable sentence. See United States v. Hayman, 342 U. S. 205 (1952); Unites States ex rel. Platts v. Myers, 253 F. Supp. 23 (E. D. Pa. 1966); People v. Ware, 39 Ill. 2d 66 (1968); State v. Ebinger, 97 N. J. Super. 23 (1967).
Thus, the only potential source of a conflict was the possibility that Smith’s attorney had been given confidential information by Reed which served to restrict Mr. Crowley’s cross-examination of Reed. See Olshen v. McMann, 378 F. 2d 993 (2d Cir. 1967). We noted in the Smith case that no showing of such a problem had been made and that its possibility “was extremely unlikely” because Reed’s defence “concerned an event which had no connection with Reed’s alleged transaction with Smith on December 26, 1969.” After reviewing the trial transcript and the evidence at the hearing on the motion for a new trial, we concluded that Smith’s contention that his attorney “was inhibited in his cross-examination of Reed, because of confidential communications by Reed or for any other reason, is no more than speculation. A conflict of interest such as to deny a defendant the effective assistance of counsel must be shown by evidence.” 362 Mass, at 784 (1973).
Our holding in the Smith case is dispositive of the problem before us in the instant case. As in the Smith case, Geraway’s counsel had represented one prosecution witness (Dennett) in prior unrelated criminal matters which had no connection or bearing on the charges against Geraway.3 Thus, there is no reason to infer that Mr. Inker received any confidential communications from Dennett which would have restricted his cross-examination of Dennett when he testified at Geraway’s trial. To the contrary, our review of the trial transcript indicates that Mr. Inker vigorously attacked Dennett’s cred*182ibility on cross-examination.4 Moreover, this is not a situation like that in the Smith case where the prosecution witness’s testimony could have resulted from an agreement between the witness and the prosecutor in which the defendant’s counsel participated.
Thus, no conflict of interest existed in the instant case. As in the Smith case, supra, the defendant’s contention that his attorney was inhibited in his cross-examination of prosecution witnesses because of confidential communications, divided loyalties, or for any other reason is no more than unsubstantiated speculation. Our conclusion that no actual conflict of interest existed during Geraway’s trial is supported by State and Federal cases where similar types of dual representations by defence counsel were involved. See Hayman v. United States, 205 F. 2d 891 (9th Cir. 1953), cert, den. 346 U. S. 860 (1953); Weaver v. United States, 263 F. 2d 577 (8th Cir. 1959); Olshen v. McMann, 378 F. 2d 993, 994 (2d Cir. 1967), cert. den. 389 U. S. 874 (1967); Harrison v. United States, 387 F. 2d 614 (5th Cir. 1968); United States v. Alberti, 470 F. 2d 878 (2d Cir. 1972), cert. den. sub nom. Alberti v. United States, 411 U. S. 919 (1973); United States ex rel. Kachinski v. Cavell, 311 F. Supp. 827, 829 (M. D. Pa. 1969), affd. 453 F. 2d 581 (3d Cir. 1971); Wirth v. United States, 348 F Supp. 1137 (D. Conn. 1972);5 Montgomery v. Maryland, 15 Md. App. 7 (1971); People v. Wilkins, 28 N. Y. 2d 53 (1971).
*183Finally, it should be noted that in all those cases where courts have found that defence counsel’s prior representation of prosecution witnesses in “unrelated” civil or criminal cases has resulted in a conflict of interest, there were special circumstances, such as the prosecution witness being the victim of the crime for which the defendant was charged, that indicated that the prior cases involving defence counsel were not in fact unrelated to the defendant’s criminal trial. See Zurita v. United States, 410 F. 2d 477 (7th Cir. 1969); United States ex rel. Miller v. Myers, 253 F. Supp. 55 (E. D. Pa. 1966); People v. Stoval, 40 Ill. 2d 109 (1968).
The other cases the defendant relies on where conflicts were found involved situations, unlike that in the present case, where the defence attorney’s representation of one who consented to be a government witness had not ended because the witness testified prior to his own sentencing. See United States v. Hayman, 342 U. S. 205 (1952); United States ex rel. Platts v. Myers, 253 F. Supp. 23 (E. D. Pa. 1966); United States ex rel. Williamson v. LaVallee, 282 F. Supp. 968 (E. D. N. Y. 1968); People v. Ware, 39 Ill. 2d 66 (1968); State v. Ebinger, 97 N. J. Super 23 (1967).
2. “Since we have found that no conflict of interest exists, we have no reason to decide whether, a conflict having been proven, prejudice must be shown.” Commonwealth v. Smith, supra, at 784 (1973). However, our review of the record leads us to conclude that the defendant enjoyed the services of a thorough and competent attorney who vigorously represented the interests of his client.6 There is no evidence that the defendant was prejudiced by the fact that some of Mr. Inker’s associates represented some of the prosecution witnesses in unrelated matters.
*1843. The majority opinion does not squarely rule on the constitutional claim argued to us. Instead, it rests on the power of this court under G. L. c. 278, § 33E, to order a new trial “for any other reason that justice may require.” Although the record in this case has been reviewed once before by this court under § 33E, we do not object to the decision that remand to a single justice of this court is not required where it would accomplish “no good purpose.” But we do think that the power to award a new trial under § 33E, like the “rarely used power” exercised in Commonwealth v. Freeman, 352 Mass. 556, 564 (1967), should be used with greater restraint than is shown here. See Commonwealth v. Concepcion, 362 Mass. 653, 654 (1972); Commonwealth v. Richards, 363 Mass. 299, 310(1973).
Our power to award a new trial without regard to technical rules of law should be exercised with primary focus on ultimate justice in the particular case. This means to us that we must concern ourselves primarily with the particular defendant and the particular facts, and hence that we must place primary reliance on the trial judge who has seen and heard the evidence of the live witnesses and the oral contributions of counsel. If there is an aroma of unfairness in the trial, it can be detected far more reliably by the trial judge than by appellate judges reading between the lines of a stale transcript. It is for this reason, we believe, that the trial judge has the unreviewable power to award a new trial, and that we have traditionally been very reluctant to order a new trial when the trial judge has refused to do so.
In this case, we must face the findings of the trial judge: “Mr. Inker, at all times material . . . was unaware” that members of his firm “had ever acted as attorneys for any of the witnesses . . ..’’He “was not affected in his judgment or conduct... by the legal representation” of the witnesses .by attorneys in his firm. His “legal representation of Mr. Geraway in the preparation for trial and the trial of this indictment was competent and skillful. . . . Mr. Geraway was found guilty at the trial of this indictment by a jury which had heard a great weight of clear and convincing evi*185dence of his guilt.”
The majority of three “accept... as true” these detailed findings made by the judge after hearing sworn testimony on the motion for a new trial. These findings completely and effectively negate all allegations (a) that there was impropriety on the part of counsel; (b) that the defendant was not effectively represented by competent counsel; (c) that the defendant was prejudiced in any way; and (d) that the defendant did not receive a fair trial. On the basis of the record it was virtually impossible for the majority to conclude that the judge had abused his discretion in denying a motion for a new trial. Of course, the majority do not so base their decision.
Rather, with obvious disregard of facts established by the record and the judge’s findings, the majority decide to grant a new trial under the extraordinary powers of the court as provided in G. L. c. 278, § 33E, concluding that even though the trial was free from error a “miscarriage of justice” occurred. The majority thus, in utter disregard of the exact and detailed findings of the judge based on sworn testimony (after accepting them as true), grant a new trial on the basis of illusive, irrational and self-serving allegations of a convicted defendant who is struggling to escape the consequences of his crime after a fair trial and a review by the court. We state most emphatically that the “requirements of justice would [not] be best served” by such a decision.
The majority opinion, on the basis of “potential constraints,” the “web of circumstances and overlapping relationships here,” and the defendant’s “insistent inquiries about the possibility of a conflict,” uses this case as a vehicle to convey a message to the bar as to “the necessity of the institution by counsel of adequate checking arrangements.” We do not deny that rules of law may sometimes properly serve such a prophylactic purpose, although even in deciding issues of law we should never lose sight of the ultimate purpose to acquit the innocent and convict the guilty. But in exercising a power to do justice without regard to technical rules of law, we should be especially careful to avoid sacri*186ficing justice in order to vindicate some abstract lawyer’s point.
In any event, the majority opinion chooses means which do not fit the end. To teach lawyers a lesson in office management, guilty defendants are offered a second chance to escape justice. But the “inadequate office management” was that of a lawyer requested by the defendant. The lesson is to be driven home by awarding a victory to the defendant and his offending lawyer. There is nothing to indicate that the prosecutor or the judge had any part in the offence, but their efforts suffer defeat and frustration, and the public, as usual, sustains the greatest loss. We do not believe that § 33E was ever intended to be used in such circumstances.
4. Unfortunately, the decision of three justices has effectively disposed of the instant case. However, we voice grave doubts whether the power of the court under G. L. c. 278, §33E, should be exercised without a vote of a majority of all seven justices. Decision without such a vote (as in this case) could lead to consequences not wholly consistent with the requirements of justice.
Most courts will impute the knowledge of one member of a law firm to all its members for purposes of disqualification. See Laskey Bros, of W. Va. Inc. v. Warner Bros. Pictures, Inc. 224 F. 2d 824 (2d Cir. 1935). “The premise upon which disqualification of law partners is based is that there is within the law partnership a free flow of information, so that knowledge of one member of the firm is knowledge to all.” People v. Wilkins, 28 N. Y. 2d 53, 56 (1971). Relying on this rule, the defendant argues (.hat it is irrelevant that his attorney never personally represented the prosecution witnesses because the knowledge of his attorney’s law firm associates who did represent prosecution witnesses is imputed to his attorney, a member of the same firm.
However, imputation of knowledge for purpose of disqualification is based on a presumption of a free information flow between associates of the same firm, a presumption which can be rebutted by evidence in a specific case that there was in fact no free flow of information between law firm members. See People v. Wilkins, supra, 56-57. In such cases where the presumption of free flow of information is rebutted by evidence to the contrary in the record, no conflict of interest will be found “[ajbsent a showing that the particular staff attorney [or particular member of a law firm] who defended the defendant knew of a potential conflict and was inhibited or restrained thereby during trial.” People v. Wilkins, supra, at 57.
The defendant’s brief protests that Mr. Inker did not produce Miss Kennedy’s (formerly Geraway’s wife) criminal record and that he did not explore her possible motives for testifying for the prosecution or for distorting or fabricating her testimony. It is doubtful whether the introduction of Miss Kennedy’s criminal record would have more fully impeached her credibility than the numerous admissions that she made while on the stand which tended to cast suspicion upon her version of the events. Contrary to the defendant’s view, Mr. Inker explored in detail Miss Kennedy’s motives for testifying against Geraway.
On direct examination, Miss Kennedy testified that she went to Chestnut Hill with Geraway when he rented a yellow Ford Falcon automobile. Later Geraway told her that he had “killed a guy” because he thought the man was William Dennett’s wife’s boyfriend. After the murder, Geraway stayed at Miss Kennedy’s apartment because he was fearful that he would be identified by eyewitnesses who had seen him in the vicinity of the murder.
On cross-examination, Miss Kennedy admitted that she had divorced Geraway after two years of marriage and that he was not the greatest husband. He had hit her on one occasion and had been cruel to her because her daughter was not his child, although he knew she had the child before they were married. Miss Kennedy had continued to see the defendant since their divorce though he often bothered her and was a pest. She indicated that Geraway was a liar and a teller of fanciful tales and that she seldom believed what he said. As a result of such testimony Miss Kennedy was presented to the jury as someone who might well harbor deep seated grievances against the defendant and might have a strong motive for wishing him convicted.
Mr. Inker also elicited her admission that for about ten days after the killing she had repeatedly told Lt. Ingenere that she knew nothing about the shooting. Although she had read that another man (Jackman) had been indicted and tried for this murder, she did not volunteer any information about Geraway to the police.- She had, in fact, written to Geraway telling him to stop the police from questioning her and stating that she knew nothing of the events. Finally, Mr. Inker examined discrepancies in her testimony before the Norfolk County grand jury, her statement to Lt. Ingenere and her present testimony.
The fact that other members of Mr. Inker’s firm (e.g. Mr. Oteri and Mr. White) advised some of the prosecution witnesses to answer truthfully all questions asked them by the police and grand jury during the State’s investigation of the Sidlauskas killing does not by itself constitute sufficient evidence of a type of dual representation which suggests a conflict of interest on Mr. Inker’s part. See Wirth v. United States, 348 F. Supp. 1137, 1141 (D. Conn. 1972).
The defendant’s brief argues that Dennett’s extensive record of criminal convictions should have been introduced and that his motives for testifying against Geraway should have been examined in gr.eater detail. In light of the plethora of admissions of criminal activity by Dennett, formal introduction of his record of criminal convictions was not necessary. Moreover, Mr. Inker did in fact prove Den-nett’s motives for testifying against Geraway in great detail. Dennett admitted that he once expressed a desire to kill Geraway to prevent Geraway from testifying against him concerning a bad check charge. Dennett stated during his cross-examination that he no longer wished to kill Geraway because by testifying against him he was accomplishing his wish in another way. Tangentially, Mr. Inker also touched upon the possibility that Dennett himself had committed the murder. Mr. Inker elicited from Dennett an admission that Dennett was near the scene of the crime on the night of the murder and that he had been firing a .38 caliber gun for target practice. The fatal shot was fired from a .45 caliber gun.
The Wirth case involved allegations bearing a striking resemblance to the allegations of prejudice Geraway makes in the instant case. Both Wirth and Geraway claimed their counsel prevented them from taking the stand and from placing responsibility for the crime on one of the prosecution witnesses. The court’s *183response to these contentions in the Wirth case is equally applicable to Getaway’s allegations. “Unfortunately, trial tactics originally conceived as the best defense in ‘the bright glare of hindsight’ prove to be a mistake but such does not mean that, counsel was inadequate.” P. 142. It may be of some significance to note that Geraway refused to waive his attorney-client privilege so as to permit Mr. Inker to testify about his conversations with Geraway.
At the end of his trial, Geraway made an unsworn statement to the jury in which he praised Mr. Inker and stated he could never sufficiently express his gratitude for the tremendous amount of work that Mr. Inker had put into his defence.

=== CASE 2211014 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:00.81355+00 ===

247 Cal.App.2d 554 (1967)
55 Cal. Rptr. 726
THE PEOPLE, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
CHANDLER J. WALKER, Defendant and Appellant.
Docket No. 3886.
Court of Appeals of California, Third District.
January 3, 1967.
*555 William T. Sweigert, James P. Carroll, Lally, Martin, Chedlow & Viets and Thomas W. Martin for Defendant and Appellant.
Thomas C. Lynch, Attorney General, Doris H. Maier, Assistant Attorney General, Nelson Kempsky and Raymond M. Momboisse, Deputy Attorneys General, for Plaintiff and Respondent.
PIERCE, P.J.
Chandler J. Walker was convicted of three counts of perjury. (Pen. Code, § 118.) Pronouncement of judgment was suspended and probation granted. He properly appeals from the order granting probation.
The crucial question presented on this appeal is whether an oath was taken by Walker before a notary public with sufficient formality to permit a charge of perjury within the meaning of section 118 of the Penal Code.
We hold there were irregularities in the manner in which the notary administered the oath to Walker but that an oath was administered and that perjury was proved. Other points urged for reversal are without merit and the judgment should be affirmed. Explanation of our holding will follow a statement of the facts.
Walker was the former owner of the West Coast Construction *556 Company, and as such he was in the home improvement business specializing in the sale of aluminum products. He employed salesmen whom he described as "independent contractors. These salesmen actually secured the orders.
Three sales by the Walker organization are involved in three counts of perjury prosecutions on which Walker was convicted. A discussion of one of these sales in detail will suffice for the purposes of this opinion.
This was a sale by these "independent contractors" to Willis Dunbar and his wife. They agreed to have aluminum siding and a roof and canopy placed on their home for the sum of $3.000. To their knowledge they signed only a credit report and a job authorization order. These were in the form of a printed pad with carbon paper inserted between counterparts. The salesman told the Dunbars that they would have to sign a third copy of the credit application because the carbon paper had not shown an impression of their signatures on the third counterpart. They did so, believing they were only signing the credit application. A work completion order was signed upon completion of the job. Dunbar testified that at no time did he sign a deed of trust; Mrs. Dunbar's testimony was similar to that of her husband's; and she too testified that she never knowingly signed a deed of trust. In fact the proposition that a deed of trust would be given had never been discussed.
A deed of trust was introduced signed by the Dunbars. It also included what was proved to be the signature of Walker "as witness." A form in the following language appears thereon: "[P]ersonally appeared Chandler J. Walker, personally known to me to be the person whose name is subscribed to the within Instrument, as a witness thereto, who being by me duly sworn deposes and says: That he resides in Sacramento and that he was present and saw Willis F. Dunbar & Lily B. Dunbar personally known to him to be the same persons described in and whose names are subscribed to the within Instrument as Buyers, execute and deliver the same, and said Buyers acknowledges [sic] to said affiant that they executed the same; and said affiant subscribed his name thereto as a Witness." This form was signed by Leonard C. Silvani, a notary public. The form is partially a printed form. The personalized portions were proved to have been written in by Walker who presented the instrument to Silvani to be notarized.
Walker, who testified in his own behalf, admitted that he *557 had not seen the Dunbars sign the deed of trust. His defense to the charge of perjury was that he was not under oath when he appeared before the notary.
Silvani, the notary, testified that Walker was under oath. In addition to being a notary, Silvani was engaged in the real estate mortgage business. He testified that Walker, periodically during the period when the transactions involved in the prosecution occurred, had called upon him to perform notarial duties. His testimony as to the manner in which he had administered the oath is equivocal. We have set forth material portions in a footnote.[1]
The evidence regarding the other charges is similar. It is unnecessary to discuss them in detail. The prosecution showed with reference to the charge involving other customers (Houston and Herise Brengettsey) that Walker had told a deputy district attorney that he had signed the deed of trust as a witness to their signatures but without actually having been present when they signed; that he had written up the certificate before presenting it to Silvani and had obtained *558 Mr. Silvani's signature as the notary and that the notary's seal had been affixed. (He also stated that in all cases this procedure was for the purpose of making it possible for him to record the deeds of trust.)
As to his understanding about being under oath Walker had stated to the attorney: "Q. And Mr. Silvani, did you appear before him personally at that time? A. Yes, I did. Q. And did he administer an oath? A. I would say so. Q. Yes. Now, had you really witnessed their signatures on this document? A. No I had not."[2]
Government Code section 27287 provides in part here material: "[B]efore an instrument can be recorded its execution shall be acknowledged by the person executing it ... or proved by subscribing witness ... and the acknowledgment of proof certified as prescribed by law."
An "acknowledgement" is not here involved; there was a purported proof by a purported subscribing witness with a purported sworn certificate. Such proof, of course, under oath, with the notary's certificate is a prerequisite to recordation. (Gov. Code, § 27287, supra.) The evidence shows Walker knew this. It was his purpose to obtain a recordation of the deed of trust established to have been obtained fraudulently. The latter act is not that for which he was being prosecuted. This does not mean that knowledge of the necessity of an oath is unimportant.
Section 118 of the Penal Code provides in part that "Every person who, having taken an oath that he will testify, declare, depose or certify truly before any competent ... person, in any of the cases in which such an oath may by law be administered, *559 wilfully and contrary to such oath, states as true any material matter which he knows to be false ... is guilty of perjury."
[1] A false statement pursuant to the proof or acknowledgment of an instrument before a notary public may be the basis of a charge of perjury. (Ex parte Carpenter, 64 Cal. 267 [30 P. 816]; Civ Code, § 1181; see also People v. Teixeira, 59 Cal. App. 598 [211 P. 470].) This rule, of course, applies to an oath administered by a notary on a proof by a subscribing witness.
[2] To convict one of the crime of perjury in violation of Penal Code section 118 it must be proved that the defendant: (1) took an oath that he would testify, declare, depose or certify truly before (2) a competent tribunal or person (3) that such oath was taken in a case in which an oath may be lawfully administered, and (4) that the accused wilfully and contrary to such oath stated as true, a material fact which he knew was false. (People v. Gilbert, 217 Cal. App.2d 662, 666 [31 Cal. Rptr. 920]; People v. Baranov, 201 Cal. App.2d 52, 57-58 [19 Cal. Rptr. 866].)
The manner of administering an oath in "an action or proceeding" is carefully spelled out. (Code Civ. Proc., § 2094.) Singularly enough we find no special form prescribed for the administering of an oath when, as here, a party is certifying to his act of witnessing the signatures to an instrument in writing.
Section 121 of the Penal Code provides: "It is no defense to a prosecution for perjury that the oath was administered in an irregular manner or that the person accused of perjury did not go before, or was not in the presence of, the officer purporting to administer the oath, if such accused caused or procured such officer to certify that the oath had been taken or administered."
Although no California authority applying this section has been cited by counsel (and we find none) with facts paralleling those of the case at bench, there are cases which assist us in determination of the problem presented.
In Peters v. City & County of San Francisco, 41 Cal.2d 419 [260 P.2d 55], our Supreme Court has stated (at p. 426): "The claim may be regarded as a `verified' one within the meaning of the statute although plaintiff did not appear before a notary to sign the verification. (Cf. Germ v. City & County of San Francisco, 99 Cal. App.2d 404 [222 P.2d 122] *560 [involving an identical provision in the city charter].) The object of requiring verification is to hold the claimant responsible for any false statements made in the claim, and, as pointed out in the Germ case, it is no defense to a prosecution for perjury that the person accused of swearing falsely `did not go before, or was not in the presence of, the officer purporting to administer the oath, if such accused caused or procured such officer to certify that the oath had been taken or administered.' (Germ v. City & County of San Francisco, 99 Cal. App.2d 404, 413-414 [222 P.2d 122]; Penal Code, § 121; see People v. Darcy, 59 Cal. App.2d 342 [139 P.2d 118].) It may be inferred from the evidence that plaintiff was aware that she was required to sign the verification under oath, and her attorney caused the notary to certify that plaintiff had sworn to the statement made in the claim. Accordingly, it appears that there has been substantial compliance with the statutory requirement of verification."
The case before us shows, we think, closer compliance with the requirements of oath-administration than was present in Peters, supra.
In People v. Brown, 125 Cal. App.2d 83 [269 P.2d 918], it was held (at p. 88) that it was not necessary that the words "oath," "swear" or "depose" be used. There evidence was given that defendant had raised his hand in making his statement. (Here Silvani had indicated on direct examination that Walker had raised his hand, but the weight of this testimony was, it must be recognized, lessened by his admission on cross-examination that "there was nothing physical" in the administering of the oath. Also when the court asked the compound and leading question. "... did he raise his right hand and solemnly swear that the writing he was going to make [NB, that Walker had already made the writing] was the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth, did he do that?" the answer was: "Not in that terminology, no." Unexplored was the exact, or the gist of, the terminology which was used. (See footnote 1.)
In People v. Darcy, 59 Cal. App.2d 342 [139 P.2d 118], the court states (at p. 350): "A person who, being required by law to make a statement under oath, willfully and knowingly falsifies such statement, purportedly made under oath, in any particular, is guilty of perjury as a matter of law whether or not the oath was in fact taken (sec. 129), ... and the offense is complete upon delivery of the affidavit to another person, with the intent that it be uttered or published as true."
*561 Turning to other jurisdictions, we find cases with facts similar to the case before us.
In State v. Anderson, 178 Kan. 322 [285 P.2d 1073], a deputy sheriff went before a county judge and as a result of the statements he made a complaint was prepared. The complaint stated: "Duane Anderson being duly sworn, on oath says...." After the complaint was prepared it was executed by the deputy and a warrant was issued and a party arrested. In the prosecution for perjury against the deputy, he claimed that he was not under oath, as the judge charged with administering the oath, signed the same in silence and without statements or questions to the deputy. There was at the time a Kansas statute requiring the laying of the right hand on the Holy Bible in the taking of an oath. The court said, however, "... it is common knowledge that such requirements are not always complied with strictly. The question is whether under the circumstances what was done was [a]... nullity." The court pointed out that the deputy read the statement after the judge prepared it and further commented: "Surely some weight must be given to opening statements of the complaint and to the physical acts of the party even though statutory formalities were not observed...." The theory of the court was that there was nothing to show that there was a design by either the judge or Anderson to have Anderson "unsworn." Thus, silence did not outweigh the wording of the certificate and the actual signing in view of the fact that there was nothing from which it could be concluded that the party intended not to be sworn. In the case at bench Walker not only read the statement, he had prepared it.
There is a comprehensive note (as of 1927) in 51 American Law Reports 840 on cases covering the formalities required in the administering of oaths. The note is an annotation to a reported case, Atwood v. State of Mississippi, 146 Miss. 662 [111 So. 865, 51 A.L.R. 836]. There the questioned "oath" was administered by a justice of the peace to an affidavit for a search warrant. The officer did not require the affiant to hold up his hand to be sworn, nor was there formal oral administration of the oath; but as the opinion states (on p. 838 of 51 A.L.R.) "the evidence shows, without conflict, that both the affiant and the justice of the peace knew and realized that an oath was necessary before a search warrant could be obtained, and that they considered what was done at the time the oath was signed by the affiant and the warrant issued by *562 the justice of the peace to be sufficient in law to constitute an oath.... Both of them understood, without anything being said to that effect, that the affiant was making the necessary affidavit to obtain the search warrant."
In the note in 51 American Law Reports 840 et seq. other authorities expressing rigid rules are cited as well as those stating liberal rules. [3] We take the position that the California Legislature, by the provisions of Penal Code section 121, has committed this state to a liberal policy in ruling upon the question whether compliance with formalities in oath taking has been had. We pay willing obedience to that rule. The busy business world of today inevitably spawns informality in the performance of ceremonial functions, particularly those which are (at least in some respects) the vestiges of a more ritualistic era. We look, modernly, to substance more than form. In the field of law into which this case falls the manifested intent with which an act is done should weigh more heavily than the observance of punctiliousness in its ceremonial aspects. Symbolism should not be confused with solemnization. [4] Here, although considerable doubt attends the testimony, both of the notary and of defendant Walker as to just what acts did occur when the "proof" was made and certified to, there is no question whatever about the following: (1) Walker himself prepared  wrote out  the very form which states, "Chandler J. Walker ... being by me duly sworn deposes and says ..."; (2) Walker had the specific intent to make the statement as a sworn statement, and he was well aware that the instrument would be regarded as one sworn to  to the end that it could be placed of record; (3) he approached the notary to have the necessary form notarized; (4) he was informed by the notary to the effect that he, Walker, would be regarded as being under oath, and (5) both the notary and Walker regarded the latter as being under oath. [5] [See fn. 3] We hold under the facts related there was sufficient substantial evidence before the jury, adequately instructed, to justify its implied finding that the formalities of oath taking had been complied with.[3]
*563 Walker also contends that adverse publicity had a profound prejudicial effect upon the fairness of his trial. It is asserted that there was almost a daily front page feature story in the local press setting forth accusations made against "unethical practices in the aluminum siding industry."
The record does not show any motion for a change of venue made. [6] A defendant may not claim for the first time on appeal that he was deprived of a fair trial before an unbiased jury because of newspaper publicity where with full knowledge of the publicity he made no objection and failed to move for a change of venue. (People v. Magee, 217 Cal. App.2d 443 [31 Cal. Rptr. 658].) Moreover, there is no showing in this record either of the extent or scope of the adverse publicity or that it was impossible to secure an impartial trial.
Appellant claims that the prosecution inflamed the jury with reference to Walker and his salesmen as "suede shoe boys" and "aluminum siding racketeers." There is a reference to "suede shoe boys" in the argument by defense counsel on motion for a new trial. The district attorney's arguments to the jury are not in the record. We have no way of knowing whether the remarks were made; if made, whether they were objected to or in what context the statements were uttered. [7] An appellate court will not consider statements of error asserted in a brief which are not supported by the record. (People v. Boyden, 181 Cal. App.2d 48 [4 Cal. Rptr. 869]; People v. Deriso, 222 Cal. App.2d 478 [35 Cal. Rptr. 134].)
Moreover, perjury is a specific intent crime. (People v. Guasti, 110 Cal. App.2d 456, 464 [243 P.2d 59].) As we have shown, proof by the prosecution that Walker intentionally swore falsely to serve his nefarious purposes was an important factor in the state's case. There was overwhelming evidence that his purposes were iniquitous. [8] A prosecuting attorney may use appropriate epithets warranted by the evidence. (People v. Mitchell, 63 Cal.2d 805, 809 [48 Cal. Rptr. 371, 409 P.2d 211].) We see no reason to exclude such an epithet *564 merely because it is one properly catalogued as being within the vulgate.
The purported appeal from the order denying the motion for new trial is dismissed. The order granting probation is affirmed.
Regan, J., concurred.
A petition for a rehearing was denied January 26, 1967, and appellant's petition for a hearing by the Supreme Court was denied February 28, 1967.
NOTES
[1]  On direct examination he testified: "Q. [D]id you swear him to the contents of that acknowledgment? ... A. Yes. He was under oath, yes. Q. All right. So in essence, and correct me if I'm wrong, you asked Mr. Walker whether or not he had observed the Dunbars place their signatures to that document? A. Yes. Q. And he said, `yes'? A. Yes. Q. And you asked him whether or not the contents of that acknowledgment were true, is that correct? A. I don't recall asking him. Q. To what you would swear him is true, is that correct (Mr. Railey [the prosecuting attorney] then raised his hand demonstrating to the witness what he meant)? A. Yes. Q. And what was his response to that? A. He replied yes. Q. All right, that's what I want to know.... Q. Altogether, approximately how many times ... has Mr. Walker appeared before you and been sworn? ... Q. That he observed the signatures of these trustors to these Deeds of Trust? A. I'd say several. I don't know exactly."
He testified on cross-examination when asked how he had administered the oath to Walker: "Well, there was nothing  nothing physical. I asked Mr. Walker, `Did you witness that signatures'? And I mentioned the name of the trustors and he replied affirmatively and then I might add that in this inception when I first started notarizing documents for him that I told him at that time any documents notarized you had to be under oath to have them notarized. And maybe the format wasn't what it should be, but  he was under oath. There was no raising of the hand or anything. I asked him if he witnessed the signatures and he had."
Later he testified: "... I considered he was under oath, and he knew it."
In response to a question by the court: "[W]hen Mr. Walker came in to your office, did he raise his right hand and solemnly swear that the writing he was going to make was the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth, did he do that? A. Not in that terminology, no."
On redirect: "Q.... Now are you convinced that he understood he was swearing to the authenticity of those signatures? A. Yes. Q. Would you tell him? A. Would I tell him he was swearing to the authenticity? Q. Yes. A. I would tell him that."
[2]  In his testimony at the trial Walker retracted this statement. After having admitted he had not actually witnessed any of the signatures on the deeds of trust he testified on direct eamination: "Q. Do you recall the details on each time you went [before Silvani to have his proof of signature as witness notarized] on each particular one? A. No. Q. You don't recall any? A. I don't recall the details, no.... Q. Do you have any explanation as to why you appeared before Mr. Silvani and said that you witnessed the signatures when you weren't the one that did witness them; somebody else did. Do you have any explanation for the jury and the Court? A. Well, I treated it  this, prior to the first contact with the District Attorney's Office  I treated the deeds of trust in a rather careless and light fashion...."
He later testified: "Q. Well, if you don't recall  I mean, your testimony is you don't recall having transacted the notarization, so you couldn't recall as a basis where you admit you were sworn or administered an oath? The question is  [A colloquy between counsel and the court followed] Q. Mr. Walker, on any occasion did Mr. Silvani swear you in and did you take an oath on any of the notarizations involved in this proceeding, or at any time? A. No. Q. And I'm making reference to the raising of the hand and things like that? A. No."
[3]  Even on the question as to whether there was actually a hand-raising ceremony there is conflict. Silvani's direct testimony that there was suffers by his statements on cross-examination, particularly his negative answer to the judge's question. (See footnote 1, supra.) But Walker acknowledged that on one occasion at least he had been sworn. Silvani testified there was a solemnization ceremony of some sort. Our code spells out no particular words which must be used; on the contrary it condones informality. The weight to be accorded conflicting testimony is for the trier of fact. Where there is a conflict in the testimony a reviewing court does not reweigh; we do not have to be convinced of a fact necessary to establish guilt beyond a reasonable doubt; our inquiry ends when we find substantial evidence from which a jury reasonably could be so convinced. (People v. Hall, 62 Cal.2d 104, 109-110 [41 Cal. Rptr. 284, 396 P.2d 700]; People v. Robillard, 55 Cal.2d 88, 93 [10 Cal. Rptr. 167, 358 P.2d 295, 83 A.L.R.2d 1086]; People v. Daugherty, 40 Cal.2d 876, 885 [256 P.2d 911].)

=== CASE 9737550 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:28:28.153112+00 ===

Levin, J.
The fundamental question presented by this appeal is whether a trial judge may properly reduce or enlarge a sentence based on the amount of the court’s time consumed before a defendant’s conviction.
The defendant Earegood pleaded not guilty to the charge originally lodged against him at the arraignment on the information, August 2, 1965. At the criminal calendar call October 12, 1965, the defendant demanded a jury trial. Shortly before he was given an opportunity to do so the trial judge made the following statement:
“I think it is about time to make my usual announcement, gentlemen. The purpose of this call is to get pleas. If you are going to plead or waive a trial by jury now is the time to do it, so we can schedule. The court has a long memory, and all this goes on record, and when it comes time for sen-*259fence, if yon plead or waive a jury at the last minute, it is a factor I take into consideration in sentencing. I am sure you all know the risk.”
Thereafter, on November 16, 1965, the information was amended to add the count of assault with intent to do great bodily harm less than the crime of murder,1 and the defendant pleaded guilty to that charge. The requirements of GCB. 1963, 785.3 (2) were complied with before acceptance of his guilty plea.2 The defendant was sentenced on December 17, 1965.
*260As we read Ms remarks of October 12, 1965, the trial judge told all in the courtroom, including the defendant, that those who dilly-dallied in offering a guilty plea might expect to be dealt with more severely should they later decide to offer one. "We take the judge at his word and assume he sentenced as he promised he would, and, thus, that Earegood’s sentence was increased because he dawdled before pleading. Because a sentence may not be enlarged or reduced depending on the alacrity with which the defendant pleads guilty, the sentence must be set aside.
But Earegood also contends the trial judge’s remarks influenced him to plead guilty. This contention presents several subsidiary questions:
— Did the trial judge’s remarks in fact influence the defendant to plead guilty?
— Is the plea insulated from attack because it followed negotiations and an agreement that the de*261fendant would offer a plea of guilty to an added lesser offense?
— May a trial judge validly increase or reduce a sentence based on whether the defendant was convicted following a trial or a plea of guilty?
I.
The courts hold with substantial unanimity that a trial judge may not properly encourage a defendant to plead guilty3 or impose a penalty in the form *262of an increased sentence4 upon one convicted after a trial.
Most judges would probably agree it is improper for a trial judge to influence a defendant’s decision *263whether to plead guilty and, thus, on this point at least, practice in general conforms to the judicial statements.
*264“The unequal positions of the judge and the accused, one with the power to commit to prison and the other deeply concerned to avoid prison, at once raise a question of fundamental fairness. When a judge becomes a participant in plea bargaining he brings to bear the full force and majesty of his office. His awesome power to impose a substantially longer or even maximum sentence in excess of that proposed is present whether referred to or not. A defendant needs no reminder that if he rejects the proposal, stands upon his right to trial and is convicted, he faces a significantly longer sentence. One facing a prison term, whether of longer or shorter duration, is easily influenced to accept what appears the more preferable choice.” United States, ex rel. Elksnis, v. Gilligan (SD NY, 1966), 256 F Supp 244, 254.
However, despite appellate court statements to the contrary (see footnote 4), many trial judges think it entirely proper to count against the defendant the fact that he has put the State to the expense of a trial, and sentence one convicted following a trial more heavily than if he had pled guilty.5
*265This sentencing practice finds support in tlxe American Bar Association’s recently adopted Standards Eelating to Pleas of Guilty (standard 1.8; quoted in full in footnote 8).6 The standards state it is proper for a trial judge to grant sentence concessions to those who plead guilty as long as the judge himself does not participate in the bargaining (standards 3.3[a] and 1.8[a], discussed in part II, infra).
The commentary accompanying the standards takes no notice of either the relatively few supportive or the greater number of contrary judicial state*266ments (see footnote 4), but rather relies on its own exegesis.
In those jurisdictions where plea bargaining focuses on the granting of sentence concessions, the present high proportion of guilty pleas is no doubt in part explained by the practice of granting such concessions or at least leading defendants to believe they will be granted. In proposing as a national standard the practices followed in those jurisdictions, practices contrary to most appellate court statements on the matter, ABA guilty pleas standard 1.8 (discussed in part III, infra) offers a truly minimum standard.7 That standard does not — and we say this with sincere respect for the judgment of those who participated in the promulgation of the standards — represent the conscience of the law. It is inconsistent with fundamental principles concerning the judge’s role, with the maintenance of any standards at all, and lends respectability to practices which no court should allow.
The high regard we all have for the ABA may well lead to uncritical adoption of standards issued under its authority with the result that the minimum standard will become the common standard. This *267we feel would be most unfortunate, and, accordingly, we address ourselves to wbat we believe to be a serious threat to well-established principles concerning the use of judicial power.
II.
ABA Guilty Plea standard 3.3(a) states:
“The trial judge should not participate in plea discussions”
while standard 1.8(a) states:
“It is proper for the court to grant charge and sentence concessions to defendants who enter a plea of guilty”.
There is, of course, a difference in degree between overt and covert participation, the former clearly being more inconsistent with the judge’s role than the latter. But the fact that a particular judge grants sentence concessions to guilty pleaders is not the kind of fact likely to be kept secret. On the contrary, lawyers who properly represent their clients make it their business to learn the sentencing policies of the various judges before whom they appear. Thus, in a very real sense, the judge who adopts a practice of going lighter on guilty pleaders cannot avoid participation in the plea bargaining process. His practices may become so well known that it is unnecessary for him to inject himself in the process overtly, but this hardly means he does not participate. The judge’s sentencing practices are a fact, and they are no less a fact because there is no need to rearticulate that fact upon each arraignment.
Standard 3.3 (b) states that where a “tentative plea agreement has been reached which contemplates entry of a plea of guilty * # # in the expectation * * * that sentence concessions will be *268granted, upon request of the parties the trial judge may permit the disclosure to him of the tentative agreement”, and he may indicate “whether he will concur in the proposed disposition if the information in the presentence report is consistent with the representations made to him.” It is further provided (standard 3.3 [c]) that, notwithstanding the prior plea agreement, the trial judge “should reach an independent decision.” And if the trial judge has concurred in the plea agreement (standard 3.3[b]) “but later decides that the final disposition should not include the * * # sentence concessions contemplated by the plea agreement, he shall so advise the defendant and then call upon the defendant to either affirm or withdraw his plea of guilty”.
"We are convinced of the impossibility of the judge’s avoiding active participation in plea bargaining under the circumstances described by the standard. The length of sentence is the decision of the judge. Prosecutor-defense counsel bargaining over sentence concessions would be an exercise in futility unless the bargainers thought the result of their negotiations would influence the judge. Thus, without at least the judge’s tacit approval (i.e., his “participation”), such bargaining would not take place. If the prosecutor is willing to recommend, for example, 5 years, and the defendant is seeking 2-1/2 years, and they settle on 3-1/2 years, they must of necessity in such bargaining consider the judge’s attitude.
If the judge permits disclosure to him of the prosecutor-defendant agreement upon sentence (as the quoted ABA standard contemplates), how can he avoid stating the reason for any disagreement with the recommended disposition and, perhaps, indicating what sentence he would agree to consider, at least in those jurisdictions where the administration of *269criminal justice has come to depend on a steady flow of guilty pleas? Indeed, what purpose would be served by disclosing the arrangement to the judge if not determination of whether the bargainers áre on the beam? If a meeting of the minds or finalization of a previously negotiated agreement follows the judge’s statement of his reaction to the parties’ original proposal, surely the judge has participated in achieving that result and in the bargaining itself.
If upon full information the judge decides the proposed sentence is too lenient and (as the standards suggest) offers the defendant an opportunity to withdraw his guilty plea, would not the average defendant carefully consider whether rejection of the judge’s evaluation might lead to a higher sentence should he be convicted following a trial, regardless of whether the particular judge would visit such punishment upon the defendant? The judge’s decision to reject the original sentence agreement is, of necessity, based on the judge’s evaluation of both the offender and the charged offense. After the kind of negotiating' and bargaining which preceded confrontation with the judge, is it not reasonable to expect many, if not most, offenders would conclude both fair trial and fair sentencing have been forfeited?
“Time and again this court has said that justice must not only be done but must manifestly be seen to be done.” Rex v. Justices of Bodmin (1947), KB 321, 325.
III.
ABA guilty plea standard 1.8 needs to be examined in detail.8
*270Considerations (i) and (vi) of standard 1.8 are present in every case where the defendant pleads guilty. Every guilty pleader makes his own punishment more certain and, by avoiding trial, expedites disposition of other cases. The net effect of considerations (i) and (vi) is to permit the trial judge to grant a sentence concession in every case where the defendant pleads guilty and, thus, considerations (i) and (vi) effectively cancel everything else in subparagraph (a) of standard 1.8. It would have been clearer simply to have said that sentence concessions may be granted to all guilty pleaders.
Consideration (ii), allowing sentence concessions to guilty pleaders on the ground “defendant has acknowledged his guilt and shown a willingness to assume responsibility for his conduct”,9 also applies in *271every case, if it applies in any case. If the defendant acknowledges his guilt in the expectation of a sentence concession, he is as likely to he trying to put himself in line for a sentence concession as to be truly repentant. Those who think “confession is good for the soul”, that acknowledgment of guilt and repentance is an important step on the road to rehabilitation, should be in the forefront of opposition to plea bargaining in any form, because only elimination of all concessions will remove the temptations which contaminate the moral surge of those truly repentant. Only then could we distinguish the truly repentant from those merely bargaining in the marketplace. Repentance and purchase are not coextensive concepts. The plea bargaining apologists themselves tell us that without the element of purchase there would be far fewer guilty pleas. A palpable inconsistency exists between the pragmatic basis of plea bargaining, the need to obtain guilty pleas, and the beatification of the guilty pleader.
And while we are focusing on remorse, it appears that the bargaining system may create as much recriminatory remorse as penitent remorse. If a defendant pleads guilty in the expectation of a sentence lighter than the one he in fact receives, he may well *272be left with feelings of both regret and having been cheated, feelings which, whether completely justified or not, are bound to occur in particular cases as long- as defendants are encouraged to believe it is to their advantage to plead guilty. Plea bargaining may then produce at least as much negative as positive remorse and may retard as well as promote rehabilitation.
The ABA standard also asserts (consideration [iii]) that concessions may be granted if they “will make possible alternative correctional measures which are better adapted to achieving rehabilitative, protective, deterrent or other purposes of correctional treatment, or will prevent undue harm to the defendant from the form of conviction.” It is unclear whether that consideration is intended to have application to sentence concessions or whether it relates only to charge reduction concessions. In any event, such “better adapted” corrective measures could be achieved without exacting the plea in exchange for the concession — the charge or sentence could be reduced without regard to whether the defendant pleads guilty. It is not proper for a judge to deny correctional measures “better adapted to achieving rehabilitation, et cetera” merely because one has exercised his right to stand trial. Are those ‘'misguided souls who exercise constitutional rights less in need of such alternative correctional measures than those who waive them? On the contrary, it would seem those who perversely insist upon exercising constitutional rights have at least as great a need of “better adapted” correctional measures as the truly repentant who waive them.
Standard 1.8(b) concludes:10
*273“The court should not impose upon a defendant any sentence in excess of that which would he justified by any of the rehabilitative, protective, deterrent or other purposes of the criminal law because the defendant has chosen to require the prosecution to prove his guilt at trial rather than to enter a plea of guilty.”
It seems then that the court may impose a lesser sentence than would be justified by any of those considerations upon a defendant who pleads guilty. Defenders of plea bargaining cannot have it both ways. Guilty pleaders cannot receive lighter sentences unless those convicted upon trial receive heavier sentences — disparity there must be. Any such disparity is nothing less than a judicially imposed penalty11 for the exercise of constitutional rights, however it is dressed and garnished, or however exalted and respected may be the imprimatur of the authority that defends it.
IY.
The sentencing power of the trial judge is enormous. If within the statutory range, the sentence generally is regarded as unreviewable on appeal, *274even if the defendant asserts and proves that the trial judge abused the discretion confided to him.12 A trial judge should not be permitted to use that awesome power to accomplish a waiver of fundamental guaranteed rights. One exercising a guar*275anteed right should not fear he may have to pay a price for doing so.13 He should not have to fear that if he demands a trial and is convicted his sentence will be higher than if he had waived his constitutional rights. A constitutional right may not be the subject of barter. Neither, in our view, should the exercise of judicial discretion.
“To no one will we sell, to no one deny or delay right or justice.” Magna Carta, Art 40.14
Whatever one may think of plea bargaining for charge reductions between prosecutor and defendant,15 we have not, in tailoring justice to the realities of the docket and prosecutorial and judicial manpower,16 authorized the trial judge himself to exert any pressure on the defendant to plead guilty. We *276hope we never shall, whatever may he the backlog of untried cases.17
The remedy for the backlog is not more pressure on prosecutors and defendants to strike deals, but increased public awareness of the need to provide *277adequate funds so there are enough assistant prosecutors and judges to try those whom the prosecutor believes guilty for the offenses he charges have been committed. The trenchant comments of a unanimous Court in R. R. Improvement Association v. Thomas (1965), 374 Mich 175, 187, are in point:
“Our metropolitan circuits being burdened as they are, it is better to let the work of the circuit get farther and farther behind than to crank a judicial meatgrinder the unjust output of Avhich is simply a great number of ‘cases disposed of.’ When such a choice — between contemplative and prompt justice on the one hand and assembly line justice on the other — must be made, it [the Court] is due for bitter criticism either way. But cases tried right, and then thoughtfully decided, amount of a certainty to better judicial service than that which is manifested in this and too many like appendices coming here.”
As things stand now, the experienced criminal assumes he can make a deal for a lesser charge than the one alleged in the prosecutor’s information. More likely than not, he can. Such a state of affairs will hardly inculcate respect for law and order. Participation by trial judges in the negotiating process would, no doubt, speed it up, but the public’s and profession’s esteem for the judiciary is bound to be diminished.
We should not take the next step backward and permit judges to enter the bargaining process. That is what appears on the record before us, and a new trial is ordered.
Y.
The defendant could reasonably understand the trial judge was saying he was a busy man with a long memory and those who run the gauntlet unsuccessfully will be dealt with more severely than those *278who plead guilty. Might not a defendant or his counsel reasonably conclude that if a penalty will be imposed on those who vex the court by delay in pleading guilty, those who stand trial and are convicted may expect at least similar and perhaps more severe treatment? This seems an entirely reasonable construction. Had we been in the courtroom, this is the message that would have come through to us. Surely the defendant should not be faulted for failing to interpret the judge’s remarks to mean that while those who delayed in pleading guilty, but ultimately did so, would be dealt with more harshly than those who pleaded guilty at the time of the criminal calendar call, those convicted by a jury after a possibly lengthy trial would be sentenced as if they had pled guilty at the criminal calendar call.
There is, of course, no way of knowing what influenced the defendant here to plead guilty.18 Most defendants who plead guilty are guilty and have been offered an opportunity to plead to an offense with a lower maximum sentence than the offense originally charged and in fact committed. Perhaps so in this case.19
Where a defendant claims a promise or threat was made and this is denied, there must be a testimonial hearing to determine the truth of the claim. In this case the promise-threat appears on the ree*279ord. A hearing on whether the defendant was “influenced” by the promise-threat would be unproductive. The defendant cannot constitutionally be required to submit to questioning and his attorney’s lips are sealed. Any admissions made during the bargaining process with the prosecutor or during the examination by the judge at the time he accepted the plea could be explained away as having been offered to justify the prosecutor in recommending acceptance of the negotiated plea and the judge in accepting it.20 A hearing to determine if the judge’s remarks influenced the defendant to plead guilty would present a much more difficult factual question than that presented by a trial of defendant’s guilt on the original charge.
We hold that, once established, the promise-threat will ordinarily be presumed to have influenced the defendant.21 Any other approach would be impractical. We should not spend a great amount of time trying an extraneous issue when in nearly the same time we could try the real issue, the defendant’s guilt.
YI.
The view that sentence concessions should be awarded guilty pleaders is entertained, if not expressed with the candor that appears on this record, by many trial judges (see footnote 5), all of which is known to practitioners and prosecutors and soon becomes known to defendants and the public at large. That view is so widely held that many assume a judge .will go harder on a defendant who is convicted fol*280lowing trial.22 Thus, there is an implicit promise-threat in every case, which will not he removed unless, and until, the judiciary convincingly make it known that trial judges will not deal more harshly with a defendant who is convicted following a trial than one who pleads guilty, and all become convinced that is true.
It could be argued that since the promise-threat is implicit in every case, we should grant relief in no case, even this one where the promise-threat appears on the record. ¥e are not willing so to admit judicial impotence to correct unsound practice. That we do not do more is a poor reason for doing less.
Our disposition of this case makes it unnecessary for us to consider defendant’s claims that he was not credited with jail time on his sentence and that the trial court failed to certify the stenographic record of proceedings as required by GrCR 1963, 785.3(3).
The conviction and plea are hereby set aside and the cause remanded for trial.
T. Gr. Kavanagh, J., concurred with Levin, J.
CL 1948, § 750.84 (Stat Ann 1962 Eev §28.279).
It appears that on June 20, 1965, John Henry Parsons transported in his oar the defendant, Charles Lloyd Guenther, Carl Eugene Olmstead and an unidentified female. During the trip the car was stopped; defendant and the female got out and moved some distance from the car. Thereafter, at knifepoint, and with the assistance of Olmstead, Guenther took $2.50 from Parsons. A short time later, it appears that defendant assisted Olmstead and Guenther in throwing Parsons, tied hand and foot, into the river. Parsons survived the ordeal. The defendant, Olmstead, and Guenther turned themselves in to the police.
The 3 were originally charged in a single warrant with armed robbery (CLS 1961, § 750.529 [Stat Ann 1968 Cum Supp § 28.797]) and assault with intent to murder (CL 1948, § 750.83 [Stat Ann 1962 Eev § 28.278]).
Defendant was represented at the preliminary examination by counsel and ivas arraigned on the information on August 2, 1965, stood mute, and a plea of not guilty was entered by the court. At the criminal calendar call, October 12, 1965, defendant requested a jury trial; it was immediately preceding such request that the objected-to remarks by the trial judge were made. Subsequently, on November 16, 1965, amended informations were filed, one charging Olmstead and Guenther with armed assault with intent to rob (CL 1948, § 750.89 [Stat Ann 1962 Eev § 28.284]) and the other charging the defendant with assault with intent to do great bodily harm loss than the crime of murder (see footnote 1).
At the November 16, 1965, hearing an assistant prosecuting attorney stated that, insofar as Guenther and Olmstead were concerned, he thought the people could substantiate the amended charge of assault with intent to rob while armed, but that, as far as the defendant Earegood was concerned, he did not believe the people could prove either robbery armed or assault with intent to rob while armed. He added: “It isn’t quite clear in the history or in the lower court exam as to when Earegood was subsequently picked up again and when he became a party with the 3, but I do feel he had something to do with this man being thrown in the river, although there isn’t any testimony in the lower court exam by the complainant that at any time did William Joseph Earegood in any manner tie him up, and *260there isn’t any explanation as to when they did pick Earegood up again.”
Olmstead and Guenther then pleaded guilty to the amended charges against them. Earegood was then questioned by the court. He acknowledged he had discussed the proposed amended information with his attorney and knew the nature of the crime charged and that he had a right to a jury trial, and that the maximum penalty that could be imposed upon conviction was 10 years’ imprisonment. He then stated he wished to plead guilty. In response to inquiries from the court he stated that he pleaded guilty freely and voluntarily, he had not been threatened in any way to secure the plea and that no promises of favor or leniency had been made. The following colloquy then took place:
“The Court: What part did you play in this matter?
“Mr. Earegood: I was there to help put him in the -water.
“The Court: And did you help put him in?
“Mr. Earegood: Yes.
“The Court: What did you do ?
“Mr. Earegood: Just helped throw him in the water.
“The Court: You were right there pushing, helping, is that right?
“Mr. Earegood: Yes.
“Mr. Delaney [Earegood’s attorney]: I believe he lifted him out of the trunk, your Honor.
“The Court: Is that the part you played, you helped lift him out of the trunk?
“Mr. Earegood (indicating affirmatively).”
See Rogers v. State (1962), 243 Miss 219, 229 (136 So 2d 331, 335) (judge actively engaged in persuading defendant to plead guilty, made promises and held out hope of lenient treatment at penitentiary. The Mississippi supreme court said: “His lawful duty was just the opposite — to see to it that a plea of guilty was voluntary.”) See, also, Mesmer v. Raines (Okla Crim App, 1960), 351 P2d 1018 (“the court may not properly bargain with a prisoner to induce him to enter a plea of guilty”); State v. Benfield (1965), 264 NC 75, 77 (140 SE2d 706, 708) (“The fact that the court interrupted the hearing before all the evidence was in to express the opinion that the jury would convict defendant, followed by the statement that, if convicted, defendant could expect 'a long sentence/ necessarily leads, we think, to the conclusion that defendant changed his plea from not guilty to guilty because of what the judge said.”); MeClure v. Boles (ND W Va, 1964), 233 E Supp 928 (approving plea bargaining between prosecutor and defendant adding: “It goes without saying, of course, that the court cannot be party to such inquiries or arrangements”).
See, also, People v. Farina (1956), 2 App Div 2d 776 (154 NYS2d 501) (defendant entitled to withdraw his plea of guilty even though judge’s promise as to sentence length fulfilled); affirmed People v. Farina (1957), 2 NY2d 454 (141 NE2d 589). Similarly, see United States, ex rel. Elksnis, v. Gilligan (SD NY, 1966), 256 F Supp 244; People v. Guiden (1958), 5 App Div 2d 975 (172 NYS2d 640).
Accord: Letters v. Commonwealth (1963), 346 Mass 403 (193 NE 2d 578) (defendants told maximum sentences permissible would be given on conviction and lesser sentences would follow a plea of guilty). Similarly, see oft-cited Euziere v. United States (CA 10, 1957), 249 F2d 293, 295. And in another similar case, United States v. Tateo (SD NY, 1963), 214 F Supp 560, the court said defendant’s right to require the government to establish his guilt (p 567) “should not be exercised under the shadow of a penalty”. On re-trial, defendant’s claim of double jeopardy was rejected. United States v. Tateo (1964), 377 US 463 (84 S Ct 1587, 12 L Ed 2d 448), Justices Goldberg, Black and Douglas dissenting, stated that the defendant had been subjected to “judicial coercion”. 377 US 463, 473.
See, also, Commonwealth v. Senauskas (1937), 326 Pa 69, 71, 72 (191 A 167, 168) (“It may be stated generally that for a judge to make a bargain, engagement, or promise in advance of the hearing of a ease, irrespective of what the evidence might thereafter show the facts to be and as to what judgment he should render therein, would *262be judicial misconduct. Such agreements have uniformly been held to have no binding effect, and they are incompatible with the powers or duties of a judicial officer.”), followed in Commonwealth, ex rel Kerekes, v. Moroney (1966), 423 Pa 337, 349 (223 A2d 699, 705), where the court approved prosecutor-defendant plea bargaining, but opined that judge-defendant sentence bargaining should not be permitted; Waddy v. Heer (CA 6, 1967), 383 F2d 789, 793, dictum that “the promise of a lesser penalty by a judge as an inducement for a plea of guilty [was] properly condemned” in certain eases previously cited; compare Worcester v. Commissioner of Internal Revenue (CA 1, 1966), 370 F2d 713, 718 (“It is no answer to say that the defendant need not accept the court’s ‘offer’. The vice is that vis-a-vis the court he is in an unequal position.”)
Contrast: United States, ex rel. McGrath, v. LaVallee (CA 2, 1963), 319 F2d 308, where it was claimed the trial judge promised defendant consideration should he plead guilty. The court of appeals ordered an evidentiary hearing. On a subsequent appeal the trial judge’s determination that there was no coercion was sustained as not clearly erroneous. United States, ex rel. McGrath, v. LaVallee (CA 2, 1965), 348 F2d 373. Mr. Justice Marshall, then a Federal circuit judge, dissented from the first opinion stating that the transcript undisputably showed improper influence by the trial judge. The trial judge had stated to the defendant (p 320) : “If you are convicted as a second offender of robbery in the first degree, you will be entitled to no consideration of any land from me.” Mr. Justice Marshall declared (pp 319, 320) : “Our concept of due process must draw a distinct line between, on the one hand, advice from and ‘bargaining’ between defense and prosecuting attorneys and, on the other hand, discussions by judges who are ultimately to determine the length of sentence to be imposed. This is especially true ivhen, as hero, conference in chambers is ordered by the judge himself without any apparent request by either defendant or prosecutor.” See, also, United States v. Cariola (CA 3, 1963), 323 F2d 180, where the court, 24 years after sentence, refused to set aside a plea of guilty offered following a sentence commitment; the commitment and the sentence in fact meted out was for the defendant to spend the balance of the day of sentence in the courtroom; the majority stated it did not “condone” or deem “salutary” the practice followed. Chief Judge Biggs dissented because the plea was induced by a sentence promise from the judge himself. It is apparent from the report in People v. Darrah (1965), 33 Ill 2d 175 (210 NE2d 478), that an agreement regarding sentence had been reached before the guilty plea was offered and that the judge had at least discussed the matter with the defendant’s attorney before he pleaded guilty. Nevertheless, the court refused to set aside the plea because there was no proof the judge initiated the discussions.
Letters v. Commonwealth, supra, 405 (193 NE2d 578, 580): “a defendant, whatever his character, may not be punished for exercising ids right to trial and, therefore, the fact that he had done so should be given no weight in determining his sentence.”
*263In Thomas v, United States (CA 5, 1966), 368 F2d 941, 944, 946, at sentencing the trial judge stated that if defendant admitted his guilt the judge would take that into account and if he persisted in asserting his innocence that too would be taken into account. lie asked the defendant, “Which will it be?”; defendant responded, “I am innocent.” Defendant was sentenced to the maximum term permitted by law. In vacating the sentence the court of appeals stated : “When Thomas received harsher punishment than the court would have decreed had he waived his Fifth Amendment rights, he paid a judicially imposed penalty for exercising his constitutionally guaranteed rights. Upon that ground alone, we think that his sentence is 'subject to collateral attack’ ”,
In People v. Moriarty (1962), 25 Ill 2d 565, 566, 567 (185 NE2d 688, 689), at sentencing the trial judge indicated that had the defendant pled guilty instead of being convicted by a jury a lesser sentence would have been imposed. In vacating the sentence the supreme court of Illinois declared: “A defendant in a criminal case should not be punished by a heavy sentence merely because he exercises his constitutional right to be tried before an impartial judge or jury.”
In Gillespie v. State (1960), Okla Crim, 355 P2d 451, the cause was remanded for reconsideration of the defendant’s application for a suspended sentence which had been rejected solely because the defendant had tried his case before a jury. The court of criminal appeals of Oklahoma stated (p 456): “A policy designed to deny defendant a suspended sentence solely because he demanded a jury trial is contrary to law and an unjustifiable denial of defendant’s rights to have his application for a suspended sentence considered upon its merits ^
See, also, United States v. Wiley (CA 7, 1959), 267 F2d 453; United States v. Wiley (CA 7, 1960), 278 F2d 500; United States v. Wiley (ND Ill, 1960), 184 F Supp 679. In Wiley, a first offender went to trial in a relatively minor felony ease, was convicted and received a sentence of 3 years. His co-defendant, who had 4 prior felony convictions and pled guilty, received a sentence of 2 years. At sentencing the trial judge stated he did not consider probal ion for Wiley because he had been convicted following a trial. On appeal, Wiley’s conviction was affirmed, but the appellate court remanded the case to the district court for consideration of probation. The district court refused to change the sentence and on the second appeal the appellate court again remanded for resentencing, following which the district judge reimposed the 3-year sentence and suspended its execution.
The opinions of the appellate court in Wiley referred to the fact that Wiley’s defense was not frivolous. In People v. Morales (1967), 252 Cal App 2d 537 (60 Cal Rptr 671), it appeared a heavier sentence was imposed because the defendant, “although lacking a meritorious defense”, pled not guilty and demanded a jury trial. The California court of appeals ruled (p 677) “that a trial court cannot impose a more severe punishment on the basis of its conclusion that a defendant who has pled not guilty presented a frivolous defense or one which *264the court concludes was presented in bad faith. Any such implications in the Wiley case® are rejected by this court.”
Contrast State v. Tuttle (1963), 21 Wis 2d 147, 153 (124 NW2d 9, 12) (The Wisconsin supreme court said that although the defendant was not entitled to leniency for “confession and repentance”, the merits of the case warranted sentence in a lower range than that meted out; the court held it was improper to fine a trial-convicted traffic offender at upper level of statutory range because of his lawyer’s discourtesy to court); People v. Guiden, supra, 976 (172 NYS 2d 642) : “it is an abuse of judicial discretion to impose additional punishment upon a defendant either because his counsel refused to advise him to plead guilty, or as a warning or ‘barometer’ to members of the bar,” but “acceptance of pleas of guilty to lesser offenses with consequent lighter sentences is perfectly appropriate.” See, also, State v. Owens (1958), 21 Conn Sup 418 (158 A2d 867).
Compare People v. Mulier (1968), 12 Mich App 28 (imposition of a harsher sentence following a re-trial where no grounds therefor are shown in the record infringes Michigan’s constitutional right of appeal; in an opinion by Chief Judge Lesinski comprehensively reviewing the case law in other jurisdictions both favoring and opposing this view.)
66% of the Federal district judges who responded to a Yale Law Journal questionnaire considered defendant’s plea a relevant *265factor at sentencing, with the diminutions varying from 10% to 95% of the punishment which would ordinarily be given if the defendant were convicted following a trial. Note, The Influence of the Defendant’s Plea on Judicial Determination of Sentence, 66 Yale L J 204, 206 (1956). See, also, Newman, Conviction: The Determination of Guilt or Innocence Without Trial, p 89 (1966).
See, also, Pilot Institute on Sentencing under the auspices of tlio Judicial Conference of the United States (1959), 26 FED 231, expressing competing views of several judges who participated in the institute.
In Dewey v. United States (CA 8, 1959), 268 F2d 124, 128, the Court of Appeals took “judicial notice of the faet that trial courts quite generally impose a lighter sentence on pleas of guilty than in cases where the accused pleaded not guilty but has been found guilty by a jury.”
In Detroit, where plea bargaining discussions center around potential charge reduction, in contrast with other jurisdictions where it is customary to seek prosecutorial recommendations to the sentencing judge in exchange for a guilty plea, practice probably conforms with the appellate court statements, although there is a lingering belief on the part of counsel, defense and prosecutors, that stricter sentences will be meted out to those convicted following a trial:
“In bargaining for a plea of guilty to a lesser offense, the prosecutor may intimate to the defense that the faet the county is saved the cost of a contested trial will be taken into account in sentencing. Judges uniformly stated that they did not let insistence upon a trial influence their sentencing decisions, but defense counsel and prosecutors were of the impression that the judges, perhaps subconsciously, did indeed hand down stricter sentences when a trial was insisted upon and the evidence overwhelmingly established guilt.” Law Enforcement in the Metropolis, a working paper on the criminal law-system in Detroit, American Bar Foundation, p 156 (1967). The report concerns the recorder’s court of the city of Detroit.
Originally proposed in a tentative draft February, 1967, as part of the Association’s Project on Minimum Standards for Criminal Justice. The standards were partly revised in December, 1967, and were adopted by the governors of the American Bar Association in February, 1968.
1t is recognized that standard 1.8 (see fototnote 8 for full text) covers both charge and sentence concessions. The granting of charge concessions in exchange for guilty pleas has been largely approved by the courts. (See Judge Levin’s separate opinion in People v. Byrd (1968), 12 Mich App 186, 194). There is, however, an essential difference between charge and sentence concessions. The former are negotiated with the prosecutor, and the judge’s role is essentially passive. The sentencing power, however, is vested in the judge. No meaningful bargaining regarding sentence concessions can take place without at least his tacit approval. Covering both charge and sentence concessions in one standard obscures the difference between bai'gaining with the prosecutor and bargaining with the judge, a difference recognized by the standards themselves when they state (standard 3.3[a]) that the judge should not participate in the bargaining (see discussion, infra, part II), and by the courts (see eases collected in footnotes 3 and 4 and especially quotation above in footnote 3 from Mr. Justice Marshall’s dissenting opinion as a United States circuit judge in United States, ex rel. McGrath, v. LaVallee [CA 2, 1963], 319 F2d 308, 319).
“1.8 Consideration of plea in final disposition.
(a) It is proper for the court to grant charge and sentence concessions to defendants who enter a plea of guilty or nolo contendere when the interest of the public in the effective administration of *270criminal justice would thereby be served. Among the considerations which are appropriate in determining this question are:
(i) that the defendant by his plea has aided in ensuring the prompt and certain application of correctional measures to him;
(ii) that the defendant has acknowledged Ms guilt and shown a willingness tc assume responsibility for Ms conduct;
(iii) that the concessions will make possible alternative correctional measures which are better adapted to achieving rehabilitative, protective, deterrent or other purposes of correctional treatment, or will prevent undue harm to the defendant from the form of conviction;
(iv) that the defendant has made public trial unnecessary when there are good reasons for not having the case dealt with in a public trial;
(v) that the defendant has given or offered cooperation when such cooperation has resulted or may result in the successful prosecution of other offenders engaged in equally serious or more serious criminal conduct;
(vi) that the defendant by Ms plea has aided in avoiding delay (including delay due to crowded dockets) in the disposition of other cases and thereby has increased the probability of prompt and certain application of correctional measures to other offenders.
(b) The court should not impose upon a defendant any sentence in excess of that which would be justified by any of the rehabilitative, protective, deterrent or other purposes of the criminal law because the defendant has chosen to require the prosecution to prove his guilt at trial rather than to enter a plea of guilty or nolo contendere
Along the same line, the award of sentence concessions has been defended on the ground that the defendant who pleads guilty has thereby avoided perjuring himself at trial, and, conversely, that it is appropriate to impose harsher sentences on those who 'testify and *271are nevertheless convicted, by a jury because the jury verdict establishes that they have perjured themselves. (See authorities and discussion in commentary accompanying ABA guilty plea standards, pp 43, 44). However, even if the defendant has testified and even if the jury’s verdict might be read as a determinaton that the defendant perjured himself in denying guilt, the judge may not properly punish for that offense until the defendant has been informed against, tried and convicted of that offense, and, conversely, the trial judge may not on that basis properly award to those who waive trial sentence concessions denied those who stand trial on the assumption that had they stood trial they would have testified falsely. See Baker v. State (1968), 3 Md App 251, (238 A2d 561, 566) (The trial judge may not consider defendant’s possible involvement in another crime for which he was neither charged nor convicted: “That a just sentence based on proper considerations is an essential element of a fair trial cannot be questioned”.)
Considerations (iv) and (v) are atypical and, therefore, do not support a system of plea bargaining in general. As to consideration (iv), saving the complaining witness the embarrassment of a trial, see Letters v. Commonwealth, supra, 404, 405 (193 NE 578, 580). (In a *273rape case trial judge said lie would impose consecutive life sentences “if it became necessary for the complainant to take the stand.” Defendant pled to a reduced charge. In reversing, the appellate court said: “In view ** * * of what is at stake for the defendant it would appear difficult to conclude that a decision not to plead guilty * * * is a significant reflection of character. The circumstances, if onlertainable at all, would be relevant at the time for sentencing and not before. But, plainly, a defendant, whatever his character, may not be punished for exercising his right to trial and, therefore, the fact that he has done so should be given no weight in determining his sentence.”)
As to consideraton (v), a defendant who turns State’s evidence, see Mr. Chief Justice Warren’s dissent in United States v. Hoffa (1966), 385 US 293, 313 (87 S Ct 408, 17 L Ed 2d 374), rehearing denied 386 US 940, (87 S Ct 970, 17 L Ed 2d 880), stating the use of informers is proper in some circumstances but was improper in Soffa.
See. Note, The Influence of the Defendant’s Plea on Judicial Determination of Sentence, 66 Yale L J 204 (1956).
The appellate courts of Michigan have denied themselves the power to review sentences unless the sentence imposed exceeds the statutory maximum. People v. Krum (1965), 374 Mich 356, 362; People v. Connor (1957), 348 Mich 456, 463; In re Doelle (1948), 323 Mich 241, 245; In re DeMeerleer (1948), 323 Mich 287, 289; People v. Harwood (1938) 286 Mich 96, 98; Cummins v. People (1879), 42 Mich 142, 144; People v. Pate (1965), 2 Mich App 66, 68; People v. Tetts (1967), 6 Mich App 254, 259.
It was not always thus. In People v. Murray (1888), 72 Mich 10, at a time when Michigan did not have an indeterminate sentence law and the defendant was required to serve whatever sentence was imposed unless pardoned, the defendant had been sentenced to 50 years in prison for statutory rape. The Supreme Court stated the sentence should not have exceeded 25 years, holding the trial judge had abused the discretion vested in him by the statute (pp 16, 17) : “the sentence imposed * * * is for 50 years, and will very likely reach beyond the natural life of the respondent * * * . We see nothing in this record warranting any such sentence, and it must be regarded as excessive. It will not do to say the executive may apply the remedy in such a case. We do not Tcnow what the executive may do, and it is but a poor commentary upon the judiciary when it becomes necessary for the executive to regulate the humanity of the bench.
“But the Constitution has not left the liberty of the citizen of any state entirely to the indiscretion or caprice of its judiciary, but enjoins upon all that unusual punishments shall not be inflicted.
“We are all of opinion that the present case shows an abuse of the discretion vested by the statute in the circuit judge in this respect.” (Emphasis supplied.)
The ABA has also adopted Standards Relating to Appellate Review of Sentence (February, 1968). These provide that “judicial review should be available for all sentences imposed in cases where provision is made for review of the conviction.” The accompanying commentary states, “Review of the merits of a sentence has actually been undertaken by an appellate court in only 21 States. The number in which review is realistically available in every serious case is much lower, something on the order of 15.” (p 13)
Those States providing for review do so either by statute or, in a few States, by reassertion of the court’s inherent judicial power. In those jurisdictions where appellate review exists, there is at least some opportunity for appellate courts to control sentence concessions negotiated under a plea bargaining system. But in jurisdictions not allowing for sentence review the practices of a bargaining system, except in the rarest case, will be obscured from appellate standards. Thus the ABA Appellate Review of Sentence proposals make somewhat more tolerable, in theory at least, the essentially regressive plea bargaining rationale of guilty plea standard 1.8.
See United States v. Jackson (1968), 390 US 570 (88 S Ct 1209, 20 L Ed 2d 138); Spevack v. Klein (1967), 385 US 511 (87 S Ct 625, 17 L Ed 2d 574); Garrity v. New Jersey (1967), 385 US 493 (87 S Ct 616, 17 L Ed 2d 562).
“Liberty and freedom partake more of the nature of articles of faith than articles of commerce.” People v. Robinson (1955), 344 Mich 353, 361, by Mr. Justice Talbot Smith, dissenting on an issue not dealt with in the majority opinion.
See People v. Byrd (1968), 12 Mich App 186, for a statement of Judge Levin’s views on plea bargaining with the prosecutor over charge reductions. See, also, People v. Hollman (1968), 12 Mich App 231.
The problem is not solely indigenous to Michigan, as shown by a recent article, City Courts Facing a Growing Crisis, The New. York Times, February 12,1968, p 41:
“Every few minutes the assembly-line in the city’s awesomely overloaded criminal court system lurches forward to produce a new defendant in an atmosphere of thinly masked impatience.
“He is like a factory product — ‘like a can of peas being processed,’ says an important criminal lawyer — to be labelled, handled briefly, then moved on, and often forgotten.
“The heavy volume forces such rapid handling — a dismissal, a guilty plea or an adjournment for a later hearing that everyone is under pressure to get out of the way for the next ease. * * *
“ ‘Instant justice’ is the way Justice Bernard Botein, presiding judge of the appellate division for Manhattan and the Bronx, describes the criminal court process. ‘We’re holding it together with Scotch tape and wire because of lack of manpower — lack of judges and court personnel,’ he explains.”
In O’Hara v. People (1879), 41 Mich 623, 624, the defendant was convicted by a jury, and then: “Some very extraordinary proceedings followed. The defendant was given by the judge to understand that he must submit to a severe sentence or else withdraw his plea of not guilty, enter a plea of guilty and immediately pay $400 and estop himself from bringing error. He accepted the last alternative and went through the form of withdrawing the plea on which he had been tried and convicted, and of pleading guilty, and paid in the $400.
“The attorney general very naturally declines to offer’ anything in defense of these proceedings. * * *
“The great impropriety of the later proceedings referred to is too manifest to justify extended comment.
“When a convicted person is brought up for sentence he has rights still, and it is specially incumbent on the judge to take care that they are fully observed and protected. No sort of pressure can be permitted to bring the party to forego any right or advantage however slight. The law will not suffer the least weight to he put in the scale against him, and any attempt cannot fail to he reprobated. Standing at the har to receive judgment the law surrounds him with its protecting principles and intends that his sentence shall he the reflection of its justice and as far as possible free from all taint of human frailty.” (Emphasis supplied.)
The later case of People v. Brown (1884), 54 Mich 15, cannot be read as an approval of the general practice of granting sentence concessions to those who plead guilty and imposing harsher treatment on those who do not. In People v. Brown, the Court found the defendant was not misled by the trial judge and reaffirmed its view that it is improper to induce pleas by promises or threats regarding the sentence to be imposed. The trial judge had been greatly importuned by many people. He acknowledged he had told the defendant if he (p 21) : “should plead guilty, I should view his case as one meriting less punishment than I should feel disposed to impose should he be convicted after a trial by jury.” The Supreme Court stated (P 29) :
“The most that can be fairly imputed to the judge is an excess of patience in listening to the importunities. It was a natural consequence that he should on one occasion have been imprudent enough to intimate a purpose to impose a lighter sentence in case of conviction on plea of guilty than upon conviction by a jury. The importunities drew out from him that much; and it may be assumed that it possibly had some effect upon respondent’s mind.
“Had an intimation of the sort been made by way of threat, and a plea of guilty been secured thereby, the judgment upon the plea ought to be set aside. O’Hara v. People, 41 Mich 623. And even though not given by way of threat, had a sentence of great severity followed, it might have been apparent that the defendant had been wronged.” (Emphasis supplied.)
Compare Bram v. United States (1897), 168 US 532, 543, 565 (18 S Ct 183, 42 L Ed 568); People v. Wolcott (1883), 51 Midi 612, 615.
The defendant Earegood described his acts of participation in the crime before the judge accepted his plea of guilty to the reduced offense (see footnote 2, supra). Those statements may have been entirely accurate; on the other hand, they may have been made in order to justify the trial judge in accepting the plea. See footnote 20, infra, and discussion in People v. Byrd, ante, part IV. See, also, People v. Zaleski (1965), 375 Mich 71, 83; Kercheval v. United States (1927), 274 US 220, 223 (47 S Ct 582, 71 L Ed 1009); Williams v. Kaiser (1944), 323 US 471, 475 (65 S Ct 363, 89 L Ed 398); Rogers v. Richmond (1961), 365 US 534, 544 (81 S Ct 735, 5 L Ed 2d 760). But see People v. Dunn (1968), 380 Mich 693.
Unless the defendant is willing to admit guilt to the lesser offense to which he is offered the opportunity to plead guilty, he will not be allowed to do so. People v. Barrows (1959), 358 Mich 267. See, also, additional cases collected in People v. Byrd, ante, footnote 23.
Harrison v. United States (1968) 392 US 219 (88 S Ct 2008, 2011, 2012; 20 L Ed 2d 1047, 1053).
“Even when there have been no explicit negotiations, defendants relying on prevailing practices often act on the justifiable assumption that those who plead guilty will be sentenced more leniently.” The President's Commission on Law Enforcement and Administration of Justice, Task Force Eeport: The Courts (1967), p 9.

=== CASE 9737551 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:28:28.160897+00 ===

Quinn, P. J.,
(dissenting). What is said here in no way condones the remarks of the trial judge at the call of the criminal calendar October 12, 1965, as quoted at the beginning of the majority opinion. The remarks were improper and injudicious, but on this record, they do not support the reasoning or the result of the majority opinion.
As noted in that opinion, the remarks were directed to all in the court room on October 12, 1965. Five weeks later and after an amended information *281charging a lesser offense was filed, defendant pleaded guilty to such lesser offense and recited on the record facts establishing the offense and his participation in it. At the same time, defendant stated he was pleading guilty freely and voluntarily and that no threats or promises had been made to induce the plea.
I agree with the majority opinion that to lengthen a sentence because of a late plea of guilty is improper. If the record established this to be the fact here, I would vacate sentence and remand for re-sentencing. The record does not establish the fact, and the majority opinion only does so by assumption. I cannot make that assumption in view of the fact that all judicial proceedings in courts of general jurisdiction are presumed to be correct and regular, in the absence of proof to the contrary. 1 Wharton Criminal Evidence (12th .ed), § 126, p 233. In addition, as was said in In re Valle (1961), 364 Mich 471, 478:
“The oath of public officials as to the performance of their sworn duties is, it has been our experience, so consistently in accord with the fact of such performance that only in the most unusual circumstances would we be persuaded otherwise.”
The record does not support the claim of defendant that the remarks of the judge influenced defendant’s plea. In fact, defendant’s answers to judicial interrogation at the time of plea negate such a claim. In view of defendant’s positive assertion at time of plea that he pleaded freely and voluntarily without being influenced by threat or promise, I am unable to accept his present belated and self-serving argument that he was influenced by the implied threat in the remarks of the trial judge hereinbefore referred to as proof overcoming what is disclosed by the record at time of plea.
*282As stated in People v. Winegar (1968), 380 Mich 719, a convicted defendant no longer enjoys the presumption of innocence. On appeal from conviction, defendant has the burden of establishing reversible error, absent a showing of violation or denial' of constitutional rights, and reversible error is to be measured by the standards established by statute, CL 1948, § 769.26 (Stat Ann 1954 Rev § 28.1096) and rule, OCR 1963, 529.1. (Winegar, supra). This defendant has failed to do.
I vote to affirm and such vote indicates my belief that the other points asserted by defendant on this appeal are without merit.

=== CASE 9737552 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:28:31.62473+00 ===

T. G-. Kavanagh, J.
The plaintiff brought this action in garnishment against the defendant insurance company under the terms of defendant’s policy of comprehensive liability insurance.
The facts giving rise to this claim are these: Frank X. and Mary Holzer were insured by defendant under a homeowners’ policy which provided in pertinent part:
“Provisions applicable to section II “This company agrees with the named insured. * * *
“1. Coverage E-Personal liability:
“(a) Liability: To pay on behalf of the insured all sums which the insured shall become legally obligated to pay as damages because of bodily injury or property damage. * * *
“Section II of this policy does not apply: * # *
“(b) Under coverages E and F, to the ownership, maintenance, operation, use, loading or unloading of (1) automobiles or midget automobiles while *148away from the premises or the ways immediately adjoining * * *. (Emphasis added.)
“(f) Under insuring agreement (1) (a) of coverage E, to property damage to property used by, rented to or in the care, custody or control of the insured, or property as to which the insured for any purpose is exercising physical control.”
The insurance policy provisions themselves recognize that each member of the family is separately insured and that there is a separate liability to each insured. The policy states:
“General Conditions
“Definitions
“(a) The insurance afforded under coverage E applies separately to each insured against whom claim is made and suit is brought.”
The insureds’ minor son, Wilfred D. Holzer, stole an automobile from Katterheinrieh Motor Sales and damaged it through reckless operation. The plaintiff insurance company, subrogee of Katterheinrieh Motor Sales, obtained a judgment in the amount of $472 against the parents of the minor child pursuant to CLS 1961, § 600.2913, as amended by PA 1962, No 23 (Stat Ann 1962 Eev § 27A.2913)* which renders parents liable to the extent of $500 in damages for malicious and wilful acts of minors under 18 years of age residing in the parental home.
Subsequent to the judgment, a garnishment action was filed against the defendant, United States Pire Insurance Company asserting liability under their comprehensive personal liability policy with the Holzers. The defendant refused to pay, relying on the special exclusions in the policy for liability arising out of the use of automobiles.
The only question on appeal is whether this homeowners’ policy affords coverage for statutory lia*149bility imposed upon parents under CLS 1961, § 600-.2913, as amended by PA 1962, No 23 (Stat Ann 1962 Rev § 27A.2913) where the wanton and malicious act of the child is performed through the use of an automobile.
It is admitted by the plaintiff that if judgment had been obtained against Wilfred Holzer, the minor, the exclusion would apply and the defendant would be under no duty or obligation to pay a judgment against him. However, as the judgment is not against the minor child but is against the insured parents by virtue of the statute imposing liability, it is plaintiff’s contention that the exclusion does not apply and that defendant has an absolute duty under coverage E of the contract of insurance to pay the full amount of the judgment.
On the other hand, defendant admits that if the judgment against the parents were for damages caused by the use of any instrumentality other than an automobile the exclusion would not apply and they would be obligated to pay the judgment under the contract.
To decide this question, then, we must construe the policy of insurance.
The rules of construction of an insurance policy are well known. If the question is whether the policy be broad enough to cover an asserted liability the terms are liberally construed to favor coverage. If the question is whether the exclusionary provisions of a policy avoid the asserted liability, the exclusionary language is strictly construed, again to favor insurance.
If the insurance afforded by the policy applies to each insured, it would seem that the exclusion of such coverage should be tested against the liability sought to he enforced.
*150Assuming A, B and C are each insured under the policy, and A and B are independently liable in suits against them arising out of C’s act there is no provision of the contract which should be construed to deny them coverage simply because C’s coverage would be excluded if an action were brought against him.
Here the parents are liable because of the statute which becomes operative on account of the maliciously destructive act of the child, independent of the means the child employed to cause the destruction.
To extend the exclusionary language of this policy in our view violates the general rule of construction of insurance policies.
For this reason we hold that the decision of the trial court must be reversed. Appellant may tax costs.
Lbsinski, C. J., concurred with T. G. Kavanagh, J.
Since amended by PA 1967, No 184, effective July 1, 1968.

=== CASE 9737554 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:28:35.292283+00 ===

Case Summary
Buchanan, P.J.
Because the Marion Circuit Court entered judgment on the evidence in favor of Plaintiff-Appellee, Becky Peffley (Becky), as beneficiary of a group life insurance policy issued by Defendant-Appellant, American United Life Insurance Company (AUL), it appeals, alleging that certain evidence was improperly excluded which would have required submission of the case to the jury on the issue as to whether *31the insured changed beneficiaries under the policy prior to his death.
We reverse.
FACTS
The facts and evidence most favorable to Becky as Appellee and in support of the judgment are:
Ronald Peffiey (Decedent) and his first wife, Louise Peffiey (Louise), were divorced in 1964. Shortly thereafter the Decedent married Plaintiff-Appellee Becky Peffiey (Becky).
In 1965, American United Life Insurance Company (AUL) issued a group life insurance policy to Decedent’s employer, the School Board of the City of Indianapolis, under which Decedent’s life was insured for $12,000. Becky was originally named as beneficiary, subject to the following provision in the policy relating to beneficiary changes:
“BENEFICIARY. The Employee may change the beneficiary from time to time without the beneficiary’s consent by filing a written notice of such change through the Employer.”
Decedent and Becky were divorced in December, 1967, approximately ten months prior to his death in October, 1968.
Following Decedent’s death, AUL paid the entire proceeds of the policy to Louise (Decedent’s first wife), basing its action upon copies of documents in its files which indicated that the beneficiary had been changed by him three months prior to his death. These copies consisted of three documents:
Exhibit C: A form transmittal letter from AUL to Decedent’s employer stating that enclosed change-riders had been prepared designating a new beneficiary and correcting the name of the insured as requested by the Decedent.
Exhibit D: AUL’s change-rider form acknowledging receipt of a change card from the Decedent and *32certifying the designated beneficiary to be Louise.
Exhibit E: AUL’s change-rider form acknowledging correction of Decedent’s name on the policy from Ronald C. Peffley to C. Ronald Peffley.
Becky subsequently brought suit against AUL to recover the proceeds of the policy, after having been informed by AUL that it did not possess the original written notice (change card) executed and signed by the Decedent.
At trial, AUL produced the above-mentioned documents (Exhibits C, D, and E) in order to show that the Decedent had filed the written notice of beneficiary change (change card) in accordance with the terms of the policy, thus operating to divest Becky of her interest in the insurance proceeds. As a foundation, AUL produced its assistant corporate counsel and a supervisor of group policies who identified the exhibits as those found in AUL’s office files and testified to the following internal procedure governing policy changes initiated by an insured:
A printed “change card” is obtained by the insured from his employer, completed and mailed to AUL. Upon receipt, its contents are reviewed by an AUL employee, who then prepares the transmittal letter and change-rider documents. These forms reflect any changes appearing on the change card. The originals of the documents are sent to the employer-policyholder along with the change card. Carbon copies are kept in AUL’s files although no such copies of the change card are retained.
Following AUL’s offer of these exhibits and Becky’s objections thereto, the following stipulation was entered into the record by the parties:
“It is stipulated by and between the parties that the original of the change of beneficiary card . . . respecting Mr. Peffley, if there was a card . . . has been searched for diligently in the files and at the office of American United Life Insurance Company in their files and in the files at the offices of the Indianapolis School Board Commissioners, the de*33cedent’s employer, that these searches failed to reveal any such card and it cannot be found at any of those places.” (Emphasis supplied.)
The trial judge nevertheless sustained the objection and excluded these three documents (Exhibits C, D, and E) without stating his reasons therefor. An attempted reoffer later in the trial suffered the same fate.
AUL also offered into evidence Exhibit G, a copy of Decedent’s certificate of insurance (hereinafter referred to as “the policy”) found among his private papers. Upon the face of the policy was the following memorandum, printed in pencil beside Becky’s name as beneficiary:
“CHANGED 7/8/68 TO C. LOUISE PEFFLEY.”
Louise and Decedent’s friend both testified to their familiarity with Decedent’s block printing and identified the hand printing as Decedent’s.
After offering the policy (Exhibit G) into evidence, AUL further offered a promissory note (Exhibit J), which Louise testified was executed by the Decedent as an exemplar of his hand printing to further authenticate the memorandum.
These exhibits (G and J) were also excluded by the trial judge.
At the end of AUL’s case, Becky moved for judgment on the evidence, which motion was granted by the trial judge, who thereupon discharged the jury and entered judgment for Becky on her claim.
ISSUES
The following issues are presented by this appeal:
ISSUE ONE. Did the trial court erroneously exclude, as secondary evidence, copies of AUL’s business records (Exhibits C, D, and E) indicating that a change of beneficiary was effected by Decedent prior to his death?
*34ISSUE TWO: A. Was the Decedent’s hand-printed private memorandum on his copy of the policy (Exhibit G) properly excluded as viola-tive of the hearsay rule, and B. Was the promissory note (Exhibit J) purportedly executed by Decedent properly excluded as irrelevant?
As to ISSUE ONE, Becky contends that AUL’s transmittal letter and change-rider forms were properly excluded under the “best evidence” rule, claiming the exhibits were offered to prove the contents of the change card which was not itself produced by AUL as the best proof of the beneficiary change. In addition, she argues that this evidence, if admitted, would have had the effect of varying the terms of the policy, thereby violating the parol evidence rule.
AUL contends these documents are relevant evidence of a change in beneficiaries, having been consummated by written notice from the Decedent. AUL argues that such documents as these are admissible as its business records which could not have been prepared except by receipt of the change card from the Decedent. Furthermore, it rejects Becky’s contention that the “best evidence” rule is operative to exclude this evidence, arguing that the change card was not in its possession and was proven lost after a diligent search was conducted.
As to ISSUE TWO-A, Becky contends that the printed memorandum (Exhibit G) was inadmissible as a declaration by the Decedent (presumably basing her contention on the rule excluding hearsay evidence, although no such specific reference is found in her brief on appeal). She further claims the exhibit is inadmissible under the “best evidence” and parol evidence rules, for the same reasons advanced by her under ISSUE ONE.
AUL disputes these assertions and claims that Exhibit G was a properly authenticated hand printing of the Decedent, *35admissible to show that he had, by his own hand, noted the change of beneficiaries upon the face of his policy.
As to ISSUE TWO-B, Becky maintains that the sample of Decedent’s printing (Exhibit J) was so far removed from the issues involved at trial that its exclusion was justifiable for the reason that it was irrelevant.
AUL argues that the printing exemplar was admissible so that the jury could employ it as a basis of comparison with the printing upon the policy (Exhibit G) and satisfy itself that the memorandum on the policy was, in fact, printed by the Decedent.
DECISION
As both issues concern exclusion of evidence, our decision should be prefaced by a recitation of familiar principles governing appellate review of error created by wrongfully excluded evidence.
In general, an exclusionary ruling will not be found erroneous if sustainable on any valid theory, regardless of the grounds asserted by the parties at trial. See, Eckman v. Funderburg (1915), 183 Ind. 208, 108 N.E. 577; Lengyel v. Hecht (1968), 143 Ind. App. 660, 242 N.E.2d 135. Once found to be erroneous, however, rejection of evidence which is vital to an appellant’s case is necessarily prejudicial. Dollman v. Pauley (1931), 202 Ind. 387, 174 N.E. 729; Northern Indiana Public Service Co. v. McClure (1940), 108 Ind. App. 253, 24 N.E.2d 788; Plymouth Savings & Loan Ass’n No. 2 v. Kassing (1919), 72 Ind. App. 1, 125 N.E. 488.
So, our pursuit is of valid theories on which the trial court’s exclusion of the proffered evidence in question might be justified.
ISSUE ONE.
CONCLUSION—It is our opinion that the trial court committed reversible error in excluding AUL’s tendered file *36documents (Exhibits C, D, and E) indicating a change of beneficiary from Becky to Louise was effected prior to Decedent’s death.
Relevancy
If Exhibits C, D, and E are relevant, they should be admitted into evidence so that the jury may have before it all evidence which logically tends to establish or give weight to a factual issue in the case unless objectionable on other grounds. Warrenburg v. State (1973), 260 Ind. 572, 298 N.E.2d 434; Kavanagh v. Butorac (1966), 140 Ind. App. 139, 221 N.E.2d 824.
The overriding factual issue confronting the jury in this case was whether AUL received a written change card from the Decedent directing that beneficiaries be changed on the policy. The existence of these business record exhibits tended to prove the existence, and receipt by AUL, of the change card directing AUL to change the beneficiary from Becky to Louise—a fundamental fact.
Regardless of the whereabouts of the change card at the time of trial, these three exhibits tended to prove that such a card had been received setting in motion the machinery that produced a tell-tale deposit of carbon copies in AUL’s records, i.e., a transmittal letter to Decedent’s employer (Exhibit C), a change-rider form acknowledging receipt of a change card from Decedent designating Louise as the beneficiary (Exhibit D), and a change-rider form making a minor correction in the Decedent’s name (Exhibit E). Such evidence could hardly be excluded as irrevelant.
Self-serving Declaration—Hearsay
Neither may these three exhibits be excluded as self-serving or hearsay if they qualify as business records.
*37*36A synthesis of the Indiana cases treating what modern authorities call the “business record” exception to the hear*37say rule is that documentary evidence is admissible if identified by its entrant or one under whose supervision it is kept and shown to be an original or first permanent entry, made in the routine course of business, at or near the time of the recorded transaction, by one having both a duty to so record and personal knowledge of the transaction represented by the entry. Herman v. State (1965), 247 Ind. 7, 210 N.E.2d 249, cert. denied, 384 U.S. 918, Polus v. Conner (1931), 92 Ind. App. 465, 176 N.E. 234; J. P. Smith Shoe Co. v. Curme-Feltman Shoe Co. (1918), 71 Ind. App. 401, 118 N.E. 360; Marks v. Box (1913), 54 Ind. App. 487, 103 N.E. 27; Indianapolis Outfitting Co. v. Cheyne Electric Co. (1913), 52 Ind. App. 153, 100 N.E. 468.
As indicated in the factual statement, an adequate foundation was laid by AUL’s counsel for the introduction of Exhibits C, D, and E as “business record” exceptions to the rule against admission of hearsay.
Two witnesses (AUL’s assistant counsel and a supervisor over group policies) testified that these file documents were prepared in the ordinary course of AUL’s business shortly after receipt of a change card by an employee whose duty it was to type them and who had personal knowledge of the card’s existence, receipt, and content. The self-serving aspect of such evidence only affects its weight. McDonough v. State (1961), 242 Ind. 376, 175 N.E.2d 418; State v. Central States Bridge Co. (1911), 49 Ind. App. 544, 97 N.E. 803.
“Best Evidence” Ride
Exclusion of Exhibits C, D, and E may not be defended on the ground they violate the “best evidence” rule.
It is axiomatic that an original writing is the most trustworthy proof of its content. See, Supreme Tribe of Ben Hur v. Bastian (1926), 85 Ind. App. 327, 151 N.E. 346. The revered “best evidence” rule naturally follows to reject secondary evidence of an inferior, and *38possibly more suspicious, quality when offered in substitution for the primary writing.
Professor McCormick aptly expressed this maxim, which he perhaps more artfully denominates the “Original Document Rule”:
“[I]n proving the terms of a writing, where the terms are material, the original writing must be produced unless it is shown to be unavailable for some reason other than the serious fault of the 'proponent.” McCormick on Evidence, § 230 at p. 560 (West 2d ed. 1972). (Emphasis supplied.)
The “best evidence” rule does not operate, however, to indiscriminately exclude all secondary evidence.
Indiana courts, at an early date, recognized that unavailability of a lost writing will permit introduction of other evidence to prove the writing’s content if the proponent satisfactorily demonstrates to the trial court that the original writing is lost. If he can show by a preponderance of the evidence that a diligent but unsuccessful search for the writing has been made in the place or places where it is most likely to be found, secondary evidence of the writing is admissible to prove content of the writing. Howe v. Fleming (1889), 123 Ind. 262, 24 N.E. 238; The Johnson Harvester Co. v. Bartley (1883), 94 Ind. 131.
Ordinarily it is within the discretion of the trial judge to make the preliminary factual determination whether an adequate showing of this sort has been made. Johnson v. Jordan (1917), 64 Ind. App. 110, 115 N.E. 600.
A unique situation is presented by this case obviating the necessity of such prior findings by the court. The parties stipulated that a diligent search for the change card had been conducted by AUL in its files and in the files of Decedent’s employer—the place where it would be sent according to AUL’s normal business practice. Neither party challenged the diligence or scope of the search, or limited the breadth of the stipulation.
*39The loss of, and diligent search for, the original writing having been conclusively established by the parties, the trial court could not properly exclude Exhibits C, D, and E on the basis of the “best evidence” rule or the Original Document Rule.
Parol Evidence Rule
Becky’s assertion that admission of these three exhibits would violate the parol evidence rule is froth easily blown away by a statement of the rule.
The parol evidence rule operates to exclude extrinsic evidence of prior or contemporaneous declarations and transactions offered to vary or contradict the terms of an integrated written agreement. See, Vernon Fire & Casualty Ins. Co. v. Thatcher (1972), 152 Ind. App. 692, 285 N.E.2d 660; I.L.E. Evidence § 181.
It obviously has no application to evidence offered to prove a change of beneficiary subsequent to the execution of the insurance agreement and in accordance with its terms. See, 30 Am. Jur. 2d Evidence § 1063 at p. 203.
Thus, we cam find no valid theory supporting the trial court’s exclusion of Exhibits C, D and E, and the judgment must be reversed for this reason.
ISSUE TWO.
CONCLUSION—It is the opinion of the majority of this court, not including the author of this opinion, that AUL should be afforded the opportunity on retrial to show circumstantial probability of truthworthiness and the need for the admission into evidence of Exhibits G and J.
Although we unanimously agree that our conclusion as to ISSUE ONE requires a reversal of this cause for retrial, it is expedient that the admissibility of Exhibits G and J also be considered as they may be offered again by AUL upon retrial.
*40The oft-stated general rule is that declarations of a decedent offered as proof of their content are hearsay and excludeable as such, unless falling within one of the exceptions to the hearsay rule. Barger v. Barger
(1943), 221 Ind. 530, 48 N.E.2d 813; Brown v. Kenyon (1886), 108 Ind. 283, 9 N.E. 283; Tenta v. Guraly (1966), 140 Ind. App. 160, 221 N.E.2d 577; First Bank and Trust Co. of South Bend v. Tellson (1954), 124 Ind. App. 478, 118 N.E.2d 496.
Decedent’s memorandum (Exhibit G) is not a self-serving declaration, a quality found in numerous cases on this subject. It is, nevertheless, hearsay. It was offered to prove that Decedent entered a hand-printed memorandum on his copy of the policy that the beneficiary was changed to Louise on July 8, 1968.
AUL made no showing at trial, nor does it contend on appeal, that this evidence qualifies under any currently recognized exception to the hearsay rule.
The most obvious possibility is that a writing of this sort might be admissible as part of the “res gestae”, if satisfactorily shown to be a spontaneous exclamation which accompanies and gives character to the act to be proved. McConnell v. Hannah (1884), 96 Ind. 102; Tenta v. Guraly, supra.
No such spontaneity appears to have been presented by the evidence before the trial judge. Absent such showing, he could reasonably find that Decedent’s printed utterance that the beneficiary was changed to Louise on July 8, 1968, was so unconnected in time with the act it described that it constituted a mere narration of a past event.
It is the opinion of this writer that, under the circumstances presented by this case, the law in this state prevents the admission of Exhibit G as violative of the hearsay rule. See, e.g., Barger v. Barger, supra (post-testamentary declaration as to execution of a will held inadmissible as hearsay).
*41The majority of this court, however, adopts the reasoning of other authorities which take a more flexible approach to exceptions to the hearsay rule.1 Wigmore2 in discussing the principles underlying the exceptions to the hearsay rule indicates they are based on two considerations: “a Circumstantial Probability of Trustworthiness, and a Necessity, for the evidence.”
The majority adopts these two principles as its standard and liberalizes the hearsay rule by adopting a general exception which would apply if the offering party demonstrates circumstantial probability of trustworthiness and necessity.
The author hereof is of the opinion that, regardless of the merits of engrafting further exceptions onto the hearsay rule, this court is faced with a long history of strict applications of the exceptions. To hold Exhibit G. admissible under these circumstances would of necessity overrule Barger v. Barger, supra, and similar cases excluding hearsay under circumstances akin to those surrounding the admission of Exhibit G. Any such holding represents a major change in the direction of the law relating to admissibility of hearsay evidence. To invade the vast field of hearsay exceptions hardly seems proper as this case must be reversed on other grounds in any event.
Furthermore the trial court’s action in excluding this evidence should be upheld if there is any legal basis for doing so. Cain v. State (1973), 261 Ind. 31, 300 N.E.2d 89.
*42Nevertheless, it is the opinion of the majority that Exhibit G should be admitted on retrial if counsel should substantially demonstrate the existence of a “circumstantial probability of trustworthiness” and “necessity”.
The printing- on the promissory note (Exhibit J) was offered as an exemplar for the limited purpose of authenticating the memorandum of the Decedent on his copy of the policy (Exhibit G). Under ordinary circumstances, such an exemplar is admissible for this purpose. Indiana Code 1971, §34-3-6-1, Ind. Ann. Stat. §2-1723 (Burns Code ed.), reads:
“In any proceeding before a court or judicial officer of the State of Indiana where the genuineness of the handwriting of any person may be involved, any admitted or proved handwriting of such person shall be competent evidence as a basis for comparison by witnesses, or by the jury, court or officer conducting such proceeding, to prove or disprove such genuineness.” (Emphasis supplied.)
This exemplar (Exhibit J) can only be relevant for authentication purposes if Exhibit G (the hand-printed memorandum of the Decedent on the policy) is properly admitted into evidence. Therefore should Exhibit G be admitted at retrial, so should Exhibit J. However, if Exhibit G is properly excluded as not meeting the standard of trustworthiness and necessity, Exhibit J likewise must fall—its relevancy depends upon Exhibit G.
The judgment rendered by the trial court is therefore reversed and the case remanded for a new trial consistent with the majority views expressed herein.
Sullivan and White, JJ., concur.
NOTE.—Reported at 301 N.E.2d 651.
. The proposed new rules of federal procedure include new exceptions. The comment to §§ 803 (24) and 804 (b) (6) is in part: “It would however, be presumptuous to assume that all possible desirable exceptions to the hearsay rule have been catalogued and to pass the hearsay rule to oncoming generations as a closed system.” Exception (24) of Rule 804 (b) (6) provides for Other Exceptions as to: “A statement not specifically covered by any of the foregoing exceptions but having comparable circumstantial guarantees of trustworthiness.”
Also, see Gagnon v. Pronovost (1952), 97 N.H. 500, 92 A.2d 904, 905.
. 5 Wigmore on Evidence § 1420 at 202. (Chadbourne rev. 1970).

=== CASE 9737593 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:29:36.056442+00 ===

JUSTICE FREEMAN delivered the opinion of the court: Plaintiff, Diane Dillon, brought a medical malpractice action in the circuit court of Cook County against, inter alios, Evanston Hospital (hereafter hospital) and Dr. Stephen Sener. A jury found against these particular defendants and in favor of plaintiff. The appellate court affirmed. No. 1 — 98—2893 (unpublished order under Supreme Court Rule 23). We allowed the hospital and Dr. Sener’s petition for leave to appeal (177 Ill. 2d R. 315(a)). We now affirm the judgments below in part and reverse in part, and remand the cause to the trial court for a new trial solely on the issue of damages for the increased risk of future injury. BACKGROUND During the course of treatment for breast cancer, Dr. Sener surgically inserted a catheter into a vein in plaintiffs upper chest under the clavicle. He performed the insertion on April 20, 1989. The purpose of the catheter was to provide a means to administer chemotherapy and to draw blood without repeatedly inserting needles into plaintiffs veins. The catheter inserted into plaintiff was approximately 16 centimeters long. After plaintiff completed chemotherapy, the catheter ceased to function, and on July 13, 1990, Dr. Sener removed it. However, unbeknownst to plaintiff — or Dr. Sener — the catheter was not removed in its entirety. Rather, Dr. Sener removed only a seven-centimeter portion of the catheter. A nine-centimeter catheter fragment remained in plaintiff. She was not informed of any abnormality despite the fact that she had a chest X ray taken at the hospital in December 1990. In December 1991, plaintiff had a routine chest X ray taken at a different hospital. The X ray revealed that the catheter fragment had migrated to plaintiffs heart. The tip of the fragment is embedded in the wall of the right atrium or the right ventricle. The rest of the fragment is floating free in plaintiffs heart. Upon learning that the fragment was in her heart, plaintiff met with Dr. Sener. He could not recall his specific actions in removing the catheter from plaintiff. However, he acknowledged that the fragment was in her heart. Based on the length of time that the fragment had been there, Dr. Sener recommended that plaintiff not attempt to remove it because several risks were attendant to removal. For example, all or part of the fragment could escape and travel further into the heart, making retrieval more difficult, or removal could tear the heart wall. Dr. Sener opined that it would be more dangerous to attempt to remove the catheter fragment than it would be to leave it in place. Plaintiff sought opinions from other physicians; all but one agreed with Dr. Sener. Based on the majority of medical opinions she received, plaintiff decided to leave the catheter fragment in her heart. Plaintiff filed a complaint for medical malpractice against Dr. Sener, Dr. David Lim, who assisted in the insertion, the hospital, and the catheter’s manufacturer, Davol, Inc., a division of Bard, Inc. (hereafter Davol). After the completion of pretrial proceedings, the trial court entered summary judgment in favor of Dr. Lim. Trial commenced on plaintiffs fifth amended complaint, which named as additional defendants radiologist Dr. Ronald Port and nurse Kathy Henderson. At the close of a trial, the jury found in favor of plaintiff and against Dr. Sener and the hospital. However, the jury found in favor of the remaining defendants. Dr. Sener and the hospital did not present the jury with any special interrogatories to determine on which basis the jury found defendants to have been negligent. The jury awarded plaintiff $1.5 million for past pain and suffering, $1.5 million for future pain and suffering, and $500,000 for the increased risk of future injuries. Plaintiff had not sought compensation for past or future medical expenses. Dr. Sener and the hospital appealed. The appellate court affirmed, with one justice dissenting. No. 1 — 98—2893 (unpublished order under Supreme Court Rule 23). Dr. Sener and the hospital appeal. Additional pertinent facts will be discussed in the context of the issues raised in this appeal. DISCUSSION I. Fifth Amended Complaint: Negligent Insertion Dr. Sener and the hospital first contend that plaintiffs fifth amended complaint was untimely. Plaintiff filed her original complaint on July 1, 1992. Count I alleged that the hospital was negligent in (1) allowing the catheter to be removed in a way that caused a portion to remain in plaintiff, (2) failing to advise plaintiff of the fact that a portion of the catheter remained in her, and (3) providing a defective catheter. In count II, plaintiff alleged that Dr. Sener failed to remove the catheter. Similarly, in count III, plaintiff alleged that Dr. Setter’s actions in not removing the entire catheter were negligent. Notably, the original complaint contained no allegations against Dr. Sener or the hospital that the insertion of the catheter was negligent. Plaintiff attached to the original complaint a report of a reviewing health professional. The report stated that the cause of action was meritorious because, inter alia, the catheter was improperly placed. On April 19, 1993, plaintiff filed a second amended complaint adding a count against Dr. Lim, which alleged that he assisted in plaintiff’s surgery and that he negligently inserted the catheter. On March 21, 1995, the trial court granted him summary judgment. Plaintiff continued to amend her original complaint throughout the pretrial proceedings as discovery was being conducted. In January 1994, Davol answered plaintiffs fourth amended complaint. Davol asserted the affirmative defense that plaintiffs injuries were proximately caused by the intervening and superseding negligent acts as described in the reports of reviewing health professionals attached to the fourth amended complaint. One of those reports stated in part that the catheter had been improperly placed. On September 6, 1996, plaintiff filed answers to supplemental interrogatories regarding her expert witness, Dr. Michael Blank. Dr. Blank had a new opinion after reviewing the interrogatory answers of Davol, which disclosed opinions critical of the catheter’s insertion. According to Dr. Blank, if Dr. Sener had inserted the catheter in the manner Davol asserted, then Dr. Blank believed that Dr. Sener had deviated from the standard of care in inserting the catheter, which ultimately resulted in the catheter’s fracture. On November 6, 1996, in supplemental answers to interrogatories, plaintiff disclosed that Dr. Blank might opine, based on his review of the X rays, that Dr. Sener negligently inserted the catheter in an improper location that ultimately resulted in the catheter’s fracture. In May 1997, Davol disclosed that Dr. Paul Goldfarb would testify to his opinion that the catheter was improperly inserted, causing it to fracture as the result of repeated compression by the clavicle as the catheter passed over the first rib. On November 17, 1997, plaintiff moved to file her fifth amended complaint adding allegations that the catheter was improperly inserted. The trial court allowed plaintiff leave to file because the removal of the catheter was, according to the court, “a completion of the same process” as the insertion. Plaintiff alleged as follows. Counts I and II alleged that Dr. Sener and the hospital negligently inspected, inserted, and removed the catheter; failed to ascertain that the catheter fragment remained in plaintiff; and failed to advise plaintiff that the fragment remained in her body. Count III alleged that Dr. Sener’s actions should be considered negligent under the theory of res ipsa loquitur. Count IV alleged that Davol negligently designed and manufactured the catheter; count V alleged that Dr. Port failed to see the catheter fragment in the December 1990 X ray; and count VI alleged that nurse Henderson improperly maintained the catheter after its insertion in plaintiff. Jury selection began the next day. Dr. Sener and the hospital contend that the trial court abused its discretion in allowing plaintiff to file her fifth amended complaint, containing the allegations of negligent insertion, because it was not timely. In essence, they believe that plaintiff had ample knowledge from the outset of the litigation that Dr. Sener inserted the catheter and improperly waited until the eve of trial to officially allege negligence regarding the catheter’s insertion. Plaintiff responds that Dr. Sener and the hospital cannot complain because plaintiff presented several theories of negligence, the jury returned a general verdict against them on the negligence claim, and they failed to submit a special interrogatory on any matter. Dr. Sener and the hospital in turn reply that we may not consider plaintiffs defense because she did not raise it in the appellate court. We may consider plaintiffs defense of the trial court’s judgment. An appellee in the appellate court may raise a ground in this court which was not presented to the appellate court in order to sustain the judgment of the trial court, as long as there is a factual basis for it. Estate of Johnson v. Condell Memorial Hospital, 119 Ill. 2d 496, 502 (1988); Hammond v. North American Asbestos Corp., 97 Ill. 2d 195, 209 (1983). Count I of the fifth amended complaint alleged several theories of negligence in addition to the theory of which Dr. Sener and the hospital complain, i.e., negligent insertion. They have not challenged the sufficiency of the evidence on any of those other theories. Also, the jury returned a general verdict against them on the negligence claim. Section 2 — 1201(d) of the Code of Civil Procedure provides in pertinent part: “If several grounds of recovery are pleaded in support of the same claim, whether in the same or different counts, an entire verdict rendered for that claim shall not be set aside or reversed for the reason that any ground is defective, if one or more of the grounds is sufficient to sustain the verdict ***.” 735 ILCS 5/2 — 1201(d) (West 2000). Because Dr. Sener and the hospital did not submit special interrogatories, there is no way of knowing on what theory the jury found defendants negligent. “When there is a general verdict and more than one theory is presented, the verdict will be upheld if there was sufficient evidence to sustain either theory, and the defendant, having failed to request special interrogatories, cannot complain.” Witherell v. Weimer, 118 Ill. 2d 321, 329 (1987). We shall not set aside the verdict based on this contention. II. Res Ipsa Loquitur Dr. Sener and the hospital next contend that the trial court erred in instructing the jury on plaintiffs theory of res ipsa loquitur against Dr. Sener. As with the prior contention, plaintiff defends the. judgment by pointing to the jury verdict. The verdict form shows that the jury returned separate verdicts in favor of plaintiff against Dr. Sener on both negligence and res ipsa loquitur. Because the evidence supports the verdict based on negligence, we shall not set aside the verdict based on this contention. See Miller v. DeWitt, 37 Ill. 2d 273, 286-87 (1967); 735 ILCS 5/2 — 1201(d) (West 2000). III. Admission of Videotape Dr. Sener and the hospital contend that the trial court erred in allowing the jury to view a videotape depicting a bacterial infection in the heart that spread to the brain. The appellate court concluded that the trial court’s ruling was not an abuse of discretion. Dr. Sener and the hospital bring this assignment of error to this court. However, their three-paragraph argument does not contain any authority. Supreme Court Rule 341(e)(7) provides that a litigant’s brief must contain citations to the relevant authority supporting the argument on appeal. 188 Ill. 2d R. 341(e)(7). “A court of review is entitled to have the issues clearly defined and to be cited pertinent authority. A point not argued or supported by citation to relevant authority fails to satisfy the requirements of Rule 341(e)(7).” Canteen Corp. v. Department of Revenue, 123 Ill. 2d 95, 111-12 (1988); accord Kelley v. Kelley, 317 Ill. 104, 107 (1925). Although we could, in light of the violation of Rule 341(e)(7), consider this matter waived, we instead will exercise our discretion in this matter and address the issue on the merits since we can discern the question sought to be resolved. See People ex rel. Carter v. Touchette, 5 Ill. 2d 303, 305 (1955); People v. Jung, 192 Ill. 2d 1, 12-13 (2000) (Freeman, J., specially concurring, joined by Miller and McMorrow, JJ.); Roberts v. Dow Chemical Co., 244 Ill. App. 3d 253, 256 (1993). After reviewing the record, we hold that the trial court did not abuse its discretion by admitting the videotape as demonstrative evidence. Dr. David Snydman, qualified and board certified in infectious diseases, testified that the video animation would be helpful in explaining to the jury the general development of endocarditis, a condition for which plaintiff is now at risk. He clearly and specifically explained the relevant differences between the type and location of infection depicted in the videotape and the infection that plaintiff may suffer in the future, owing to the presence of the catheter fragment. Further, Dr. Sener and the hospital had the right and the opportunity to cross-examine Dr. Snydman so as to assure that the videotape could not have misled or confused the jury. IV Exclusion of Cumulative Testimony Dr. Sener and the hospital next contend that the trial court erred in excluding as cumulative the testimony of one of their experts, Dr. John Raaf. The record shows that during the court’s consideration of motions in limine, the court discussed generally the problem of cumulative testimony and informed counsel for both sides that the court would not entertain cumulative medical testimony and would sustain objections to such testimony. Dr. Richard Vasquez testified as an expert on behalf of defendants. Dr. Vasquez opined that Dr. Sener had met the medically relevant standard of care. Dr. Sener and the hospital then called Dr. Raaf as an expert. After listening to the equivalent of approximately 20 record pages of testimony, the trial court called a sidebar to express concern regarding Dr. Raaf s testimony. The court stated that if Dr. Raaf was about to testify regarding the medical standard of care, then that testimony would be cumulative. Defense counsel stated that Dr. Raaf s testimony would go to the medical standard of care. Defense counsel declined to make an offer of proof as to other matters to which Dr. Raaf could testify. The court excused Dr. Raaf and told the jury: “THE COURT: Folks, after talking with the lawyers, I have — I have determined that the last witness, Dr. Raaf, his testimony was going to be on similar topics to those we have covered. So I’ve decided it would be more efficient on use of your time if we move on to another topic, okay? THE JURY: Thank you.” The appellate court found no abuse of discretion. Initially, we note plaintiffs argument, in defense of the judgment, that we are precluded from reviewing this contention because Dr. Sener and the hospital failed to make an offer of proof. When a trial court excludes evidence, no appealable issue remains unless a formal offer of proof is made. The failure to do so results in a waiver of the issue on appeal. The purpose of an offer of proof is to inform the trial court, opposing counsel, and a reviewing court of the nature and substance of the evidence sought to be introduced. However, an offer of proof is not required where it is apparent that the trial court clearly-understood the nature and character of the evidence sought to be introduced. People v. Peeples, 155 Ill. 2d 422, 457-58 (1993); see also In re A.M., 274 Ill. App. 3d 702, 709 (1995); M. Graham, Cleary & Graham’s Handbook of Illinois Evidence § 103.7, at 23-24 (7th ed. 1999). In this case, an offer of proof was not required because the trial court understood that Dr. Raaf would testify as to the medical standard of care. See First National Bank of Mount Prospect v. Village of Mount Prospect, 197 Ill. App. 3d 855, 864-65 (1990) (offer of proof unnecessary where expert’s opinion testimony was obvious). Turning to the merits, the exclusion of cumulative evidence is within the discretion of the trial court, whose ruling will not be reversed absent a clear abuse of that discretion. Kozasa v. Guardian Electric Manufacturing Co., 99 Ill. App. 3d 669, 678 (1981) (collecting cases). This discretion includes limiting the number of expert witnesses. See Yassin v. Certified Grocers of Illinois, 150 Ill. App. 3d 1052, 1061 (1986); M. Graham, Cleary & Graham’s Handbook of Illinois Evidence § 403.1, at 192 (7th ed. 1999). Dr. Sener and the hospital note that plaintiff and Davol were allowed to present several expert witnesses to criticize various aspects of Dr. Sener’s conduct, while he and the hospital could present only one. They posit: “It is common knowledge that in medical malpractice cases, each side presents two or three expert witnesses to support the conduct or criticize the conduct of the Defendant.” They assert that “[t]he abuse of discretion in this case is the uneven treatment of the parties.” We cannot accept this contention. As in the appellate court, Dr. Sener and the hospital do not indicate how the evidence that Dr. Raaf would have presented, i.e., his opinion that Dr. Sener had met the medically relevant standard of care, was not cumulative to the testimony of Dr. Vasquez. Nor have they shown that the expert testimony that plaintiff and Davol presented was in any way cumulative. Further, Dr. Sener and the hospital presented several experts and treating physicians, who testified on various aspects of the case for the defense. We uphold the ruling of the trial court. V Damages: Increased Risk of Future Injury Dr. Sener and the hospital next contend that the trial court erred in instructing the jury that it could award plaintiff damages for “[t]he increased risk of future injuries.” Plaintiffs argument to the contrary notwithstanding, we note that this issue was adequately preserved for appellate review. There was evidence presented at trial establishing the proximate causal connection between the actions of Dr. Sener and the hospital and the catheter fragment becoming embedded in plaintiff’s heart. On medical advice, plaintiff chose not to attempt removal of the fragment. All the expert witnesses but one believed that the risks of injury from an attempted removal of the fragment outweighed the risks that would exist if the catheter remained in the heart. The attendant risks of the catheter remaining were infection, perforation of the heart, arrhythmia, embolization, and further migration of the fragment. At the time of trial, plaintiff had not suffered from any of these conditions, although she did suffer from anxiety over the fragment’s presence. The evidence was that it was not reasonably certain that plaintiff would in the future suffer the injuries for which she was at risk due to the fragment’s presence in her heart. Several physicians testified about the risk of infection, with the lowest estimated risk being close to zero and the highest being 20%. The risk of arrhythmia was less than 5%. The risks of perforation and migration were also small. The risk of embolization was low to nonexistent. The jury instruction that addressed compensation for plaintiffs increased risks stated in relevant part: “If you decide for the plaintiff on the question of liability, you must then fix the amount of money which will reasonably and fairly compensate her for any of the following elements of damages proved by the evidence to have resulted from the negligence of one or more of the defendants, taking into consideration the nature, extent, and duration of the injury: The increased risk of future injuries. The pain and suffering experienced and reasonably certain to be experienced in the future as a result of the injuries.” (Emphasis added.) This instruction was a modified combination of Illinois Pattern Jury Instructions, Civil, No. 30.01 and No. 30.05 (3d ed. 1995). The modification was the addition of the italicized sentence on the increased risk of future injuries. There is no Illinois pattern jury instruction for that element of damages. The jury awarded plaintiff $500,000 for her increased risk of future injuries. The appellate court upheld the award, holding that the trial court did not err in instructing the jury that plaintiff could be compensated for the increased risk of future harm. This court has historically rejected assessing damages for future injuries. This court has explained: “It would be plainly unjust to require a defendant to pay damages for results that may or may not ensue and that are merely problematical. To justify a recovery for future damages the law requires proof of a reasonable certainty that they will be endured in the future.” Amann v. Chicago Consolidated Traction Co., 243 Ill. 263, 267 (1909). In 1922, this court reiterated this position in Stevens v. Illinois Central R.R. Co., 306 Ill. 370, 377 (1922). Based on the principles noted in Amann and Stevens, some panels of our appellate court have denied recovery for an increased risk of future injury that is not reasonably certain to occur. See, e.g., Wehmeier v. UNR Industries, Inc., 213 Ill. App. 3d 6, 33-34 (1991). However, other panels of our appellate court have allowed compensation for an increased risk of future injury, notwithstanding the improbability of the injury’s occurrence. See, e.g., Jeffers v. Weinger, 132 Ill. App. 3d 877, 884 (1985) (finding “that whether there is a 1% possibility [of plaintiff losing her foot] or a 99% possibility, each is an element of damage which should be considered by the jury”). The rationale of those decisions allowing recovery is that “the increased risk is itself a present injury which should be as compensable as any other present injury.” Anderson v. Golden, 279 Ill. App. 3d 398, 400 (1996); accord Harp v. Illinois Central Gulf R.R. Co., 55 Ill. App. 3d 822, 827 (1977). In light of the above, a divergence of authority exists in Illinois whether a plaintiff may recover damages for the increased risk of future injuries. Cases such as Stevens and Amann and the decisions of our appellate court which adhere to them represent the majority view: “The traditional American rule *** is that recovery of damages based on future consequences may be had only if such consequences are ‘reasonably certain.’ Recovery of damages for speculative or conjectural future consequences is not permitted. To meet the ‘reasonably certain’ standard, courts have generally required plaintiffs to prove that it is more likely than not (a greater than 50% chance) that the projected consequence will occur. If such proof is made, the alleged future effect may be treated as certain to happen and the injured party may be awarded full compensation for it; if the proof does not establish a greater than 50% chance, the injured party’s award must be limited to damages for harm already manifest.” Wilson v. Johns-Manville Sales Corp., 684 F.2d 111, 119 (D.C. Cir. 1982). Accord 2 D. Dobbs, Remedies § 8.1(7), at 407 (2d ed. 1993); J. King, Causation, Valuation, and Chance in Personal Injury Torts Involving Preexisting Conditions and Future Consequences, 90 Yale L.J. 13'53, 1370-72 (1981); Note, Damages Contingent Upon Chance, 18 Rutgers L. Rev. 875, 876 (1964) (all-or-nothing approach “is the majority rule in the United States”). As one court has explained: “In evaluating damages in a tort action, a trier is concerned with reasonable probabilities, not with possibilities.” Healy v. White, 173 Conn. 438, 443, 378 A.2d 540, 544 (1977), overruled, Petriello v. Kalman, 215 Conn. 377, 576 A.2d 474 (1990). “[A] consequence of an injury which is possible, which may possibly ensue, is a risk which the injured person must bear because the law cannot be administered so as to do reasonably efficient justice if conjecture and speculation are to be used as a measure of damages. On the other hand, a consequence which stands on the plane of reasonable probability, although it is not certain to occur, may be considered in the evaluation of the damage claim against the defendant. In this way, to the extent that men can achieve justice through general rules, a just balance of the warring interests is accomplished.” Budden v. Goldstein, 43 N.J. Super. 340, 347, 128 A.2d 730, 734 (1957). Not all jurisdictions follow the majority rule. For example, in Petriello v. Kalman, 215 Conn. 377, 576 A.2d 474 (1990), the Supreme Court of Connecticut provided an analysis that revealed the problems inherent with the majority approach. That court criticized the “all-or-nothing” approach as follows: “In essence, if a plaintiff can prove that there exists a 51 percent chance that his injury is permanent or that future injury will result, he may receive full compensation for that injury as if it were a certainty. If, however, the plaintiff establishes only a 49 percent chance of such a consequence, he may recover nothing for the risk to which he is presently exposed. Although this all or nothing view has been adopted by a majority of courts faced with the issue, the concept has been severely criticized by numerous commentators. By denying any compensation unless a plaintiff proves that a future consequence is more likely to occur than not, courts have created a system in which a significant number of persons receive compensation for future consequences that never occur and, conversely, a significant number of persons receive no compensation at all for consequences that later ensue from risks not rising to the level of probability. This system is inconsistent with the goal of compensating tort victims fairly for all the consequences of the injuries they have sustained, while avoiding, so far as possible, windfall awards for consequences that never happen.” Petriello, 215 Conn. at 393-94, 576 A.2d at 482-83. Accord DePass v. United States, 721 F.2d 203, 208 (7th Cir. 1983) (Posner, J., dissenting) (“A tortfeasor should not get off scot-free because instead of killing his victim outright he inflicts an injury that is likely though not certain to shorten the victim’s life”); 90 Yale L.J. at 1376-81 (criticizing all-or-nothing approach as arbitrary); 2 G. Boston, Stein on Personal Injury Damages § 9:16, at 9 — 31 through 9 — 32 (3d ed. 1997) (same). We believe that the split of authority in our appellate court compels us to revisit this issue and reexamine our holdings in Amann and Stevens. Our review of cases from other jurisdictions indicates a trend toward allowing compensation for increased risk of future injury as long as it can be shown to a reasonable degree of certainty that the defendant’s wrongdoing created the increased risk. Anderson, 279 Ill. App. 3d at 400 (citing cases); see also United States v. Anderson, 669 A.2d 73 (Del. 1995); 2 J. Nates, C. Kimball, D. Axelrod & R. Goldstein, Damages in Tort Actions § 13.02 (2001); 2 G. Boston, Stein on Personal Injury Damages § 9:16, at 9 — 30 (3d ed. 1997) (“Compensation should be given for the fact of increased susceptibility”). This reasoning shows that “[t]he primary motivation of the courts for permitting damages for such an injury is fairness.” 2 J. Nates, C. Kimball, D. Axelrod & R. Goldstein, Damages in Tort Actions § 13.02, at 13 — 8 (2001). Further, based on the principle of single recovery, “[o]ur legal system provides no opportunity for a second look at a damage award so that it may be revised with the benefit of hindsight.” Petriello, 215 Conn. at 395, 576 A.2d at 483. Based on this reasoning, the appellate court in this case relied on the appellate court’s decision in Anderson. There, the court stated that where a defendant’s negligence causes a plaintiff to suffer a present injury, the plaintiff is entitled to compensation for the full extent of the injury. If a defendant’s negligence places a plaintiff at greater risk of sustaining future injuries than if the negligence had not occurred, the appellate court saw “ ‘no legitimate reason why [the plaintiff] should not receive present compensation based upon the likelihood of the risk becoming a reality.’ ” Anderson, 279 Ill. App. 3d at 401, quoting Petriello, 215 Conn. at 396, 576 A.2d at 483. The Anderson court held that a plaintiff who has competent evidence which shows that a defendant has negligently caused her to bear the burden of an increased risk of future injury may present evidence of the increased risk as an element of present damages. The Anderson court further noted that the treatment of an increased risk of future injury as a present injury does not run afoul of the general rule that possible future damages are not compensable absent evidence that such damages are reasonably certain to occur. The court reasoned that this rule stems from the principle that damages may not be awarded on the basis of speculation or conjecture. An award of damages for an increased risk of future injury is proper only if it can be shown to a reasonable degree of certainty that the risk was proximately caused by the defendant’s negligence. Therefore, there is no element of speculation or conjecture in awarding damages for increased risks. Anderson, 279 Ill. App. 3d at 400-01. Like the court in Anderson, we also believe that the Connecticut court’s approach to this issue better comports with this state’s principle of single recovery. An entire claim arising from a single tort cannot be divided and be the subject of several actions, regardless of whether or not the plaintiff has recovered all that he or she might have recovered. This is true even as to prospective damages. There cannot be successive actions brought for a single tort as damages in the future are suffered, but the one action must embrace prospective as well as accrued damages. Mason v. Parker, 295 Ill. App. 3d 1096, 1098 (1998), quoting Radosta v. Chrysler Corp., 110 Ill. App. 3d 1066, 1068-69 (1982); accord 1 D. Dobbs, Remedies § 3.1, at 277-78 (2d ed. 1993) (“The damages remedy is not conditional, and it is not payable periodically as loss accrues unless a statute so provides. So the damages award is traditionally made once, in a lump sum to compensate for all the relevant injuries, past and future”). Indeed, this court long ago so held in the specific context of a medical malpractice action. See Howell v. Goodrich, 69 Ill. 556, 559-60 (1873) (“For such a cause of action *** there can not be successive suits brought from time to time, as damages may in the future be suffered, but the recovery is once for all, and may embrace prospective as well as accrued damages”). The single recovery principle requires that all damages, future as well as past, must be presented and considered at the time of trial. “This in turn faces the tribunal with the difficult and uncertain task of prophecy, with no chance for second-guessing where the prophecy turns out to be mistaken, or where the parties have failed to present all items of their claims.” 4 F. Harper, F. James, & O. Gray, Torts § 25.2, at 498 (2d ed. 1986). Also, this court has previously held in a different context: “There is nothing novel about requiring health care professionals to compensate patients who are negligently injured while in their care. To the extent a plaintiffs chance of recovery or survival is lessened by the malpractice, he or she should be able to present evidence to a jury that the defendant’s malpractice, to a reasonable degree of medical certainty, proximately caused the increased risk of harm or lost chance of recovery. We therefore reject the reasoning of cases which hold, as a matter of law, that plaintiffs may not recover for medical malpractice injuries if they are unable to prove that they would have enjoyed a greater than 50% chance of survival or recovery absent the alleged malpractice of the defendant. [Citations.] To hold otherwise would free health care providers from legal responsibility for even the grossest acts of negligence, as long as the patient upon whom the malpractice was performed already suffered an illness or injury that could be quantified by experts as affording that patient less than a 50% chance of recovering his or her health.” Holton v. Memorial Hospital, 176 Ill. 2d 95, 119 (1997). The theories of lost chance of recovery and increased risk of future injury have similar theoretical underpinnings. See Anderson, 669 A.2d at 75-76; 2 D. Dobbs, Remedies § 8.1(7), at 408 (2d ed. 1993). We realize that our decision to recognize damages for the increased risk of future injury is at odds with our previous holdings in Stevens and Amann. However, we note that those cases are over 80 years old, and that scientific advances now enable the medical community to more accurately determine the probability of future injuries than in the past. The risk therefore of undue speculation is lessened. We further note that the split in our appellate court has caused mixed results in cases such as this, where some parties recovered compensation, while others did not. Fairness requires that this court speak to this issue definitively. Having reviewed all of the authorities on this issue, we believe our decision will provide needed stability in this matter for the bench and the bar. Accordingly, we hold simply that a plaintiff must be permitted to recover for all demonstrated injuries. The burden is on the plaintiff to prove that the defendant’s negligence increased the plaintiffs risk of future injuries. A plaintiff can obtain compensation for a future injury that is not reasonably certain to occur, but the compensation would reflect the low probability of occurrence. See Feist v. Sears, Roebuck & Co., 267 Or. 402, 410, 517 P.2d 675, 679 (1973) (“ ‘Admittedly the probability of [plaintiff] getting epileptic seizures is low and it should be weighed by the jury accordingly’ ”), quoting Schwegel v. Goldberg, 209 Pa. Super. 280, 287-88, 228 A.2d 405, 409 (1967). This “fits comfortably within traditional damage calculation methods.” Anderson, 669 A.2d at 78, citing Petriello, 215 Conn. at 397-98, 576 A.2d at 484; accord 2 G. Boston, Stein on Personal Injury Damages § 9:16, at 9 — 30 through 9 — 31 (3d ed. 1997) (stating that the solution is not in denying recovery, but in “letting the jury determine on a common sense basis the amount of damages which will reasonably compensate the plaintiff’). “The defendant’s proper remedy lies in objecting to the excessiveness of the verdict in an appropriate case.” 2 J. Nates, C. Kimball, D. Axelrod & R Goldstein, Damages in Tort Actions § 13.02, at 13 — 9 (2001). Having determined that this element of damages is compensable, we now consider whether the jury was properly instructed thereon. The record shows that Dr. Sener and the hospital failed to object with specificity to the form of the instruction and to offer their own versions thereof. Accordingly, we could consider this issue waived for appellate review. See 155 Ill. 2d R 366(b) (2) (i); Deal v. Byford, 127 Ill. 2d 192, 203 (1989). However, the waiver rule is a principle of administrative convenience, an admonition to the parties; it is not a jurisdictional requirement or any limitation upon the jurisdiction of a reviewing court. In this regard, this court has recognized that a reviewing court may, in furtherance of its responsibility to provide a just result and to maintain a sound and uniform body of precedent, override considerations of waiver that stem from the adversarial nature of our system. In re C.R.H., 163 Ill. 2d 263, 274 (1994); Hux v. Raben, 38 Ill. 2d 223, 224-25 (1967); accord 155 Ill. 2d R. 366(a)(5). In this case, for reasons which we will explain, we deem that this responsibility outweighs the waiver by Dr. Sener and the hospital. See, e.g., Welch v. Johnson, 147 Ill. 2d 40, 48 (1992); American Federation of State, County & Municipal Employees, Council 31 v. County of Cook, 145 Ill. 2d 475, 480 (1991). In Illinois, the parties are entitled to have the jury instructed on the issues presented, the principles of law to be applied, and the necessary facts to be proved to support its verdict. The decision to give or deny an instruction is within the trial court’s discretion. The standard for determining an abuse of discretion is whether, taken as a whole, the instructions are sufficiently clear so as not to mislead and whether they fairly and correctly state the law. See Magna Trust Co. v. Illinois Central R.R. Co., 313 Ill. App. 3d 375, 388 (2000); accord Korpalski v. Lyman, 114 Ill. App. 3d 563, 568 (1983). In this case, there is no pattern jury instruction on the increased risk of future injury as an element of damages. Accordingly, this is a situation where our pattern instructions are inadequate and additional instruction is appropriate. See Balestri v. Terminal Freight Cooperative Ass’n, 76 Ill. 2d 451, 454-55 (1979). Under Supreme Court Rule 239(a) (177 Ill. 2d R. 239(a)), a nonpattern instruction is permissible if it is simple, brief, impartial, and nonargumentative. Where a unique factual situation, or a point of law, is presented, a nonpattern instruction may be given if it is accurate and will have no improper effect on the jury. Magna Trust, 313 Ill. App. 3d at 388. Applying these principles to this case, we conclude that the instruction which the jury received on this element of damages did not adequately state the law. We earlier quoted the jury’s instruction on damages, which included the following description of this element: “The increased risk of future injuries.” This instruction fails to instruct the jury on several important legal requirements, e.g., the increased risk must be based on evidence and not speculation, and, more importantly, the size of the award must reflect the probability of occurrence. For example, as a result of Petriello, Connecticut Civil Jury Instruction No. 2 — 40(c) was promulgated: “Damages — Compensation for Increased Risk of Injury *** The plaintiff claims that he/she has suffered an increased risk of [alleged future complication] as a result of the defendant’s negligence. The plaintiff is entitled to recover damages for physical harm resulting from a failure to exercise reasonable care. If the failure to exercise reasonable care increases the risk that such harm will occur in the future, the plaintiff is entitled to compensation for the increased risk. In order to award this element of damages, you must find a breach of duty that was a substantial factor in causing a present injury which has resulted in an increased risk of future harm. The increased risk must have a basis in the evidence. Your verdict must not be based on speculation. The plaintiff is entitled to compensation to the extent that the future harm is likely to occur as measured by multiplying the total compensation to which the plaintiff would be entitled if the harm in question were certain to occur by the proven probability that the harm in question will in fact occur.” (Emphasis added.) In the present case, the instruction given failed to convey the principles of law expressed in the italicized portion of the Connecticut instruction. While not prescribing its use verbatim, we hold that the essence of this instruction fairly and correctly states the law on this element of damages. Our responsibility to provide a just result requires reversal on this issue. The partial dissent, pointing to the dictionary meaning of “risk,” concludes that the jury instruction given in this case “was sufficient to describe the type of assessment the jury was required to make.” 199 111. 2d at 509 (Harrison, C.J., concurring in part and dissenting in part). However, it must be remembered that juries are composed of laypersons who are not trained to separate issues and to disregard irrelevant matters. That is the purpose of jury instructions. The function of jury instructions is to convey to the jury the correct principles of law applicable to the submitted evidence and, as a result, jury instructions must state the law fairly and distinctly and must not mislead the jury or prejudice a party. See Ono v. Chicago Park District, 235 Ill. App. 3d 383, 386 (1992); Pry v. Alton & Southern Ry. Co., 233 Ill. App. 3d 197, 214 (1992); Fravel v. Morenz, 151 Ill. App. 3d 42, 45 (1986). In the context of this issue, reliance on a dictionary is inadequate to fulfill this purpose. Our responsibility to maintain a sound and uniform body of precedent likewise requires reversal on this issue. As we earlier noted, today’s decision represents a departure from the previous holdings of this court. There was a split of authority in the appellate court over whether the increased risk of future injury was compensable as an element of damages. Further, those appellate court decisions that allowed recovery did not discuss the form of the instruction. We have now definitively spoken to this issue. A retrial, in which a jury may apply the correct legal principles to the submitted evidence, is appropriate to maintain a sound and uniform body of precedent. The jury in this case was inadequately instructed on the increased risk of future injury as an element of damages. Accordingly, we reverse plaintiffs damages award for the increased risk of future injury, and remand the cause to the trial court for a new trial solely on that element of damages. CONCLUSION For the foregoing reasons, the judgments of the circuit and appellate courts are affirmed in part and reversed in part, and the cause remanded to the circuit court of Cook County for further proceedings consistent with this opinion. Appellate court affirmed in part and reversed in part; circuit court affirmed in part and reversed in part; cause remanded. JUSTICE FITZGERALD took no part in the consideration or decision of this case.

=== CASE 9737594 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:29:36.063469+00 ===

CHIEF JUSTICE HARRISON, concurring in part and dissenting in part: The appellate court’s judgment affirming the judgment of the circuit court should be upheld without qualification. Contrary to my colleagues, I would not remand for a new trial on the element of damages for increased risk of future injuries. The damages instruction tendered by plaintiff was adequate as given. Although my colleagues are quite right that the jury’s assessment of increased risk must be based on evidence, not speculation, that is true of every element of damages. Indeed, it is true of every element of plaintiffs cause of action. Juries are told this at the outset of their deliberations. Illinois Pattern Jury Instructions, Civil, No. 1.01(3) (1995), specifically cautions the jury that its verdict “must be based on evidence and not upon speculation, guess or conjecture.” We do not require this caveat to be repeated in the instructions governing the other aspects of a plaintiffs claim, and there is no reason to require such repetition with respect to a plaintiffs claim for damages based on increased risk of future injuries. I am also unpersuaded by the majority’s contention that the damages instruction tendered in this case failed to adequately apprise the jury that the size of its award for increased risk of future injuries must reflect the probability that such injuries will occur. The instruction was specifically phrased in terms of “risk.” By definition, risk includes “the product of the amount that may be lost and the probability of losing it.” Webster’s Third New International Dictionary 1961 (1986). Accordingly, the charge to the jury here was sufficient to describe the type of assessment the jury was required to make. Even if the revisions to the instruction proposed by my colleagues would have been helpful to the jury, that is not an adequate basis under the law for disturbing the jury’s verdict. In assessing the sufficiency of the jury’s instructions, the issue is not whether our court could have phrased the instructions in a better way. It is whether the instructions given, considered as a whole and read as a series, were sufficiently clear so as not to mislead the jury and whether they fairly and correctly stated principles of law which pertain to the case. See Eaves v. Hyster Co., 244 Ill. App. 3d 260, 262 (1993). If the defendants in this case believed that the wording in the instruction on damages was incorrect, incomplete, or otherwise inadequate, it was their duty to object to that instruction and to offer their own remedial versions. Deal v. Byford, 127 Ill. 2d 192, 203 (1989). They did not do so. In the trial court, defendants’ objection was that the issue of increased risk of future injuries should not be presented to the jury at all. Defendants did not take issue with the way that issue was set forth in the instruction tendered by plaintiff, and defense counsel declined an express invitation by the trial judge to propose alternative language. Under these circumstances, any claim of error with respect to the wording of the instruction has been waived. See Diaz v. Chicago Transit Authority, 174 Ill. App. 3d 396, 401-02 (1988). In all other respects, I am in complete accord with the majority’s disposition.

=== CASE 2211236 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:03.964979+00 ===

210 Cal.App.2d 141 (1962)
26 Cal. Rptr. 562
ALEJANDRO DE ECHEGUREN, Plaintiff and Appellant,
v.
MERCEDES DE ECHEGUREN et al., Defendants and Respondents.
Docket No. 20145.
Court of Appeals of California, First District, Division One.
November 26, 1962.
*143 James Martin MacInnis for Plaintiff and Appellant.
Sullivan, Roche, Johnson & Farraher and Vincent J. Mullins for Defendants and Respondents.
SULLIVAN, J.
Plaintiff appeals from a judgment in favor of the defendants Mercedes de Echeguren Miller and Paul Albert Miller entered upon an order granting defendants' motion for summary judgment.[1] For convenience we will refer to the defendants by their first names.
Plaintiff's first amended complaint sets forth two separately stated causes of action. In the first, the complaint alleges that plaintiff and Mercedes were married in Spain in 1952, at all times thereafter have been husband and wife and have two children born issue of such marriage; that Mercedes without provocation, cause or plaintiff's consent separated from plaintiff at the request and procurement of Paul; and that Mercedes and Paul conspired with each other to obtain a dissolution of the marriage between plaintiff and Mercedes so that they might have a civil ceremony performed declaring Mercedes and Paul "to be purported husband and wife."
In furtherance of this conspiracy, so it is alleged, and with each defendant acting jointly with and as the agent of the other, Paul invited Mercedes to become his wife and she accepted *144 the invitation; in 1955 Mercedes separated from the plaintiff and purported to take certain steps to declare herself a resident of Nevada, being assisted therein by Paul; that Mercedes never intended to become a permanent or bona fide resident of Nevada, except insofar as by remaining physically there for the requisite period of time "she hoped to cast a color of legitimacy upon her purported Nevada residence"; that it was the intention of the defendants to intermarry and live permanently thereafter not as residents of Nevada but as residents of California; that on January 31, 1956, she obtained a decree of divorce in Nevada; that thereafter Mercedes remained in Nevada and Paul joined her there, the parties planning to intermarry after the passage of such a period of time that might make it appear that Mercedes "had ... truly become a resident" of Nevada; that on August 13, 1956, the defendants "purported to marry each other" by a civil ceremony in New York; that at the end of August or beginning of September 1956, the defendants returned to San Francisco with the minor children of plaintiff and Mercedes. The complaint contains the general allegation that plaintiff and defendants are bona fide residents of San Francisco and "have occupied such status continuously, and without interruption, prior to and during the calendar years 1955 through 1959." The first cause of action concludes with allegations to the effect that the Nevada decree of divorce obtained by Mercedes was invalid since the Nevada court "did not obtain jurisdiction over the marital res of plaintiff and defendant MERCEDES ... nor over the person of plaintiff, ..."
The second cause of action, after incorporating by reference all of the allegations of the first, sets forth certain allegations pertaining to the custody of the two children of plaintiff and Mercedes, which need not be here detailed.
The prayer of the first amended complaint is that the above-mentioned Nevada decree of divorce be declared void, that the "purported inter-marriage" between Mercedes and Paul be declared void, and that the court make such orders pertaining to the custody of the children as may be reasonable.
Defendants' demurrer to the first amended complaint was overruled. They filed an answer admitting the first marriage of Mercedes to plaintiff, its termination by divorce, the subsequent marriage of Mercedes and Paul, the fact that there were two children of Mercedes' marriage to plaintiff, and denying all other allegations of the first amended complaint.
*145 Shortly thereafter, the defendants filed a motion for summary judgment supported only by the declaration of Vincent J. Mullins, one of defendants' counsel below and on this appeal. Mr. Mullins' declaration states that he is the attorney for the defendants and "is familiar with all of the facts and circumstances of said cause of action"; that in respect to the second cause of action plaintiff does not desire the custody of the children, is unable to provide for them and has failed, refused and neglected to contribute to their support; and that "nevertheless, defendants hereby stipulate that plaintiff's prayer in this regard be granted and that this Court make and enter its order awarding the legal custody of said children jointly to plaintiff and defendant MERCEDES MILLER, with physical custody in defendant MERCEDES MILLER with full visitation rights in plaintiff."
The declaration thereupon continues: "As to the remaining count of said complaint, your affiant declares that said cause of action is a sham and frivolous one. Said count asks this Court to declare that the defendant MERCEDES MILLER improperly secured a divorce from plaintiff and that she thereafter improperly married defendant PAUL MILLER. Said alleged cause of action is not a proper subject for declaratory relief. It is brought solely for vindictive purposes and can accomplish no practical results for any party hereto, save and except the inflicting of harm upon the two minor children of plaintiff and defendant MERCEDES MILLER." The foregoing are the only statements made relevant to the first cause of action.
No affidavit in opposition to the motion was filed by or on behalf of the plaintiff. The court below made a written "Order Granting Motion for Summary Judgment" in which it first awarded custody of the children according to, but without express reference to, the defendants' stipulation set forth above. The order then provided: "THIS COURT FURTHER FINDS the granting of declaratory relief herein, as prayed for in the first count of plaintiff's complaint, is not necessary or proper at this time under all the circumstances herein, and this Court therefore grants the said motion."[2] Judgment was rendered accordingly. It is apparent that, insofar as the *146 second count is concerned, the declaration of defendants' counsel was treated by the trial court as a stipulation for awarding custody of children. The parties agree that these custody matters are not involved in the present appeal. To simplify matters, therefore, our discussion will be directed to the other aspects of the summary judgment. As we shall point out, a resolution of these problems will determine all matters embraced by the judgment, including the custody matters.
Section 437c of the Code of Civil Procedure sets forth the procedure to be followed in obtaining a summary judgment. So far as relevant here, it prescribes the following requirements for the affidavit of the moving party: "The affidavit ... in support of the motion must contain facts sufficient to entitle... defendant to a judgment in the action, and the facts stated therein shall be within the personal knowledge of the affiant, and shall be set forth with particularity, and each affidavit shall show affirmatively that affiant, if sworn as a witness, can testify competently thereto." (Emphasis added.)
In Snider v. Snider (1962) 200 Cal. App.2d 741 [19 Cal. Rptr. 709], this court summarized the principles of law defining the nature and purpose of summary judgment procedure and the rules governing the affidavits required therefor. [1] We there said: "At the outset we recognize the admonition of the Supreme Court in Eagle Oil & Ref. Co. v. Prentice, 19 Cal.2d 553, 556 [122 P.2d 264]: `The procedure is drastic and should be used with caution in order that it may not become a substitute for existing methods in the determination of issues of fact. (See Walsh v. Walsh, supra [18 Cal.2d 439 (116 P.2d 62)].)
"`For these reasons it may further be said that the affidavits of the moving party, the plaintiff in this case, should be strictly construed and those of his opponent liberally construed.' (See also McComsey v. Leaf, 36 Cal. App.2d 132 [97 P.2d 242]; Nini v. Culberg, 183 Cal. App.2d 657, 661 [7 Cal. Rptr. 146].) If, after an examination of the affidavits, doubt exists as to whether summary judgment should be granted, such doubt should be resolved against the moving party. (Whaley v. Fowler, 152 Cal. App.2d 379, 381 [313 P.2d 97]; House v. Lala, 180 Cal. App.2d 412, 415 [4 Cal. Rptr. 366]; Travelers Indemnity Co. v. McIntosh, 112 Cal. App.2d 177, 182 [245 P.2d 1065].) But, on the other hand, as we stated in Burke v. Hibernia Bank, 186 Cal. App.2d at page 744 [9 Cal. Rptr. 890]: `a summary judgment will stand if the supporting affidavits state facts sufficient to sustain a judgment and the counteraffidavits *147 do not proffer competent and sufficient evidence to present a triable issue of fact. (Coyne v. Krempels (1950) 36 Cal.2d 257, 261 [223 P.2d 244]; Code Civ. Proc., § 437c.)'
[2] "We first consider the affidavits of the moving party. They `must contain facts sufficient to entitle ... defendant to a judgment in the action....' (Code Civ. Proc., § 437c.) To prevail, therefore, such affidavits `must state facts establishing every element necessary to sustain a judgment in his favor.' (House v. Lala, supra, 180 Cal. App.2d 412, 416.) Such facts `shall be set forth with particularity' (Code Civ. Proc., § 437c) and shall be within the personal knowledge of the affiant, the affidavit to show that the affiant, if sworn as a witness, can testify competently thereto. [3] As the court stated in House v. Lala, supra, `[t]o satisfy the statutory requirement of "particularity," the movant's affidavits must state all the requisite evidentiary facts and not merely the ultimate facts. (Southern Pacific Co. v. Fish, 166 Cal. App.2d 353, 362 [333 P.2d 133]; Murphy v. Kelly, 137 Cal. App.2d 21, 30-31 [289 P.2d 565].) [4] Moreover, neither conclusions of law nor conclusions of fact are sufficient to satisfy the statutory requirement. (Gardenswartz v. Equitable etc. Soc., 23 Cal. App.2d Supp. 745, 754 [68 P.2d 322].)'" (200 Cal. App.2d at pp. 748-749.)
[5] It is therefore well settled that summary judgment cannot be ordered for the moving party, even though the affidavits of the opposing party be insufficient or absent, unless the moving party presents affidavits in support of his motion which comply with the statute and show that he is entitled to judgment. (Coyne v. Krempels (1950) 36 Cal.2d 257, 261 [223 P.2d 244]; Southern Pacific Co. v. Fish (1958) 166 Cal. App.2d 353, 362, 364-366 [333 P.2d 133]; Gardenswartz v. Equitable etc. Soc., 23 Cal. App.2d Supp. 745, 754 [68 P.2d 322]; House v. Lala (1960) 180 Cal. App.2d 412, 416 [4 Cal. Rptr. 366]; Rodes v. Shannon (1961) 194 Cal. App.2d 743, 748-749 [15 Cal. Rptr. 349].) As is stated in Southern Pacific Co. v. Fish, supra, "there first must be a sufficiently supportive affidavit before the defects of any counteraffidavit, either of form or substance, need be examined; ..." (166 Cal. App.2d at p. 366; emphasis added.) [6] "[T]he failure of a party to file a counter affidavit does not of itself entitle the moving party to summary judgment. [Citations.]" (Taliaferro v. Taliaferro (1960) 179 Cal. App.2d 787, 791 [4 Cal. Rptr. 689].)
[7] Applying the above rules, it is too plain to require any extended discussion that defendants' declaration filed in *148 support of their motion completely fails to comply with the requirements of section 437c. That portion thereof directed to the first count, consists of four sentences. Three of them, stating in effect that the action is "sham and frivolous," "not a proper subject for declaratory relief" and "brought solely for vindictive purposes" are only conclusions of the declarant. The remaining sentence which describes the first count contributes no factual support. The declaration does not contain a single statement of fact in regard to the action for declaratory relief. Nowhere does it allege facts, let alone facts with the requisite particularity and within the personal knowledge of the declarant. Nowhere does it make an affirmative showing that the declarant, if sworn as a witness, could testify to any factual matters. It is clear that the declaration fails to establish that the defendants are entitled to summary judgment.
What we have said above is in no way affected by the fact that the court below made findings of fact in the instant case. [8] Findings of fact and conclusions of law are required after "the trial of a question of fact by the court." (Code Civ. Proc., § 632; emphasis added.) They have no place in summary judgment procedure which seeks to discover whether there is anything to try and is concerned with "issue finding" not "issue determination." (Walsh v. Walsh (1941) 18 Cal.2d 439, 441 [116 P.2d 62]; Buffalo Arms, Inc. v. Remler Co. (1960) 179 Cal. App.2d 700, 703 [4 Cal. Rptr. 103].) [9] A summary judgment proceeding is not a trial on the merits. (Luders v. Pummer (1957) 152 Cal. App.2d 276, 279 [313 P.2d 38].)
[10] Defendants appear to labor under the misconception that opposition to the motion for summary judgment must be made by counteraffidavit and, if not made, the motion is granted, as it were, by default. As we have shown, such is not the law. In support of their position, defendants quote copiously from Kelly v. Liddicoat (1939) 35 Cal. App.2d 559, 565 [96 P.2d 186]; Cone v. Union Oil Co. (1954) 129 Cal. App.2d 558, 562-563 [277 P.2d 464]; Best v. Burch (1955) 132 Cal. App.2d 859, 861 [283 P.2d 262]; and Coyne v. Krempels, supra, 36 Cal.2d 257, 261-263. They, however, refrain from furnishing us with any analysis of the above cases from which they quote. An examination of the above four cases shows that in all of them the movant presented a sufficient affidavit or affidavits and the opposing party filed none. None of these cases hold, as defendants seem to urge, that the absence of *149 affidavits in opposition will of itself warrant the granting of summary judgment. The Supreme Court in Coyne v. Krempels, which is cited in both Cone, supra, and Best, supra, carefully pointed out that summary judgment is proper only if the supporting affidavits are sufficient to sustain judgment in favor of the movant and the opposing parties' affidavits do not allege facts sufficient to present a triable issue of fact, citing Hardy v. Hardy (1943) 23 Cal.2d 244, 245, 247 [143 P.2d 701] and Gardenswartz v. Equitable etc. Soc., supra, 23 Cal. App.2d Supp. 745, 750, 751. The Supreme Court thus reaffirmed the Gardenswartz case, supra, where it was said that under the applicable paragraph of section 437c set forth by us above "summary judgment for plaintiff cannot be ordered, even though affidavits for the defendant be insufficient or absent, unless the plaintiff presents affidavits in support of his motion which comply with the section and show that he is entitled to judgment. [Citations.]" (23 Cal. App.2d at p. 751.) Strangely, defendants who have included in their brief a lengthy quotation from Coyne v. Krempels, appear to have been unimpressed by the statement of the above rule and supporting authorities which immediately precede the quoted matter.
Nor does Grady v. Easley (1941) 45 Cal. App.2d 632 [114 P.2d 635] or Gibson v. De La Salle Institute (1944) 66 Cal. App.2d 609 [152 P.2d 774] give defendants any assistance. Defendants cite both cases (as well as Kelly v. Liddicoat, supra, 35 Cal. App.2d 559 already discussed herein) in support of the argument that "[i]t is, of course, axiomatic that summary judgment will not be reversed unless an abuse of discretion is made to appear" and that appellant herein has failed to show such abuse of discretion. [11] Defendants fail to apprehend that it is an abuse of discretion for the trial court to render a summary judgment on the insufficient and, in the instant case, worthless affidavit of the movant.[3]
We turn to a second contention which defendants advance to uphold the judgment. In essence, it is that the judgment *150 "was peculiarly proper because of the nature of the action, to-wit, an action for declaratory relief." Defendants' argument proceeds as follows: The court by statute (Code Civ. Proc., § 1061) had discretionary power to deny declaratory relief; by its findings and conclusions, it made a determination in the very language of the statute that such relief was not necessary or proper;[4] such determination was properly made in the course of summary judgment procedure "based upon the uncontradicted showing ... [made by defendants while] [p]laintiff-appellant made no showing whatsoever ... that declaratory relief here would serve any useful purpose"; and such determination "was, therefore, not only the result of a hearing on the actual facts, but the result of a hearing acquiesced in, in effect, by plaintiff-appellant." (All original emphasis.)
Defendants appear to be confused about the proceedings below. [12] The record is clear that they were proceedings under section 437c for a summary judgment and that such judgment was rendered as a result thereof. There was therefore no "hearing on the actual facts" and no "findings of fact" made under recognized procedural rules. As we have already stated, the defendants made no "showing" at all in compliance with the above section, the absence of a showing or opposition by plaintiff was immaterial, and, in view of the inherent defects in the movant's affidavit, there was actually nothing for plaintiff to "acquiesce" in.
Nevertheless the defendants attempt to import a new character to these proceedings and to urge that after all, the trial court was utilizing them to give expression to its discretionary power to deny declaratory relief. [13] As Witkin points out "the broad discretionary power of the trial court to deny such [declaratory] relief may be invoked by general demurrer." (2 Witkin, Cal. Procedure, p. 1480; see e.g. the following cases cited by defendants: Lord v. Garland (1946) 27 Cal.2d 840 [168 P.2d 5]; Moss v. Moss (1942) 20 Cal.2d 640 [128 P.2d 526, 141 A.L.R. 1422]; Simpson v. Security First Nat. Bank (1945) 71 Cal. App.2d 154 [162 P.2d 494]; *151 Coruccini v. Lambert (1952) 113 Cal. App.2d 486 [248 P.2d 457]; Collins v. City & County of San Francisco (1952) 112 Cal. App.2d 719 [247 P.2d 362].) The trial court did not invoke such discretionary power upon hearing the defendants' demurrer to the first amended complaint which, as the record before us shows, challenged the legal sufficiency of the first cause of action for declaratory relief not only by a general specification but also by a separate specification set forth at length and in detail. [14] On the contrary, the court overruled the demurrer, thus determining that the complaint set forth sufficient facts for declaratory relief.
Defendants attempt to avoid the effect of this by arguing that, as stated in Moss v. Moss, supra, it was better practice for the court to overrule the demurrer and exercise its power to deny declaratory relief by some other procedure.[5] Defendants asserts that "[t]he trial court followed precisely the procedure suggested in the Moss case, namely, it overruled defendants' demurrer and, later, made a clear determination, under its discretionary power, that declaratory relief was not appropriate...." (Emphasis added.) However, it is obvious that this was not the posture of the instant case in the proceedings we now review. In view of their nature and purpose, the trial court was not concerned with "issue determination" but with "issue finding." (Walsh v. Walsh, supra, 18 Cal.2d 439; Buffalo Arms, Inc. v. Remler Co., supra, 179 Cal. App.2d 700.) The court proceeded to render a summary judgment without a sufficiently supportive affidavit. Defendants, upon the citation of a number of cases, insist that this court cannot review the denial of declaratory relief except where an abuse of discretion exists. [15a] It does exist where a summary judgment is granted to a moving party who has not complied with the applicable statute and is therefore not entitled to it.
We hold therefore that the summary judgment cannot be upheld as to the first cause of action. As we stated at the outset, the provisions of the judgment referrable to the second cause of action and dealing with the awarding of custody, appear to have been made upon a stipulation offered by the *152 defendants. These provisions are an integral part of the entire controversy. Although apparently not objected to by plaintiff, they would appear to be favorable to the defendant Mercedes Miller, particularly when it is recalled that they are based on her stipulation. In this sense they represent a partial judgment for such defendant. [16] While summary judgment procedure permits a partial summary judgment for a plaintiff (Code Civ. Proc., § 437c, 4th par.) we find in the statute no similar provision authorizing a partial judgment for the defendant. (See 2 Witkin, Cal. Procedure, p. 1717.) [15b] We are therefore of the opinion that the entire judgment should be reversed.
Since an appropriate court can from time to time modify or vacate orders awarding custody and since the question of custody is an incident of the main controversy, it will probably be more effectively resolved if considered by the court with the case as a whole. Furthermore, it is possible to construe defendants' stipulation for the award of custody as having been conditionally made, that is, to be operative if all other relief prayed for by plaintiff were denied. There is no record of its formal acceptance by plaintiff in the proceedings below and under all circumstances we think that it would be equitable for us not to treat it as a permanent binding commitment by the defendant mother.
The judgment is reversed.
Bray, P.J., and Molinari, J., concurred.
Respondents' petition for a hearing by the Supreme Court was denied January 23, 1963.
NOTES
[1]  The appeal is not taken from a portion of the judgment dealing with the custody of the children. We dispose of this point infra.
[2]  In the findings of fact and conclusions of law thereupon filed the court found that all of the allegations of defendants' declaration were true, that "[d]eclaratory relief is not necessary or proper ... at this time under all the circumstances herein," and as conclusions awarded custody of children as above noted, stating that otherwise "plaintiff shall take nothing under his complaint herein."
[3]  Thus in Grady v. Easley, supra, cited by defendants, it is said at page 641: "While `Ordinarily, the only question presented upon an appeal from a summary judgment under section 437c is whether or not the trial court abused its discretion' (Kelly v. Liddicoat, 35 Cal. App.2d 559, 560 [96 P.2d 186], citing Bank of America etc. Assn. v. Oil Well Supply Co., 12 Cal. App.2d 265 [55 P.2d 885]; nevertheless, `The validity of the judgment is to be determined by the sufficiency of the affidavits considered upon the hearing of the motion.' (McComsey v. Leaf, 36 Cal. App.2d 132, 133 [97 P.2d 242].)"
[4]  Code of Civ. Proc. § 1061, found in the chapter dealing with declaratory relief, provides as follows: "The court may refuse to exercise the power granted by this chapter in any case where its declaration or determination is not necessary or proper at the time under all the circumstances."
As stated above, the trial court made a finding that "[d]eclaratory relief is not necessary or proper in this action at this time under all the circumstances herein."
[5]  The suggestion in Moss is found in the following language: "While it might be better practice for the trial court to overrule the demurrer and exercise its discretion in denying declaratory relief by some other procedure, as, for example, upon a motion to dismiss (cf. Cutting v. Bryan, 206 Cal. 254 [274 P. 326]), the fact that it did so in ruling upon the general demurrer cannot be held reversible error in view of the decided cases in this state." (20 Cal.2d at p. 643.)

=== CASE 2210990 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:00.500973+00 ===

247 Cal.App.2d 741 (1967)
PAUL FRETZ et al., Plaintiffs and Appellants,
v.
JACK P. BURKE et al., Defendants and Appellants.
Civ. No. 23297.
California Court of Appeals. First Dist., Div. Three.
Jan. 17, 1967.
Edward K. Allison and Moroney, Prior & Lanam for Plaintiffs and Appellants.
Arthur J. Lempert for Defendants and Appellants. *743
DEVINE, J.  [fn. *]
Plaintiffs obtained a preliminary injunction requiring defendants Jack P. Burke and The Fundamental Oil Corporation to pay their respective shares of profits of Mountain View Oil Company, a corporation, and defendants appeal; but $5,000 of the total amount was ordered retained in trust for plaintiffs, and this part of the order is appealed by plaintiffs.
The facts are before us in a settled statement. Plaintiffs are limited partners and defendant Burke is the sole general partner of Mountain View Oil Company. The company is operated by The Fundamental Oil Corporation under a management contract. This corporation is wholly owned by Burke.  [fn. 1] Plaintiffs seek dissolution of the partnership, alleging acts of breach of fiduciary relationship by Burke. They ask that Fundamental be enjoined from operating Mountain View, they demand damages, and they pray for other relief.
In their answer, Burke and Fundamental allege that the present action was part of a scheme of harassment to force Burke to purchase plaintiffs' interests; that the partnership is operating at a handsome profit and that a sale of it or its assets would be exceedingly detrimental to the interests of all concerned; that the demand for a sale of the assets is designed to diminish and perhaps extinguish the profits realizable by the general partner; and that all charges for operator's services have been reasonable and fair.
On October 26, 1964, after being served with the summons and complaint, Burke sent a letter to each of the plaintiffs, stating that the sums otherwise distributable to them out of partnership profits would henceforth be held in a "suspense account" pending the outcome of the action filed by plaintiffs. Defendant contends that the fund should be maintained as an offset to possible costs and expenses of litigation with which plaintiffs may be charged. Since October 1964, Burke or Fundamental has made distributions of profits to all partners except the plaintiffs. The total sum distributable each month was $5,000. The portion otherwise distributable to plaintiffs has been held in the suspense account. It is well in excess of $35,000.
The superior court, on motion of plaintiffs, ordered: (1) *744 that defendant pay plaintiffs their respective shares of profits of Mountain View, except $5,000; (2) that Burke deposit $5,000 in a trust account with plaintiffs as beneficiaries, to be held until final judgment in this action; and (3) that defendant pay plaintiffs their proportionate shares of all future profits of Mountain View. Defendant appeals from the order in its entirety. Plaintiffs appeal from the order to the extent that it requires the holding of $5,000 in trust.
General Principles
[1] General principles of law which apply to the granting of a preliminary injunction, or its denial (it was herein denied in part) are: (1) The act of the trial court is discretionary and will be disturbed on appeal only if abuse of discretion is shown. (Kendall v. Foulks, 180 Cal. 171 [179 P. 886]; Riviello v. Journeymen Barbers etc. Union, 88 Cal.App.2d 499, 510 [199 P.2d 400]; Hidden Harbor, Inc. v. American Federation of Musicians, 134 Cal.App.2d 399, 402-403 [285 P.2d 691].) (2) In this matter, wherein equities must be delicately balanced, each case is to be judged on its own peculiar facts. (Elsis v. Evans, 157 Cal.App.2d 399, 408 [321 P.2d 514]; Phillips v. Isham, 111 Cal.App.2d 537, 539 [244 P.2d 716].) (3) Preliminary injunction may be proper in partnership dissolution proceedings. (Kendall v. Foulks, supra, p. 174.)
Defendant's Appeal
We give, one by one, the points made by defendant as appellant, and our conclusions:
1. Defendant argues that an injunction is to be granted only to direct or to prevent future acts or omissions, not to undo what has been done because this is the function of other actions, such as one for damages. [2] It is true that the office of injunction is preventive rather than remedial. (People v. Paramount Citrus Assn., 147 Cal.App.2d 399 [305 P.2d 135]; Allen v. Hotel & Restaurant etc. Alliance, 97 Cal.App.2d 343, 347 [217 P.2d 699]; Vincent Petroleum Corp. v. Culver City, 43 Cal.App.2d 511, 515 [111 P.2d 433]; 43 C.J.S.,  22, pp. 443-444.) But an injunction may be granted as to past acts if there is evidence that they will probably recur. (Rosicrucian Fellowship v. Rosicrucian etc. Church, 39 Cal.2d 121 [245 P.2d 481]; Mallon v. City of Long Beach, 164 Cal.App.2d 178, 190 [330 P.2d 423]; Thome v. Honcut Dredging Co., 43 Cal.App.2d 737, 742 [111 P.2d 368].) Defendant plainly expects to continue withholding. Besides, defendant had not completed a wrongful act, such as seizing the funds *745 himself. He had placed them in a suspense account until determination of the lawsuit. The injunction simply directs that the part which belongs to plaintiffs shall be paid to them now, and shall not be held by defendant in suspense.
[3] A limited partner is entitled to receive a share of the profits. (Corp. Code,  15510, subd. (2).) That there were profits, disbursable, is shown by the fact that defendant paid himself his share, as well as the nonsuing partners theirs. We know of no law or principle which allows a managing partner to withhold the periodic share of profits from partners who seek accounting while making disbursements to himself and to nonsuing partners. [4] Since the court was enjoining defendant to pay future instalments of profits, the court could well act as it did in ordering disbursed to the owners the simple transfer of funds theretofore placed in suspense by unilateral act of defendant. Equity delights to do justice, and that not by halves. (30 C.J.S.,  104, p. 1069.)
[5] 2. Defendant argues that injunction will not lie to compel the payment of money. He argues that refusal to obey would produce contempt proceedings and possibly lead to imprisonment for debt, which is forbidden. (Cal. Const., art. I,  15.) But the court did not order defendant to pay anything from his own resources. The court neither created nor enforced a personal debt of defendant. The case is completely different from that cited by defendant, McCollum v. McCollum (1934, Tex. Civ. App.) 67 S.W.2d 1055, wherein the trial court had rendered a money judgment against certain partners for a salary for one partner, and the injunction was reversed because it gave a money judgment which must be paid under the penalty of contempt. The court here directed only that defendant pay plaintiffs in the manner he pays to others when profits are distributed. The court directed how payments are to be made when it has been decided that they are disbursable. If contempt proceedings were to follow, imprisonment would not be for debt but for noncompliance with an order as to the manner of payment of amounts demonstrably due because of the payment to others in the same class.
[6] 3. Defendant argues that need was not shown for the preliminary injunction, and that a mandatory injunction requires a very strong showing, much more than does a prohibitory injunction, a showing, in fact, of irreparable injury. No proof has been offered, says defendant, that the funds are *746 about to be dissipated or that defendant will be unable to disburse whatever amount an accounting may show to be due to plaintiffs. Defendant cites cases in which it is said that irreparable injury is a requisite to issuance of a mandatory preliminary injunction: Hagen v. Beth, 118 Cal. 330 [50 P. 425] (signs ordered removed); Bo Kay Chan v. Gerdon Land Co., 103 Cal.App.2d 724 [230 P.2d 1] (light well ordered restored); Allen v. Hotel & Restaurant etc. Alliance, 97 Cal.App.2d 343 [217 P.2d 699] (restoration to employment eligibility list directed). But in all of these in which the appellate court reversed the order granting the injunction, the plaintiff had obtained by the order the complete relief which he had sought in the action itself. The injunction did not tend to maintain the status quo but to coerce the defendant into performing an act in advance of trial which upon trial might not have been decreed. In the case before us, the order granting the preliminary injunction does not decide in whole or in part the merits of the controversy. It merely prevents defendant from putting funds which belong to plaintiffs into a suspense account, purportedly as security for possible costs, a security which the law does not allow him. The relief obtained by plaintiffs by the injunction is collateral to the relief which they seek by the action itself. We regard the order granting the injunction as preserving the status quo, namely, the procedure of disbursing profits as it had existed before commencement of the action. The status quo does not necessarily refer to inaction. It may encompass the continuing of regular and usual procedures.
[7] The term "irreparable injury" as applied to the granting of an injunction has been defined as "that species of damages, whether great or small, that ought not to be submitted to on the one hand or inflicted on the other." (Anderson v. Souza, 38 Cal.2d 825, 834 [243 P.2d 497]; Wind v. Herbert, 186 Cal.App.2d 276, 285 [8 Cal.Rptr. 817].) Defendant finds fault with this definition in that every injury is one which ought not to have been submitted to or inflicted; wherefore, the definition would make every injury irreparable. We believe the definition is not to be regarded as enlarging all injuries to the status of irreparability, but, as applied to cases such as the one before us, to be deemed as warranting the use of the injunctive power of the court against a wrong which the trial judge no doubt deemed insufferable because it constitutes an overbearing assumption by one person of superiority and domination over the rights and property of others. *747
Defendant claims statutory help from Code of Civil Procedure section 526, subdivision 5, which provides that an injunction cannot be granted to prevent the breach of a contract which would not be specifically enforced. This conflicts with defendant's insistence that the injunction is of the mandatory, not the prohibitory, kind. Anyway, the nature of the proceeding before us is not for specific performance nor for damages for breach of contract, but is of the equitable character of a suit for accounting. This distinction was made in Kendall v. Foulks, supra, 180 Cal. 171, 174-175.
Defendant argues that plaintiffs could not have had a clear right to relief, else the court would not have withheld the $5,000; but this does not follow. The withholding of the relatively small amount is discussed below.
[8] Finally, defendant argues that the injunction requires continuous supervision of future affirmative acts. He cites several cases in which specific performance has been denied for this reason; but preliminary injunction, as distinguished from specific performance, is by its nature limited in time. Moreover, its terms are simple and enforcement can be accomplished readily. The order granting the injunction must be affirmed.
Plaintiffs' Appeal
[9] Although the judge might well have ordered the entire amount held in the suspense account handed over to plaintiffs, it was not an abuse of his discretion to withhold a relatively small amount. The granting or denying of an injunction being so largely discretionary, the denial in part must likewise be held sustainable as an exercise of judgment. Mere error (and we do not hold there was error) is not sufficient to bring about reversal of an order denying in whole a preliminary mandatory injunction. (Alvarez v. Eden Township Hospital Dist., 191 Cal.App.2d 309, 311 [12 Cal.Rptr. 661].) It is not sufficient cause for reversal of a partial denial. The amount withheld is but a fraction of that which will now be payable to plaintiffs. There are five plaintiffs, so that the amount temporarily withheld from each is not large. Argument could be made, with some logic, that although defendant does not have a legal right to the withholding, once it has been done the holding in suspense of the relatively small amount of $5,000, as a sort of security for costs or as an incentive for plaintiffs to bring the case promptly to trial, need not be interfered with; but perhaps it is better to regard *748 this part of the court's decision as simply a discretionary abstention from the full use of the court's equitable power.
The order is affirmed in its entirety. Each party to bear own costs on appeal.
Draper, P. J., and Salsman, J., concurred.
NOTES
[fn. *]  *. Assigned by the Chairman of the Judicial Council.
[fn. 1]  1. Throughout this opinion reference is made to "defendant" in the singular, because defendants other than Burke are but nominal. The words "plaintiffs" and "defendant" are used rather than the terms "appellants" and "respondents" because both parties have appealed.

=== CASE 9737555 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:28:35.297154+00 ===

On Petition foe Rehearing
Buchanan, J.
The central factual issue in this case was whether the deceased-insured changed the beneficiary of a *43certain American United Life group life insurance policy on his life from Plaintiff-Appellee (Becky) to Louise, his first wife. To do so the deceased-insured would have been required to execute a Change of Beneficiary card.
Becky stipulated that a search had been made by the parties concerned for the original of a Change of Beneficiary card, “if there was a card,” and maintains our opinion assumes Becky’s acknowledgment of the existence of such card, a fact which Becky stoutly denies.
We held that Exhibits C, D, and E, excluded by the trial court, should have been admitted in evidence as they tended to support the execution of a Change of Beneficiary card by decedent. Our opinion carefully uses the words “diligent search” and in no way implies that Becky stipulated the existence of the Change card. The existence or non-existence of the Change card was for the jury to determine and Exhibits C, D, and E tended to support the existence and the contents of such a writing.
The stipulation was recognized for just what it was and no more, i.e., a diligent search had been conducted for an instrument whicli may or may not have been in existence. No semantic sleight of hand here.
Appellee’s Petition for Rehearing is denied.
Sullivan, P.J., and White, J., concur.
Note.—Reported at 306 N.E.2d 131.

=== CASE 3784366 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2016-07-06 07:34:05.35464+00 ===

The Court of Appeals, with one judge dissenting, decided in favor of the administrator, on the ground that upon the facts of the record no gift appeared to have been made, and that the deposit of Green's funds in a savings account to the credit of himself and Mrs. Richardson, the deposit being made payable to either or survivor, was intended to be of a testamentary character, which, as it was not executed with the formality of a will, was invalid. Viewing the transaction as a testamentary disposition, it of course lacks the requisites of a valid will; and viewing it as a gift, it may be questioned whether the delivery essential to constitute a completed gift was present. *Page 247
However, the particular form of deposit found in this case was a general deposit account, into which Green paid his money from time to time, to be repaid on demand, in whole or in part, as called for, in current money. In this kind of deposit the title to the money deposited passes to the bank from the depositor. The depositor is not entitled to have the identical thing deposited returned to him, but the bank becomes the depositor's debtor in the amount of the deposit. 7 Corpus Juris, 628;Treasurer v. Bank, 47 Ohio St. 503, 10 L.R.A., 196, 25 N.E. 697; C., H.  D. R. Co. v. Bank, 54 Ohio St. 60, 31 L.R.A., 653, 56 Am. St. Rep., 700, 42 N.E. 700; Covert v. Rhodes,48 Ohio St. 66, 27 N.E. 94; Bank v. Brewing Co., 50 Ohio St. 151, 40 Am. St. Rep., 660, 33 N.E. 1054.
Hence the specific question before us is not whether Green made a gift of the fund in specie, but whether he created in his sister a joint interest in the deposit equal to his own.
Now while Annie Richardson was authorized to withdraw all or any part of the balance at any time after this account was opened, so also was Jerome C. Green. The record shows that withdrawals and deposits were made only by Green, and no deposits or withdrawals whatever were made by Mrs. Richardson during Green's life. In other words Green exercised control of the account up to the time of his death. It was because of this retention of control that the Court of Appeals held there was no delivery, actual or constructive, of the fund to his sister.
This control, however, was not exclusive. It was just the same control that Mrs. Richardson *Page 248
herself was authorized to exercise. The sister's interest was equal to Green's. She could withdraw all or any part of the funds upon deposit at any time during Green's life. While the account remained in the bank and the authority to pay remained unrevoked, Green himself could make no more withdrawals than his sister. It is true that Green retained the power to revoke Mrs. Richardson's right to withdraw, but until her power was terminated by him according to the arrangement to which she had assented her authority over the deposit was equal to his own. Although Green retained control of the account she had equal control thereof subject only to his right to terminate the same.
The intent to leave to his sister the balance of the account upon his death was clearly manifested by Green's letters. Now when the decedent put the money in the bank subject to the right of his sister to withdraw therefrom, complying with all the rules of the bank, securing his sister's signature to the card evidencing the arrangement, he had done all that he could to place the account within her joint authority, and thereby by contract created in his sister a joint interest in the account, equal to his own.
Being immediately executed, this transaction required no consideration. 5 Corpus Juris, 930, note 3, and cases cited.
Mrs. Richardson was notified in writing of the creation of the joint interest and assented thereto in writing. The bank book was left at the bank, where, as the record shows, payment would have been made to Mrs. Richardson during Green's life-time *Page 249
if she had appeared to make a withdrawal. Being joint owner of Green's chose in action against the bank, with a right equal to Green's, at Green's death Mrs. Richardson was entitled to possession of the money due upon the account, as against the administrator.
There is authority contra to this holding. Carr v. Carr,15 Cal. App. 480, 115 P. 261; Drink-house v. German Savings Loan Society, 17 Cal. App. 162, 118 P. 953; Brown, Admr., v.Brown, 23 Barb. (N.Y.), 565; Wolfe v. Hoefke, 124 Wash. 495,214 P. 1047; Pearre v. Grossnickle, 139 Md. 274, 115 A. 49. However, the weight of authority supports our present conclusion.
It is generally held that an intent to transfer a present interest in the fund must be shown. Skill-man, Ex'r., v.Wiegand, 54 N.J. Eq. 198, 33 A. 929, and Raftery v. Reilly,41 R.I. 47, 102 A. 711.
Here there is no question, as appears in the letters given above, but that this intent existed. Under these circumstances the weight of authority is to the effect that a joint interest has been created. This is shown by the following cases:
Where an account in a savings bank was made in the name of the donor and donee jointly, it was held that there was a complete gift of a joint interest, though the donor retained the passbook. Commonwealth Trust Co. v. Du Montimer,193 Mo. App., 290, 183 S.W. 1137.
A niece, on decedent's death, was held vested with the title to decedent's deposit with a savings society which was transferred to a joint account in the names of both parties payable to survivor by decedent's direction; the niece drawing money *Page 250
therefrom thereafter. McCarthy v. Holland, Admr., 30 Cal. App. 495,158 P. 1045.
The owner of money has created a joint interest of another in a deposit when it appears to be his intention to divest himself of the exclusive ownership and control and vest such ownership and control jointly in himself and another, with the attendant right of survivorship. Raftery v. Reilly, 41 R.I. 47,102 A. 711; Id. (R.I.), 102 A. 963.
An aunt creating with her own money a joint bank account with her niece was held to have made a gift of the money then on deposit. Kelly, Treasurer, v. Woolsey, 177 Cal. 325,170 P. 837.
Where moneys belonging originally either wholly to a mother, or in part to her and in part to her daughter, are deposited by them in a bank in their joint names, and they both sign and deliver to the bank a writing stating that the account and all moneys credited thereon belong to them as joint tenants and are to be the absolute property of the survivor, the moneys remaining on deposit at the mother's death belong to the surviving daughter as constituting a valid gift. New JerseyTitle Guaranty  Trust Co. v. Archibald, 91 N.J. Eq. 82,108 A. 434, affirming 90 N.J. Eq. 384, 107 A. 472.
The deposit in a savings bank by one to the joint account of himself and another operates as a present and complete gift in joint ownership, if depositor clearly intended such result.Battles v. Millbury Savings Bank, 250 Mass. 180, 145 N.E. 55.
A depositor caused a savings bank account standing in his name to be changed so as to stand in the *Page 251
joint names of himself and wife., for the purpose of giving her the same control over the deposit as himself, and notified her of what he had done, and why he did it. Held, this was a fully executed gift to the wife. In re Griffith's Estate, 1 Lack. Leg. N., (Pa.), 311.
Where the decedent, who had had a bank account in his own name, changed the same to a joint account for himself and wife, the transaction must be deemed donative in character. In reLydig's Estate, 113 Misc. Rep., 263, 184 N.Y. S., 542.
In Kennedy v. Kennedy, 169 Cal. 287, Ann. Cas., 1916D, 515,146 P. 647, (Supreme Court of California, Feb. 11, 1915), the court held that a joint ownership, with the incident of survivorship attaching as a matter of law, may be created in a bank deposit by agreement between donor and donee.
These holdings apply irrespective of the fact that the power of revocation is retained, as it was in this case by the party who creates the joint interest. Kaufman v. Edwards, 92 N.J. Eq. 554,113 A. 598.
A gift of a savings bank deposit is none the less a gift because a power of revocation is retained by the donor in his lifetime and enjoyment is postponed until his death.Dunn v. Houghton, (N.J. Ch.), 51 A. 71; Raftery v. Reilly,41 R.I. 47, 102 A. 711; Battles v. Millbury Savings Bank,250 Mass. 180, 145 N.E. 55.
These holdings also apply even in the case where the bank book has been retained in the possession of the donor. It may be observed that the instant case is stronger upon the facts than *Page 252
the holdings here quoted, for in this case it is conceded that Green gave possession of the bank book to the bank and received therefor a receipt, which was found among his effects by the administrator. Hence a fair presumption arises upon the record that Green deposited his book with the bank to facilitate the making of withdrawals by his sister, Annie Richardson. In other words, Green had done everything in his power to create a joint interest in his sister, equal to his own, consummating the transaction by delivering the pass book to the bank where his sister might have equal access thereto.
However, the authorities do not ground their conclusions upon the proposition that the bank book must be left in the possession of a third party in order to create a joint interest in the deposit in a transaction of this kind. It is generally held that delivery of the bank book is not a prerequisite to the creation and transfer of a joint title in a savings deposit. Marston v. Industrial Trust Co., (R. I.), 107 A. 88.
A deposit of money in bank to the credit of the depositor or his wife, "or the survivor of them," operates as a gift to the wife, though she never had possession of the passbook.McElroy v. Albany Savings Bank, 8 A.D. 46,40 N.Y. S., 422.
The retention of a savings bank passbook, after an agreement with the bank that a donee thereof should have whatever balance might be left on the death of the depositor, does not affect the donation, which was completed when the contract right was vested in the donee; the bank book having *Page 253
been retained in order that the donor might exercise her rights in respect to the debt due from tile bank. Dunn v. Houghton, (N.J. Ch.), 51 A. 71.
Certain cases hold that a trust is established under these circumstances and that the bank is trustee for the donee. This is the ground of the decision in Booth v. Oakland Bank ofSavings, 122 Cal. 19, 54 P. 370, a well-considered case, which holds that a trust is created where one having a deposit in a savings bank stated to its teller that she wanted it so either of her two sisters could, in the event of her death, draw the money without probate proceedings, and thereupon gave an order to the bank to pay to either of them or herself, and furnished their signatures, and the bank added their names to the passbook and in like manner changed the account on the ledger.
However, we prefer to place our holding upon the ground above indicated. After all, upon deposit of an account the bank is constituted a debtor, and when the depositor orders the bank to pay himself or another upon order of either party, notifies the second party of the completed transaction and secures her signature evidencing assent to the arrangement, he has created in the second party by contract a joint interest in his right to the deposit equal to his own.
In this view of the case it makes no difference that prior to the creation of the deposit in question Green bad opened a joint account at the same bank for himself and his sister, Florence Desmond, and had later terminated that particular joint account. Reserving, as he did, the right to close such amount, he was only acting pursuant to the *Page 254
contract when he terminated his sister Florence Desmond's right to withdraw, and was equally within his rights when he reopened the account in the name of himself and Mrs. Richardson. The joint interest created by the opening of such an account was always subject to the right of the person who opened the account to terminate and revoke the authority to withdraw. In the case of the Desmond account this right was exercised. Not being exercised before Green's death in the case of the Richardson account, Mrs. Richardson was entitled to possession and ownership of the balance of the deposit as against the administrator.
Judgment of the Court of Appeals reversed.
Judgment reversed.
MARSHALL, C.J., JONES, MATTHIAS, DAY and KINKADE, JJ., concur. *Page 255

=== CASE 2211057 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:01.27692+00 ===

12 Mich. App. 44 (1968)
162 N.W.2d 310
BRIDGMAN
v.
BUNKER.
Docket No. 4,000.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided June 25, 1968.
James Thomson, for plaintiff.
Nunneley, Nunneley & Hirt (Thomas D. Rinehart, of counsel), for defendant Almstadt.
George N. Parris, Prosecuting Attorney, and Thaddeus F. Hamera, Assistant Prosecuting Attorney, for defendant Bereza.
*46 McGREGOR, J.
On Christmas Day, December 25, 1964, at approximately 4:45 a.m., trooper Thomas Bereza of the Michigan State police, on Gratiot avenue in Macomb county, observed an automobile coming towards him, going south in the northbound lane. He stopped the automobile, which was being operated by the plaintiff, observed that he was in a state of intoxication, arrested him, and took him to the county jail where he was "booked" on a charge of driving under the influence of liquor.[1] Subsequently, on Christmas Day, he was taken before Judge Bunker, found guilty, and was sentenced to serve 30 days in the county jail and fined $100 and court costs.
A State police officer then took the plaintiff to the county jail where he was received by deputy sheriffs, acting pursuant to the commitment papers from the court. On January 8, 1965, the plaintiff paid his fine and was released on a one-year probation sentence. Plaintiff appealed to the circuit court, which set aside the conviction on the ground that the accused was convicted on a legal holiday, and ordered the repayment of the fine and costs. Plaintiff then filed his action for false imprisonment, naming Judge Bunker, Trooper Bereza, and county Sheriff Almstadt as defendants.
Motions for summary judgment in favor of Bereza and Almstadt were granted by the circuit court.[2] The case as to defendant Bunker is not before us.
Plaintiff contends that the court, in making a determination of the facts in granting a summary judgment to defendants Bereza and Almstadt upon affidavit of motion for summary judgment, usurped the function of a jury, and denied the plaintiff his right of due process of law.
*47 A motion for a summary judgment admits all well-pleaded facts as true. The pleadings and motion affidavits disclose that the plaintiff's claims are insubstantial and without merit, and raise no genuine issues as to these two defendants.
The pleadings disclose nothing erroneous in the arrest of the plaintiff by trooper Bereza for a misdemeanor committed in the trooper's presence, the resulting charge, his conviction,[3] or the court sentence, except that the court procedure was held on Christmas Day. There was no illegal arrest in this case by Trooper Bereza. No one contends that Christmas Day is not a legal public holiday.
When the plaintiff was committed to the county jail, the sheriff was not there, but plaintiff contends that because the sheriff has charge of the jail by law,[4] any acts, knowledge, or misconduct of a deputy sheriff is constructively attributable to the sheriff under the doctrine of respondeat superior. The doctrine of respondeat superior is not applicable to a sheriff for acts, defaults, or misconduct of deputy sheriffs in the course of their duties.[5]
The statutes concerning State police and public safety include a pertinent clause relative to the instant matter, CL 1948, § 28.6 (Stat Ann 1961 Rev § 4.436):
"and each officer of said department are hereby granted all the immunities and matters of defense available or hereafter made available to conservators of the peace and/or sheriffs in any suit brought against them by virtue of acts done in the course of their employment."
*48 There is no allegation by plaintiff that the justice court operated by defendant Bunker was without jurisdiction or that any act was performed which indicated bias, fraud, or prejudice on the part of either of the defendants herein, Sheriff Almstadt or Trooper Bereza. Plaintiff's pleadings contend only that the holding of court on Christmas Day was illegal and coram non judice. There is no showing in the pleadings or supporting affidavits that the defendant trooper or the defendant sheriff did not act in good faith.
An officer is not required to look behind a regular warrant or commitment order coming from a proper jurisdiction. There is no claim that the process in the instant case did not issue from a court having authority of law to do so. With the policy of no undue delay in bringing an accused before a magistrate, holding of weekend arraignments, and the Supreme Court ruling that magistrates are on legal duty at all times, "Sunday, holidays, or no," People v. Hamilton (1960), 359 Mich 410, 417, a committing officer would be hard pressed to discern which proceedings are valid and which are not.
In Brown v. Hadwin (1914), 182 Mich 491, 495-497, the arrested person subsequently brought an action for false imprisonment, after being discharged on request of the prosecuting attorney, because of a faulty warrant, void on its face. In that false arrest case, a directed verdict of the trial court was sustained by the Supreme Court, which stated in its opinion:
"There is no question that the process in the instant case issued from a court having authority of law to issue such process, and that the process was legal in form, and we are of the opinion that the failure to allege to whom the liquor was furnished or sold is not such a defect as to notify or fairly apprise the officer that it was issued without authority. *49 As was said by Justice MARSTON, in Wheaton v. Beecher (1882), 49 Mich 348, 350, 351:
"`An officer to whom a criminal warrant is delivered by a magistrate may be indicted for refusing to serve or return the same. 1 Bishop, Criminal Law, § 350. If no cause or an insufficient cause appear therein and the person accused resists and kills the officer, then, according to the extent of the authority of the officer his death may be murder, manslaughter, or perhaps justifiable homicide. Hoye v. Bush (1840), 1 Man & Grang 775 (133 Eng Rep 545), cited in Drennan v. People (1861), 10 Mich 169, 183.
"`The officer is not bound to look behind a regular warrant coming from a proper jurisdiction.
"`In many cases it must be exceedingly difficult for the officer or his advisers to determine whether a warrant is or is not defective upon its face, and in view of the peculiar position in which the officer is placed, in all such cases he cannot be held liable in a civil action for damages, for making the arrest.' * * *
"The warrant issued was nevertheless fair on its face, and this proceeding against the process server is an action of false imprisonment alone. In such an action this court has not required the officer to look behind the process. In serving the process he has a right to rely on the warrant, and is not compelled to examine the complaint or other preliminary proceedings."
In an analogous case, Doak v. Springstead (1938), 284 Mich 459, the Michigan Supreme Court affirmed a directed verdict for the defendant in an action for false imprisonment where the plaintiff was arrested and detained on a charge of misdemeanor and subsequently convicted in justice court, although on appeal he was found not guilty by a jury. The court held that in an action for false imprisonment a conviction of the accused is conclusive evidence of *50 probable cause, although on appeal the conviction is set aside or the accused is acquitted, where there was no charge in the declaration that the conviction of the accused was obtained by unfair means.
It is the policy of the law to protect law officers acting in good faith from damage claims for false imprisonment if they are obeying orders issued from a court of competent jurisdiction.
"If possible, any doubt should be resolved in favor of an honest discharge of duty by peace officers, and the courts should not place them in fear of responding in damages for the lawful and proper discharge of that duty." Odinetz v. Budds (1946), 315 Mich 512, 518.
The summary judgment of the trial court is affirmed as to defendants Almstadt and Bereza, with costs to the appellees.
LESINSKI, C.J., and CANHAM, J., concurred.
NOTES
[1]  CLS 1961, § 257.625 (Stat Ann 1960 Rev § 9.2325).
[2]  GCR 1963, 117.1.
[3]  It is disputed by plaintiff that he pleaded guilty.
[4]  CLS 1961, § 51.75 (Stat Ann 1961 Rev § 5.868).
[5]  CLS 1961, § 51.70 (Stat Ann 1961 Rev § 5.863): "No sheriff shall be responsible for the acts, defaults or misconduct in office of any deputy sheriff."

=== CASE 9737556 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:28:39.266316+00 ===

Connor T. Hansen, J.
After the state had rested its case, counsel for the defendant moved for a dismissal on the ground that the state had not proved that the complainant and the defendant were not married. The motion was denied and no evidence was introduced by the defendant.
On appeal the defendant urges that the state failed to prove beyond a reasonable doubt the nonmarital status of the complainant and the defendant and that the defendant offered to have nonmarital sexual intercourse for money. These are two of the essential elements of the crime of which the defendant was convicted.
An examination of the record reveals that there is no direct evidence to the effect that the defendant was not married to the complainant or that she specifically offered to have sexual intercourse with him. We must, therefore, determine whether the circumstantial evidence presented at the trial is sufficient to sustain the finding of guilty by the trial court.
The complaining and principal witness in the case was a vice squad officer of the Milwaukee Police Department. He met the defendant while seated in his parked car on Third street in Milwaukee at 2:10 a. m. It was his own automobile and he was not wearing a police uniform. The defendant walked over to the passenger side of complainant’s automobile and asked him if he was looking for a girl. He replied, “Yes” and she responded that it would cost him some money. The officer asked, “What for?” and the defendant replied, “For a half and half.” He then asked, “How much money?” and she said, “20.”
*32The officer was told to follow another car driven by a man and in which the defendant was a passenger. The two cars proceeded to a residence at Eighteenth and Cherry in Milwaukee. The defendant got out of the car in which she was riding and the officer got out of his car. The defendant told the officer to come with her and they entered the residence. Inside the residence they met a Mr. Miller and the complainant then accompanied the defendant to the bedroom.
When the two of them were in the bedroom, the defendant said it cost $20 to go to bed with her and $3 for the room. The officer gave her the $3 for the room which she gave to Miller. The defendant told the complainant to undress and then left the room. She returned to the bedroom and told him to put the $20 on the dresser. She then left the room and returned with a pan of water and a bar of soap. The officer then put the $20 on the dresser. The defendant insisted the officer get undressed first, whereupon he identified himself as a police officer and arrested her.
Miller was called as a witness for the state and testified that he lived at the address where the activity took place. He testified that he saw the complainant and the defendant together and that she gave Miller $3. He also testified that he saw the complainant take her from the building.
There is absolutely no dispute as to any of the testimony offered. The appellant urges reversal claiming that the evidence does not sustain the finding of guilt beyond a reasonable doubt by the trial judge sitting as a finder of fact. It is argued that the evidence does not support the finding that the complainant police officer and the defendant were not husband and wife and that the defendant offered to have sexual intercourse with the complainant. A review of the evidence leads one to *33conclude that such a contention is little short of preposterous.
On review, the test requires that this court he satisfied that the finder of fact, on the credible evidence submitted, could find the defendant guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. State v. Stevens (1965), 26 Wis. 2d 451, 464, 132 N. W. 2d 502. The conviction must be affirmed if the evidence, believed and rationally considered by the finder of fact, was sufficient to prove the defendant’s guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. Oseman v. State (1966), 32 Wis. 2d 523, 531, 145 N. W. 2d 766. In a criminal case, the same rule applies whether the trial is to a court or to a jury. Alston v. State (1966), 30 Wis, 2d 88, 100, 140 N. W. 2d 286.
Also it is well established that a finding of guilt may rest upon evidence which is entirely circumstantial. State v. Smith (1967), 36 Wis. 2d 584, 153 N. W. 2d 538; Hemmis v. State (1964), 24 Wis. 2d 346, 129 N. W. 2d 209.
“The standard to be used when appraising the sufficiency of circumstantial evidence is identical in that each of the several circumstances relied upon must be proved beyond a reasonable doubt, and these circumstances must not only point with moral certainty to the guilt of the defendant, but must exclude every reasonable hypothesis of innocence. See State v. Johnson (1960), 11 Wis. 2d 130, 136, 104 N. W. 2d 379.” Smith, supra, 591.
Considering the conduct of the defendant and the complainant toward one another and the undisputed evidence of the testimony at the trial, we see no reasonable hypothesis upon which it could be concluded that defendant and complainant were husband and wife. There was sufficient credible evidence before the trial judge to warrant a finding that beyond a reasonable doubt the defendant offered to have nonmarital sexual intercourse for money. Also the fact finder had the opportunity *34to see and observe the parties. State v. Fries (1945), 246 Wis. 521, 17 N. W. 2d 578.
It is also contended that the evidence only establishes that the defendant offered the complainant a “half and half” and that nowhere in the record did the witness explain what a “half and half” was. This contention would gather significance if the officer had arrested the defendant immediately after she approached him on Third street as he sat in his car. However, in view of all that transpired after the initial offer, including the events in the residence at Eighteenth and Cherry streets, we conclude this argument to be without merit. We find nothing in the record to justify a reversal or the granting of a new trial.
By the Court. — Judgment affirmed.

=== CASE 9737557 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:28:39.270262+00 ===

Heffernan, J.
(dissenting). I respectfully disagree with my colleagues who would affirm the conviction.
To sustain a criminal conviction the state “must prove all the essential facts entering into the description of the offense.” Kreutzer v. Westfahl (1925), 187 Wis. 468, 478, 204 N. W. 595. In Koscak v. State (1915), 160 Wis. 255, 265, 152 N. W. 181, we said, “It is elementary that every essential of the offense charged must be established to constitute a violation of the criminal law.”
One of the elements of the crime of prostitution is nonmarital intercourse. In the instant case, not only was there no proof that the proffered connection was non-marital, but in fact there was no attempt at such proof. The majority opinion reasons that proof of this essential fact was made by circumstantial evidence. Even a cursory reading of the record should reveal that there was no attempt to circumstantially show the omitted fact. There was an utter failure of proof either direct or circumstantial.
As soon as the state rested, the defense moved to dismiss for failure of proof. The record shows that the *35district attorney asked the judge to permit the recall of the officer, who was apparently still present in the courtroom, to supply the omitted testimony. The judge, however; ignored this offer of testimony and proceeded to make a finding of guilty. It would appear, under these circumstances, we should not now shore up a shoddy job by conjuring up circumstantial evidence to sustain the state’s case. It is well recognized that circumstantial evidence should not be resorted to when there is direct evidence available, as clearly there was here. 29 Am. Jur. 2d, Evidence, p. 312, sec. 264, points out, “When it is disclosed that direct evidence of a material fact is probably in existence, circumstantial evidence of that fact cannot be resorted to . . . .”
It is clear that the state negligently failed to prove the essential elements of the crime. When the omission became apparent and could readily (we assume) have been rectified, it was error for the judge, knowing of this omission, to proceed with a finding of guilty. If the trial judge concluded that the case ought not to have been dismissed, it was well within his discretion, under these circumstances, to permit the state to recall its witnesses to prove the missing elements of the crime.
I am authorized to state that Mr. Justice Wilkie joins in this dissent.

=== CASE 9737558 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:28:40.563211+00 ===

JUSTICE COOK delivered the opinion of the court: The question raised in this case is whether an amended complaint adding additional parties is properly filed within the period of the statute of limitations when the clerk tells counsel the order granting leave to file the amended complaint will be entered by the court as a routine matter, but that is not done. The trial court answered the question in the negative and granted the motions to dismiss filed by the additional defendants. We reverse and remand. I. BACKGROUND Plaintiff Patricia Fischer is the independent administratrix of the estate of Laveda Mary Zara, who died December 29, 1998. An action for the death of a person arising out of patient care shall not be brought more than two years after knowledge of the death. 735 ILCS 5/13—212(a) (West 2000). Under section 13 — 212(a) of the Code of Civil Procedure (Code) (735 ILCS 5/13 — 212(a) (West 2000)), the last day for filing an action in this case was December 29, 2000. On June 30, 2000, plaintiff filed a complaint against defendant Senior Living Properties, L.L.C., d/b/a Westabbe Health Care Center (Senior Living). Summons was issued and Senior Living filed its entry of appearance. Plaintiff obtained leave of court for additional time to file the affidavit and report required by section 2 — 622 of the Code (735 ILCS 5/2—622 (West 2000)). Senior Living had not filed an answer as of December 29, 2000. On December 27, 2000, plaintiffs attorney, officed in Effingham County, filed an amended complaint with the circuit clerk of Sangamon County. The amended complaint added two defendants, defendant St. John’s Hospital of the Hospital Sisters of the Third Order of St. Francis, d/b/a St. John’s Hospital of Springfield (St. John’s), and defendant Joseph J. Maurer, M.D. Plaintiff’s attorney personally delivered the following documents to the circuit clerk: a certificate of service on Senior Living, a motion for leave to file the amended complaint instanter, a proposed order granting leave to file the amended complaint instanter, and summons accompanied by copies of the amended complaint. The circuit clerk advised plaintiffs attorney that the order for leave would be tendered to the judge that day as a routine matter unless plaintiffs attorney was informed otherwise. The documents were all file-stamped on December 27, 2000, summons was issued, and St. John’s and Dr. Maurer were served on January 3, 2001. On January 30, 2001, Dr. Maurer’s attorney told plaintiffs attorney the court file failed to reflect entry of the order granting leave to file the amended complaint instanter. Without objection the order was entered following a hearing on February 13, 2001. Dr. Maurer filed a motion to dismiss on March 23, 2001, alleging that the complaint failed to state a cause of action and was not filed within the two-year statute of limitations, because the complaint was not filed until after December 29, 2000. On June 5, 2001, after a hearing, the trial court entered an order allowing St. John’s to adopt Dr. Maurer’s motion to dismiss, allowing plaintiffs counsel to file an affidavit to supplement the record as to the statements made by the clerk’s office personnel, and allowing the motions to dismiss on the basis that the statute of limitations had expired on December 29, 2000. The trial court subsequently made a finding under Rule 304(a) (155 Ill 2d R. 304(a)) that there was no just reason for delaying either enforcement or appeal. II. ANALYSIS  Motions to dismiss, under both sections 2 — 615 and 2 — 619 of the Code (735 ILCS 5/2—615, 2—619 (West 2000)), present questions of law which we review de nova. Illinois Graphics Co. v. Nickum, 159 Ill. 2d 469, 494, 639 N.E.2d 1282, 1293-94 (1994).  This court has stated that “an amended complaint, adding additional parties, filed without leave of the court is a nullity.” Allen v. Archer Daniels Midland Co., 129 Ill. App. 3d 783, 786, 473 N.E.2d 137, 139 (1985). We had previously recognized that there are problems when leave of court must be obtained to amend a complaint near the end of a limitations period. Clark v. Brokaw Hospital, 126 Ill. App. 3d 779, 782-83, 467 N.E.2d 652, 655 (1984) (motion to convert respondent in discovery to a defendant sufficient if motion made within six-month period even though the motion is not heard and ruled on until after six-month period). The customary deliberate method of setting and hearing motions may not be appropriate where the statute of limitations is about to expire. In Allen, we declined to consider the procedure mentioned in Clark because there was no evidence that the motion for leave to amend was filed within the period of limitations. Allen, 129 Ill. App. 3d at 786, 473 N.E.2d at 139. Allen and Clark both recognize that strict compliance is not always required in obtaining leave to amend a complaint. Petrella v. Leisky, 92 Ill. App. 3d 880, 417 N.E.2d 134 (1981), the case relied upon by Allen for the “nullity” language quoted above, involved the filing of a complaint as a supplemental pleading under section 2 — 609 of the Code (735 ILCS 5/2—609 (West 2000)). Section 2 — 609 specifically requires that a supplemental pleading be “by leave of court and upon terms.” 735 ILCS 5/2—609 (West 2000). The complaint in Petrella was not a proper supplemental pleading because supplemental pleadings are only employed to set forth matters arising after the original pleading has been filed. Petrella, 92 Ill. App. 3d at 881, 417 N.E.2d at 136. There was apparently no motion for leave to amend filed in Petrella. The case cited by Petrella for the proposition that an ineffective attempt to amend a complaint is a nullity had applied “prior law” to an attempt to amend made without leave of court and after judgment. Register Gazette Co. v. Larash, 109 Ill. App. 236, 237-38 (1903); Petrella, 92 Ill. App. 3d at 883, 417 N.E.2d at 137. Clearly a defendant who is added after judgment and without any opportunity to defend is unfairly prejudiced by the amendment.  Section 2 — 616 of the Code, dealing with amendments “introducing any party who ought to have been joined,” contains no specific requirement that leave of court be obtained. 735 ILCS 5/2—616(a) (West 2000). The section simply provides that “[a]t any time before final judgment amendments.may be allowed on just and reasonable terms.” (Emphasis added.) 735 ILCS 5/2 — 616(a) (West 2000). Perhaps the legislature could lay down an inflexible rule that no amendment adding parties could ever be effective without a signed order granting leave to amend. The very general language of section 2 — 616, however, does not establish such a rule. The provisions of section 2 — 616 requiring leave of court are directory, not mandatory. In re Estate of Zander, 242 Ill. App. 3d 774, 777, 611 N.E.2d 86, 88 (1993). Defendants cite a number of cases in support of the trial court’s order. All those cases recite the statement that “[a]n amended complaint adding additional parties filed without leave of court is a nullity.” Callaghan Paving, Inc. v. Keeneyville Construction Co., 197 Ill. App. 3d 937, 939, 557 N.E.2d 228, 229 (1990) (plaintiffs amendment adding a defendant without leave of court was a nullity and it must be disregarded on review); First Robinson Savings & Loan v. Ledo Construction Co., 210 Ill. App. 3d 889, 892-93, 569 N.E.2d 304, 307 (1991) (an order adding a defendant obtained ex parte and without notice is void); Greene v. Helis, 252 Ill. App. 3d 957, 960, 625 N.E.2d 162, 165 (1993) (leave to amend must be expressly granted by court order and will not be implied). However, the holdings in all those cases have been rejected by subsequent decisions of the supreme court and of this court. In Ragan v. Columbia Mutual Insurance Co., 183 Ill. 2d 342, 701 N.E.2d 493 (1998), the supreme court considered a case where the plaintiff had amended his complaint without leave of court to add a prayer for prejudgment interest. The defendant did not object and filed a response, and prejudgment interest was awarded, but defendant raised the argument in the appellate court that the trial court had no jurisdiction over the amended complaint, citing Greene and other cases. The supreme court distinguished those cases because they involved an amendment that would add a party but also found the cases “unpersuasive.” Ragan, 183 Ill. 2d at 354, 701 N.E.2d at 498. “[Section 2 — 616 of the] Code of Civil Procedure provides that technical defects in pleadings should not prevent the courts from doing justice between the parties.” Ragan, 183 Ill. 2d at 354, 701 N.E.2d at 498. The idea that the filing of an amended complaint was a void act because it was done without statutory authority, was a nullity, and constituted error that was “jurisdictional” has been rejected by this court. Ganci v. Blauvelt, 294 Ill. App. 3d 508, 515-16, 690 N.E.2d 649, 654 (1998) (failure to obtain leave to file a third-party complaint seeking contribution was waived and could not be raised for the first time on appeal). “[T]reating obtaining of leave as an element of jurisdiction is contrary to the most recent theories of circuit court jurisdiction.” Ganci, 294 Ill. App. 3d at 516, 690 N.E.2d at 654. Under the 1970 Constitution (Ill. Const. 1970, art. VI, § 9), circuit court jurisdiction is conferred by the constitution and strict compliance with the statute is no longer necessary. Ganci, 294 Ill. App. 3d at 519, 690 N.E.2d at 656; see also Estate of Zander, 242 Ill. App. 3d at 777, 611 N.E.2d at 88 (provisions of section 2 — 616 requiring leave of court are directory, not mandatory, and may be waived). First Robinson has been overruled by the Fifth District, where it originated. Savage v. Pho, 312 Ill. App. 3d 553, 558, 727 N.E.2d 1052, 1056 (2000).  Defendant Maurer argues that even if the trial court had granted leave to amend on December 27, the complaint would have to be dismissed because plaintiff did not set the motion for hearing and give the existing defendant, Senior Living, the number of days’ notice required. We disagree. The motion may be considered as an emergency motion which may be made ex parte and heard without calling the motion for hearing. Savage, 312 Ill. App. 3d at 558, 727 N.E.2d at 1056. It is impossible to conceive of a court denying leave to amend in the situation of this case, where the parties to be joined are not before it to make their positions known. Even if the court suspects the complaint may be defective, the proper course is to allow it to be filed and then hear the arguments of the parties. Motions granting leave to amend to add parties during the pleading stage are granted as a matter of routine. Savage, 312 Ill. App. 3d at 559, 727 N.E.2d at 1057. The clerk in this case stated these orders were entered as a matter of routine, and the judge in fact did sign the order. If a party files a complaint on paper which measures 8V2 by 12 inches, must the complaint be stricken? See 134 Ill. 2d R. 10 (“shall be 8V2 inches by 11 inches”). If an appellee’s brief in the appellate court has a cover that is more a dark blue than a light blue, must the brief be ignored? See 134 Ill. 2d R. 344(c) (“light blue”). Some rules constitute minor technicalities; enforcing them exalts form over substance to deprive a party of his day in court and frustrating the resolution of the litigation on the merits. Shaifer v. Folino, 272 Ill. App. 3d 709, 720, 650 N.E.2d 594, 601 (1995), quoting Hatcher v. Kentner, 120 Ill. App. 3d 571, 575, 458 N.E.2d 131, 133-34 (1983); Cirrincione v. Johnson, 184 Ill. 2d 109, 113-14, 703 N.E.2d 67, 69 (1998) (invalidating lien due to the instant technicalities would serve no purpose). We conclude that the filing of an amended complaint where the judge has not signed the order granting leave is not per se inadequate. We must accordingly consider whether there was substantial compliance with the requirements of sections 2 — 616 and 13 — 212(a) of the Code in this case. We should consider the object sought to be obtained and the evils intended to be remedied by these statutes. The purpose of a statute of limitations is to discourage the presentment of stale claims. Guzman v. C.R. Epperson Construction, Inc., 196 Ill. 2d 391, 400, 752 N.E.2d 1069, 1075-76 (2001). Plaintiff should not be allowed to extend the statute by doing nothing for months, to the prejudice of the persons sought to be added as defendants. We should be wary of a rule that would allow the apparent running of the statute to be explained away by private actions within the control of counsel. In re Application of the County Collector, 265 Ill. App. 3d 485, 491, 637 N.E.2d 679, 683 (1994) (important to establish a clear rule and reliable standard of proof regarding when documents will be deemed filed). There is no risk in the present case of manipulation by counsel. Counsel here performed the most public of acts: he handed the complaint to the circuit clerk, who file-stamped it and caused summons to be served on the parties named. St. Johns and Maurer were not unduly prejudiced by the failure to sign the order granting leave. They received their summons and copies of the amended complaint at the same time they would have received them if the order had been signed. Nor are defendants prejudiced by denying them a technical argument which would have defeated plaintiffs claim. We are not interested in whether defendants prevail in this case, but whether the matter is resolved justly, on its merits. People ex rel. Hartigan v. All American Aluminum & Construction Co., 171 Ill. App. 3d 27, 33, 524 N.E.2d 1067, 1070 (1988) (allowing Attorney General to add parties not named in the order granting leave to amend). The routine nature of these orders is confirmed by the fact that there were ways defendants could have been added without requesting any leave of court. Petrella recognized that plaintiff could have filed a separate action against the new defendant without leave of court and then moved to consolidate the actions. Petrella, 92 Ill. App. 3d at 882, 417 N.E.2d at 137. Petrella, however, passed over that possibility: “[rjegardless of what plaintiff could have done, what he did was to file the supplemental complaint as an adjunct to his pending case.” (Emphasis in original.) Petrella, 92 Ill. App. 3d at 882, 417 N.E.2d at 137. That attitude is mistaken. “[I]t is not an adequate discharge of duty for courts to say: We see what you are driving at, but you have not said it, and therefore we shall go on as before.” Johnson v. United States, 163 F. 30, 32 (1st Cir. 1908) (Holmes, J.). The character of a pleading is determined by its content and not the title or label asserted by the petitioner. People v. Harvey, 196 Ill. 2d 444, 457, 753 N.E.2d 293, 300-01 (2001) (Fitzgerald, J., specially concurring) (attack on void judgment need not satisfy requirements of section 2 — 1401 even though it was a section 2 — 1401 petition that was filed); La Salle National Trust, N.A. v. Board of Directors of the 1100 Lake Shore Drive Condominium, 287 Ill. App. 3d 449, 456, 677 N.E.2d 1378, 1383 (1997) (plaintiff adequately pied “constructive fraud” even though those words were not used). A timely order granting leave can only be a minor technicality when parties can otherwise be properly added without obtaining leave. The argument is made the late order granting leave to amend could have been accepted if, instead of seeking leave to amend instanter, plaintiff had obtained a hearing date for the motion, notified Senior Living of the motion and hearing date, and obtained an order allowing amendment. The only difference between that and what was actually done is the opportunity given Senior Living to appear at a hearing and object. Again, concern over the rights of Senior Living is misplaced. It is unlikely that a defendant such as Senior Living will object to the addition of a defendant, and Senior Living did not object when it was given the opportunity to do so here. Objecting to a motion for leave to amend is not the mechanism for challenging a defective pleading; the mechanism is the filing of a section 2 — 615 motion after the amendment has been allowed. Trinity Bible Baptist Church v. Federal Kemper Insurance Co., 219 Ill. App. 3d 156, 163, 578 N.E.2d 1375, 1379 (1991). St. John’s and Maurer should not be heard to complain that Senior Living’s rights were violated. It is possible to blame every failure of the trial court and the circuit clerk upon the attorneys, by suggesting they should have better “monitored” the case. It is fair to criticize attorneys where something is overlooked in the trial court and not brought to the court’s attention for a lengthy period of time. That was not the case here. Can plaintiff’s attorney be criticized for handing the motion for leave to amend to the clerk and not to the judge? “Pleadings subsequent to the complaint, written motions, and other papers required to be filed shall be filed with the clerk ***.” 134 Ill. 2d R 104(b). Should plaintiffs attorney have ignored the clerk’s instructions and taken the motion for leave to amend to the judge himself? Should plaintiffs attorney have phoned the judge or sat outside his chambers until he was personally told by the judge that the order had been signed? A rule that prevents the court from using court officers and employees and insists upon personal action by the judge will not promote judicial economy (or civility between the bench and bar). Should plaintiffs attorney have gone to look for a judge? A system where attorneys select the judge to sign their orders is not a desirable one. Local attorneys should not be advantaged in these cases by their ability to contact a judge who is not in his chambers or is handling other matters. Whatever rule is applied in this case should not vary from county to county. Circuit rules may direct how routine motions are to be handled but those rules should be considered directory and not allowed to invalidate a filing where there has been substantial compliance. III. CONCLUSION  We conclude that plaintiffs attorney properly filed his papers in the office of the circuit clerk and followed the instructions given him by the clerk. The clerk placed the motion on the court’s routine motion call. The trial court would have signed the order granting leave to amend as a matter of routine and did eventually sign the order here without objection. The failure to obtain that signature on December 27 was only a minor technicality. Plaintiff substantially complied with both sections 2 — 616 and 13 — 212(a). Failure to timely obtain the signature did not cause any delay, defendants were in no way prejudiced, and plaintiff acted in good faith. We reverse the trial court’s judgment that the statute of limitations had expired in this case and remand for further proceedings. Reversed and remanded. TURNER, J., concurs.