=== CASE 9739498 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:16:25.472035+00 ===

*506GIVAN, Justice,
concurring in result.
I am compelled to write a concurring in result opinion in this case because I perceive the majority has misconceived the long-standing rules of discovery procedure as applied to criminal cases.
For a thorough understanding of the principles involved in this most important application of the rules of discovery, I would refer the reader to 2 Wiltrout, Indiana Practice § 945(6) (1967). There the author discusses the rule and the exceptions thereto, citing as authority the case of Hickman v. Taylor (1947), 329 U.S. 495, 67 S.Ct. 385, 91 L.Ed. 451 for the proposition that work products of counsel are not generally discoverable.
The Hickman case specifically mentions statements taken of potential witnesses as being included within the work-product exception to discoverability. During the 1960s, when Indiana was contemplating the adoption of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, the matter was referred to a Civil Code Study Commission. After extensive study and much research, the Commission prepared a volume entitled, Indiana Rules of Civil Procedure Proposed Final Droft, which was submitted to the Bar, to the Legislature, and to the Supreme Court for study and possible implementation. In that draft, starting at page 128, there is an extensive explanation of Rule 26, entitled "General Provisions Governing Discovery." Here we find no debate that work products are not generally discoverable. However, the text informs us of the various exceptions to that rule and again in the comments cites us to many cases including Hickman, supra.
Equipped with this scholarly study, the Legislature first enacted the rules as a statute. This was accomplished through cooperation between the Legislature and the Supreme Court with the understanding of both that the rules contained several statements of substantive law which did not come within the province of the Supreme Court to adopt. After passage by the Legislature, the rules then were submitted to the Supreme Court which, with minor changes to some of the obviously procedural matters, adopted them. Rule 26 was adopted without change.
Following this adoption, we find many cases, most of which are cited by the majority in their opinion, implementing and explaining Rule 26 as applied to criminal cases. The general holding has been that unless there is a criminal rule directly opposed to the civil rules, the civil rules also will apply in criminal cases. However, as to Rule 26, this Court has held in the cases cited by the majority, that as far as criminal cases are concerned, the trial court has a wider latitude in permitting discovery than generally is accepted in civil cases.
In most of the cases cited by the majority, this Court upheld the trial court's discretion whether to order the production of statements which ordinarily would be considered as work product. In some of those cases, it was held that the asking party should be allowed such discovery because they clearly had demonstrated an exception to the general rule, and in order to do justice, the production should be ordered. In other cases, we reversed the trial judge's order to produce where there had been no showing of such necessity, e.g., State ex rel. Keaton v. Circuit Court of Rush County (1985), Ind., 475 N.E.2d 1146; State ex rel. Meyers v. Tippecanoe Superior Court (1982), Ind., 438 N.E.2d 989. I see no contradiction in any of these cases. Though the results differ, the cases demonstrate a clear understanding of the rule and its exceptions and make consistent application thereof.
In cases such as Burns v. State (1987), Ind., 511 N.E.2d 1052, cited by the majority, we have held that the work-product exception does not preclude discovery of verbatim statements of witnesses once they have testified at trial. Here again, we see a clear articulation of the exceptions and how they are to be applied to the rule. The majority sets out these cases and correctly describes what they hold. However, such observations are by no means authority for the statement in the majority opinion, "We therefore hold that the work-product doctrine is not applicable to shield ver*507batim witness statements from otherwise proper discovery."
In the case at bar, appellant had filed a motion requesting that the State produce the names and addresses of all the persons the State had interviewed plus written and oral statements, excluding memoranda reporting or summarizing their statements. The trial court granted appellant's motion as to a list of names of all witnesses to be used by the State, but the motion otherwise was denied. There is no showing in this record that an exception to the general work-product rule existed requiring the disclosure of material such as statements of witnesses.
The majority opinion patently ignores the well-founded principle that an exception must be demonstrated to the trial court before any work-product material may be discovered. When such a showing is made, conceivably a trial judge could abuse his discretion by refusing to allow such discovery. When, however, as in the case at bar, there has been no such showing and the trial judge exercised his discretion in refusing to order disclosure of work prod-uet, his ruling should be sustained. Though the majority eventually has reached the correct result in this case, I am concerned that they have muddied the water on this issue and have made a clearly erroneous statement leading members of the bench and bar -to believe that work-product statements taken of prospective witnesses are discoverable under all circumstances regardless of need.
I would hold that the trial court's denial of appellant's broad discovery request was not error.
PIVARNIK, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9738639 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:59:18.019794+00 ===

WAHL, Justice
(concurring in part, dissenting in part).
Not only should defendant’s two convictions for aggravated assault and his conviction for unauthorized use of a motor vehicle be vacated, as the majority holds, the conviction for burglary should be vacated as well.
It is unconscionable that a defendant, to avail himself of his right under Minnesota law to be tried by a jury of twelve, must run the risk of facing four additional charges arising out of the same incident and end up with a maximum of 40 years instead of the maximum 20 years he could have received on conviction of the aggravated robbery with which he was charged at the first trial.
The state had all the facts concerning the Orman robbery and defendant’s complicity in it before issuing the single-count complaint on which defendant was first tried. With knowledge of Minn.Stat. § 609.585, which makes possible convictions and consecutive sentences for both burglary and any other crime committed on entering or in the building entered, the state chose to proceed to trial on one count of aggravated robbery. During the course of that trial, through no fault of defendant, one of the jurors did not appear. In order to be assured of his right to a unanimous verdict by a jury of twelve, defendant moved for a mistrial, joined by the state. The court, agreeing that this was the “proper thing in the sense of justice,” declared a mistrial.
The state issued two new complaints before the second trial, adding two counts of aggravated assault, one count of burglary, and one count of unauthorized use of a motor vehicle. On defendant’s conviction on all charges, the court imposed two consecutive 1- to 20-year sentences. Defendant’s assertion of his right to a jury of twelve resulted in a sentence twice what he might have received had he been found guilty at the first trial.
This court, in State v. Holmes, 281 Minn. 294, 161 N.W.2d 650 (1968), held that an appellant’s right to appeal a conviction *751could not be chilled by the imposition, on retrial, of a sentence more onerous than the one he initially received. The rule in Holmes, the court noted in State v. Prudhomme, 303 Minn. 376, 228 N.W.2d 243 (1975), was based on procedural fairness and principles of public policy, rather than on constitutional grounds. Those same principles of public policy, that same concern for procedural fairness apply with equal force to the case at bar. Regardless of what offenses might have been charged in the original or in a properly amended complaint, defendant should not be subjected to additional convictions and a double sentence for the exercise of so fundamental a right as trial by a jury of twelve. He should be convicted and sentenced on the aggravated robbery charge for which he was first partially tried and on that charge only.

=== CASE 2217030 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:20.972859+00 ===

256 Cal.App.2d 693 (1967)
WILLIAM McLEOD, Plaintiff and Appellant,
v.
CITY OF LOS ANGELES et al., Defendants and Respondents.
Civ. No. 31767.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. One.
Dec. 6, 1967.
Gladys Towles Root and K. E. Nungesser for Plaintiff and Appellant. *694
Roger Arnebergh, City Attorney, Bourke Jones, Assistant City Attorney, Jack L. Wells and Consuelo B. Marshall, Deputy City Attorneys, for Defendants and Respondents.
FOURT, J.
This is an appeal from a judgment after the sustaining of a demurrer without leave to amend.
William McLeod on June 2, 1966, filed a petition in the Superior Court of Los Angeles County wherein, among other things, he alleged the incorporation of the City of Los Angeles] that the members of the board of civil service commissioners of the city were duly appointed and acting; and that the police department of the city operates under the charter provisions of the city. He further alleged that he was appointed a member of the police department about October 1, 1955, and served until about July 2, 1965, and that on the latter date he was wrongfully and with coercion forced to resign from the department; that he was subjected to intensive interrogation without legal counsel and was falsely accused of misconduct and deprived of due process of law; that another member of the department charged likewise was not dismissed; that he, petitioner, maintained an excellent record and conducted himself properly; that as a consequence petitioner has been deprived of employment, retirement benefits and other benefits without just cause.petitioner sought a writ to compel the city to reinstate him as a member of the department, and for all other proper relief in the premises and for costs.
A demurrer to the petition was sustained and petitioner filed an amended petition in the superior court on July 25, 1966.petitioner realleged the formal allegations of the first petition and then set forth that on August 30, 1965, petitioner had petitioned the board of civil service commissioners for reinstatement to the department in accordance with the provisions of section 112 1/2 of the city charter. A copy of the document submitted to the board of civil service commissioners was attached to the complaint wherein it was stated, in effect, that petitioner rescinded his resignation of July 2, 1965. The reasons for the stated rescission in general were that he, the petitioner, was under pressure, that he was told that if he would resign no criminal charges would follow, that if he did not resign for "personal reasons" that upon inquiry by any prospective employers the files and records with reference to the charges of Beverly Tate would be made available, that his resignation came on July 2, 1965, after *695 hours of interrogation, all without counsel, and that the grand jury did not bring in a criminal bill against him.
It was further alleged that by letter of October 7, 1965, the board of civil service commissioners directed to petitioner a report dated September 27, 1965, wherein the board indicated that it had received and filed the demand.petitioner also realleged his service in the department, his coerced resignation, his intensive interrogation, the false charges leveled against him, his past record with the department and then sought the same relief as mentioned in the original petition.
An answer and a demurrer were filed in behalf of the city and the city authorities. The demurrer was sustained without leave to amend and judgment of dismissal was ordered on December 5, 1966. A timely notice of appeal was filed.
Section 112 1/2 of the Los Angeles City Charter reads:
"Whenever it is claimed by any person that he has been unlawfully suspended, laid off or discharged, and that such lay-off, suspension or discharge is ineffective for any reason, any claim for compensation must be made and a demand for reinstatement must be presented in writing within ninety days following the date on which it is claimed that such person was first illegally, wrongfully or invalidly laid off, suspended or discharged. Such demand for reinstatement must be filed with the Board of Civil Service Commissioners and such claim for compensation for such allegedly wrongful, illegal or erroneous discharge must be filed with the City Clerk. Failure to file such demand for reinstatement within the time herein specified shall be a bar to any action to compel such reinstatement and proof of filing such a demand for reinstatement must be completed and proved a condition precedent to the maintenance of any action for reinstatement.proof of filing the claim for compensation within the time and in the manner herein specified shall be a condition precedent to any recovery of wages or salary claimed to be due on account of said layoff, suspension or discharge. Except as herein specified, such claims for compensation shall conform to the requirements of Sections 363, 369 and 376 of this charter." (Italics added.)
Insofar as the record discloses, petitioner never did file a claim for compensation with the city clerk pursuant to the above set forth section of the charter. It is further noted that there is no allegation in the petition to the effect that petitioner had exhausted all administrative remedies provided for by section 112 1/2 of the charter, nor is there any allegation which purports to explain why petitioner waited about eight *696 months after his claim was denied before instituting his action.
Appellant asserts that in the proceedings brought by him he was attempting to be reinstated, that he has the right to seek reinstatement of his wages or compensation in another proceeding because, as he contends, section 112 1/2 of the charter does not apply to a policeman. Further, he argues that it was error to sustain the demurrer upon any theory of laches and that the statements made by him advised of his right to counsel.
We have concluded that it was proper, under the circumstances, to sustain the demurrer and to award judgment to the defendants.
[1] "... [T]he rule is that where an administrative remedy is provided by statute, relief must be sought from the administrative body and this remedy exhausted before the courts will act." Compliance with this rule is a "jurisdictional prerequisite to resort to the courts." (Abelleira v. District Court of Appeal, 17 Cal.2d 280, 292, 293 [109 P.2d 942, 132 A.L.R. 715].)
This court in City of Los Angeles v. Superior Court, 246 Cal.App.2d 73, in answering a contention that section 112 1/2 of the charter was inapplicable to police officers, stated as follows at page 78 [54 Cal.Rptr. 442]:
"... [I]t is our conclusion that the cases of Varela [107 Cal.App.2d 816 (238 P.2d 62)] and Temple [92 Cal.App.2d 177 (206 P.2d 909)] properly followed the Moreno [20 Cal.2d 531 (127 P.2d 914)] decision and were correctly decided. (In each case a hearing by the Supreme Court was denied.) The applicability of section 112 1/2 does not depend upon the method of prosecuting charges against an employee but, rather, upon the nature of the claim made by the employee after his discharge. The crucial holding of these cases is that section 112 1/2 applies to any civil service employee, including a policeman and a fireman, who claims that he has been unlawfully suspended, laid off or discharged. Although in Moreno, Varela and Temple there was an alleged coerced or involuntary resignation which was held to be tantamount to an unlawful discharge, the police officer in Stoker v. Bowron [129 Cal.App.2d 671 (277 P.2d 439)] was removed by an order of discharge following the filing of a complaint and a finding by the board of rights, all as provided in section 202. It was there contended by the discharged officer, as it is by Heckl, that section 112 does not apply to firemen and policemen; that section 202 provides a complete procedure for trial *697 and punishment by a board of rights with regard to charges against a policeman, and that the three-year limitation of subdivision (16) thereof was applicable; that, since the Civil Service Commission has no jurisdiction over disciplinary proceedings against firemen and policemen and has no authority to grant a rehearing, it necessarily follows that section 112 1/2 has no application to them. The court held that since the discharged employee had alleged 'a wrongful discharge,' compliance with section 112 1/2 of the city charter was a prerequisite to the maintenance of an action. The court relied upon the Varela case and also referred to Lorenson v. City of Los Angeles [41 Cal.2d 334 (260 P.2d 49)], in which the Supreme Court held that the provisions of section 112 1/2 did not apply since plaintiff therein had not made 'the claim which is essential to the applicability of section 112 1/2,' stating (41 Cal.2d at p. 341): 'Other charter provisions which the city also urges as requiring reversal of the judgment clearly do not apply. For instance, with respect to section 112 1/2, plaintiff has not claimed that he was illegally, wrongfully, or invalidly "suspended, laid off or discharged." Rather he has at all times protested his belief, and his right to believe, that the order of the chief of police temporarily relieving him from duty, although unjust and unfounded in ultimate truth, was legal and valid until such time as the board of rights had disposed of the charge against him.'"
"In the instant case, as in Moreno, Varela and Temple, Heckl claims that his resignation was made under duress and was illegal from the date of said resignation. He, accordingly, places himself squarely within the provisions of section 112 1/2."
Petitioner in this case states, in part, that this proceeding is only for reinstatement and not for any compensation, yet he also contends that he can, under another separate proceeding, claim and collect compensation for the period from the date of his resignation and his reinsatement. There is, of course, no waiver of any back salary and no allegation of such. We think the charter provision contemplates that if a policeman has in mind the collection of money for his services from the date of his resignation that he should make the claim in accordance with the provisions of the charter.
The work of the police department must go on and the presumption is that petitioner's position was promptly filled after his resignation. In fact, appellant in his brief indicates that the position was probably filled the day following his *698 resignation. See Newman v. Board of Civil Service Comrs., 140 Cal.App.2d 907, 910-911 [296 P.2d 41], where it is said:
"In United States ex rel. Arant v. Lane [249 U.S. 367 (63 L.Ed. 650, 39 S.Ct. 293)], it is pointed out that 'When a public official is unlawfully removed from office, whether from disregard of the law by his superior or from mistake as to the facts of his case, obvious considerations of public policy make it of first importance that he should promptly take the action requisite to effectively assert his rights, to the end that if his contention be justified the government service may be disturbed as little as possible, and that two salaries shall not be paid for a single service.' (Italics added.)"
"In Corcoran v. City of Los Angeles, supra, this court said (p. 842 [136 Cal.App.2d 839 (289 P.2d 556)]): 'With respect to actions brought by discharged public officers and employees to obtain reinstatement, it has been uniformly held that they must act with the utmost diligence in asserting their rights.' If unreasonable delay occurs, prejudice is presumed. [Citation.] However, such presumption does not arise in every situation for often the delay in asserting a party's claim to reinstatement in a public employment is excusable. [Citation.]"
"In Atlantic City v. Civil Service Com. of New Jersey [3 N.J. Super. 57 (65 A.2d 535)], a discharged employee attempted to avoid the consequences of laches by waiving his claim for compensation for the period between the date of his dismissal and the filing of his suit. In discussing this question the court stated: 'This waiver should not nor does it warrant this court eliminating from our consideration the fact of Barratta's unwarranted inaction. In Marjon v. Altman, supra [120 N.J.L. 16 (197 A. 724)], Mr. Justice Heher stated: "Moreover, the long delay was clearly disadvantageous to the municipality, in that reinstatement would entail liability for double compensation, to say nothing of the detriment that frequently flows from the uncertainty respecting the incumbent's status." ' (Italics added.)"
"Assuming arguendo, petitioner has waived  [fn. *] and can waive effectively back salary [citation], she does not thereby entirely eliminate prejudice to the city by her undue delay in filing suit for reinstatement. If petitioner were reinstated in her old position her successor would naturally have to be displaced and no doubt reinstated in another position, thus displacing another employee. This disruptive process might *699 well continue on down through the department. Such uncertainty is detrimental to employee morale and to the department's efficiency and effectiveness. The service to the public is thereby disturbed and consequently suffers. [Citations.]"
See also Wolstenholme v. City of Oakland, 54 Cal.2d 48, where the court stated at page 50 [4 Cal.Rptr. 153, 351 P.2d 321]:
"(1) Public policy requires that an employee of a public body who claims to have been improperly or illegally discharged must act with the utmost diligence in asserting his rights. [Citations.]"
"(2) It is presumed that where one has been dismissed from an active position in the public service, someone else has been chosen to take his place. [Citations.]"
"(3) If a discharged public employee delays unreasonably in bringing an action to obtain reinstatement, prejudice is presumed. [Citations.]"
[2] In the case at bench it appears on the face of the record that petitioner waited about eight months before instituting an action in the matter after it was determined that his resignation was not to be overturned. There is no allegation in the petition with reference to this delay. Petitioner's choice in bringing his action apparently was deliberate and uninfluenced by any promises or suggestion of reinstatement. He chose to remain silent and inactive when vigilance and alertness were required of him. There was no explanation apparently for the inertia--except perhaps that he stood in the shadow of an indictment by the grand jury and which under the circumstances is no excuse and in any event no allegation is made with reference thereto. There was by the delay an acquiescence by the petitioner which precludes him from now litigating the matter. He was a police officer of about ten years' experience, presumably he was well acquainted with his rights and to wait eight months before doing anything is too long under the circumstances. The taxpaying public has an interest which is entitled to some protection.
We hold that under the circumstances petitioner was guilty of laches in not commencing his action within due time. His pleadings made no allegation of excuse for the delay.
We have considered petitioner's other contentions and find no merit therein.
The judgment is affirmed.
Wood, P. J., and Lillie, J., concurred.
NOTES
[fn. *]  *. "On July 27, 1953, petitioner filed a claim for salary with the city clerk. It was denied by the city council on November 18, 1953."

=== CASE 2217032 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:21.001091+00 ===

90 Ill. App.2d 31 (1967)
234 N.E.2d 339
William Coursey, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
Board of Fire and Police Commissioners of the Village of Skokie, Illinois, and Kenneth B. Chamberlain, Chief of Police of the Village of Skokie Police Department, Defendants-Appellees.
Gen. No. 50,682.
Illinois Appellate Court  First District, Third Division.
November 30, 1967.
*32 *33 Gene J. Shapiro and Edward G. Raszus, of Chicago (Gene J. Shapiro, of counsel), for appellant.
John E. Toomey and Lee M. Burkey, of Chicago, amici curiae.
Marvin J. Glink, of Chicago, for appellees.
MR. JUSTICE DEMPSEY delivered the opinion of the court.
William Coursey, a policeman of the Village of Skokie, was charged with several violations of its police department's rules. After a hearing before the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners he was discharged from service. He filed suit for administrative review. The trial court affirmed the board's decision and he has appealed.
The charges against Coursey were based upon his conduct in regard to certain juvenile violators of the village's curfew ordinance, his failure to report the incident fully and his refusal, during the subsequent investigation, to take a polygraph examination. It is his position that the findings of the board were arbitrary, capricious and contrary to the manifest weight of the evidence.
On the night of April 25th and the early morning of April 26th, 1964, Coursey was on duty and assigned a *34 specific beat to patrol in his squad car. Shortly after midnight, while making his rounds, he stopped at a bowling alley to check for violations of the curfew. The manager of the alley told him that a young boy was alone in a car in the parking lot. Coursey went to the car to question him. The boy, 13 years old, told him he was waiting in the family car for his sister and her girl friend. Coursey took the boy inside the bowling alley while he looked for other violators of the curfew. About half an hour after midnight an automobile with two teenage couples in it entered the parking lot. The boy said he thought the auto was the one his sister was in and that she had been "out whoring around." He also used other vulgarisms. Coursey asked if one of the occupants of the auto was the boy's sister and Cathy, 17 years old, said that she was. She told Coursey that her brother had been left behind because he had been causing trouble and using foul language. Coursey told them they were in violation of the curfew, asked if they had identification cards and wrote down their names, addresses, ages and telephone numbers. He reprimanded them and told the boys to go home. He offered to take the other girl, Helen, home and said he would explain to her parents why she was late coming in. Helen said she had come with Cathy and would leave with her. Coursey then said he would follow to make sure she arrived without hindrance. He escorted the car to Helen's home in Morton Grove without having requested permission to leave Skokie. At Helen's home he again said that he wanted to speak with her parents but she told him that her parents were in bed. He then told her to tell Cathy to meet him at the parking lot of the Niles Township High School so that he could talk to her about the language her brother was using.
The evidence as to what transpired at the high school parking lot is conflicting. Coursey's testimony before the board follows: Cathy and her brother met him at the *35 parking lot. He called the boy over to the squad car and asked him about the vulgar words he was using. After talking about five minutes, he told the boy to tell Cathy to come over to the car. He questioned her about the boy's language and suggested that she tell her mother about it. He talked to her for five to seven minutes and then, about 1:45 a.m., she and her brother drove away. He followed their car for a short distance and continued his patrol when they turned off.
Cathy and her brother related a very different version of what took place. The boy testified that Coursey called him into the squad car, asked him why he called the girls the names he did and if he knew the meaning of the words. He was then told to send his sister over to the squad car. Cathy stated that her brother came to their car and said Coursey wanted to talk to her. She entered the squad car and Coursey asked where her brother learned that language. He asked how broadminded she was and if she "ever had it." He asked her to conduct an experiment to help her brother: to expose herself to him, to let him touch her and to keep a record of their reactions. Shortly before the conversation ended, Cathy asked what time it was and was told it was 2:00 a.m. When she returned to her car, she drove away and Coursey followed. Several blocks later he signalled for her to stop; she did so and then entered the patrol car. He told her to start the experiment immediately, to unfasten her bra and let her brother touch her; he said, "Well, let me help you undo your bra." She refused, went back to her car and sped away. Coursey followed for a short time and then turned back.
When Coursey finished his eight-hour shift at 7:00 a.m., he returned to the station house and filed an "activity report." The report did not show that he had detained and questioned violators of the curfew or that he had left his beat or the village.
*36 The following day, after completing his tour of duty, Coursey told his supervisor he was worried about an incident which happened the night before; that he had ejected some teenagers from the parking lot of a bowling alley and one girl said she would make trouble for him. Coursey said that was all that happened and that the manager of the alley was there at the time. He was told not to worry. He did not disclose that he had left his beat and that he had stopped the teenagers again in the high school parking lot.
Cathy, her brother and their mother made a complaint to the state's attorney and a police investigation began. Coursey was questioned by the state's attorney and a police detective and, according to the latter, did not attempt to withhold information from them. Shortly thereafter the chief of police sent Coursey a written order to submit to a polygraph examination. Coursey did not appear for the test. Soon afterward the following charges were placed against him:
(1) failure to obey the order directing him to take the polygraph examination;
(2) insubordination in failing to comply with the order;
(3) professional misconduct on the evening of April 25th tending to bring the police department into disrepute;
(4) leaving his assigned beat and duty without being relieved, and
(5) failing to properly complete his activity report for his period of duty from 11:00 p.m. on April 25th to 7:00 a.m., April 26th.
The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners found him guilty of all except the third charge; no decision was rendered on that charge because of the board's findings on the other four charges, but the board stated that his conduct on the night in question was unprofessional.
*37 [1, 2] The statute under which the board acted provides, in relevant part, that "... no officer ... of the ... police department ... shall be removed or discharged except for cause...." Ill Rev Stats, c 24, § 10-2-17 (1963). Although "cause" is not defined by the statute, the courts have construed it to be some substantial shortcoming which renders the employee's continuance in office in some way detrimental to the discipline and efficiency of the service and which the law and sound public opinion recognize as good cause for his no longer holding the position. Murphy v. Houston, 250 Ill. App. 385 (1928). The rule to be applied in determining whether the appellant is correct in his contention that the board's findings against him must be reversed is that a decision of an administrative agency is not to be set aside unless it is against the manifest weight of the evidence. Avent v. Police Board of City of Chicago, 49 Ill. App.2d 228, 199 NE2d 637 (1964).
[3] The board's finding that Coursey was guilty of leaving his assigned beat and the village limits of Skokie without authorization is unexceptionable, for he admitted that he went to Morton Grove and that he did not have permission to do so. He explained that he felt it was his job to see that the teenagers got home. However, he did not explain why, having escorted Helen to her home outside of Skokie, he did not also accompany Cathy and her brother to their home which, too, was beyond his jurisdiction. Nor did he offer justification for his failure to obtain permission to leave his beat or his failure to radio the police station that he was departing from his assigned patrol. The gravity of his act is intensified by the fact that less than six months previously he had been reprimanded for a similar offense, advised that at no time was he to leave his beat unless authorized and warned that further conduct of this nature would result in more stern disciplinary action. Although there may be circumstances which would require a police officer to leave his *38 beat and would prevent his requesting permission or giving immediate notice to his superiors, they were not present in the situation confronting Coursey, on the evening of April 25th. The situation did not call for speedy and uninterrupted action from him; there was no emergency and he was not in pursuit of a known or suspected criminal. By leaving his beat and going out of the village without permission, Coursey disabled himself from responding quickly to whatever jeopardy might threaten the lives and property of those within his jurisdiction, and seriously weakened the plan of community protection established by his superiors. This conduct was detrimental to the discipline and efficiency of the police department, and the board's decision that this was cause for his discharge was not improper. Hammers v. Board of Fire and Police Com'rs, 10 Ill. App.2d 218, 134 NE2d 647 (1956).
The charge that Coursey failed to complete the activity report was based upon his failure to record his prolonged detention of Cathy and her brother and the circumstances under which he abandoned his beat. His explanation for not including these items in his report was that he did not think they were necessary. His report showed only that he made a "premises examination" at the bowling alley, one other "premises examination," and spent the balance of his period of duty  seven and a half hours  on patrol. The report was incomplete and the testimony indicated that Coursey's familiarity with departmental requirements should have apprised him of this. His immediate supervisor stated that the interrogation of the adolescents for a period of two hours should have been noted on the activity report. Another superior testified that the detention of juveniles in excess of an hour also should have been noted on the report. He testified further that all the Skokie police officers were advised of the importance of keeping a log of activities and of accounting for their duty time, and that he had discussed with *39 Coursey the procedure to be used in filling out the report. Coursey was familiar with the function of the report: to provide the administrators of the police department with the information necessary for an evaluation of the effectiveness of current practices and an assessment of the performance of each officer. His failure to include the names and addresses of the detained juveniles might not by itself have rendered the report incomplete, but his total suppression of the events occurring after his initial questioning of them made it inaccurate and misleading. The report not only did not disclose that a significant part of his time was taken up in questioning the teenagers; it also implied that during this time he was actively patrolling his beat. That Coursey violated a departmental rule and that the violation was serious was established by the evidence.
The board's finding that Coursey was guilty of insubordination in not taking the polygraph examination has been argued more extensively than all other points. Interest engendered by this finding brought requests for filing of amici curiae briefs; the requests were granted and briefs have been accepted on both sides of the issue. Epitomized, the arguments made by Coursey and in his behalf are these:
He had the right not to take the examination; therefore, his refusal to take it was not insubordination and should not be regarded as an admission of guilt.
Despite this, the invocation of his right colored the board's thinking on the other charges against him and was the real reason for the severe penalty imposed on him.
The order of the chief of police was unauthorized by State statute, village ordinance or police department rule.
*40 It was unnecessary because he had cooperated with his interrogators and had answered all questions put to him.
It was unreasonable because a polygraph examination is fallible and without probative value.
It was useless because the chief of police testified that the outcome would not have been used for or against him and the board conceded it would not have considered the result if the test had been taken.
It was unjust because willingness or unwillingness to take a polygraph examination is inadmissible in civil, criminal or administrative proceedings.
[4, 5] Illinois courts have held that disobedience to a proper order given by a superior officer is cause for discharge (Zinser v. Board of Fire and Police Com'rs, 28 Ill. App.2d 435, 172 NE2d 33 (1961)) and that an officer's refusal to sign an immunity waiver before testifying before a grand jury is ground for dismissal (Drury v. Hurley, 339 Ill. App. 33, 402 Ill. 243, 88 NE2d 728 (1949), cert den 339 U.S. 983; Moretti v. Civil Service Board, 2 Ill. App.2d 89, 118 NE2d 615 (1954)), but there has been no Illinois decision as to whether a police officer's refusal to submit to a polygraph examination is cause for his discharge. There are decisions outside of Illinois which hold that it is and this also is the opinion of the Attorney General of Illinois: Fichera v. State Personnel Board, 217 Cal App2d 613, 32 Cal Rep 159 (1963); Frazee v. Civil Service Board, 170 Cal App2d 333, 338 P.2d 943 (1959); Illinois Attorney General's Report and Opinions, No. 346 (1962). On the other hand, Stape v. Civil Service Commission, 404 Pa 354, 172 A2d 161 (1961) is to the contrary. Also, in administrative proceedings, the National Labor Board and the Board of Review of the Labor Department of Illinois have rejected an unfavorable inference *41 of guilt from failure to take a lie test. Lone Star Co., 149 NLRB, No. 67, 1964, 57 LRRM 1365; Wieboldt Stores, Inc., 65-BRD-111; Montgomery Ward & Co., 65-BRD-112; Monogram Models, Inc., 65-BRD-113.
No question of the constitutional privilege against coerced self-incrimination is involved in this case. Coursey did not refuse to submit to the test on the ground that it might have resulted in his making self-incriminating statements which could be used against him in a subsequent criminal proceeding. Nor did the board derive any imputation of guilt from his refusal  for it made no finding concerning his alleged unprofessional conduct in relation to the juveniles. The precise issues, then, are whether the chief of police had authority to order him to take the examination and whether the order was reasonable and, if so, whether his refusal to follow the order was a proper reason for his discharge.
[6, 7] The corporate authorities of each municipality may prescribe the duties and powers of all police officers. Ill Rev Stats, c 24, § 11-1-2 (1963). Although no rule of the Skokie Police Department specifically covers polygraph examinations, one of the department's rules is that the officer assigned to investigate a complaint by a citizen against a member of the department:
"... shall conduct a thorough and accurate investigation. Such investigation shall include formal statements from all parties concerned, when necessary and pertinent, ... and all other information bearing on the matter."
The authority of the police chief to order an officer to take a polygraph examination, and to determine when the order should be given, can be derived by implication from this rule. But more important than this, the authority of a police chief under proper circumstances to issue such *42 an order, like any other sound and reasonable order for the good of the service, is inherent in his position.
There may be circumstances wherein a superior officer's order that a subordinate submit to a polygraph test would be arbitrary, but here, with conflict between the juveniles' accusations and Coursey's denials, the order was reasonable. What is more, it would not have been useless. The case was of public interest (see Coursey v. Greater Niles Tp. Pub. Co., 82 Ill. App.2d 76, 227 NE2d 164 (1967)) and the citizens of Skokie were entitled to assurance that the village's police force was above reproach. The chief of police was confronted with a situation where public confidence in his department might be undermined by the accusations made against one of its members. The chief would naturally want his subordinate exonerated and his department vindicated. A successful lie test by the truth-asserting officer would be a long step toward these ends  for in the public mind the result of such a test is often conclusive. In a situation like this, arranging for a polygraph examination and requesting the officer to take it was neither unreasonable nor useless. The chief would expect the officer to pass the test, and publication of the anticipated result would, from the public's view, clear the officer and restore confidence in the department.
[8-10] The statutes prohibiting a court from requiring or suggesting that the defendant in a criminal trial or the plaintiff or defendant in a civil trial submit to a "polygraphic detection deception test" apply neither in terms nor in principle to a proceeding before a Board of Fire and Police Commissioners. (Ill Rev Stats, c 38, § 158-1 (1961); Ill Rev Stats, c 110, § 54.1 (1963).) The board is required to investigate the charges of misconduct placed against an officer, and in its investigation it has power to secure by its subpoena the attendance and testimony of witnesses. Ill Rev Stats, c 24, § 10-2-17 (1963). The board's assessment of the officer's fitness for the *43 responsibilities of police duty should be based upon all the information reasonably related to his fitness, and his willingness or unwillingness to submit to a polygraph test when accused or suspected of a crime, or of conduct detrimental to the police force, is certainly a factor to be weighed.
Effective and efficient operation of a police department requires that allegations of police misconduct be thoroughly investigated. The polygraph machine can be a useful investigative tool when the test is skillfully prepared and is administered and interpreted by a qualified person; while it is not accurate to the degree that absolute judgments can be made as to the veracity of the person tested (People v. Triplett, 37 Ill.2d 234, 226 NE2d 30 (1967)) the results are often reliable within recognized limits. Thus, for example, the results of a polygraph examination may be of help in narrowing the field of persons suspected of an offense or may assist in a determination whether to commence disciplinary action when, as here, there is an accusation against a police officer which he insists is untrue. Be that as it may, the issue is not the accuracy of a polygraph examination, but Coursey's failure to take an examination.
[11] The chief of police did not exceed his authority in ordering Coursey to take the examination and his authority was not arbitrarily exercised. As a private individual Coursey did not have to submit to the examination, but as a policeman he did not have the privilege of refusing; having refused, he forfeited any right he had to be retained on the police force because his refusal was in conflict with his obligation as a policeman to obey the order of his commanding officer. His refusal impeded the investigation of a serious charge affecting the whole police department as well as himself. To sustain his action would be to vitiate the systematic authority and discipline upon which proper enforcement of the law is dependent.
*44 The evidence was sufficient to sustain all the factual findings made by the board. And it therefore became the board's responsibility to evaluate the gravity of the proved violations and to determine what disciplinary sanction should be imposed for the infractions of the police department regulations and the noncompliance with the instruction of the department's commanding officer. The decision to remove Coursey from the force was not capricious; it was reasonably related to his misconduct, to the discipline and efficiency of the department and to the maintenance of public confidence in the department.
The judgment of the Circuit Court upholding the decision of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners of the Village of Skokie is affirmed.
Affirmed.
SULLIVAN, P.J. and SCHWARTZ, J., concur.

=== CASE 2217038 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:21.062509+00 ===

256 Cal.App.2d 190 (1967)
63 Cal. Rptr. 841
SMITH-RICE HEAVY LIFTS, INC., et al., Plaintiffs and Appellants,
v.
THE COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES, Defendant and Respondent.
Docket No. 30256.
Court of Appeals of California, Second District, Division Two.
November 21, 1967.
*191 Graham, James & Rolph, Graham & James, Reed M. Williams and Don A. Proudfoot, Jr., for Plaintiffs and Appellants.
Harold W. Kennedy and John D. Maharg, County Counsel, and John D. Cahill, Deputy County Counsel, for Defendant and Respondent.
HERNDON, J.
Plaintiffs appeal from that portion of the judgment which denies them recovery of ad valorem property taxes levied for the years 1962 and 1963 on certain "derrick barges" owned by appellants. Appellants contend (1) that two of their barges were specifically exempted from all such taxes by the terms of article XIII, section 4 of the California *192 Constitution; and (2) that in any event none of their barges was subject to tax assessment by the County of Los Angeles by virtue of Revenue and Taxation Code, sections 1139 and 1140.
Section 4 of article XIII reads as follows: "All vessels of more than 50 tons burden registered at any port in this State and engaged in the transportation of freight or passengers shall be exempt from taxation except for state purposes.
The indicated sections of the Revenue and Taxation Code provide as follows:
"§ 1139. Except as otherwise provided in this article, when the owner or master of a taxable vessel gives written notice of its habitual place of mooring when not in service to the assessor of the county where the vessel is documented, the vessel shall be assessed only in the county where habitually moored."
"§ 1140. Vessels, except ferryboats, regularly engaged in transporting passengers or cargo between two or more ports and vessels concerning which notice of habitual place of mooring has not been given shall be assessed only in the county where documented."
The determinative facts, insofar as they were not based upon express stipulation, are without essential conflict. Appellants' barges are vessels without means of self-propulsion on which large and powerful cranes have been affixed. An officer of the appellant corporations testified that "the principal reason that the various companies employ ... [our] barges is because of their capacity or ability to lift heavy weights with their cranes." The barges are used to perform such heavy-lift services as dredging, laying pipe, construction work, lifting cargo and testing equipment. When the cranes located thereon are being operated, the barges remain motionless in the water. They are, however, occasionally moved between lifts if the next item to be lifted is then beyond the reach of their boom or if, after having lifted the item, the place of deposit is beyond such reach. In the latter case the material lifted is placed upon the deck of the barge until it has been shifted to a point permitting its deposit in the desired location.
It is stipulated that appellants' barges (1) are vessels, (2) of more than 50 tons burden, and (3) are registered at a port in this state, i.e., San Francisco. Therefore, the controversy presented by appellants' first contention narrows to the question whether or not the above described activities constitute "the transportation of freight" within the meaning of this *193 expression in California Constitution, article XIII, section 4. The issue is narrowed even further by appellants' concession expressed in the following manner in their closing brief:
"Appellants do not contend that when the vessels were dredging, laying pipe, engaged in construction work, and testing equipment, they were transporting freight. But appellants do contend that the vessels were engaged in the transportation of freight when they were used for what respondent characterizes as `lifting cargo'."
Initially appellants had sought recovery of taxes paid on five of their barges, i.e., numbers 5, 7, 15, 16 and 17.[1] However, at the commencement of the trial it was stipulated that barge number 5 was not engaged in the transportation of freight for hire at any time material to either the 1962 or 1963 assessment and barge number 15 was not so engaged in respect to the 1962 assessment. Following the court's pronouncement of judgment, but before entry thereof, it was further stipulated that barge number 15 should be deemed entitled to tax exemption for the year 1963. The reason given for this latter stipulation is that during this period "the crane was removed from the barge and it was under lease by plaintiff to Garvin Tugboat and Salvage Company, and was being used in the hauling of rock and freight." Judgment was entered as to these two barges in accordance with these stipulations.
The parties selected the sample periods January 1 through March 21 of 1962 and 1963 for the purpose of determining the questioned commercial use of the three remaining barges during the years in issue.
Based on this agreement, an exhibit was introduced into evidence that contained an enigmatic daily breakdown of the operations of each of the barges during the selected periods. In summarized form these Tables of Uses contained the following information:
Days                   Cargo       Cargo
Used      Non-Cargo   (Carry)   (Non-Carry)
Derrick Barge  7-1962      24          5          7          15
Derrick Barge  7-1963       9          5          3           1
Derrick Barge 16-1962      23          8          4          12
Derrick Barge 16-1963      28         13         10           5
Derrick Barge 17-1963       9          2          6           2
*194 The court concluded that barge number 17 was engaged in the transportation of freight in 1963 within the meaning of article XIII, section 4, and therefore was exempt from the tax imposed. Respondent has not appealed from this determination and we express no opinion on its propriety. The court held that the other barges were not engaged in the transportation of freight and were not exempt from taxation.
The only explanation of the material contained in this exhibit, or the anticipated use to be made thereof by the trial court, is found in the following quotation from the reporter's transcript:
"MR. WILLIAMS [counsel for appellants]: Does the Court have the table of uses before it? THE COURT: Yes, I have it now. MR. WILLIAMS: I think a couple of comments would be in order with respect to what the table shows. As the Court will note there are laid out in column form and Mr. Cahill [counsel for respondent] and I have selected the period of January through March as a period to look at the uses of the derrick barges for the purpose of determining their overall use. The total number of days in which the derrick barges were used for hire or for compensation for any purpose are set forth in the first column entitled `Days Used.' The second column of `Non-Cargo,' indicates those days on which the barges were used for compensation for a period unrelated to the cargo activities. The third column is one which indicates the days on which the derrick barges were used for compensation, for cargo work and where the cargo was loaded onto the derrick barge and the derrick barge moved from one place to another with the cargo actually on board. The last column `Non-Carry' indicates the days in which the derrick barges were used for cargo work for compensation where the derrick barge did not, itself, physically move with the cargo on board. Do you have anything you wish to add to that, Mr. Cahill? MR. CAHILL: No, I have nothing to add."
[1] The Supreme Court of California in Cedars of Lebanon Hospital v. County of Los Angeles, 35 Cal.2d 729, stated at page 734 [221 P.2d 31, 15 A.L.R.2d 1045]: "Constitutional provisions and statutes granting exemptions from taxation are strictly construed to the end that such concession will be neither enlarged nor extended beyond the plain meaning of the language employed. [Citations.] ... Such rule of strict construction governing property tax exemptions is distinguished from the rule of liberal construction applying in the determination of exemption qualifications under social security and *195 unemployment compensation acts. [Citations.] Exemption provisions in statutes of the latter character will be liberally construed so as to effectuate their beneficent purpose to encourage and promote organizations seeking classification within the broad scope of the statutory language. [Citations.] This is not, however, the rule to be applied where exemption is claimed from general property taxation as provided in our state Constitution. (Art. XIII, § 1, Watchtower Bible & Tract Soc., Inc. v. County of Los Angeles, 30 Cal.2d 426, 429 [182 P.2d 178].)" (Italics added.)
[2] The rule has long been established in California that a presumption exists in favor of the validity of a tax assessment and that it is incumbent upon a person complaining thereof to prove a case showing the assessment was unauthorized by law. (Savings & Loan Soc. v. San Francisco, 146 Cal. 673, 678 [80 P. 1086]; Western Union Tel. Co. v. County of Los Angeles, 160 Cal. 124, 126-127 [116 P. 564]; Utah Construction v. Richardson, 187 Cal. 649, 654-655 [203 P. 401].) We have concluded that appellants failed to sustain their burden of proof in the instant case.
Neither the Table of Uses introduced as an exhibit nor the explanation thereof quoted supra gives any indication of the nature of the barges' movements, or the distances involved in such movements when they were engaged in what is denominated "Cargo (carry)" activities. The officer of appellant corporations who testified on their behalf did assert that "during 1962 and 1963 cargo was transported from one port to another port within the State of California." He did not indicate that such indefinitely described services were performed by any of the barges here involved or that such services were performed during the stipulated "sample periods." Judging from the photographs introduced by appellants as exhibits, it appears that even in their "Cargo (carry)" activities, the movements of the barges were limited to short distances within the harbor itself when the cargo to be lifted from a dock onto the deck of a commercial freighter was situated beyond the effective scope of their boom or when during unloading operations it was desirable to deposit the cargo at a point beyond their stationary reach.
[3] However, even if we were to conclude, as the trial court apparently did, that appellants' barges would qualify for the constitutional exemption if their principal operations during the chosen "sample periods" were of the "Cargo *196 (carry)" variety, it would not follow that their "Cargo (non-carry)" operations entitled them to similar treatment. As previously indicated, appellants concede that when their barges are acting as stationary, though floating, piers for the cranes located thereon, the movement of various items of property for hire by means of the cranes does not constitute the "transportation of freight" within the meaning of the constitutional exemption when such "transportation" occurs in connection with dredging, laying pipe or construction work. The result should not be different when property similarly moved may be denominated "cargo" by reason of the fact that it theretofore has been, or thereafter will be, transported by other vessels. The performance of such symbiotical services does not serve to alter the essential nature of appellants' operations to the extent of converting the floating derricks into the exempt vessels to which they are temporarily attached.
In Dragich v. Los Angeles County, 30 Cal. App.2d 397 [86 P.2d 669], the court in approaching the problem of interpreting the constitutional provision here under consideration stated at page 399: "It is at once apparent that said section was not intended to exempt all vessels of the specified tonnage but only those `engaged in the transportation of freight or passengers.' This phrase must be given some meaning. If it be given the broad meaning contended for by respondents, it would only be necessary that the vessel be used for the conveyance of property or persons. But to give this phrase such meaning would be to render it meaningless as all vessels are used for the conveyance of either property or persons or both.
"In discussing said phrase, respondents lay great stress upon the broad meaning accorded by the authorities to the word `transportation.' In our opinion, the meaning of other words is of equal if not greater importance in determining the proper interpretation of said phrase. Furthermore the reading of the phrase as a whole is of paramount importance. The word `freight' has more than one meaning but it generally denotes properly transported by a carrier from a consignor to a consignee. (Civ. Code, sec. 2110.) In one accepted sense, it means `the hire or compensation paid by anyone for the transport of goods ...' (Webster's New Inter. Dictionary, 2d ed.), and when used to denote the property transported, it carries the definite implication that the transportation is for hire. A similar implication is found in the use of the word `passengers.' A `passenger' is defined as `A traveler by some *197 established public conveyance, as a coach, omnibus, steamboat, railroad train, etc.' ..." (Italics added.)
In the instant case, when appellants' derricks are operating upon their stationary barges, they are not engaged as "a carrier" transporting "freight." Although the items of personal property being lifted and deposited by appellants' cranes during their "Cargo (non-carry)" operations may properly be characterized as "freight," such characterization stems from their past or future relationship to the vessel being serviced rather than their relationship to appellants' barges.
As noted by respondent, the history of the constitutional amendment here under consideration, particularly the arguments to the voters at the time of its initial adoption in 1914, and readoption in 1932, makes clear that the principal purpose behind the creation of this tax exemption was to insure that California obtained, and thereafter retained, its fair share of the increased maritime industry resulting from the opening of the Panama Canal and the national effort to increase the size of America's merchant fleet in the face of the then impending first World War. The obvious intent of its proponents was to encourage persons and corporations owning vessels engaged in interstate and international operations to establish their headquarters and home ports in California rather than in other coastal states which had theretofore extended tax benefits to such maritime operations.[2] (Cf. Dragich v. Los Angeles County, supra, 30 Cal. App.2d 397, 398; Alalunga Sport Fishers, Inc. v. County of San Diego, 247 Cal. App.2d 663, 666 [55 Cal. Rptr. 875]; Star etc. Boat Co. v. County of San Diego, 163 Cal. App.2d 534, 537 [329 P.2d 716]; County of Los Angeles v. Craig, 38 Cal. App.2d 58, 61 [100 P.2d 818].)
However, as observed in Alalunga at page 667: "[I]t is equally obvious that that purpose is not exclusively served by the language of the amendment itself." As a result this constitutional exemption has been given a scope considerably broader than that which respondent urges was the limited initial intent of its authors. Further, in County of Los Angeles v. Craig, supra, 38 Cal. App.2d at pp. 60-61, the court *198 held that the word "registered" in article XIII, section 4, had not been used in its technical sense. From this holding it follows that the specified exemption is not restricted to "sea-going vessels" engaged "only in trade with foreign countries" (46 U.S.C.A. § 11), and may include "licensed or enrolled" vessels "employed in the coasting trade or fisheries" (46 U.S.C.A. § 251). Therefore, in Star etc. Boat Co. v. County of San Diego, supra, 163 Cal. App.2d at p. 539, the exemption was extended to certain oil carrying barges and the tugs which towed them in transporting such oil between the ports of Los Angeles and San Diego.
Nevertheless, as indicated by the above quoted comments of the court in Dragich v. Los Angeles County, supra, 30 Cal. App.2d 397, 399, article XIII, section 4 "was not intended to exempt all vessels of the specified tonnage but only those `engaged in the transportation of freight or passengers'." The court in Dragich refused to extend the exemption to certain commercial fishing boats despite the fact that they transported cargoes of fish taken in their own fishing operations. (See also Crivello v. County of San Diego, 50 Cal. App.2d 713 [123 P.2d 899].)
The court in Dragich stated at page 398: "[The fishing boats of plaintiffs] were engaged in fishing and were not engaged in any other business." With equal logic it may be said in the instant case that appellants' derrick barges were engaged in heavy lift operations and were not engaged in any other business.
Appellants place their primary reliance upon the recent decision in Alalunga, supra, 247 Cal. App.2d 663, wherein the tax exemption was held to extend to certain sport fishing vessels of the required tonnage that carried passengers from a particular dock in the San Diego harbor to various fishing grounds in the vicinity of the Coronado Islands or in open waters off San Diego. Although the passengers did not know their exact destination when they left the dock, they did know that following a day's fishing from the deck of the ships, they would be returned to the same dock from which they had departed.
However, we are not persuaded by appellants' arguments that Alalunga is factually analogous to the instant case. It is beyond reasonable dispute that the persons boarding the boats involved in Alalunga were passengers who, for specified monetary consideration, were furnished transportation thereon by water to and from various points on the ocean as conditions *199 favorable to fishing made appropriate. Appellants' derricks performed no such functions when, in a stationary position, they lifted various items of property to and from docks and other cargo-carrying vessels. In order to place the operations of the appellants' derrick barges into the Alalunga picture, we would have to imagine them lifting the passengers from the dock to the deck of the fishing boats there involved, or serving as a stationary, though floating, gangplank over which the passengers walked in order to board the vessels which were thereafter to transport them by sea to their chosen fishing sites. We feel confident that such peripheral operations would not warrant their receiving the benefit of the exemption extended to the fishing ships themselves because they do not amount to the type of transportation by vessel contemplated by the constitutional amendment.
Appellants' second assignment of error is based upon their contention that in any event Revenue and Taxation Code, sections 1139 and 1140 preclude taxation by Los Angeles County of their derrick barges permanently situated therein. Appellants argue that although certain of their derrick barges are taxable since they are not primarily engaged in the transportation of freight and therefore not within the purview of article XIII, section 4, nevertheless since they are documented in San Francisco, they cannot be taxed elsewhere except upon their own election.
The trial court rejected this argument and concluded that these sections of the Revenue and Taxation Code were unconstitutional in that they violated article XIII, section 10 of the California Constitution which provides: "All property, except as otherwise in this constitution provided, shall be assessed in the county, city, city and county, town or township, or district in which it is situated, in the manner prescribed by law." (Italics added.)
On this appeal appellants seek to overcome this holding by citing certain language contained in article XIII, section 14, relating to taxation for state purposes which, they assert, gives the Legislature the power to impose a different rule without running counter to the provisions of section 10 since such method of taxation is "otherwise in this constitution provided." They rely on that portion of section 14 which provides:
"The Legislature shall have the power to provide for the assessment, levy, and collection of taxes upon all forms of *200 tangible personal property ... in such manner, and at such rates, as may be provided by law ... and may exempt entirely from taxation any or all forms, types or classes of personal property."
We seriously doubt the soundness of appellants' argument in this respect. However, we find it unnecessary to reach the question it poses since we believe that Revenue and Taxation Code, sections 1139 and 1140, properly interpreted, do not preclude taxation of appellants' derrick barges by the County of Los Angeles.
[4] Generally speaking, the right to tax is founded upon the concept that "it is in return for the benefit received by the person who pays it or by the property assessed." (46 Cal.Jur.2d, § 11, p. 494.) [5] Where property is situated exclusively within one taxing authority, in this instance a county, article XIII, section 10, requires that it be assessed only in that county from which it derives benefits and not in another county from whom it receives no benefits. That the Legislature fully acquiesces in such concept is made clear by the terms of Revenue and Taxation Code, section 404, which provides: "All taxable property, except State assessed property, shall be assessed by the assessing agency of the taxing agency where the property is situated." (Italics added.)
As observed in the Code Commissioners' Note to section 1139, this section was intended to establish as between counties an artificial tax situs analogous to the "home port" rule applicable to the several states with regard to ships moving between different states or different foreign countries.[3] (Ayer & Lord Tie Co. v. Kentucky, 202 U.S. 409, 423 [50 L.Ed. 1082, 1087, 26 S.Ct. 679]; Southern Pac. Co. v. Kentucky ex rel. Alexander, 222 U.S. 63, 67-68 [56 L.Ed. 96, 97-98, 32 S.Ct. 13];, Scandinavian Airlines System, Inc. v. County of Los Angeles, 56 Cal.2d 11 [14 Cal. Rptr. 25, 363 P.2d 25]; California *201 etc. Co. v. City & County of San Francisco, 150 Cal. 145 [88 P. 704]; Olson v. San Francisco, 148 Cal. 80 [82 P. 850, 113 Am.St.Rep. 191, 7 Ann. Cas. 443, 2 L.R.A.N.S. 197]; San Francisco v. Talbot, 63 Cal. 485; People v. Niles, 35 Cal. 282.)
However, even as between separate sovereign states the artificial tax situs created by the home port rule was inapplicable whenever the vessel itself had acquired a permanent situs within a jurisdiction other than that in which it was documented and its owner was domiciled. [6] We believe that section 1139 was never intended to adopt a different rule as between counties. We believe it was designed to apply only to vessels having no actual, permanent situs sufficient to permit them to be treated in accordance with the basic rule promulgated in article XIII, section 10, and Revenue and Taxation Code, section 404.
[7] Insofar as the vessels in the instant case are concerned, Los Angeles County is far more than their "habitual place of mooring when not in service." (§ 1139.) (Italics added.) For from five to ten years preceding the instant action appellants' derrick barges have been physically within the County of Los Angeles and receiving the benefit of fire and police services therefrom even when in service. Sections 1139 and 1140 are therefore inapplicable to the instant case and the question of their constitutionality in regard to vessels whose movements preclude their achieving a permanent situs for tax purposes need not now be decided.
The judgment is affirmed.
Roth, P.J., and Fleming, J., concurred.
A petition for a rehearing was denied December 12, 1967, and appellants' petition for a hearing by the Supreme Court was denied January 17, 1968.
NOTES
[1]  The assessment on barge number 17 was only for the year 1963.
[2]  See Oregon Constitution, article IX, section 1b, which since has been wisely replaced by Oregon Revised Statutes 308.256, 308.515, 488.732 et al., which present a complete and integrated tax schedule appropriate to all forms of ships and shipping.
[3]  Former Political Code, section 3644, from which both our present Revenue and Taxation Code sections are derived, provides:
"All vessels not exempt from taxation under the provisions of the Constitution, except as provided below, shall be assessed and their taxes paid only in the county, or city and county, in which they make their home port or their habitual place of anchorage or mooring when not in service when the assessor of the county or city and county wherein such vessels are registered is given notice in writing, by the owner or master of such vessel, as to such place of anchorage or mooring.
"Such vessels as are regularly engaged in transporting passengers or cargo between two or more ports, except ferryboats, and vessels concerning which no such notice as hereinabove provided shall have been given, must be assessed and the taxes thereon paid only in the county or city and county where the same are registered, enrolled, or licensed."

=== CASE 2217043 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:21.123028+00 ===

256 Cal.App.2d 56 (1967)
JOSEPH E. MARTINDELL et al., Plaintiffs and Respondents,
v.
LLEWELLYN G. BODRERO et al., Defendants and Appellants.
Civ. No. 30448.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. Two.
Nov. 16, 1967.
Pray, Price, Williams & Deatherage and William C. Price for Defendants and Appellants.
Kindel & Anderson and Malcolm G. Smith for Plaintiffs and Respondents.
ROTH, P. J.
Action upon a promissory note.
Appellants, all individuals, together with respondent Martindell, were directors and minority shareholders of a corporation known as El Bodrero Hotel, organized to build and operate a motel.
The corporation encountered financial difficulties in completing construction of the motel.
At a board meeting on February 15, 1958, appellants Bodrero and Sant each agreed to loan $6,000 to the corporation in return for its note. Respondent for himself and wife also agreed to loan $6,000, but unlike Bodrero and Sant, he stated that he would make it only in exchange for a note signed individually by the directors as makers. The loan was made on that basis. In addition, respondents' note was guaranteed by Bodrero, the president of the corporation. Respondents' note was due in May 1958.
To enable the corporation to qualify for a Small Business Administration loan, the corporation made it appear that the note was its obligation; that there were no guarantors on the note and that interest had been reduced to 6 percent. Martindell was in Alaska and had nothing to do with the arrangement for the loan. Martindell, as one of the directors of the corporation, and his wife, were induced, however, to sign a *59 standby agreement for this loan by assurances, oral and written, concurrently made by the various individual makers and the guarantor of his note that the interest rate would remain 10 percent.
In December 1960, respondents attempted to collect on the note. Appellants Bodrero and Pearson assured him it would be paid by the makers at the rate of $200 a month. A board meeting was convened and a resolution was adopted to pay respondents' note at the rate of $200 a month, beginning January 1961. In January 1961, a corporation check for $200 was sent to respondents. In 1962, at a meeting of the board, it was decided that no further payments could be made at that time. Respondents, on May 15, 1963, sued all the individual makers, appellants herein, and also sued appellant Bodrero on his guarantee.
Section 337, subdivision 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure bars the action since it was not brought within the four-year limitations period, unless the part payment made as above indicated, tolls the statute. The trial court found upon ample evidence that the note was the individual obligation of each of the appellants; and that the payment of $200 was made by the corporation with the knowledge, authorization, participation and consent of appellants and therefore tolled the statute of limitations as to all the makers.
Appellants appeal from the judgment ordering them to pay the $6,000 due on the note, together with 10 percent interest from February 15, 1958 and attorneys' fees, and from the minute order of November 8, 1965, modifying a pretrial order.
[1] As a general rule, part payment of a debt or obligation is sufficient to extend the bar of the statute. The theory on which this is based is that the payment is an acknowledgment of the existence of the indebtedness which raises an implied promise to continue the obligation and to pay the balance. (Note, 29 So. Cal.L.Rev. 370, 374 (1956).)
Section 360 of the Code of Civil Procedure provides: "that any payment on account of principal or interest due on a promissory note made by the party to be charged shall be deemed a sufficient acknowledgment or promise of a continuing contract to stop, from time to time as any such payment is made, the running of the time within which an action may be commenced upon the principal sum or upon any installment of principal or interest due on such note, and to start the running of a new period of time. ..."
The precise question at bench is whether the $200 payment *60 made by the corporation may be considered to have been made by "the party to be charged."
Bullock v. Simon, 132 Cal.App.2d Supp. 881 [281 P.2d 916], defines to a limited extent the connection between the payment and the party to be charged therewith. In Bullock, the creditor gave certain "credits" on the obligation of his debtor. These "credits" were made without the consent of the debtor and with no notice to the debtor of the fact that such "credits" were given. The court found that there was no payment on principal or interest due made by a "party to be charged." [2] At page 884, it cited with approval the holding of Good v. Ehrlich, 67 Kan. 94 [72 P. 545] that: "A part payment, in order to be efficient to toll the statute of limitations or remove the bar, must have been made as part payment of the obligation in question by the obligor, or by some one at his direction, and under such circumstances as to amount to an acknowledgment of an existing liability on such obligation." Such payment, the court in Bullock concluded, must have been " 'authorized by defendant or someone legally competent to act for him.' " (Bullock v. Simon, supra, at page 884, quoting from 54 C.J.S. 430).
This rule is in accord with that of other jurisdictions. (See Stroud v. Payne, 124 Neb. 612 [247 N.W. 595]; McNamee v. Graese, 61 S.D. 46 [245 N.W. 924]; Goerlinger v. Juetten, 237 Wis. 543 [297 N.W. 361]; Patterson v. Collier, 113 Mich. 12 [72 N.W. 327, 67 Am.St.Rep. 440].)
[3] It is clear that part payment creates an implied promise that the debtor will pay the balance. To create such an implication, however, the one making payment must have a relation to the payment of the debt which will warrant an inference that the actual debtor intended to renew his promise to satisfy the indebtedness. (Abele v. Dietz, 312 Mass. 685 [45 N.E.2d 970, 144 A.L.R. 1015].)
The specific question at bench is the relationship of the corporation to the individual makers of the note and its authority to make payment for them. The relationship has already been shown. The question of authority in the context of the facts at bench is similar to any agency. [4] Whether an actual or ostensible authority existed to make the corporation an actual agent of all the makers, in respect of the $200 payment, was a question of fact. Such agency may be shown by direct or circumstantial evidence. (Seneris v. Haas, 45 Cal.2d 811, 831 [291 P.2d 915, 53 A.L.R.2d 124]; Crabbe v. Mires, 112 Cal.App.2d 456 459-460 [246 P.2d 991]; Ghiglione v. *61 American Trust Co., 49 Cal.App.2d 633, 637-638 [122 P.2d 301].)
[5] Sufficient evidence was presented to the trial court to show that the corporation was authorized by appellants to make the $200 payment to respondents on the debt of all the makers. All appellants were at the December 1960 meeting at which the $200 payment was approved. Two of them, Bodrero and Pearson, signed the check sent to respondents. The check was issued at appellants' direction with full knowledge of the purpose for which it was paid and no evidence was presented to indicate that it was not intended as their personal payment. The trial court found as a fact that the corporation made the payment on behalf of all the makers. We are bound by that finding.
[6] Although the record is clear that respondents would not accept the corporation's note, appellants nevertheless contend that the trial court erred in excluding parol evidence offered to show that the note was that of the corporation and not that of the individual appellants. They argue that the individual signers of the note were acting as mere agents for the corporation, and that the corporation was the primary obligor. [7] It is well established that parol evidence is not admissible to relieve from liability an agent who signs personally without disclosing the name of the principal on the face of the instrument. (Van Haaren v. Whitmore, 2 Cal.App.2d 632, 634-635 [38 P.2d 829]; Otis Elevator Co. v. Berry, 28 Cal.App.2d 430, 432 [82 P.2d 704]; Firestone v. Wahl, 133 Cal.App.2d 501, 504-505 [284 P.2d 499].)
The parol evidence was properly excluded.
[8a] Appellants' argument that the interest rate on the note was reduced to 6 percent by virtue of the agreement prepared for the Small Business Administration, is without merit.
Section 1698 of the Civil Code provides that: "A contract in writing may be altered by a contract in writing, or by an executed oral agreement, and not otherwise." The agreement in question did not constitute a "contract in writing" between the parties to the note. Exhibits 7 and 8 show that appellants, as heretofore stated, persuaded respondents, who were in Alaska, to sign a stand-by agreement to enable the corporation to obtain a loan from the Small Business Administration, and the makers of the note never contemplated reducing the interest to be paid. Further, the uncontradicted record shows that as late as December 1960, more than two *62 years after the stand-by agreement was executed, appellants treated the interest rate as being the full 10 percent. Martindell testified:
"A. I did, I talked to Mr. Bodrero. He knew what I was there for because of the way the conversation started off."
"He said, 'Well, Gene, don't you think that interest is a little high? He says, 'Why don't you cut the interest from 10 to 6 per cent?' "
[9] It is well established that parol evidence may be introduced to show that the parties never intended a writing to constitute a contract. (P. A. Smith Co. v. Muller, 201 Cal. 219, 222-224 [256 P. 411]; Halldin v. Usher, 49 Cal.2d 749, 752 [321 P.2d 746].) [8b] The question of intention of the parties as to the effect of the agreement with the Small Business Administration is a question of fact. (Halldin v. Usher, supra, at page 752.) There was substantial parol evidence to the effect that the agreement was merely an accommodation by respondents and was never intended to alter the terms of the note. At best, the agreement of the corporation with Small Business Administration was one which would estop respondents as against Small Business Administration from claiming they were entitled to 10 percent as against 6 percent. The trial court found that no alteration or variation in the terms of the note was intended by any of the parties. The evidence supports the finding.
[10] Appellants' final contention is that the lower court erred in holding appellant Bodrero personally liable as guarantor. We agree.
In Purdy v. Maree, 31 Cal.App.2d 125, the court says at page 127 [87 P.2d 390]: "Though there is authority to the contrary, the clear weight of authority in the United States, and we believe the better law, is that a payment by a principal debtor will not operate to toll the statute of limitations as to the guarantor. [Citing cases.]" (See also, Easton v. Ash, 18 Cal.2d 530, 538 [116 P.2d 433].) There was no provision in the guaranty that a part payment by appellants would toll the limitations period as to Bodrero. (Purdy v. Maree, supra; Easton v. Ash, supra.) Respondents' claim against Bodrero on the personal guaranty is barred by the statute of limitations. However, although there is a finding on the subject of guaranty, there is no separate judgment against Bodrero as a guarantor. The judgment is against the individual appellants as makers.
[11] The note provides for attorneys' fees. It is established *63 in this state that this court has the authority to fix such fees for services rendered on appeal. (Coronet Credit Corp. v. West Thrift Co., 244 Cal.App.2d 631 [53 Cal.Rptr. 433].) We find the sum of $350 to be reasonable.
The judgment is affirmed, appellants will pay to respondents $350 attorneys' fees incurred for the reasonable value of services rendered on this appeal. Respondents to recover costs of appeal. The minute order modifying the pretrial order is a matter included within the appeal from the judgment. The separate appeal therefrom is therefore dismissed.
Herndon, J., and Fleming, J., concurred.

=== CASE 2217047 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:21.174819+00 ===

91 Ill. App.2d 194 (1968)
234 N.E.2d 160
Harlem Savings Association, Plaintiff and Counter-Defendant-Appellee,
v.
Bruno Lesniak, Irene Lesniak, His Wife, Unknown Owners, Registrar of Torrens Titles and Golden Manor Homes, Inc., Defendants, and Bruno Lesniak and Irene Lesniak, Defendants, Counter-Plaintiffs and Third-Party Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v.
Harlem Savings Association, Counter-Defendant-Appellee, and Golden Manor Homes, Inc., Third-Party Defendant-Appellee.
Gen. No. 52,687.
Illinois Appellate Court  First District, Fourth Division.
January 15, 1968.
*195 Arthur George, of Chicago, for appellant.
Hoft, Shapiro & Hoft, of Chicago, for appellee.
MR. JUSTICE ENGLISH delivered the opinion of the court.
In this matter defendants filed a notice of appeal from a decree of foreclosure entered on July 7, 1967. Numerous issues are involved, relating not only to the basic litigation but also to a counterclaim and a third-party complaint.
Defendants moved in this court to expunge an order entered on December 19, 1967, in the trial court approving the Report of Sale and Distribution. In considering this motion we found that the decree of foreclosure from which this appeal was sought is not a final judgment and therefore not appealable. Calumet Federal Savings & Loan Ass'n of Chicago v. Markman, 50 Ill. App.2d 430, 438, 200 NE2d 419.
[1-3] The authority of this court stems from the constitution and pertains only to "appeals from final judgments of a Circuit Court," with exceptions not here pertinent. Art VI, §§ 6 and 7; Harris Trust & Savings Bank v. Briskin Mfg. Co., 63 Ill. App.2d 12, 15-16, 211 NE 2d 32. When we are without jurisdiction to determine an appeal it is our duty to dismiss it, even though neither of the parties has requested such action. Cook County v. Hoytt, 41 Ill. App.2d 122, 124, 190 NE2d 150; Village of Niles v. Szczesny, 13 Ill.2d 45, 49, 147 NE2d 371. This appeal is, therefore, dismissed on the court's own motion.
If the subject matter of this attempted appeal were again to be presented to this court, the abstracts and *196 briefs now on file could be refiled in the new appeal without reprint.
Appeal dismissed.
McCORMICK, P.J. and DRUCKER, J., concur.

=== CASE 2217054 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:21.257722+00 ===

90 Ill. App.2d 210 (1967)
234 N.E.2d 120
Miles G. Burford and Janice H. Burford, Plaintiffs-Appellees,
v.
Village of La Grange, a Municipal Corporation, Defendant-Appellant.
Gen. No. 50,834.
Illinois Appellate Court  First District.
December 20, 1967.
Rehearing denied January 17, 1968.
*211 William J. Linklater and Jerome H. Torshen, of Chicago (Jerome H. Torshen, of counsel), for appellant.
Edward J. Barrett, of Chicago, for appellees.
MR. PRESIDING JUSTICE SMITH delivered the opinion of the court.
The plaintiffs obtained a jury verdict of $21,000 for water damage to their residence resulting from allegedly inadequate or defective village storm sewers. The trial court ordered a remittitur and reduced the judgment to $12,070.46. Plaintiffs consented to the remittitur as a condition to the denial of a new trial, but reserved their right to question the propriety of the remittitur on appeal in accordance with Ill. Rev Stats 1965, c 110, § 68.1. By its appeal, the village attacks the judgment so entered and the plaintiffs attack the propriety of the remittitur.
The defendant-appellant first asserts that the trial court should have directed a verdict in its favor as requested. The home of the plaintiffs is located on the northwest corner of the intersection of Elm Street and Sunset Avenue in the village and faces Elm. There is a storm sewer in Sunset. A spur drain located on the plaintiffs' property and terminating at the back of the property connects with this sewer. The downspouts to the house drain into this spur sewer. The liability of the defendant-village to the plaintiffs must be predicated upon the existence of some duty owed by the village to the plaintiffs in connection with (a) the Sunset Avenue drain or (b) *212 the spur drain located wholly upon plaintiffs' property and a breach of that duty. There is no evidence in the record that the village constructed the sewer in Sunset, the spur drain, or that either was constructed by a private party and subsequently dedicated to the village. The village manager testified that the records of the village show a meeting on June 7, 1915, and the "granting of permission to a subdivider for the installation of sewers on Sunset Avenue." Plaintiffs' Exhibit No. 48 is a plat of such drains and shows their location in Sunset. There are no connecting spur drains located on private property shown in this exhibit. The construction or ownership of a drain or sewer is, however, basically immaterial.
"... where a municipality has adopted a sewer or drain constructed by a private person and has assumed control over it, the fact that the municipality has not constructed the sewer or drain will not excuse the municipality from liability for negligence in its operation." ILP, Cities, Villages, and Other Municipal Corporations, § 554, p 136.
The village manager testified on behalf of the plaintiffs that, he became manager on August 1, 1957; there was an inspection of the village sewers prior to that time; during his employment there had been an inspection of the sewers on a regular basis; there was a program of maintenance to clean all catch basins or street inlets at least once every other year; and this system is still in effect. It further appears that a supplementary or auxiliary storm sewer was placed in Sunset after the flood of July 1957. It thus appears that the village had assumed the inspection, maintenance and the repair of the storm sewer in Sunset and was therefore under a duty to the plaintiffs not to be negligent in the performance of that duty.
As to the spur drain on the plaintiffs' property, it is shown on the map of the village sewer system now hanging *213 in the village hall. That same map shows privately-owned storm sewers on private property of others. The village engineer who prepared the map explained that the presence of these spur drains on the village map was so that the village would be advised and informed of the private sewers draining into the village sewer. There is nothing in the village records or elsewhere indicating that the village had an easement to either install or maintain this spur sewer on plaintiffs' property and normally such an easement would be obtained. The evidence further shows that during the repair of the property, the plaintiffs poured concrete into the spur drain and effectively plugged it. Thereafter sometime in 1958, at the request of the plaintiffs, the village likewise plugged this sewer in the village street at its connection with the village sewer.
The village manager testified that he didn't know whether the spur drain into the plaintiffs' property was inspected or cleaned, and a search of the records did not disclose an application by or a permit issued to the property owner for permission to attach this particular spur drain to the village's sewer. No one testified to any inspection or maintenance by the village. The presence on the village map of this spur drain and of other privately-owned spur drains creates no presumption of village ownership or control where direct testimony of the engineer who prepared the map is that it was for information only. On this record, therefore, it seems transparently clear that the village neither owned the spur drain nor had they inspected it and maintained it. The record is thus barren of any facts creating an obligation or duty on the defendant-village to maintain, inspect, or repair this spur drain.
[1] Let us turn now to the occurrence events which precipitated this suit. Plaintiffs acquired this seven-room, two-story, frame-colonial house on October 2, 1954, and moved in around November 1 the same year. In October, prior to occupying the house, Mrs. Burford noticed surface *214 waters in the intersection at Sunset and Elm, but did not then examine the house. In July 1955, there was a heavy rain and water started coming into their basement and reached a depth of approximately 2 inches. In September of the same year, a like rain occurred and this time the water reached a height of 6 inches. In August or September 1956, the third rain occurred and the water in the basement reached a height of approximately 8 inches. In July 1957, there was a heavy rain and flood and this time the water reached a depth of from 4 to 6 feet, remained in the basement overnight, and a deep freeze, sewing machine, and other furniture and articles were floating around. Mrs. Burford noticed a slushing of water and a rocking and shaking of the house. She called the fire department to disconnect the electricity and was advised by them to move out with her children. At this time, there was a sea of water across the street in all directions, their lawn was under water, and it was the same at the neighbors. She and the children moved out. There is little doubt but that the rain in July 1957, was a gully-washing, frog-strangling rain. Plaintiffs' witness Reed testified "we had a 7-inch rain and at that time it reversed the flow of the Chicago River  it got so heavy that it flooded the Daily News basement." The official report of the United States Weather Bureau read in part as follows: "The deluge on the evening of the 12th set new 6 and 24-hour rainfall records for Chicago ... The heavy rainfall resulted in severe flooding, and practically paralyzed transportation. Damage ran into the millions of dollars." A professional meteorologist testified that the record rainfall on July 12 was substantially greater than anything that had officially been recorded before that time, and that similar rainfalls of that encountered on July 12 could not be expected to return for well in excess of 100 years. It has been stated:
"... even if there is negligence concurring with an extraordinary flood or rainfall, the municipality is *215 relieved from liability if the flow is so voluminous in character that it would of itself have produced the injury independently of such negligence. In other words, if the superior force would have produced the same damage whether or not the municipality had been negligent, its negligence is not deemed the cause of the injury." CJS, Municipal Corporations, § 879.
In Carlson v. A. & P. Corrugated Box Corp., 364 Pa 216, 72 A2d 290 (1950), the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania stated:
"... a unanimous host of authorities, both in our own Commonwealth and elsewhere, ... uniformly hold that although no liability can be fastened upon the defendant if the damage is caused by an act of God so overwhelming as of its own force to produce the injury independently of the defendant's negligence, such liability does arise if the damage results from the concurrence of the defendant's negligence with the act of God and the damage would not have occurred in the absence of such negligence."
See also 59 ALR2d 324, § 19(a); Bouillon v. City of Greenville, 233 Ill. App. 500. Assuming without presently holding that the defendant-village was negligent, we think it abundantly clear as a matter of law that the defendant-village cannot be liable to the plaintiffs on any part of their damages occasioned by the flood of July 12, 1957. It seems clear from this record that the flood was so overwhelming and so devastating that the damages to the plaintiffs would have occurred notwithstanding any independent negligence of the defendant-village. 59 ALR2d 326, § 19(b).
During the fall of 1957, the plaintiffs repaired their home. To do so, it was necessary to jack up the entire house on hydraulic lifts, remove and rebuild the entire basement and foundation at a cost of $12,070.46, the precise amount of the judgment entered in this cause. *216 The evidence discloses that the intersection of Sunset and Elm was a swamp in 1915, and that a portion of the plaintiffs' lot was included in it; the natural drainage in the area was towards this intersection; and the composition of the soil was such that this house began to settle shortly after it was built. Mrs. Burford had noticed a large, running diagonal crack on the east wall when they inspected the property prior to purchase. Mr. Burford testified that he was home during the September 1955 episode; the water came in mostly up through the floor and in the joints between the walls and the floor in the south end of the building; there may have been some backup, but this was nominal, and the majority of the water came in through the foundation of the basement floor. The record further shows that after the 1957 flood the east wall bulged inward and the basement floor heaved upward.
Plaintiffs' witness Flood, a licensed, civil engineer, in response to a hypothetical question specifically limited to a blockage of the spur drain and specifically excluding any blocking of the Sunset Avenue drain, was asked whether or not the blocking of the sewer could have been a contributing factor in the damage to the foundation wall. He stated that such blockage could have been a contributing factor to the damage, and this "is based on the opinion that in the blockage of a sewer, a build-up of water behind the sewer is transmitted to the outside of the basement walls and floor. This pressure, in effect, pushing against the walls can push the walls inward, causing bulging and cracking of the walls. Also, the same pressure results in a (sic) uplift of the floor and can result in cracking of the floor and is called hyrostatic (sic) pressure." On cross-examination, he also testified that "a jagged diagonal crack in a foundation is not necessarily indicative of settlement, but can be indicative of lateral pressure and, if such a diagonal crack existed in 1954, it would indicate there had been pressures on that wall prior to that day." He further testified that "if the house was underpinned *217 in part, it connotes that the foundations which were weakened were strengthened; you underpin a house to strengthen the foundation and underpinning can be due to the need to place an additional load on a specific foundation or due to the fact that the soil below the foundation will not support the original load."
Defense witness O'Brien testified that he was a registered, professional engineer in Illinois and Wisconsin, and he had been employed by Mr. Burford in the fall of 1957 to make recommendations in the underpinning operation which was then in progress. His report shows that the original foundations of this house were 10-inch, cinderbrick walls supported at basement floor level by a four-inch-thick concrete footing approximately 14 inches wide. His recommendation to Mr. Burford as shown by the report was that the new foundation be a continuous reenforced wall and footing, and that the footings should be at least 4 feet wide and, if economically possible, larger. In testifying that the heavy rainfall could have resulted in the bulging, he stated: "The bulge would have occurred to the wall, (1) if the wall had not been highly reenforced, and (2) with the heavy rainfall a large amount of hydrostatic pressure would develop from surface water in the back of the foundation wall, resulting in this movement of the wall which would have occurred from inadequate reenforcing or insufficient reenforcing." He further stated that "if the walls were thick and adequately reenforced, this buckling would not have occurred." He further stated that this buckling or bulging could not have resulted from a sewer backup, and that "if the bulging is toward the inside, pressure has to be from the outside, from the surface water that accumulates behind the foundation walls. Outside hydrostatic pressure could be a cause of damage to the foundation."
Plaintiff's witness Reed was the plumber on the job during the repairs. In attempting to find where this water was coming from, they dug around in the yard *218 southeast of the porch, which is on the southside of the house, and found this 8- or 10-inch spur drain. They tried to determine where it came from, because the main sewer of the house was on the northside of the house. They took a sewer rod and pushed it back to see where it went in each direction from the hole they had dug. In rodding towards the east and towards Sunset, they encountered no obstruction and water would run out and go towards the east or towards Sunset. In rodding the other way, they found they couldn't go very far, because it was plugged with mud and debris and gunk, or soupy mud. This debris was filling up the drain between the main sewer on Sunset and the house. He further testified that this blocked drain could have been a contributing factor of the damage to this foundation, that the blocked drain could have diverted water onto the plaintiffs' premises which found its way into the foundation and basement.
Molding this testimony into ultimate facts, it seems transparently clear that (1) faulty, inadequate and insufficient basement construction for this particular area contributed no small part to the damage sustained, (2) the damage occasioned by the deluge of 1957 would have occurred irrespective of any negligence on the part of the defendant-village, and (3) the blockage in the spur drain on the plaintiffs' property contributed immeasurably to the development of the outside, hydrostatic pressure which caused the bulging of the east wall and the upheaval of the basement floor. This third act is emphasized when we consider that the downspouts to the house were connected to the spur drain, that there is no evidence the spur drain was directly connected to the basement, and the fact that except for a nominal amount, the water was coming into the side walls and bubbling from the floor.
[2] Up to this point, therefore, the village cannot be liable for the damage occasioned by the faulty construction of the basement nor the flood of 1957. It seems equally clear that it is not responsible for any damage *219 occasioned by the stoppage of the spur drain. The rule is stated thusly:
"Ordinarily the city is only liable for the clogging or obstruction of drains and sewers maintained by it or over which it has control, with the result that it is not liable for the clogging of a drain or sewer maintained and controlled by a private property owner." 59 ALR2d 314, § 11.
[3] We turn now to a consideration of the negligence of the village, if any. Such negligence must be predicated upon a failure to properly inspect  and the evidence is that it did inspect  or a defective or blocked village sewer  and the evidence is that it wasn't  or the inadequacy of the sewer system itself. Plaintiffs' witness O'Malley was employed by the Village of La Grange from July 1957 to September 1963 as its civil engineer. Following the flood of 1957, he caused a survey to be made of Sunset Avenue and recommended a supplemental sewer which was installed in 1958 or 1959. He testified as follows:
"`In 1957, there was no crack in the pipes in the sewer line on Sunset. The water flowed freely through that sewer except that there was probably a 6 inch pocket at Sunset and Elm which shows on the plans that we made up. In a heavy rain, water would flow freely provided Cossitt Avenue was below its capacity and it wasn't overloaded. There was no break or no obstruction in the sewer. There was a flow. On direct examination, I testified that the Cossitt Avenue sewer was not large enough to handle that type of rainstorm as occurred on July 12 and 13, 1957.'"
He further testified that there was a sag in the Sunset Avenue sewer about 50 feet on either side of the manhole, that the sag wouldn't do it any good, and "whether it *220 does it much harm  it wouldn't  it wasn't designed that way." He further testified:
"`I would say that Mr. Burford's main problem, unless he had an overhead sewer, came from the house connection that goes into Sunset Avenue, in my opinion. If he had an overhead sewer there and if things were really tight, then he probably wouldn't have had this problem.'"
He further testified that he didn't think the spur line did the property any good, but how much harm it actually did, he didn't know. He also testified that even if there was an overhead sewer, it is possible that the water could have seeped in under the foundation or along side of the drainage tile on the outside of the wall. There is no evidence in the record establishing whether or not the other occurrences which Mrs. Burford testified about were normal or abnormal rainfalls. In Illinois, the rule is stated thusly:
"... where a municipality provides ample sewers and drains to carry off all water likely to fall or accumulate under ordinary conditions, the fact that the sewers and drains prove inadequate to carry off all the water from an extraordinary rainstorm, does not subject the municipality to liability for damages caused by the surplus water.
"... it is liable only for such injuries or damages which are the proximate cause of such negligence." ILP, City, Villages and Municipal Corporations, p 136, § 555.
[4, 5] It is now the rule in Illinois, that verdicts may be directed and judgment n.o.v. entered in those cases in which all of the evidence when viewed in its aspect most favorable to the opponent so overwhelmingly favors movant that no contrary verdict based on that evidence *221 could ever stand. Pedrick v. Peoria & E.R. Co., 37 Ill.2d 494, 229 NE2d 504. The picture, vivid and clear painted by this evidence, is that this house was originally constructed in a low and swampy area; that settlement of the house began soon after its construction; that the foundation and basement construction was wholly inadequate from an engineering standpoint for the area in which it was built; that the stoppage in the spur drain materially contributed to the damage to the foundation as the downspout water had no place to go except into the adjacent soil to build up hydrostatic pressure against the outside of the walls and floor, and that there is no evidence that the Sunset Avenue sewer was inadequate to handle an ordinary rainfall, nor is there any evidence from which it could be reasonably concluded that the village ever assumed the management or control of the spur drain. The verdict of the jury in this case would impose on this village a standard of conduct and a duty which transcends that ordinary care which should be and is the established obligation of the village. Roche v. City of Minneapolis, 223 Minn 359, 27 NW2d 295, 173 ALR 1020.
Accordingly, the judgment of the trial court is reversed and the cause remanded to that court with directions to enter a judgment non obstante veredicto.
Reversed and remanded.
CRAVEN and TRAPP, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9738641 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:59:27.508469+00 ===

DUNN, Justice.
Plaintiff was found in contempt of court for defaulting in his obligations to pay child support and alimony. We reverse and remand.
Plaintiff and defendant were divorced on July 14, 1977. Under the terms of the support agreement entered into by the parties, plaintiff agreed to pay defendant $208.33 per month for each of three children and $833.33 per month in alimony. At the time of the divorce and for three months thereafter, plaintiff practiced pediatrics and neonatology with the Medical Clinic in Yankton, South Dakota. He earned $40,000 per year from this employment. The association with the Medical Clinic was terminated in November of 1977, apparently through no fault of plaintiff. Subsequent to this termination, plaintiff refused an offer of employment with Sacred Heart Hospital in Yankton at a salary of $40,000 per year because “the workload was too great.” Plaintiff, his new bride and their child moved to Rapid City, South Dakota, where he opened a medical practice in late March of 1978. At the time this matter was briefed, plaintiff asserted that the new practice was not yet paying operating expenses. He purchased a new home with a monthly payment of $555, maintained a 1977 Corvette automobile with payments of $307 per month, and purchased a $100,000 insurance policy, naming his new wife as the beneficiary.
Plaintiff’s financial obligations to his former wife and their children were fulfilled from the date of the divorce decree until July and August of 1978, when he defaulted. Defendant initiated an order to show cause, which was heard on August 25,1978. The court issued its memorandum decision on August 28, 1978, and on August 30,1978, entered its order finding plaintiff in contempt- of court for his willful failure and refusal to meet his financial obligations. In its order, the court granted plaintiff thirty days to purge himself of contempt. He failed to do so, and defendant initiated an-. other order to show cause on October -12, 1978, which was heard on October 25, 1978. On the same date, the court entered its order and judgment finding plaintiff in contempt. Following denial of a motion for new trial, appeals were taken from both the order of August 30,1978, and the order and judgment of October 25,1978. The appeals were consolidated by order of this court.
The plaintiff contends that the record did not contain sufficient evidence to find that he had the ability to comply with agreement requiring alimony and support payments and willfully refused to do so. He cites Agrue v. Agrue, 233 Or. 456, 378 P.2d 965 (1963), and Balaam v. Balaam, 52 Wis.2d 20, 187 N.W.2d 867 (1971), as support for his contention that a divorced husband is entitled to pursue a fair choice of livelihood, even though his choice may result in a reduction of income. Both decisions, however, speak of good faith. We see no good faith on the part of plaintiff when he insists upon maintaining high monthly payments for a new house and a sports car while his medical practice is unable to meet expenses and his former wife receives welfare in Massachusetts. The defense of absolute inability must be proved by the party who asserts it. Bailey v. Bailey, 77 S.D. 546, 95 N.W.2d 533 (1959); Simmons v. Simmons, 67 S.D. 145, 290 N.W. 319 (1940). These cases both imply that the primary responsibility of one in plaintiff’s position is to his former wife and their children. It is true that plaintiff borrowed money to pay his obligations in the past and that he is now unable to obtain further *864loans; however, it is clear that he would not be in such a dilemma had he refrained from indulging in expensive luxuries.
Nor do we find any substance to plaintiff’s contention that the order and the order and judgment finding him in contempt are fatally defective because they were not personally served upon him. Krueger v. Krueger, 32 S.D. 470, 143 N.W. 368 (1913). This is a clear misreading of Krueger and its predecessors, Scott v. Scott, 9 S.D. 125, 68 N.W. 194 (1896), and Larson v. Larson, 9 S.D. 1, 67 N.W. 842 (1896). These cases hold that a person may not be adjudged guilty of contempt without a showing “that a copy of such decree was personally served upon him before the commission of, or omission to do, those acts the commission or omission of which constitute the alleged contempt.” Krueger, 32 S.D. 472, 143 N.W. 369. This statement clearly refers to the original divorce decree mandating alimony and child support payments. Plaintiff does not contend that the original divorce decree was not served upon him personally, and the fact that he abided by the decree for many months satisfies us that he fully understood his obligations.
Furthermore, it is clear that the plaintiff had notice of the order of August 30, 1978, by and through his counsel. His counsel plainly admitted that “we received notice of it on 5 September, I believe.” It is also clear that the order and judgment of October 25,1978, was entered in the presence of plaintiff’s counsel. Plaintiff’s contention that the orders finding him guilty of contempt had to have been served upon him personally is therefore unfounded.
Finally, plaintiff argues that the trial court failed to enter findings of fact and conclusions of law regarding his financial ability to meet his obligations and his willful refusal to do so. With this we must agree. There were no separate findings of fact at the initial contempt proceeding. The memorandum decision of August 28, 1978, does not suffice for separate findings of fact. In Mulder v. Tague, 85 S.D. 544, 186 N.W.2d 884 (1971), we found that the memorandum decision was adequate without separate findings of fact. The Mulder case differs from the instant case, however, in that the memorandum decision contained an extensive recitation of the facts and the applicable law as found by the court, and it was specifically incorporated into the findings and conclusions.
In this case, the findings of fact incorporated into the order and judgment of October 25, 1978, were insufficient to form a clear basis for the contempt order. Without a thorough recitation of facts that support a finding of contempt and without a finding that the four elements of contempt are present, a conclusion that contempt of court has occurred is improper. The four elements to which we allude are (1) existence of an order, (2) knowledge of that order, (3) ability to comply with the order, and (4) willful or contumacious disobedience. Hanisch v. Hanisch, 273 N.W.2d 188 (S.D.1979). It is clear that the findings of fact of October 25, 1978, were insufficient, and therefore the order and judgment nunc pro tunc of the same date did not cure the failure to enter findings at the original contempt proceeding.
The order and the order and judgment from which the appeals are taken are reversed, and the matter is remanded to the trial court for findings of fact and conclusions of law to support the contempt judgment.
MORGAN and HENDERSON, JJ., concur.
WOLLMAN, C. J., and FOSHEIM, J., concur specially.

=== CASE 9738642 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:59:27.51236+00 ===

FOSHEIM, Justice
(concurring specially).
The majority opinion correctly states the rule announced in Krueger v. Krueger, 32 S.D. 470, 143 N.W. 368 (1913); Scott v. Scott, 9 S.D. 125, 68 N.W. 194 (1896); and Larson v. Larson, 9 S.D. 1, 67 N.W. 842 (1896), that in order to support a finding that the acts were wilful and contemptuous it must be shown that a copy of the divorce decree was personally served upon the con-temnor. Proof, however, that the alleged *865contemnor had actual notice of his obligations as imposed by the decree renders personal service unnecessary. Freeman v. City of Huron, 8 S.D. 435, 66 N.W. 928 (1896); State v. Knight, 3 S.D. 509, 54 N.W. 412 (1893).
In my opinion, this requirement applies to all subsequent orders in the contempt process including grants of purgation. While the record does not show proof of personal service of the divorce decree, the plaintiff, as the majority opinion notes, does not urge any such failure. I disagree, however, with that part of the opinion which concludes that since appellant’s counsel was present when the August 30, 1978 order was entered and thereafter acknowledged having received notice of that order, the notice requirements were thereby met. In my opinion, that conclusion is erroneous. The evidence necessary to prove contempt must be clear and satisfactory, 27B C.J.S. Divorce § 262(j) (1959), and must be strictly construed in favor of the accused. The usual ■ presumption in favor of the regularity of the proceedings does not apply in contempt' matters. Ex parte Shackleford, 116 Cal.App.2d 864, 254 P.2d 610 (1953); Groves v. Superior Court, 62 Cal.App.2d 559, 145 P.2d 355 (1944). The knowledge of counsel cannot be imputed to his client to show actual notice and contumacious conduct with re-' spect to the original decree, Svihla v. Svihla, 126 N.W.2d 135 (N.D.1964), or an order to show cause, Kroneberger v. Superior Court, 196 Cal.App.2d 206, 16 Cal.Rptr. 339 (1961). I believe that this rule logically extends to all subsequent orders springing from the original.
I agree with the majority opinion that the failure of the trial court to enter proper findings of fact and conclusions of law regarding the plaintiff’s financial ability to meet his obligation and his wilful refusal to do so is reversible error.* Fienup v. Rentto, 74 S.D. 329, 52 N.W.2d 486 (1952); Hoffman v. Hoffman, 26 S.D. 34, 127 N.W. 478 (1910).
The remand to enter proper findings of fact and conclusions of law will, in my opinion, require retracing the proceedings to the Memorandum Decision entered on August 28, 1978. The findings of fact and conclusions of law will likely then replace and render moot objections concerning the order of August 30, 1978.
I am authorized to state that Chief Justice WOLLMAN joins in this special concurrence.
I thus question the propriety of directly addressing the sufficiency of the evidence relating to the elements of the contempt issue.

=== CASE 2217072 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:21.443528+00 ===

95 Mich. App. 188 (1980)
290 N.W.2d 119
PEOPLE
v.
MAYES
Docket No. 78-5432.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided January 23, 1980.
Frank J. Kelley, Attorney General, Robert A. Derengoski, Solicitor General, William L. Cahalan, Prosecuting Attorney, Edward R. Wilson, Principal Attorney, Appeals, and Paul G. Bruno, Assistant Prosecuting Attorney, for the people.
Charles Burke, for defendant on appeal.
*189 Before: BASHARA, P.J., and D.E. HOLBROOK, JR. and J.C. DANER,[*] JJ.
PER CURIAM.
The defendant pled guilty to breaking and entering an occupied dwelling while he was on authorized leave from a halfway house and was sentenced to from 3-1/2 to 5 years in prison. The sentence was ordered to run consecutively with the prison term he was serving at the time the crime was committed. The defendant appeals as of right the consecutive nature of his sentence.
The defendant contends that although MCL 768.7a; MSA 28.1030(1) requires consecutive sentencing for crimes committed while incarcerated in a penal institution or while escaped from such an institution, his status while on authorized leave from a halfway house was not within either of those classifications. The statute at issue provides:
"A person who is incarcerated in a penal or reformatory institution in this state, or who escapes from that institution, and who commits a crime during that incarceration or escape which is punishable by imprisonment in a penal or reformatory institution in this state shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to sentence therefor in the manner provided by law for such crimes. The term of sentence imposed for the crime shall commence at the expiration of the term or terms of sentence which the person is serving or has become liable to serve in a penal or reformatory institution in this state."
In People v Smith (On Rehearing), 89 Mich App 478, 489; 280 NW2d 862 (1979), this Court held that for purposes of the escape statute, MCL 750.193; MSA 28.390, any grounds under the control of persons authorized by the corrections department to have inmates under their care, custody *190 or supervision is a prison. Thus, a halfway house is a prison for purposes of the escape statute.
Without deciding whether or not the commission of a crime while on leave from a halfway house is an escape, absent an intent not to return, we hold that a crime committed while on leave from a haflway house is committed during one's incarceration in a penal institution. The alternative interpretation of the consecutive sentencing statute, which is advanced by the defendant, is clearly outside of the legislative intent, which was to create a disincentive for committing criminal acts by those serving prison sentences.
The consecutive sentence in the present case is, therefore, affirmed.
NOTES
[*]  Circuit judge, sitting on the Court of Appeals by assignment.

=== CASE 9738643 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:59:34.230057+00 ===

Brodkey, J.
Plaintiff below, Dairyland Insurance Company, has filed an appeal to this court, seeking to reverse an order of the District Court for Holt County which sustained a motion for summary judgment filed by the defendant, Karla Denay Hearon, by and through her father, William Hearon, and by William Hearon on his own behalf. In its order, entered on January 3, 1979, the trial court ordered, adjudged, and decreed that the defendants’ motion for summary judgment be granted and that Dairyland Insurance Com*751pany (Dairyland) be required to defend the defendant, Eileen Esterling, and to provide coverage to said defendant in a pending action against her. In its appeal to this court, Dairyland assigns as error the failure of the trial court to grant judgment in its favor on defendants’ motion for summary judgment, and also in allowing and granting attorney’s fees and costs to Eileen Esterling. We reverse and remand.
The action in which the motion for summary judgment was filed was a declaratory judgment action brought by Dairyland to determine the rights of the various parties to an action for damages under a “Family Combination Automobile Policy” issued by Dairyland to Robert Esterling, husband of Eileen Esterling, on November 11, 1975. That policy provided, in part, that Dairyland would “pay on behalf of the insured all sums which the insured shall become legally obligated to pay as damages because of * * * bodily injury, sickness or disease, including death resulting therefrom, * * * sustained by any person; [and also for any property damage] arising out of the ownership, maintenance or use of the owned automobile or any nonowned automobile, and the company shall defend any suit alleging such bodily injury or property damage and seeking damages which are payable under the terms of this policy, even if any of the allegations of the suit are groundless, false or fraudulent; but the company may make such investigation and settlement of any claim or suit as it deems expedient.”
Dairyland attached to its petition for declaratory judgment, as an exhibit, the petition in a case filed in the District Court for Holt County entitled Karla Denay Hearon, by and through her Father and Next Friend, William Hearon, Plaintiff v. Eileen Ester-ling, Defendant, Case No. 17133, which petition sets out and summarizes the salient facts giving rise to this litigation. It appears that on December 4, 1975, the mother of Karla Denay Hearon left her minor *752daughter in the care, custody, and control of Eileen Esterling, the wife of the named insured, engaging her to babysit with Karla for a monetary consideration. It further appears that Eileen Esterling then took their pickup truck, the insured vehicle, and drove from O’Neill, Nebraska, to Neligh, Nebraska, taking with her her sister, her 4-year-old son Bradley Esterling, and Karla Hearon. Upon arriving in Neligh, Eileen Esterling and her sister got out of the parked pickup truck, the insured vehicle, leaving Bradley and Karla by themselves in the pickup. The petition alleges that Bradley “did take a cigarette lighter and set the plaintiff’s coat on fire,” resulting in injuries to the plaintiff. The source of the cigarette lighter is neither alleged in the petition nor shown in the record. Karla sustained severe injuries as a result of the fire. The grounds of negligence alleged against the defendant, Eileen Ester-ling, were that she failed to properly supervise the plaintiff, failed to protect the plaintiff from the acts of her 4-year-old son, and failed to provide safe premises for the plaintiff. Dairyland then filed its declaratory judgment action, asking the court to declare that the policy provision referred to above provided no coverage for this incident.
The principal issue presented in this appeal is whether or not coverage exists under the policy in question, particularly under the policy provisions quoted above. As a general rule, an insurance policy should be considered as any other contract, and should be given effect according to the ordinary sense of the terms used; and if those terms are clear, they will be applied according to their plain and ordinary meaning. Preferred Risk Mut. Ins. Co. v. Continental Ins. Co., 172 Neb. 179, 109 N. W. 2d 126 (1961). However, it is also a well-established rule that an insurance contract will be interpreted in accordance with the reasonable expectations of the insured at the time of the contract, and in case of *753doubt, the policy will be liberally construed in favor of the insured. Neal v. St. Paul Fire & Marine Ins. Co., 197 Neb. 718, 250 N. W. 2d 648 (1977).
The phrase “arising out of the ownership, maintenance, or use of the owned automobile” has frequently been examined and interpreted by the courts to determine whether insurance coverage exists. In an annotation entitled “Automobile liability insurance: what are accidents or injuries ‘arising out of the ownership, maintenance, or use’ of insured vehicle,” 89 A. L. R. 2d 150, it is stated: “A frequent question confronting the courts in determining whether a particular injury or accident is within the coverage provided by the ‘ownership, maintenance or use’ clause of an automobile liability insurance policy is the one of causal connection or relationship of the accident or injury to the ownership, maintenance, or use of a vehicle. All the cases agree that a causal relation or connection must exist between an accident or injury and the ownership, maintenance, or use of a vehicle in order for the accident or injury to come within the meaning of the clause ‘arising out of the ownership, maintenance or use’ of a vehicle, and where such causal connection or relation is absent coverage will be denied. The difficulty therefore relates mainly to the determination whether or not there was under the facts of the particular case the required causal relationship.” See, also, 6B Appleman Insurance Law and Practice, §§ 4311 to 4330 (Buckley Ed., 1979).
One of the leading and frequently quoted cases dealing with this problem is National Union Fire Ins. Co. v. Bruecks, 179 Neb. 642, 139 N. W. 2d 821 (1966), where we held that the accidental discharge of a loaded gun in an automobile being used to transport a minor home after a hunting trip was not an accident within the contemplation of the term “arising out of the use” of an automobile, under the facts of that case. In Bruecks we stated: “The policy is *754intended to cover any injury caused by an accident arising out of the use of an automobile and a reasonably liberal construction should be in order if we are to effectuate the purpose of the contract. * * *
“The words ‘arising out of the use’ are very broad, general, and comprehensive terms, and are ordinarily understood to mean originating from, growing out of, or flowing from.”
In that case we also stated: “It would seem that the obligation to defend a suit for an insured should be determined on the basis of whether the petition filed against him attempts to allege a liability within the terms of the policy. In the tort action, which is the basis for this declaratory judgment action, there is no allegation set out in the petition which would indicate that the action was brought as one arising out of the use of a motor vehicle. * * * [T]he allegations of negligence * * * may be summarized as failing to unload the gun previous to entering the automobile and in attempting to unload the gun in a moving automobile. These allegations in no way predicate recovery on the use of the automobile as such. The gun did not discharge as a result of being in the vehicle or from any reason even remotely connected with the vehicle. It seems clearly apparent that the tort action is not premised upon any connection with the automobile in which the shooting occurred, except as describing the situs of the act.
* * *
“It seems patent, however, that some causal relation must exist between the injury and the use of the vehicle to come within the ambit of ‘arising out of the use of a vehicle.’ ”
In the instant case, the underlying tort petition does not allege that it was the act of igniting Karla’s clothing that caused the injury. Rather, as previously stated, the petition alleges that the negligence of Eileen Esterling consisted of failing to supervise, failing to protect, and failing to provide *755safe premises. In order to invoke coverage under the policy provisions, it is necessary that one of the three allegedly negligent acts must have arisen from “the operation, maintenance, or use” of the vehicle, and have caused the injuries to Karla. It seems clear that the first two allegations referred to cannot be said to have arisen out of the use of an automobile, and the attorney for Eileen Esterling conceded this point in his oral argument before this court. That being so, we need only consider whether the failure to provide safe premises arose out of the operation, maintenance, or use of the insured vehicle; or, to be more specific, we must determine whether the use of the vehicle as a playhouse for the children was within the intended policy coverage; and whether the injuries were the result of an accident arising out of the “use” of an automobile.
The case of Hartford Fire Ins. v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins., 264 Ark. 743, 574 S. W. 2d 265 (1978), is instructive and persuasive upon that question and involved a situation strikingly similar to that in the instant case. In the Arkansas case, two minors were playing inside the insured vehicle, a camper used primarily as a recreational vehicle, which was parked in a carport adjoining the residence of the insured. One of the minors inside the camper pointed a pistol at a child outside the camper. The pistol was not a part of the vehicle’s equipment, but was customarily kept in a loaded condition in the vehicle. The weapon discharged, killing the child outside the camper. In finding no coverage under the automobile insurance policy, the Arkansas court stated: “We are of the view that the accidental death of [the child] cannot be said to be causally related to the use of the camper. As to causation, the accident could just have easily occurred in a field, in the driveway, or in a hunting lodge. The fact that the person discharging the pistol was inside the vehicle *756at the time of this accident does not make the injury one ‘arising out of the ownership, maintenance, or use’ of the camper. Consequently, appellee’s policy provided no coverage in this situation.” We agree completely with the reasoning of the Arkansas court.
We note that appellees in their briefs have cited cases wherein coverage under the automobile liability insurance policies containing the same or similar provisions as those contained in the policy in this case has been found to exist in situations involving passengers who were bitten by dogs being transported in the vehicle. National Indemnity Co. v. Corbo, 248 So. 2d 238 (Fla., 1971); Hartford Accident & Indem. Co. v. Civil Service Employees Ins. Co., 33 Cal. App. 3d 26, 108 Cal. Rptr. 737 (1973). We believe that those cases are distinguishable from the instant case, as they involved accidents causally connected with the use of the insured vehicle. We are unable to conclude that the failure to provide safe premises for Karla, the minor child, made the injury to her one which arose out of the ownership, maintenance, or use of the vehicle. Furthermore, under the ‘‘reasonable expectations” test, we have difficulty in concluding that at the time of the inception of the insurance contract between Dairyland and the Esterlings, the parties contemplated or intended that using the vehicle as a playhouse for their minor children would constitute a use of the vehicle within the meaning of the policy. We decline to enlarge the coverage provided by the contract by judicial construction without regard to the intent of the parties when entering into the insurance contract.
We conclude, therefore, that the trial court erred in sustaining defendants’ motion for summary judgment, and in finding that the plaintiff was legally obligated to defend Eileen Esterling, and to provide coverage to her. In view of our disposition of this matter, we also conclude that Mrs. Esterling is not *757entitled to an award of attorney’s fees and we reverse the District Court’s award of such fees. We therefore reverse the order of the District Court and remand the case for further proceedings not inconsistent with this opinion.
Reversed and remanded.

=== CASE 9738644 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:59:34.234138+00 ===

Reagan, District Judge,
concurring.
I concur with the result reached in the majority opinion, but I disagree with certain conclusions stated and some of the reasoning for the decision reached. I also feel the majority opinion lacks sufficient directions for further proceedings by the trial court.
The majority opinion rightfully states the issue presented by this action: whether plaintiff is required to provide coverage to Eileen Esterling under the policy provision providing coverage for damages “arising out of the ownership, maintenance or use of the owned automobile.” The opinion correctly states the salient facts giving rise to this declaratory judgment action, although it should be pointed out the only allegation of negligence in the underlying tort action which could even arguably be covered under this policy was the one claiming the insured “failed to provide a safe premises” for the injured minor.
I agree with the majority opinion that insurance policies are considered as any other contract, and given effect according to the ordinary sense of the terms used. Preferred Risk Mut. Ins. Co. v. Continental Ins. Co., 172 Neb. 179, 109 N. W. 2d 126 (1961). I agree with, and place emphasis on, the majority statement that ambiguities in policies should be liberally construed in favor of reasonable expectations of the insured. Neal v. St. Paul Fire & Marine Ins. Co., 197 Neb. 718, 250 N. W. 2d 648 (1977).
The majority then cites 89 A. L. R. 2d 150 and 6B Appleman Insurance Law and Practice §§ 4311 to 4330 (Buckley Ed., 1979) for the proposition there *758must be a causal connection between the accident or injury and the ownership, maintenance, or use of the insured vehicle for coverage to be afforded. Although such may be a correct statement of the law, it may lead to an erroneous inference that the ownership, maintenance, or use of an insured vehicle must be the proximate or a proximate cause of the accident or injury. Cases collected, as well as text comments, in Appleman, supra at § 4317, establish that ownership, maintenance, or use of a vehicle need not be the direct and efficient cause of the injury, merely that some substantial nexus between the injury and the insured vehicle exist.
The case of National Union Fire Ins. Co. v. Bruecks, 179 Neb. 642, 139 N. W. 2d 821 (1966), also relied upon by the majority, is distinguishable from the instant case in at least two important aspects. In Bruecks, there were no allegations of negligence in the underlying petition which could even arguably relate to the ownership, maintenance, or use of the insured vehicle. Secondly, the underlying tort action was against a passenger who was totally unconnected with the ownership or maintenance of the vehicle where the injury occurred.
The majority opinion then moves toward the conclusion that Mrs. Esterling’s use of the insured vehicle as a playhouse was not within the intended policy coverage. There are two problems with this reasoning. First, it assumes that it was the insured’s intent to use the vehicle as a playhouse. This is an assumption based on absolutely no evidence and one which is contrary to the normal experience of mankind. Without endorsing the safety of such practice, one must recognize how frequently adults leave small children in automobiles for a few minutes (and sometimes longer) while they run into a store for a loaf of bread or a quart of milk. Secondly, it refers only to the use of the vehicle and disregards the term “maintenance.”
*759As far as this court knows, “maintenance” is not defined within Dairyland’s policy. The normal definition of this term would be an act or acts of keeping or supporting a particular object (such as the insured vehicle) in a state of good repair or condition. It has been indicated in the text cited by the majority that maintenance includes acts of either commission or omission relative to the external or mechanical condition of the vehicle. Appleman, supra at § 4315, p. 339. Although Hartford Fire Ins. v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins., 264 Ark. 743, 574 S. W. 2d 265 (1978), is similar to the instant case in some aspects, it is substantially different in others. That case was an action for contribution between insurance companies and was decided after a full evidentiary hearing. The opinion is premised on “use” of the insured vehicle, rather than “maintenance,” and it is clear the trier of fact came to the conclusion the insured vehicle was in fact being used as a “playhouse. ”
With the ambiguity in the term “maintenance,” the one underlying allegation of negligence that the insured “failed to provide a safe premises,” a question of fact is presented on whether coverage exists. That could only be determined on a full and complete evidentiary hearing. If this analysis is correct, the decision reached by the court this term in MFA Ins. Companies v. Mendenhall, ante p. 430, 288 N. W. 2d 270 (1980), entitles either party to a jury trial as a matter of right. Such a trial would not of necessity terminate the controversy, for even if coverage should exist, Dairyland could still defend the tort action on the issue of damages or on the issue of whether Mrs. Esterling’s failure to supervise was the sole proximate cause of the injuries sustained.
Because of this, the trial court should consider the broad discretion vested in it by section 25-21,154, R. R. S. 1943, to refuse to entertain a declaratory judg*760ment proceeding that would not terminate the uncertainty or controversy. The trial court could adequately protect Dairyland’s rights in the tort action by requesting the jury to make specific findings of fact regarding the cause of the injury.

=== CASE 2217083 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:21.593237+00 ===

290 N.W.2d 174 (1980)
Verna Hall EDDY, et al., Appellants,
v.
REPUBLIC NATIONAL LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY, Defendant,
Rollie M. Martin, Respondent.
No. 49564.
Supreme Court of Minnesota.
March 7, 1980.
*175 Robert C. Onan, Jr., St. Paul, for appellants.
O'Connor & Hannan and Kenneth B. Jones, Jr., Minneapolis, for respondent.
Heard before SHERAN, C.J., OTIS and KELLY, JJ. and considered and decided by the court en banc.
SHERAN, Chief Justice.
Plaintiff, Verna Hall Eddy, the named beneficiary of a life insurance policy which was to be issued by defendant, Republic National Life Insurance Company (Republic), on the life of her husband who was employed by plaintiff Datco Specialty Lighting Company, Inc. and Datco of Hawaii, Inc., together appeal from a judgment entered in the Hennepin County District Court dismissing their suit against defendant Rollie M. Martin. Plaintiffs settled with defendant Republic and argue that, nevertheless, they should be allowed to litigate whether defendant Martin was acting as a broker and is therefore still liable. We agree with the plaintiffs that the trial court erred in dismissing their suit against Martin, and we consequently reverse and remand.
Early in 1976, the Datco Companies asked Rollie Martin to obtain a second tier of group life term insurance coverage for employees of the four Datco Companies. Rollie Martin is an experienced group life insurance agent and broker who had previously submitted other insurance applications on Datco's behalf to various insurance companies. Martin submitted an application to Republic for coverage on the lives of 15 Datco employees, including Thomas Dodd Eddy. Republic issued an insurance *176 policy. The policy, however, named only Datco Specialty Lighting Company, Inc. as group policyholder and omitted Datco of Hawaii, Inc. for which Mr. Eddy worked. The certificate issued to Mr. Eddy designated his wife, plaintiff Verna Hall Eddy, as beneficiary. Mr. Eddy died approximately six months later. Republic refused to pay insurance proceeds to Verna Eddy, claiming that Mr. Eddy was not an employee of Datco Specialty Lighting Company, Inc., the named policyholder.
In December 1977, plaintiffs filed a $25,000 suit against Republic for breach of contract and reformation of contract and against Martin for negligence and misrepresentation. The defendants answered the complaint and cross-claimed for contribution or indemnity against their respective co-defendant.
On September 20, 1978, reserving their right to continue against Martin, plaintiffs settled the case with Republic and issued a release for which they received $17,500. At a special session, Martin moved for a summary judgment on the ground that release of Republic released him. After considering the pleadings and submitted discovery, the trial court ruled that since a genuine issue of material fact existed as to whether Martin was an agent or a broker who would have independent liability, it would be inappropriate to grant a summary judgment.
On October 30, 1978, in the chambers of another trial judge, Martin moved to dismiss the case on the ground that there was no issue as to Martin's status as an agent for Republic. In support of his motion, Martin relied upon paragraph 15 of the complaint in which plaintiffs called Martin an "agent" for Republic. Since Martin conceded in his answer that he was an agent for Republic by admitting paragraphs 1 to 27 of the complaint, there was no disagreement in the pleadings as to Martin's status as an agent. Martin thus argued that dismissal was required because the pleadings failed to state a cause of action against Martin once Republic had been released.
Plaintiffs responded by citing answers to interrogatories in which Republic had denied that Martin was its agent. When it was brought to their attention that those responses had neither been sent to Martin nor filed with the court, plaintiffs argued that the third and fourth causes of action stated in the complaint (negligence and misrepresentation) had put Martin on notice concerning the broker/agent issue. Plaintiffs also asserted that the issue had been raised during Martin's deposition.
Plaintiffs moved, however, "as a protective measure," to add a paragraph to the complaint in which they would claim that Martin was a broker. Martin objected to this as untimely and as a surprise. The court denied the motion to amend the complaint and stated that it didn't have the authority to continue the case.
Plaintiffs renewed their argument that the negligence and misrepresentation causes of action placed Martin on notice of the broker/agent issue. The trial court rejected this argument on the ground that the causes of action could have been brought whether Martin was an agent or a broker so they did not, in and of themselves, put Martin on notice that he would have to litigate his status. The court dismissed plaintiffs' suit because it found that there was no issue as to Martin's status as an agent.
While it is generally the rule that an insurance company is liable for the torts of its agents when they are acting within the scope of their employment, see Morrison v. Swenson, 274 Minn. 127, 142 N.W.2d 640 (1966); 4 Couch on Insurance § 26:433 (2d ed. 1960), before that rule can be applied it is essential to determine whether the person claimed to be an agent was, in fact, acting in that capacity. A person who procures insurance for others can be an insurance agent, an insurance broker, or both. The essence of the difference is that whereas an insurance agent acts on behalf of a particular insurance company, an insurance broker acts on behalf of the prospective insured. In which capacity a person is acting is a question of fact. Morrison v. Swenson, supra, quoted in Automated Systems, Inc. v. Nat'l Indem. Co., 269 N.W.2d 749, 752 *177 (Minn.1978). A broker is independently liable to the insured in either contract or tort for failing to procure insurance as instructed, Consolidated Sun Ray, Inc. v. Lea, 276 F.Supp. 132 (E.D.Pa.1967), affirmed 401 F.2d 650 (3d Cir. 1968), cert. denied, 393 U.S. 1050, 89 S.Ct. 688, 21 L.Ed.2d 692 (1969); 16 J. Appleman, Insurance Law and Practice § 8841 at 514-15 (rev.1968), but an agent's liability may be affected by the settlement of his principal. The capacity in which Martin was acting must therefore be established before the impact of Republic's settlement on his liability, if any, can be ascertained. Martin's liability as a broker is limited to the difference between what the plaintiffs have received and the face value of the policy to which they were entitled. Gothberg v. Nemerovski, 58 Ill. App.2d 372, 208 N.E.2d 12 (1965); 16 J. Appleman, Insurance Law and Practice § 8841 (rev.1968).
Since Martin may have been independently liable as a broker, which is a question for the fact finder, we reverse and remand this case. The trial court can either allow the plaintiffs to amend their pleadings and grant a continuance so that defendant Martin can prepare his defense or proceed with the pleadings as they stand.
Reversed and remanded.
TODD, J., took no part in the consideration or decision of this case.

=== CASE 9738645 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:59:35.934477+00 ===

Hunter, J.
This is an appeal in a criminal action in which the appellant, Herbert W. King, Jr., was charged with, and convicted of, murder in the second degree. Trial was to a jury, and a verdict of guilty was returned. Judgment was entered on the verdict and the appellant was sentenced to a term of life imprisonment.
The appellant waived arraignment and entered a plea of not guilty to the indictment, which, omitting the caption, reads as follows:
“The Grand Jury of the County of Allen, State of Indiana, upon their oaths, present that Herbert W. King, Jr., on the 11th day of June, 1965, in the County of Allen, in the State of Indiana, unlawfully, feloniously, purposely and maliciously, but without premeditation, did kill and murder Gene Carl Faust, a human being, by then and there unlawfully, feloniously, purposely and maliciously, but without premeditátion, shooting at and against the said Gene Carl Faust, with a certain .38 caliber revolver, loaded and charged with gun powder and bullet and thereby mortally wounded said Gene Carl Faust with said bullet, discharged and shot as aforesaid, from which mortal wound the said Gene Carl Faust then and there died; the Grand Jurors, upon their oaths, as aforesaid, do say and charge that the *702said Herbert W. King, Jr., did then and there unlawfully, feloniously, purposely and maliciously, but without premeditation, kill and murder the said Gene Carl Faust, in manner and form aforesaid, contrary to the form of the statute in such case made and provided, and against the peace and dignity of the State of Indiana.”
The indictment was filed pursuant to the terms of the following statute:
“Whoever, purposely and maliciously, but without premeditation, kills any human being, is guilty of murder in the second degree, and on conviction, shall be imprisoned in the state prison during his life. (Acts 1905, Ch. 169, Paragraph 350, p. 584.)” Ind. Anno. Stat. § 10-3404 (1956 Repl.)
Under the issues formed at trial the burden was upon the State of Indiana to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that:
1. Appellant killed the decedent.
2. The killing was done purposely and maliciously.
In our determination it is our duty to look to the record of the evidence most favorable to the appellee, State of Indiana. Capps v. State (1967), 248 Ind. 472, 229 N. E. 2d 794. The evidence when viewed in this manner may be summarized as follows:
On June 11, 1965, Herman Gayheart went to his brother’s apartment, a remodeled single residence, at 924 West Washington Street, Fort Wayne, Indiana. He arrived there at or around noon. Herman Gayheart’s brother’s apartment is on the lower left side of the building. Mrs. Liz Lyons, on that date lived in the lower right apartment. Appellant, on that date, lived in an upstairs apartment on the left side of the building. There is a common front porch on the building with a small divider running from the steps to the front of the house.
Herman Gayheart had known decedent, Gene Carl Faust, and his family for about three years. During the afternoon on that date, Herman Gayheart and his brother drank five *703beers from a six-pack of beer. Liz Lyons drank one can of beer.
About 6 o’clock that evening Herman Gayheart, Liz Lyons, Herman Gayheart’s cousin and the Kings were on the front porch. Dorothy Faust, wife of the decedent, and her two children were also on the front porch.
Then Gene Faust drove up in a 1953 Chevrolet and parked it on a side street. He got out of the car and came around to the front of the house. His little boy ran down the steps to greet him and said hello. Then the little boy called him a name — either a “souse” or a “louse.” This remark upset decedent and he slapped his son. The child started to bleed.
The decedent then came up to the front porch and he and Liz Lyons had a conversation about discipline of the boy. Some remarks were exchanged by and between Herman Gay-heart and the decedent and a fight started. Herman Gayheart, during the course of the fight, hit decedent on the head with the beer bottle. The two men fought for a couple of minutes.
Appellant then came over to where the two men were fighting and told them to break it up. At this point, appellant had a gun in his hand. Herman Gayheart turned decedent loose and backed up and got on the divider. At that time, decedent and appellant started to fight. They were on Liz Lyons’ side of the porch. When they were fighting, appellant had his gun in his belt. He was not holding the gun in his hand. Decedent had his arms locked around appellant’s legs and he was shaking appellant. Appellant got the gun out from under his belt and said he was going to shoot decedent. Gayheart told appellant not to shoot him and appellant told Gayheart to stay out of it. All witnesses stated they heard a gun fire. When the police arrived, they asked who shot Gene Carl Faust and appellant told them he had done it.
Herman Gayheart specifically testified as follows:
“A. They struggled around there two or three minutes fighting, and then Gene has his arms locked around Mr. King’s legs there and his head down there at his *704knees and he was shaking him. and Mr. King was getting his gun out from under his belt. He had stuck it under his pants right there and he was getting it back out and said he was going to shoot him and he got up and I said, ‘Don’t shoot him,’ and he walked over towards me and he put the gun on me then.
Q. Did he take the gun out of his belt?
A. He walked out just behind me when he said he was going to shoot him.
Q. Said he was going to shoot who ?
A. Gene.”
The witness Liz Lyons testified that the decedent and Gay-heart had stopped fighting when the appellant appeared with the gun and that the deceased was trying to get in the door when the appellant shot him.
Dorothy Mae Faust testified she saw the decedent with a gun in his hand when he came out the middle door and walked over to the middle ledge.
And appellant aimed the gun, point blank, at Gayheart’s face when Gayheart turned around and appellant said “Quit your fighting or I’ll blow your brains out.”
In response to a question “Why did you shoot this man at the time you did?” Appellant answered: “Well, more or less he was overpowering me and out of fear, so when I got the chance I shot him.”
The central question presented by this appeal is whether there was sufficient evidence of probative value and sufficient reasonable inferences to be adduced therefrom, to justify the jury’s finding of malice and purpose as a necessary element of the crime.
The question resolves itself into two issues, which may be stated as follows:
(1) Whether, on the record before us, the jury was required to find as a matter of law that appellant acted in self-defense, and
(2) If the jury was not required to find as a matter of law that appellant acted in self-defense, was the jury then *705required, as a matter of law, to find that the evidence supports only a conviction for manslaughter, rather than for second-degree murder.
Where one has taken the life of another human being, and thereafter contends that he did so in self-defense, he can only be successful in his contention if:
(1) he acted without fault,
(2) he was in a place where he had a right to be, and
(3) he was in real danger of death or great bodily harm, or in such apparent danger as caused him in good faith to fear death or great bodily harm.
Bullard v. State (1964), 245 Ind. 90, 195 N. E. 2d 856; Hightire v. State (1966), 247 Ind. 164, 213 N. E. 2d 707. The burden is upon the State to show that defendant does not meet one or more of these requirements. Dorak v. State (1915), 183 Ind. 622, 109 N. E. 771. Whether the State, has borne its burden of showing that the homicidal act was not carried out in self-defense is a question, of ultimate fact to be decided by the jury. Robinson v. State (1962), 243 Ind. 192, 184 N. E. 2d 16.
After the jury has made this determination in favor of the State and against the defendant, this Court, on appeal:
. . has upon it a duty to consider, not to weigh, the evidence in the case for the purpose of determining whether there is any substantial evidence of probative value from which a jury reasonably could have inferred that the appellant was guilty of the offense charged” Robinson v. State, supra, 243 Ind. at 197. See also Easton v. State (1967) 248 Ind. 338, 228 N. E. 2d 6; Baker v. State (1956), 236 Ind. 55, 138 N. E. 2d 641.
From the evidence, as above set out, there was clearly substantial evidence of probative value to justify the jury in concluding that appellant was not in real danger of death or great bodily harm, or was not in good faith in fear of death or great bodily harm due to appar*706ent danger. Furthermore, there is also substantial evidence of probative value which would justify the jury in determining that appellant did not act without fault.
There was testimony to the effect that the decedent had been badly, almost viciously, beaten in the fight with Herman Gayheart that immediately preceded the shooting. The decedent’s wife, Mrs. Faust, testified that Gayheart had stopped fighting with decedent, upon appellant’s demand, and that the appellant himself began fighting with the decedent. Mrs. Faust also said that the last thing she remembered seeing before she heard the shot was the decedent holding on to appellant’s legs, and that decedent might have been trying to get up.
This clearly constitutes substantial evidence of probative value tending to show that appellant was wrongfully prolonging a disturbance of the peace by fighting with decedent, and, in any event, decedent was in no condition which would lead appellant to conclude he was in danger of death or great bodily harm. Upon these facts, the jury was justified in concluding that appellant’s contention of self-defense could not stand.
Appellants’ cites the case of Coryell v. State (1891), 130 Ind. 51, 29 N. E. 369 in support of his position. In that case the defendant Coryell was found guilty of manslaughter and this Court reversed his conviction. In that case, as in the one at bar, the appellant admitted the killing and the claim was made that it was done in self-defense. It was the question of self-defense in the Coryell case that this Court determined in favor of the defendant, but the facts in that case are far different from those in the case at bar. This is clearly borne out by the language found in that case which is, in part, as follows:
“The evidence, however, shows that he subsequently made an effort to withdraw himself from the conflict, and that from that time he acted on the defensive.
The evidence for the State shows that after his unsuccessful effort to leave the school-house, he was forced to *707abandon the possession of his child; was forced back into the corner of the room, and so set upon and assailed by the decreased and his father and brother that further retreat was impossible; that he was knocked or forced down on the floor and his cries for help unheeded; that after an unsuccessful effort to free himself from his assilants by using his pistol as a club, he fired the fatal shot, when down, with three men beating him.” 130 Ind. at 57.
Appellant also cites in support of his position the case of Trogdon v. State (1892), 133 Ind. 1. This Court said in that case:
“. . . if the assault of the attacking party be of such a character, and so eminent as to warrant the party assaulted, considering his situation and apparent surroundings, to believe that he is in danger of the loss of life or great bodily harm, and he does so believe, he may, without delay, use such means as may be at hand, and reasonably seems to him to be necessary to repel the apprehended danger or attack, and if death follows as a result thereof, he will not be guilty of an unlawful homicide; and if, in such case, the danger appears to be real, and is reasonably believed by him to be so, the fact, if such be the fact, that the danger was not real, but only apparent, such fact would not render him guilty, for the question of apparent necessity as well as the amount of force necessary to employ to resist an attack, can only be determined from the standpoint of the defendant at the time, and under all the existing circumstances.”
We agree with the rule stated in Trogdon. However, upon the basis of the foregoing discussion, the rule is not applicable to the present case, and cannot operate to appellant’s benefit.
Having determined that appellant’s contention of self-defense was properly rejected by the jury, we can summarily dispose of appellant’s contention that “the mere use of a deadly weapon, by and of itself, cannot support a presumption of malice.”
*708*707Appellant supports this position by arguing that the use of a deadly weapon in self-defense does not evidence malice *708in connection with the crime of second-degree murder. Clearly, that argument is correct. As a matter of fact, if self-defense is shown, it eliminates the possibility that any crime has been committed at all.
However, it is well-established in Indiana that the use of a deadly weapon against an unarmed person in a manner likely to produce death is sufficient evidence for the jury to conclude that malice existed. Sparks v. State (1964), 245 Ind. 245, 195 N. E. 2d 469, rehearing granted on other grounds, 245 Ind. 50, 196 N. E. 2d 748; Warren v. State (1963), 243 Ind. 508, 188 N. E. 2d 108; Miller v. State (1962), 242 Ind. 678, 181 N. E. 2d 633 and cases cited therein. Where self-defense cannot be established to the satisfaction of the trier of the facts this rule remains controlling.
The question of whether or not malice was present in a given situation is a question for the jury to determine. Landreth v. State (1930), 201 Ind. 691, 696, 171 N. E. 192, 72 A.L.R. 891. The only question for this Court on appeal is whether the verdict of the jury is supported by substantial evidence of probative value. Robinson v. State, supra; Easton v. State, supra; Baker v. State, supra.
We conclude that the record shows sufficient evidence of probative value to support the conclusion of the jury that appellant acted with malice and purpose.
As a court of review, we are not free to substitute our view of what the evidence establishes for that of the jury. Therefore, and for all of the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the trial court is affirmed.
Judgement affirmed.
Lewis, C. J., Arterburn and Jackson, JJ., concur.
Mote, J., dissents with opinion.

=== CASE 9738735 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:01:43.499259+00 ===

MILLER, Judge.
Defendant Reed was convicted by a jury of causing the death of another while driving under the influence of liquor and sentenced to five years imprisonment with a fine of $1,000.00.
We reverse because the State failed to present any substantial evidence that Defendant’s unlawful conduct was the proximate cause of an injury to the victim which ultimately resulted in her death.
*83Defendant was charged with violation of IC 9-4-l-54(b)l which reads in pertinent part as follows:
“Any person who while under the influence of intoxicating liquor * * * operates or drives a vehicle and when so operating or driving causes the death of another person, is guilty of a felony * *
The language of the indictment, omitting formal parts, was as follows:
“* * * JAMES REED, on or about the 5th day of August, A.D., 1976, at and in the County of Marion and in the State of Indiana, did unlawfully and feloniously drive and operate a motor vehicle, to-wit: A 1968 Ford automobile, upon a public street in the City of Indianapolis, County of Marion, State of Indiana, to-wit: On East 9th Street, 75 feet east of its intersection with North Park Avenue, while under the influence of intoxicating liquor and thereby caused the death of EDNA FINKBAUM, to-wit: By driving and operating the aforesaid motor vehicle as aforesaid into and against with great force and violence two (2) lawfully parked automobiles and thereby inflicted mortal wounds and injuries in and upon the body of the said EDNA FINKBAUM, a passenger in the automobile being operated as aforesaid by the said JAMES REED, of which mortal wounds and injuries the said EDNA FINKBAUM sickened and lanquished, and while so languishing, did in the said County of Marion, State of Indiana on the 6th day of August, A.D. 1976, die, and the mortal wounds, injuries and death of the said EDNA FINKBAUM were proximately caused by and were the direct results of the aforementioned unlawful acts of the said JAMES REED in driving and operating said 1968 Ford automobile as aforesaid, all of which is contrary to the form of the statute in such case made and provided, and against the peace and dignity of the State of Indiana.”
The State presented four witnesses at the trial. Two neighbor eyewitnesses testified that on August 5, 1976, at 4:00 p. m., the Defendant, driving his 1968 Ford station-wagon with Edna Finkbaum as a passenger, started his car from a parked position, struck two cars parked nearby and, finally, accelerated to a speed of between 35 and 45 m. p. h. and drove directly into a brick building. Neither eyewitness testified as to any injuries received by Ms. Finkbaum nor did they indicate where she was seated in the stationwagon. One of said witnesses established the fact that Defendant was intoxicated.
Pathologist James A. Benz performed an autopsy on Ms. Finkbaum two days later at noon on August 7, 1976. He testified from hospital records that she had died the day before, on August 6th at 7:50 p. m. From his own examination it was his opinion that Ms. Finkbaum died as a result of a closed head injury, that is, a blow to the head which resulted in injuries to the brain and the formation of a blood clot which had been surgically removed before she died. He noted that such an injury is produced from a blow to the head or by the head striking a fixed object. The doctor then answered the following questions:
Q. “Doctor, if I told you that the decedent was involved in an automobile accident in which the automobile hit a fixed object at a speed of forty miles an hour, would that be consistent with the injuries sustained?
A. “Yes, sir.
Q. “Could this injury have been sustained in a light fall?
A. “It depends on your definition of a light fall.
Q. “Well, if a person fell and hit his head, say lightly on the ground.
A. “Well, I have seen subdural hemato-mas caused by people falling and striking their head on the ground, yes, sir.
Q. “Do you have any opinion as to whether this was caused in such a manner?
A. “No, sir.”
It was Dr. Benz’ opinion that the blow occurred a day or two before death, although it was possible that it occurred as much as two days before the automobile *84accident. He noted that the surgeon who observed the blood clot upon its removal could make a more accurate estimate of when the injury occurred.
The State’s last witness was a police officer who arrived at the scene shortly after the' accident. He was able to form an opinion that the Defendant was then under the influence of liquor. He observed the scene of the accident and the three wrecked automobiles, including Defendant’s car which was still embedded in the building. On cross-examination he related a conversation with medical technicians at the scene who told him they did not believe Ms. Finkbaum was seriously injured and that she had sustained a knee injury.
The defense called three witnesses who resided in the same apartment building with the Defendant but were not witnesses to the accident. The purpose of their testimony was to attest to the fact the deceased was an alcoholic and had been observed falling down, due to her intoxication, on numerous occasions including an incident fifteen minutes before the accident when she fell and hit the porch steps.
DECISION:
Initially, we stress the fact that we are fully aware of our appellate responsibility to consider only that evidence most favorable to the State and all reasonable inferences drawn therefrom in determining the sufficiency of the evidence. Also, if there is substantial evidence of probative value which would permit a reasonable trier of fact to find the existence of each element of the offense beyond a reasonable doubt the judgment must be affirmed. Schilling v. State (1978), Ind., 376 N.E.2d 1142; Burris v. State (1978), Ind.App., 382 N.E.2d 963.
We have no difficulty in finding that there was very substantial evidence that the Defendant was driving his vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor and as a result of his intoxication drove his car at an excessive speed directly into a brick wall. We fail, however, to find any substantive evidence that Ms. Finkbaum, a passenger in the car, received a head injury or, for that matter, any injury in the accident which resulted in her death.
In a homicide case the State must present evidence that the defendant inflicted, or caused to be inflicted, an injury upon the victim which contributed mediately or immediately to his death. Miller v. State (1975), 263 Ind. 595, 335 N.E.2d 206; Bivins v. State (1970), 254 Ind. 184, 258 N.E.2d 644; Wahl v. State (1951), 229 Ind. 521, 98 N.E.2d 671; Hicks v. State (1938), 213 Ind. 277, 11 N.E.2d 171, 12 N.E.2d 501, cert. den. 304 U.S. 564, 58 S.Ct. 951, 82 L.Ed. 1531. Further, in reckless homicide cases, it is settled that the State must prove the defendant’s unlawful conduct (reckless driving) is the direct and proximate cause of the death of the victim. Carter v. State (1968), 250 Ind. 50, 234 N.E.2d 850; State v. Kelsey (1975), Ind.App., 325 N.E.2d 218. Such rule is equally applicable here. Both the statute, IC 9-4-l-54(b)l, supra, and the charging indictment required proof that the alleged “mortal wounds, injuries and death” of Ms. Finkbaum were proximately caused by and the direct result of the unlawful acts of the Defendant.
Thus, simply stated, it was incumbent upon the State in this case to prove the deceased received a blow to her head in the automobile crash. This the State failed to do. In fact, the only evidence from witnesses at the scene, although hearsay, indicated she had received a knee injury and otherwise was not seriously injured. There was no evidence that she was taken to the hospital as a result of the accident. The evidence reveals merely a “possibility” that Ms. Finkbaum received a head blow during the accident and we would be required to speculate that such was the case. It is true that the State may prove an essential element of the crime based on facts or reasonable inferences to be drawn from facts. However, “[a]n inference cannot arise or stand by itself. There must first be a fact established from which an inference arises.” Palace Bar, Inc. v. Fearnot (1978), Ind., 381 N.E.2d 858, 861. Dr. Benz’ testimony indicated the deceased died from a blow to her head or as a result of *85her head striking a fixed object. Of course, he had no personal knowledge of how the blow was inflicted. However, he acknowledged the blow was “consistent” with injuries received in automobile accidents or possibly could have resulted from a fall. Again, in Palace Bar, Inc., supra, at page 864 of 381 N.E.2d our Supreme Court defined the probative value of expert medical testimony as follows:
“The probative value of the testimony of an expert witness is such witness’ opinion as an expert based on facts and circumstances given to him or shown to him subsequent to the occurrence of the event. A doctor’s testimony can only be considered evidence when he states that the conclusion that he gives is based on reasonable medical certainty that a fact is true or untrue. A doctor’s testimony that a certain thing is possible is no evidence at all. His opinion as to what is possible is no more valid than the jury’s own speculation as to what is or is not possible. Almost anything is possible, and it is thus improper to allow a jury to consider and base a verdict upon a ‘possible’ cause of death.”
In the case at bar Dr. Benz testified with medical certainty that the deceased died as a result of a blow to her head. Without any additional evidence relating to how she received her injury, his statement that the injury was “consistent” with an injury received in an automobile accident, standing alone, establishes no more than the “possibility” that such was actually the case.
We are unable to discern from this record why the State made no attempt (other than by hypothetical questioning of a doctor who had examined the deceased two days after the incident) to prove that Ms. Finkbaum received a head injury in the automobile crash. The medical technicians at the scene who apparently examined Ms. Finkbaum were not called to reveal her condition at that time or to indicate whether she was taken to the hospital from the scene. Nor were any hospital employees or medical personnel called to present evidence indicating when Ms. Finkbaum was admitted to the hospital and the nature of her injuries upon admission. The surgeon who removed the blood clot did not testify as to the time of the operation or the nature of the blood clot upon its removal, which latter evidence, according to Dr. Benz, would have established with more certainty the time of the injury.
It is our appellate function to affirm the right of the trier of facts, in this case the jury, to draw an inference that was reasonable under the circumstances. “If, however, the inference drawn by the trier of facts must rest upon speculation or conjecture, it cannot be drawn beyond a reasonable doubt, and we are required to set it aside as a matter of law. ‘It is not enough to sustain a conviction that the evidence, when given full faith and credit, may warrant a suspicion or amount to a scintilla.’ Baker v. State (1956), 236 Ind. 55, 60, 138 N.E.2d 641, 644.” Sansom v. State (1977), Ind., 366 N.E.2d 1171. Thus, the mere suspicion or possibility of guilt is not sufficient to support a conviction. Burris, supra; Matthew v. State (1972), 154 Ind.App. 182, 289 N.E.2d 336; Gaddis v. State (1969), 253 Ind. 73, 251 N.E.2d 658.
Because the State failed in its burden of proof that Ms. Finkbaum’s death was proximately caused by the unlawful acts of the Defendant, we reverse Defendant’s conviction and direct the trial court to enter a judgment of acquittal.
SHIELDS, J., concurs.
BUCHANAN, C. J., dissents with opinion.

=== CASE 9739711 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:19:56.460279+00 ===

LEVINE, Justice.
Ronald Scott Thompson appeals from a criminal judgment entered upon a jury verdict finding him guilty of one count of burglary, in violation of NDCC § 12.1-22-*83902, and two counts of criminal trespass, in violation of NDCC § 12.1-22-03. We reverse and remand for a new trial.
The charges against Thompson were tried to a jury. The evidence adduced by the State consisted chiefly of eyewitness identifications of Thompson and items of clothing, seized ■ from Thompson’s residence, that allegedly matched those worn by the perpetrator of all three crimes. Beth Splonskowski, then age ten, testified that she saw an intruder in the kitchen of her parents’ home at approximately 8:00 a.m. on December 17, 1991. The intruder looked at her momentarily and fled. Beth said that the man’s face was covered by a black cap with a big eye-hole and no openings for the nose and mouth, and that he wore a green coat. Beth’s mother testified that Beth told her the man was about as tall as her father, who is between five feet, eleven inches and six feet tall. Before trial, Beth was “pretty sure” that the black cap seized from Thompson was the one worn by the intruder. At trial, Beth was absolutely certain that that cap had been worn by the trespasser.
Jeannie Nelson testified that she was awakened at approximately 5:00 a.m., on December 18, 1991, by the sound of cupboards and drawers being opened and closed in the kitchen of her home. Believing the cause of the disturbance to be her husband, David Nelson, or her son, she went back to sleep. She arose 45 minutes later, finding her kitchen in disarray. The cupboard doors were open and mail and contents of her purse were strewn about the floor. David Nelson later found opened mail on the back steps of the home and further discovered that his leather jacket was missing. The jacket was never recovered.
Peggy Nagel testified that she was awakened at approximately 5:30 a.m. on December 18,1991, by the slam of the back door of her boyfriend, Ted Morris’, house. She had been asleep on the living room couch and, hearing footsteps in the kitchen, arose to see who had entered the home. She said she made eye contact with the man and was able to see his face because the kitchen light was on. Upon seeing her, the intruder ducked back into the kitchen and ran out of the home. Morris and Na-gel did not report the incident to the police. But, David Nelson did, after he overheard a conversation about the Morris break-in while getting a haircut at the salon where Nagel worked. Nelson recognized Ted Morris as being his neighbor and notified the police of what he had overheard.
The police eventually interviewed Nagel and Morris. Nagel described the intruder as a brown-haired, “stocky” man who stood between five feet, nine inches and five feet, ten inches tall. She also said that the man was wearing a gray coat and, possibly, blue jeans. Nagel also identified Thompson in photographic lineups conducted before and during trial. Although she could not positively identify the gray jacket at the police station, she did positively identify it at trial.
The State’s final eyewitness was Chris Lembke, a newspaper carrier whose delivery route encompasses the neighborhood in which the Nelsons and Ted Morris live. Lembke testified that, at approximately 5:00 a.m., on December 18, 1991, he saw a man sitting on the porch of the home next to the Nelsons’ home, rummaging through a leather jacket. Lembke delivered the Nelsons’ newspaper and, minutes later, observed the same man walking in a nearby driveway, carrying the leather jacket. A short while later, Lembke again passed by the man, this time at a point a few blocks away from the Nelsons’. According to Lembke, the man was wearing a gray jacket and what appeared to be dark “joggers pants.” He further explained that the man’s face was covered by a dark cap with a jagged slit cut into it at eye level. Lembke, who stands over six feet tall, also said the man was between five feet, nine inches and five feet, eleven inches tall, and “stocky.” The State’s exhibits, which consisted of a dark cap with a homemade eye-hole, a gray jacket, and “joggers pants,” and which had been seized from Thompson’s residence, were all positively identified by Lembke as having been worn by *840the man he had seen on the morning of December 18, 1991.
Thompson’s defense was directed primarily to attacks upon the credibility of the eyewitnesses’ identifications. He also attacked the failure of the police to attempt to gather fingerprints or other evidence and to conduct neighborhood checks. Thompson, however, did not testify.
After the parties rested, they met with the court in chambers to discuss the court’s proposed final jury instructions. Thompson’s attorney objected to the highlighted portion of the following proposed instructions on weight and credibility:
“You are the judges of all questions of fact in this case. You alone must weigh the evidence under these instructions and determine the credibility (believability) of those who have testified. As to these matters the Court expresses no opinion.
“In performing this task you may consider those facts and circumstances in the case which tend to strengthen, weaken, or contradict one’s testimony. You may consider the age, intelligence, and experience of the witness, the strength or weakness of his recollection, how he came to know the facts to which he testified, his possible interest in the outcome of the trial, any bias or prejudice he may have, his manner and appearance, whether he was frank or evasive while testifying, and whether his testimony is reasonable or unreasonable.
“If you find a conflict in the evidence, you should reconcile it, if you can, because each witness is presumed to have told the truth. If you cannot do so, you have the right to determine whom of the witnesses you will believe, in whole or in part.
“You should give to all credible testimony its just and fair weight. You should consider the evidence in this case in the light of your common sense and your ordinary experience and observation of human affairs.”
The objection precipitated the following colloquy:
“MR. HOFFMAN: I would object to that language. I think that is in error and I think the standard North Dakota Pattern Jury Instructions on Weight and Credibility was changed in part because of that language.
“THE COURT: In error? Is there case law to support that?
“MR. HOFFMAN: I don’t have any case law, but I think — well, I guess I have some insight on that because I was for a time on the Pattern Jury Instruction Commission and I know that it was agreed upon by the Commission that that language was inappropriate to a criminal prosecution where the State has the burden of proof beyond a reasonable doubt, and I think it was agreed upon that to state that each witness is presumed to have told the truth is not appropriate, and if you look at the [new] Pattern Jury Instruction, that language is not in there for Weight and Credibility.
“THE COURT: Mr. Riha?
“MR. RIHA: As far as I know, as it is, it’s a correct statement of the law, but I guess I’m not aware of any change in the instruction.
“THE COURT: Well, to state the obvious, the patterns are not binding, certainly. They are suggested and strongly recommended and heavily used by the trial bench and bar.... I think that [the disputed language] is a correct statement of law.”
The disputed language, therefore, was included in the trial court’s jury instructions on weight and credibility. The court also instructed the jury on the State’s burden of proof, including a detailed charge on the concept of reasonable doubt, and on the presumption of innocence. The jury returned a verdict finding Thompson guilty on all three counts. Final judgment was entered and Thompson subsequently was sentenced to a ten-year prison term in the North Dakota State Penitentiary. Thompson appealed.
On appeal, Thompson urges us to find, as a matter of state constitutional law, that the presumption of truthfulness instruction contravened his due process protection *841against conviction except upon proof beyond a reasonable doubt, and thus denied him a constitutionally fair trial. See State v. Vogel, 467 N.W.2d 86 (N.D.1991); N.D. Const. Art. I, § 12. We need not reach the constitutional issue raised by Thompson, however, because there are alternative grounds to resolve this issue. See, e.g., Schaff v. Schaff, 446 N.W.2d 28 (N.D.1989); Minot Daily News v. Holum, 380 N.W.2d 347 (N.D.1986).
Jury instructions must correctly and adequately inform the jury of the applicable law and must not mislead or confuse the jury. E.g., State v. McIntyre, 488 N.W.2d 612 (N.D.1992). In determining whether a jury instruction is misleading, the instruction must be considered as a whole, and if, when so considered, the instruction correctly advises the jury as to the law, it is sufficient even if part of it standing alone may be insufficient. Id. If a jury instruction, when read as a whole, is erroneous, relates to a central subject of the case, and affects the substantial rights of the accused, it is ground for reversal.1 Id.; see also NDRCrimP 52(a) (error in criminal trial is harmless, unless error prejudiced defendant’s substantial rights).
Although the presumption of truthfulness instruction is permissible in a civil case, see Andrews v. O’Hearn, 387 N.W.2d 716 (N.D.1986) (in civil case, instruction not erroneous in context of entire instruction on weight and credibility), generally, in a criminal case, it is erroneous and should not be given, whether or not the defendant testifies. See, e.g., Cupp v. Naughten, 414 U.S. 141, 144 n. 4, 145-46 nn. 6-9, 94 S.Ct. 396, 399 n. 4, 399-400 nn. 6-9, 38 L.Ed.2d 368 (1973) (collecting cases); United States v. Varner, 748 F.2d 925, 927 n. 2 (4th Cir.1984) (collecting cases); Nelson v. State, 595 So.2d 513 (Ala.Crim.App.1992); State v. Percy, 156 Vt. 468, 595 A.2d 248 (1990); Stanley v. State, 762 P.2d 946 (Okla.Crim.App.1988); Laster v. State, 70 Md.App. 592, 521 A.2d 1289 (1987); Galauska v. State, 532 P.2d 1017 (Alaska 1975). But see Adams v. State, 542 N.E.2d 1362 (Ind.App.1989); United States v. Hall, 854 F.2d 1036 (7th Cir.1988) (instruction not erroneous when defendant testifies). In Cupp, supra, the Supreme Court aptly summarized the various bases of the federal courts’ all but universal condemnation of the instruction, echoed in the main by the state courts:
“The criticism of the instruction by the federal courts has been based on the idea that the instruction may ‘dilute,’ ‘conflict with,’ ‘seem to collide with,’ or ‘impinge upon’ a criminal defendant’s presumption of innocence; ‘clash with’ or ‘shift’ the prosecution’s burden of proof; or ‘interfere’ with or ‘invade’ the province of the jury to determine credibility.”
Cupp, 414 U.S. at 145, 94 S.Ct. at 399 (footnotes omitted). The instruction has also been criticized as “confusing and useless.” E.g., United States v. Rubio-Villareal, 967 F.2d 294, 297 (9th Cir.1992) (citation omitted). Cupp, supra. The Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals recently explained that, in a criminal case, the presumption of truthfulness instruction “ ‘water[s] down’ the more important presumption of innocence of a non-testifying defendant ... [and creates] a negative inference regarding a criminal defendant’s decision not to testify.” Hall, 854 F.2d at 1041.
*842The jury is solely responsible for judging the credibility of the witnesses and determining the weight to be given their testimony. E.g., State v. Morstad, 493 N.W.2d 645 (N.D.1992). Those important functions “ ‘should not be encumbered by an assumption that witnesses speak the truth.’ ” Varner, 748 F.2d at 927 (quoting United States v. Safley, 408 F.2d 603, 605 (4th Cir.1969)). In effect, the presumption of truthfulness instruction “constitutes a comment [by the court] on the weight and credibility of the evidence, which is impermissible.” Nelson, 595 So.2d at 512. “To employ [the instruction] in the face of an express objection is to invite reversal.” United States v. Gutierrez-Espinosa, 516 F.2d 249, 250 (9th Cir.1975).
We join the multitude of disapproving voices that have preceded ours and conclude that an instruction that witnesses are assumed or presumed to speak the truth is erroneous, and “should never be issued in a criminal trial.... ” Stanley, 762 P.2d at 949 (emphasis in original). The question on appeal, however, is whether, under the facts and circumstances of this case, the erroneous instruction was harmless error or not. Many courts have held that giving the instruction, though improper, is harmless when the circumstances reveal that the erroneous instruction was cured by other instructions. E.g., Hall, supra; Sosa v. State, 591 So.2d 897 (Ala.Crim.App.1991); Galauska v. State, supra; People v. Sosa, 26 Cal.App.3d 514, 103 Cal.Rptr. 58 (1972). Others have held that, absent an objection, giving the instruction does not constitute reversible or plain error. E.g., United States v. Ramos Algarin, 584 F.2d 562 (1st Cir.1978); United States v. LaRiche, 549 F.2d 1088 (6th Cir.1977); United States v. Chrisco, 493 F.2d 232 (8th Cir.1974); Raster v. State, supra. Because Thompson objected, there is no question of obvious error. Resolution of the remaining question of harmless error depends upon whether the instruction related to a central subject of the case and, if so, prejudiced Thompson’s substantial rights. McIntyre, supra; NDRCrimP 52(a).
Obviously, a central subject in any criminal case is the accused’s guilt or innocence. Rose v. Clark, 478 U.S. 570, 106 S.Ct. 3101, 92 L.Ed.2d 460 (1986). That determination hinges upon the State’s overcoming the presumption of the defendant’s innocence by proving, to the satisfaction of the trier of fact, each element of the crime or crimes with which the defendant is charged beyond a reasonable doubt. Vo-gel, supra. As noted above, the presumption of truthfulness instruction may affect the presumption of innocence and the State’s burden of proof, and certainly infringes upon the jury’s exclusive functions of judging weight and credibility. Accordingly, we conclude that the instruction “relates” to a central subject of this case— Thompson’s guilt or innocence.
We also conclude that, under the circumstances of this case, the erroneous instruction prejudiced Thompson’s right to have the jury determine issues of weight and credibility without prompting or influencing by the court and without shifting the burden to Thompson to disprove the testimony of the eyewitnesses. The instruction directly countermanded Thompson’s attempt to attack the credibility of the eyewitnesses. In effect, it gave those witnesses’ testimony the advantage of a ten-stroke handicap. Thompson’s attack on the eyewitnesses’ credibility was further undercut by the court’s instructing the jury, in essence, to reconcile, as truthful, any conflicting testimony. The instruction to reconcile reinforced the given premise that all of the witnesses spoke the truth. See Percy, 595 A.2d at 251. If we assume, as we must, that the jury followed the instruction, City of Grand Forks v. Cameron, 435 N.W.2d 700 (N.D.1989), then we believe that, so directed, the jury abdicated its ultimate responsibility to ferret out the truth, and depended, instead, on the presumption. The case turned on whether the jury believed the accuracy of the eyewitnesses’ identifications. Those eyewitnesses’ credibility should have been subjected to a neutral appraisal, unfettered by the suggestiveness of the instruction in favor of the veracity of witnesses. Instead, the *843eyewitnesses’ accounts, based upon perceptions borne under circumstances that were fleeting, excited and stressful, were given special treatment by virtue of the presumption. Indeed, it may be prudent to give a cautionary instruction to scrutinize carefully the accuracy of eyewitness testimony. See, e.g., Varner, supra at 926 [noting that the trial court “instructed the jury that testimony of eyewitnesses must be scrutinized carefully to determine the accuracy of their identifications”]; Gary L. Wells & Donna M. Murray, What Can Psychology Say About the Neil v. Biggers Criteria for Judging Eyewitness Accuracy?, 68 J. Applied Psychol. 347, 360 (1983) [“[I]n order to handle adequately the issue of eyewitness confidence, some cautions regarding the limited utility of eyewitness certainty may be in order.”]; see also United States v. Wade, 388 U.S. 218, 235, 87 S.Ct. 1926, 1936, 18 L.Ed.2d 1149 (1967) [discussing “the dangers inherent in eyewitness identification and the suggestibility inherent in the context of the pretrial identification”]; State v. Fontaine, 382 N.W.2d 374, 378 (N.D.1986) [upholding the trial court’s decision permitting expert testimony “concerning the difficulty of eyewitnesses to properly identify persons”]; United States v. Stevens, 935 F.2d 1380, 1397-1400 (3rd Cir.1991) [finding that expert testimony on particular weaknesses of eyewitness identifications would be helpful to the jury]. Applied to “ ‘the vagaries of eyewitness identification,’ ” Fontaine, supra at 381 (Meschke, J., concurring specially) (quoting United States v. Wade, 388 U.S. 218, 228, 87 S.Ct. 1926, 1932, 18 L.Ed.2d 1149 (1967)), the erroneous instruction was a potential source of great mischief which we cannot say was harmless error.
We conclude that the instruction concerned a subject central to Thompson’s case and prejudiced his substantial rights. Accordingly, we hold that the error was not harmless, and we reverse and remand this case for a new trial.
MESCHKE, NEUMANN and SANDSTROM, JJ., concur.
. In State v. Jensen, 251 N.W.2d 182 (N.D.1977), we held that an instruction was ground for reversal if it “‘was erroneous and related to a subject which was central to the case, and therefore affected the substantial rights of the defendant. State v. Maresch, 75 N.D. 229, 27 N.W.2d 1 (1947).’ ” (Emphasis added.) Beginning with State v. Pfister, 264 N.W.2d 694 (N.D.1978), the word "therefore" was omitted so that the two requirements for finding harmful error, sub si-lentio, were transformed into three: (1) error; (2) related to subject central to case; and (3) affects defendant’s substantial rights. That transformation has been perpetuated. E.g., State v. Reich, 298 N.W.2d 468 (N.D.1980); State v. Bonner, 361 N.W.2d 605 (N.D.1985); State v. Haugen, 458 N.W.2d 288 (N.D.1990); State v. McIntyre, 488 N.W.2d 612 (N.D.1992). While it is difficult for us to imagine when an error which relates to a central subject of a case would not affect a defendant’s substantial rights, we feel constrained by precedent to continue to analyze harmless error using the three-criteria standard rather than the two-criteria standard set forth in Jensen, supra.

=== CASE 9738646 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:59:35.939058+00 ===

*709Dissenting Opinion
Mote, J.
I wish to dissent to the majority opinion and decision. I think the evidence in this cause points only to manslaughter. In the contemplation of evidence in a charge of the kind here involved, we must exercise care and consider the facts from a reasonable point of view at the time in question and in the eyes or mind of the one charged, and not from the standpoint of cold logic to be determined later by one not involved. Under stress of circumstances, people seldom follow the pattern set by those who are without pressure and have no need or cause for extricating themselves from seemingly untenable situations. Too often, as here, I think those who are called upon to judge others do not really understand the task assigned to them.
In this appeal, we are considering the statutory crime of homicide. The indictment charged Appellant to be guilty of second degree murder. First degree murder conviction requires proof of premeditated malice, whereas second degree murder conviction requires proof of purpose and malice to kill. Other degrees of the crime eliminate the necessity of proof of the state of mind of the accused. The state of mind of another at a particular instance is difficult to prove, as it should be. Such state of mind, premeditation, purpose or intent to kill, and malice may be inferred from the facts and circumstances shown by the evidence without reasonable doubt. This rule of law is not satisfied by mere “guess” and the rule of law generally relied upon to support the necessary-elements of the crime of murder in any degree, that one is held responsible for the results of his own action or conduct, has so many exceptions that it, like the rule concerning inference, is a dangerous rule and should be exercised with particular caution.
In the case now before us, I do not find the demonstrated evidence to safely warrant an inference of purpose to kill and with malice; hence, I would reverse the trial court and remand the cause for a new trial. This conclusion is predicated *710not upon the weight to be given the evidence, but upon the lack of evidence pointing unerringly to the conviction of second degree murder. Note. — Reported in 234 N. E. 2d 465.

=== CASE 9738647 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:59:37.415982+00 ===

CONNOR T. HANSEN, J.
In State ex rel. Terry v. Schubert, 74 Wis.2d 487, 247 N.W.2d 109 (1976) (Terry I), this court reviewed an order and judgment of the circuit court for Dodge county which dismissed petitioner Terry’s writ of habeas corpus by which he sought a discharge from a commitment under ch. 975, Stats., the Wisconsin Sex Crimes Act. We held that the following minimal due process rights are applicable to the periodic examination procedure provided by sec. 975.09:
“. . . (1) written notice of the hearing; (2) disclosure of the evidentiary material which will be considered by the hearing body; (3) opportunity to be heard in person and to present witnesses and documentary evidence; (4) the right to confront and cross-examine witnesses, in the absence of good cause for not allowing confrontation; (5) a neutral and detached hearing body; and (6) a written statement by the factfinders as to the evidence relied on and reasons for refusing discharge. See Morrissey v. Brewer, supra [408 U.S. 471] at 489.” Terry I, supra, at 502a-502b.
The judgment of this court, dated November 30, 1976, reads as follows:
“Affirmed in part; reversed in part; remanded for entry of order consistent with the declaration of rights as per decision herein and ordering respondent to provide petitioner within a reasonable time a hearing under sec. 975.09, Stats., which meets the procedural requirements contained herein.”
*478The Secretary of the Department of Health & Social Services thereafter petitioned the United States Supreme Court for a writ of certiorari to review this court’s judgment. By order dated November 8, 1977, the Supreme Court granted the petition for a writ of certiorari, and ordered that the judgment of the Supreme Court of Wisconsin be vacated and that the “case [be] remanded to consider whether judgment is based upon federal or state constitutional grounds, or both. See California v. Krivda, 409 U.S. 33 (1972).” Percy v. Terry, 434 U.S. 808 (1977).
Upon receiving the remand order from the United States Supreme Court, this court issued an order vacating its judgment entered on November 30, 1976, directing the circuit court for Dodge county to return the record on appeal, and establishing a briefing schedule. On June 30, 1978, in State ex rel. Terry v. Percy, 84 Wis.2d 693, 267 N.W.2d 380 (1978) (Terry II), this court reinstated its original decision and held that the decision was based upon federal constitutional grounds. We stated:
“Pursuant to the mandate of the United States Supreme Court hereinabove quoted, we have reexamined our opinion in the subject case, have read the briefs filed by the parties and amicus curiae, and have reviewed the record. In reaching our initial decision we acted solely by compulsion of the fourteenth amendment of the federal constitution. Inasmuch as we deem it unnecessary to alter or amend our prior decision, we reiterate and reinstate that decision in its entirety as filed and modified.” Terry II, supra, at 697.
The Secretary of the Department of Health & Social Services again petitioned the United States Supreme Court for a writ of certiorari to review this court’s decision. By order dated July 24, 1979, the Supreme Court granted the petition, and ordered that the judgment of this court be vacated and the “case [be] remanded to the Supreme Court of Wisconsin for further consideration in light of Parham v. J.L. and J.R., 442 U.S. 584 *479(1979) and Greenholtz v. Inmates of Nebraska Penal Complex, 442 U.S. 1 (1979).” Percy v. Terry, 443 U.S. 902, 99 S. Ct. 3093, 61 L. Ed.2d 870 (1979).
Upon receipt of this second remand order of the United States Supreme Court, we issued an order setting the reconsideration of this case for oral argument and establishing a briefing schedule.
The facts out of which this case arises are set forth in detail in Terry I, supra. Terry was convicted of two counts of rape and one count of theft. Pursuant to the recommendation of the Department of Health & Social Services that Terry was in need of specialized treatment as a sex deviate, the trial court ordered him committed to the department under sec. 975.06, Stats. Terry was also sentenced to an indeterminate term of not more than five years on the theft conviction, to be served concurrently with the commitment.
After serving approximately three years at the Wisconsin State Prison, Terry was transferred to Central State Hospital, pursuant to sec. 975.08(2), Stats. Subsequent to the mandatory release date for the sentence on his theft conviction, Terry commenced a habeas corpus proceeding, alleging that he was not suffering from any mental aberrations due to sexual psychopathy and that continuation of his confinement was a violation of his rights.
The issue on this appeal is what process is constitutionally due a person committed under ch. 975, Stats.,1 in a reexamination of that commitment between the time of initial commitment and the expiration of the maxi*480mum term prescribed by law for the crime of which he was convicted.
Sec. 975.11, Stats., provides that the department shall discharge any person committed to it under the Sex Crimes Act “as soon as in its opinion there is reasonable probability that he can be given full liberty without danger to the public . . . .” Such a determination may be made through periodic departmental examinations as provided in sec. 975.09:
“975.09 Periodic examination. The department shall make periodic examinations of all persons within its control under s. 975.06 for the purpose of determining whether existing orders and dispositions in individual cases should be modified or continued in force. These examinations may be made as frequently as the department considers desirable and shall be made with respect to every person at intervals not exceeding one year. The department shall keep written records of all examinations and of conclusions predicated thereon, and of all orders concerning the disposition or treatment of every person under its control. Failure of the department to examine a person committed to it or to make periodic examination shall not entitle him to a discharge from the control of the department, but shall entitle him to petition the committing court for an order of discharge, and the court shall discharge him unless it appears in accordance with s. 975.13 that there is necessity for further control.”
In Terry I, supra, at 496, this court noted that the department “has shown no formalized procedures which are followed in the periodic examination provided by sec. 975.09.” Subsequent to the second remand order of the United States Supreme Court, the department adopted, by administrative order dated July 1, 1979, a detailed procedure to be followed in the periodic examination required by sec. 975.09.2
*481We must decide whether the procedural requirements for a reexamination of a sex crimes commitment set forth in Terry I should be modified in light of Parham v. J.L. and J.R., 442 U.S. 584, 99 S. Ct. 2493, 61 L. Ed.2d 101 (1979), and Greenholtz v. Inmates of Nebraska Penal Complex, 442 U.S. 1 (1979).
In Terry I, supra, at 497, this court concluded that a person committed under ch. 975, Stats., has a valuable “interest in release from commitment, once the basis for that commitment no longer exists, . . . the determination for which calls for some orderly procedure.” That conclusion was correct. The United States Supreme Court has held that a state statute may create a conditional liberty interest which is entitled to constitutional protection. Greenholtz, supra, at 11, 99 S. Ct. at 2106, 60 L. Ed.2d at 678, 679. We believe that such an interest is provided in the mandate of sec. 975.11 that a person committed under ch. 975 “shall” be discharged “as soon as in its [the department’s] opinion there is reasonable probability that he can be given full liberty without danger to the public.”
In making a determination, in Terry I, as to what procedural protections are due a person committed under ch. 975, Stats., we relied on Morrissey v. Brewer, 408 U.S. 471 (1972). In light of Greenholtz we now conclude that the process due is less stringent than the procedures we adopted in Terry I.
As in Greenholtz, the discharge from commitment with which we are concerned involves a denial to the committee of a conditional liberty which he desires, not a deprivation of liberty which he already has. Also, the de-*482cisión to discharge a person from commitment is a discretionary decision which depends on numerous elements, some of which are factual, but many of which are subjective appraisals by the department. The decision to discharge may be made for several reasons and may involve nothing more than an informed prediction as to what would best serve to protect the public or promote the welfare of the sex offender. Thus, in accordance with Greenholtz, it is not necessary that there be a formal adversary hearing in order to determine whether the commitment should be continued.
We believe that minimum due process requirements for a reexamination of a sex crimes commitment between the time of initial commitment and the expiration of the maximum time include:
(1) prior written notice of the examination.
(2) disclosure of the factors which will be considered by the decision maker.
(3) opportunity to be present and make oral or written statements and present documentary evidence.
(4) decision maker to be a person not involved in the direct care, treatment, or supervision of the sex offender.
(5) a record of the proceedings must be maintained, as provided in sec. 975.09, Stats.
(6) a written decision to be given to the sex offender stating the reasons for the decision.
(7) review by the department of a decision at the request of the sex offender.
These minimal due process rights are applicable to the periodic examination procedure provided under sec. 975.-09, Stats., and the decision of the department upon such examination is reviewable by the committing court upon writ of certiorari.
*483In State ex rel. Terry v. Percy, 84 Wis.2d 693, 697, 267 N.W.2d 380 (1978), we decided that “[ijnasmuch as we deem it unnecessary to alter or amend our prior decision, we reiterate and reinstate that decision in its entirety as filed and modified.” We now modify our decision in State ex rel. Terry v. Percy, supra, as herein set forth and, as modified, reinstate that decision. The cause is remanded for proceedings consistent with this opinion.
Numerous sections of ch. 975, Stats., were repealed, recreated and amended by ch. 117, Laws of 1979. In particular, sec. 975.01 was repealed and recreated so that it now provides that no person may be committed under ch. 975 after the effective date of the new law, which is July 1, 1980, or the day after publication, whichever is later.
The order identifies the decision maker as either the Forensic Service Director or the Sex Offender Director of the institution to which the sex offender is confined. In essence the procedure pro*481vides for: (1) prior notice of the examination; (2) opportunity to be present and make oral or written statements; (3) opportunity to question the staff personnel making the decision; (4) a written decision and recommendation to be given to the sex offender stating the reasons for the decision; and (5) review by the department of the decision at the request of the sex offender.

=== CASE 9738648 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:59:37.420654+00 ===

SHIRLEY S. ABRAHAMSON, J.
(dissenting). I agree with the majority that ch. 975 creates a liberty interest entitled to constitutional protection. Vitek v. Jones, — U.S. —, 100 S. Ct. 1254, 1261, 63 L. Ed.2d 552 (1980). When the court set forth procedural safeguards in Terry I the court believed these procedures were mandated by basic elements of fairness and equity. As Justice Hanley wrote: “Due process basically requires that the state afford the opportunity to be heard at a meaningful time and in a meaningful manner.” Terry I, 74 Wis.2d at 495. This court should not now abandon its convictions. This court should continue to require those procedures on the basis of the state statutes and state constitution. See Terry II, 84 Wis.2d 693, 698, 267 N.W.2d 38 (1978) (Abrahamson, J. concurring).1
*484The majority, relying on Greenholtz, adopts a new set of procedural requirements which it now thinks will afford the inmate the opportunity to be heard in a meaningful manner. The procedure set forth by the court raises more questions than it answers, will stimulate further litigation, and violates due process.
Relying on Greenholtz, the majority abandons the previously adopted requirement that the inmate be advised of the evidentiary material to be considered by the decision maker. Instead the inmate now has to be advised of the factors which will be considered by the decision maker. This change is unwise and unwarranted.
The majority has borrowed the “factor” language from Greenholtz, but in Greenholtz the Nebraska legislature had set forth 14 explicit factors which the decision maker is required to consider as well as one catchall factor, i.e., “whatever factors [it] determines to be relevant.” These legislatively mandated factors were important to the decision of the case because the factors revealed the nature of the decision making process of the Nebraska parole board and the factors were specific enough to provide notice to the inmate for purposes of preparation for the hearing. The factors are set forth as an appendix to the United States Supreme Court opinion. 442 U.S. at 16. In Greenholtz the United States Supreme Court stated that there was no claim that advising the inmate of these factors prejudices the inmate’s ability to prepare adequately for the hearing.
In this case no factors upon which the decision to discharge is to be based are set forth in the Wisconsin statutes, or in the current administrative order or in the majority’s opinion. The majority opinion merely states that the decision to discharge under sec. 975.11 “is a discretionary decision which depends on numerous elements, some of which are factual, but many of which are subjective appraisals by the department. The decision to dis*485charge may be made for several reasons and may involve nothing more than an informed prediction as to what would best serve to protect the public or promote the welfare of the sex offender.” We can expect litigation on whether the factors set forth by the decision maker in compliance with the majority opinion are relevant to the decision to discharge and are sufficiently specific to enable the inmate to prepare adequately for the hearing.
The majority omits any requirement that the inmate be allowed to view or know of the evidence relied upon by the decision maker, and the inmate is given no opportunity to examine the file or pertinent parts thereof. The majority holds in effect that a decision made largely on the basis of the inmate’s files adequately satisfies due process. However, the United States Supreme Court in Greenholtz and in prior cases2 has indicated that due process may require that some measure be provided to minimize the risk that relevant adverse factual information in the file is inaccurate. In Greenholtz the Nebraska statutes provided that the decision maker had the discretion to make available to the inmate information in his file. The United States Supreme Court commented that the inmates did not challenge this procedure and “apparently are satisfied with the way this provision is administered since there is no issue before us regarding access to their files.” Greenholtz, 442 U.S. at 15, n. 7. Yet in this case, unlike in the Greenholtz case, this court has furnished no protection to the inmate to ensure that the file upon which the decision maker relies is accurate.
The majority also abandons the requirement previously stated in Terry I that the decision set forth the evidence relied on by the decision maker. In Greenholtz the *486United States Supreme Court held that the parole authority need not provide a summary of the evidence in its decision. However, as noted previously, in Green-koltz apparently the inmates did have some access to their files so that they could review the evidence. Both before and after the decision, the majority opinion denies the inmate knowledge of the evidence upon which the decision is being based; I believe such denial violates basic concepts of fair play.
At a minimum, I would require the decison maker to set forth the evidence in the decision. I find the following reasoning in the dissenting opinion of Justices Marshall, Brennen and Stevens in Greenholtz persuasive:
“While requiring a summation of the essential evidence might entail some administrative inconvenience, in neither Morrissey v. Brewer, supra, at 489; Gagnon v. Scarpelli, supra, at 786; nor Wolff v. McDonnell, supra, at 563, 564-565, did the Court find that this factor justified denying a written statement of the essential evidence and the reasons underlying a decision. It simply is not unduly
“ ‘burdensome to give reasons when reasons exist. Whenever an application ... is denied . . . there should be some reason for the decision. It can scarcely be argued that government would be crippled by a requirement that the reason be communicated to the person most directly affected by the government’s action.’ Board of Regents v. Roth, 408 U.S. 564, 591 (1972) (MARSHALL, J., dissenting).
“See Mathews v. Eldridge, 424 U.S., at 345-346; SEC v. Chenery Corp., 318 U.S. 80 (1943). And an inability to provide any reasons suggests that the decision is, in fact, arbitrary.22
“Moreover, considerations identified in Morrissey and Mathews militate in favor of requiring a statement of the essential evidence. Such a requirement would direct the Board’s focus to the relevant statutory criteria and promote more careful consideration of the evidence. It would also enable inmates to detect and correct inaccu*487racies that could have a decisive impact.23 And the obligation to justify a decision publicly would provide the assurance, critical to the appearance of fairness, that the Board’s decision is not capricious. Finally, imposition of this obligation would afford inmates instruction on the measures needed to improve their prison behavior and prospects for parole, a consequence surely consistent with rehabilitative goals.24 Balancing these considerations against the Board’s minimal interest in avoiding this procedure, I am convinced that the Fourteenth Amendment requires the Parole Board to provide inmates a statement of the essential evidence as well as a meaningful explanation of the reasons for denying parole release.
The majority abandons the requirement previously stated in Terry I that the inmate have the opportunity *488to present witnesses and have the right to confront and cross-examine witnesses in the absence of good cause for not allowing confrontation. In Greenholtz the Nebraska board allows an inmate to call witnesses and to be represented by private counsel of his choice; it does not allow the inmate to hear or cross-examine adverse witnesses. 442 U.S. at 5. Although the Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals held that “in the absence of exceptional circumstances the prisoner does not have a constitutional right to call witnesses in his behalf . . .” (576 F.2d 1274, 1284 (8th Cir. 1978)), the United States Supreme Court expressly declined to express an opinion as to whether due process required a right to present favorable witnesses or to cross-examine adverse witnesses. 442 U.S. at 16 n. 8. The majority grants the inmate fewer protections than Nebraska does and thus invites further litigation.
The majority also deletes the requirement of “a neutral and detached hearing body” and substitutes “decision maker to be a person not involved in the direct care, treatment or supervision of the sex offender.” The majority’s reason for changing the language is not stated. Perhaps the majority is relying on the Parham case which upheld the Georgia statute which enabled a physician to commit a child. However, in Parham the United States Supreme Court said that the “decision to have a child institutionalized for mental health care is sufficiently great that some kind of inquiry should be made by a ‘neutral factfinder.’ ” 442 U.S. at 606. And in Parham the United States Supreme Court stated that it had “no reason to consider . . . what procedures for review are independently necessary to justify continuing a child’s confinement.” 442 U.S. at 607 n. 15. Although the decision maker need not come from outside the prison or hospital administration, the decision maker must be independent. Vitek v. Jones, — U.S. —, 100 S. Ct. *4891254, 63 L. Ed.2d 552, 48 L.W. 4317, 4321 (March 25, 1980). Our court’s original statement that the decision must be made by a “neutral and detached hearing body” is sound and should be retained. The hearing body can be one or more persons. A neutral and detached decision maker is a minimal requirement of due process. I cannot believe the majority intends to abandon this requirement.
Without carefully comparing the nature of the proceeding before us and those involved in Greenholtz or Parham3 and without carefully considering all of the procedures provided by the Nebraska and Georgia statutes and administrative rules and practices, the majority unwisely abandons its carefully considered position in Terry I.
For the reasons I have set forth I conclude that the procedure set forth by the majority fails to meet minimal due process, fair play requirements. I therefore dissent.
In State ex rel. Taylor v. Schoen, 273 N.W.2d 612 (Minn. 1978), the Supreme Court of Minnesota required its state’s parole board to follow procedures similar to those required by the United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit in Inmates of the Nebraska Penal and Correctional Complex v. Greenholtz, 576 F.2d 1274 (8th Cir. 1978), before the Greenholtz case was reversed by the United States Supreme Court, 442 U.S. 1 (1979). In a later case concerning the availability of habeas corpus, Kelsey v. State, 283 N.W.2d 892 (Minn. 1979), three justices concurred specially to state that the procedures required in Taylor “should be reaffirmed on the basis of our state constitution,” because “the procedures set out in that case are grounded on and, indeed, mandated by basic elements of fairness and equity.” 283 N.W.2d at 896.
Cf. Greene v. McElroy, 360 U.S. 474, 496 (1959); Gagnon v. Scarpelli, 411 U.S. 778, 785 (1973).
“22 See Hirschkop & Millemann, The Unconstitutionality of Prison Life, 55 Va. L. Rev. 795, 811-812, 839 (1969).
"23 The preprinted list of reasons for denying parole is unlikely to disclose these types of factual errors. Out of 375 inmates denied parole during a 6-month period, the only reason given 285 of them was: ‘Your continued correctional treatment, vocational, educational, or job assignment in the facility will substantially enhance your capacity to lead a law-abiding life when released at a later date.’ App. 40-42. Although the denial forms also include a list of six ‘ [r] ecommendations for correcting deficiencies,’ such as ‘[ejxhibit some responsibility and maturity,’ the evidence at trial showed that all six items were checked on 370 of the 375 forms, regardless of the facts of the particular case. App. 42; Tr. 38-39, 45-46.
“24 See, e.g., cases cited in n. 20, supra; Candarini v. Attorney General of United States, 369 F. Supp. 1132, 1137 (EDNY 1974); Monks v. New Jersey State Parole Board, 58 N.J. 238, 249, 277 A.2d 193, 199 (1971); K. Davis, Discretionary Justice: A Preliminary Inquiry 126-133 (1969); M. Frankel, Criminal Sentences 40-41 (1972) ; Dawson, The Decision to Grant or Deny Parole: A Study of Parole Criteria in Law and Practice, 1966 Wash. U.L.Q. 243, 302; Comment, 6 St. Mary’s L.J. 478, 487 (1974).’’ 422 U.S. at 39-41.
This case concerning continuing supervision over adult sex offenders does not necessarily contain similar policy considerations as Parham which concerned commitment of juveniles by a parent or state guardian for mental health care or as Greenholtz which concerned parole. In Wisconsin, another statute (sec. 975.10, Stats.) deals with parole of the sex crimes offender. In Green-holtz, the parole release decision was compared to the initial sentencing procedure. If the discharge of the sex offender is to be compared to the initial commitment as a sex offender, the initial procedure in Wisconsin is a full-fledged adversary proceeding with a right to a jury trial. Sec. 975.06, Stats.

=== CASE 2217093 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:21.695989+00 ===

91 Ill. App.2d 241 (1968)
234 N.E.2d 72
George Csalany, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
William Senesac and Bob Neiner, Defendants-Appellants.
Gen. No. 67-62.
Illinois Appellate Court  Third District.
January 19, 1968.
*242 Gray, McIntire & Peterson, of Kankakee, for appellants.
Samuel H. Shapiro, and Edward G. Vogt, of Kankakee, for appellee.
CULBERTSON, J.
This cause comes on for hearing before us by appeal seeking the reversal of a judgment entered in favor of the Plaintiff, George Csalany, and against the Defendants, William Senesac and Bob Neiner, in the amount of $12,850. The narrowed issue presented to us for determination is the question as to whether or not the plaintiff was guilty of contributory negligence, as a matter of law.
The evidence in this case, which is largely undisputed, reveals the facts to be that the plaintiff in this case, on July 7, 1961, was driving his automobile in an easterly direction on the Manteno-DeSelm road, a two-lane highway, about two miles west of Route 45, in Kankakee County, enroute from his home three miles away, to his place of employment in Oak Park, Illinois. Defendant Senesac was driving a truck with a huskwagon attached behind it, in the same direction, at a point where a gravel road intersects the Manteno-DeSelm road, on the north side only. The huskwagon pulled by the cob truck driven by the defendant Senesac, extended out past the cob truck on the side, and the wagon was wider than the truck, and did not have any holes or openings that one could see through. The plaintiff was in the process of passing the defendant's truck-huskwagon combination on the left, when defendant Senesac executed a left-hand turn into the side road from the south lane of the Manteno-DeSelm road. At the point of the intersection of the two roads, the vehicles collided. Plaintiff sustained personal injuries and property damage.
*243 Plaintiff testified that he was not aware of the existence of the road until after the collision. The intersection was not marked by signs indicating its existence, but the evidence discloses the two roads had joined at that point for many years. The plaintiff testified he did not see any signal indicating a left turn. Defendant Senesac testified he looked in the rearview mirror and saw a car that passed him about 150 feet or so from the place he turned. He was in front of the farmhouse gate when that car passed him. Defendant Senesac testified he did not know at the time he said he gave his arm signal that the turn signals on his truck were obscured by the wagon. Defendant Senesac further testified he couldn't see farther back than 200 feet in the rearview mirror when he started turning, as the huskwagon obscured his view. He further testified when he gave his arm signal he had to bring it back in, although he was 150 feet away from the intersection, and then he said he took his arm in about fifteen feet from the corner to guide the vehicle. The evidence discloses the truck was about 35 to 40 feet from the intersection, and plaintiff was about 50 to 55 feet from it when he started to pass. The visibility was good on the day of the occurrence in question, it being a clear and sunny day. Plaintiff testified as he started to pass he honked his horn, and that he was then traveling at a speed of 40 to 45 miles per hour. The speed limit in the area where this occurrence took place was 65 miles per hour. Plaintiff's Exhibits portray the scene of the accident, and disclose that there are farmhouses on either side of the gravel road, and there are driveways to them. The side road where the occurrence took place is between two houses. The farm truck was damaged on the left front door and front end, and the undercarriage of plaintiff's car was damaged. This is the factual situation which was presented to the jury for its determination.
It is the contention of the defendants in this case, under the facts in evidence in this case, the plaintiff was guilty of contributory negligence, as a matter of law, for having *244 violated the provisions of chapter 95 1/2, section 155(b)(2), Illinois Revised Statutes, which said statute is as follows: No vehicle shall, in overtaking and passing another vehicle or at any other time, be driven to the left side of the roadway under the following conditions: (2) when approaching within 100 feet of or traversing any intersection or railroad grade crossing.
[1, 2] As we address ourselves to a consideration of the contention made by the defendants in this case, and the opposition thereto by the plaintiff, it is well that we first address ourselves to a consideration of Rules of Law that have long prevailed and that have shown a marked durability over the years. Where reasonable men would differ when viewing evidence as to whether or not a plaintiff is guilty of contributory negligence, it is a question of fact rather than of law (Pennington v. McClain, 16 Ill.2d 577, 158 NE2d 624). Where reasonable men would differ as to the inferences to be drawn from undisputed facts, it is a question of fact, rather than law (Turner v. Cummings, 319 Ill. App. 225, 48 NE2d 225).
[3] The violation of a statute is at most prima facie evidence of negligence, and not negligence per se (Brackett v. Builders Lumber Co. of Decatur, 253 Ill. App. 107). In giving consideration to the question of passing at an intersection in violation of the statute the Courts have held, in the following cases, a question of fact was presented (Hestand v. Clark, 345 Ill. App. 480, 103 NE2d 652; Pfile v. Owens, 331 Ill. App. 390, 73 NE2d 445; and Piper v. Dowell, Inc., 335 Ill. App. 337, 80 NE2d 736).
[4] Under the factual situation as disclosed by the evidence in this case, we are of the opinion the question of whether or not plaintiff was guilty of contributory negligence was a question of fact, and it was properly submitted to the jury for its consideration. The jury in this case was adequately and accurately instructed as to the burden the plaintiff was obliged to prove to sustain a verdict in his behalf. Under the facts as they are disclosed *245 in the evidence in this case we are of the opinion, and so hold, there was no error on the part of the court in denying the defendants' motion for a directed verdict, or in the denial of the defendants' motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict, and in denying the post-trial motion in its entirety.
It is, therefore, the judgment of this court that the verdict entered in behalf of the plaintiff and against the defendants be and the same is hereby affirmed.
Affirmed.
ALLOY, P.J. and STOUDER, J., concur.

=== CASE 9738649 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:59:38.195745+00 ===

*878REES, Justice.
The defendants and the counterclaimant appeal from judgments entered in favor of plaintiffs in their action to quiet title to certain farmland. Edward Helms appeals from an adverse judgment on his counterclaim to recover the proceeds from the sale of crops from farmland separate from that involved in the plaintiffs’ original action.
On January 20, 1977 Algene Helms, both individually and as the administrator of the estate of Carl Helms, and her daughter, Carla Lamphere, filed their petition in equity against the defendants to quiet title to a 105-acre tract of farmland or, alternatively, to establish Algene’s dower interest in the property. The defendants and the counter-claimant are brothers, sisters, and a brother-in-law of Carl Helms, the common law husband of Algene. On August 5, 1977 defendant Edward Helms filed his counterclaim for one-half of the net proceeds from the 1975 crops on a 240-acre farm which he had held with Carl in joint tenancy with right of survivorship. In response, plaintiffs asserted the six-month statute of limitations for claims against estates, § 633.410, The Code 1977, as a defense.
Following trial to the court, Edward moved to amend his counterclaim to conform to proof, asserting that he was entitled to all the proceeds from the sale of the 1975 crops. His motion was overruled on October 30, 1978, the court concluding that the record did not support such an amendment. At the same time the court ruled on the merits of the controversy, quieting title in the plaintiffs and dismissing the counterclaim. Notice of appeal from these rulings was filed on November 29, 1978.
The factual underpinnings of this dispute are somewhat involved and require a brief recitation, with subsequent elaboration as needed.
In 1954 Carl Helms began cohabiting with Mrs. Don (Algene) Wittenberg, who had recently been divorced. A daughter,Carla, a plaintiff in the action, was born to the couple in January of 1955. Carl and Algene lived together until Carl’s death on October 2, 1975, but never formalized their union by a ceremonial marriage. In its findings of fact the trial court found Al-gene to be Carl’s common law wife at all times material to this appeal.
The 105-acre parcel of land in dispute was initially owned by Albert Helms, who, as shall become apparent, did not approve of Carl’s relationship with Algene. Albert was the father of Carl, Anna M. Helton, Louise Cummings, Edward Helms and Hen-ry Helms. In 1957 Albert executed a will devising the 105-acre farm to Carl “as long as he refrains from marrying or associating with in any way Mrs. Don Wittenberg”. Albert Helms died in 1967, after which his will was probated. The final report in his' estate makes no mention of the condition attached to Carl’s inheritance of the 105-acre tract of land.
In June of 1968 Carl joined in the execution of a warranty deed conveying the farm in question to the defendants, his brothers and sisters and their spouses, who would have taken the farm under the will, upon the enforcement of the limitation on Carl’s devise. The conveyance was expressly made subject to the life use of the premises by Carl Helms. The deed made reference to consideration of “one dollar and other valuable consideration”. The marital status of all those joining in the instrument, with the exception of Carl, was noted on the face of the deed. No reference was made in the instrument to Carl’s marital status, although all of the parties to the transaction knew of Carl’s relationship with Algene. The deed was recorded in May of 1969. The testimony of the parties to the transaction indicated that Carl was given the life estate in the premises in lieu of the enforcement of the condition contained in the will because his siblings felt it inequitable that Carl should be wholly deprived of the devise in his father’s will. It is this conveyance which Algene sought to set aside or, in the alternative, against which she asserted her dower interest.
The counterclaim of Edward Helms involves crop income from a 240-acre farm *879owned by Carl and Edward in joint tenancy with right of survivorship, which was rented to a neighbor in 1975 on a crop-share basis. In June and December of 1976 Al-gene, as administrator of Carl’s estate, received two checks from a grain elevator for grain sold from the premises totaling $29,-631.77 as the landlord’s share of the corn and beans harvested from the farm in 1975. This money was taken into the estate of Carl and eventually distributed to Algene and Carla.
At trial, the farm tenant on the 240-acre farm testified to his estimated expenses per acre for the corn and bean crops. After the evidence was in Edward sought to amend his counterclaim to conform to proof, claiming that he was entitled to all of the crop proceeds from the farm for that year. His motion to amend to conform to proof was overruled by the trial court in its decree as the trial court found a lack of evidentiary support for the motion.
Numerous issues are stated by the parties for review. We find resolution of the following issues essential to disposition of this appeal:
(1) Did the condition attached to the devise of the farm to Carl Helms in his father’s will prevent his ever taking title to the farm?
(2) Was plaintiffs’ action, begun more than five years but less than ten years after the execution of the deed in question, barred by the five-year limitation for fraud or permitted under the ten-year period of limitation for the recovery of real estate?
(3) Was the trial court correct in setting aside the deed of conveyance between Carl and the defendants due to illegality of consideration?
(4) If the consideration for the transaction was not illegal, did Algene retain a dower interest in the farm due to the fact she had not joined in the deed of conveyance?
(5) Was the trial court correct in finding for plaintiffs on the counterclaim for crop proceeds on the alternative grounds that the claim was barred by section 633.410, The Code, or that the counterclaimant had failed to carry the burden of proving the net rental value of the premises?
I. As this action to quiet title was brought in equity, our review is de novo. We will give weight to the findings of the district court, but are not bound by them. Hansen v. Chapin, 232 N.W.2d 506, 509 (Iowa 1975).
The defendants first contend that title to the 105-acre farm never vested in Carl due to his alleged violation of the condition attached to the devise in his father’s will. They argue that since the farm never belonged to Carl, he had no interest to transfer in the deed in which he joined, and Algene has no basis for her claimed dower interest in the property. Algene responds by arguing that the limitation on the devise is a condition subsequent which is not self-executing, but must be specifically enforced to have effect. Since there is no indication in the record that the condition was enforced, she contends that Carl took the property under the will. We find Algene’s position persuasive, as did the trial court.
Paragraph seven of the will of Albert Helms provides:
Seventh: I give, devise and bequeath to my son, Carl Helms, of Winthrop, Iowa, as long as he refrains from marrying or associating with in any way, Mrs. Don Wittenberg, the following described real estate:
The Northwest fractional Quarter (¼) of the Northwest Quarter (¼) and the West Half (½) of the Northeast fractional Quarter (Vi) of the Northwest Quarter (¼) of Section Six (6), Township Eighty-nine (89) North, Range Seven (7), and the Southeast Quarter (Vi) of the Northeast Quarter (¼) of Section One (1), Township Eighty-nine (89) North, Range Eight (8), all West of the 5th P.M., in Buchanan County, Iowa, except easement for road, if living, if not, then to his child or children or adopted child or children in equal shares, who may be living at the time *880of my death; in the event he has no child or children or adopted child or children living at the time of my death, then to my living sons and daughters in equal shares, further in the event that he does associate with or marry Mrs. Don Wittenberg then the last above described real estate shall go to my sons and daughters in equal shares, if living, and if not, then to their respective children or adopted children in equal shares who may be living at the time of my death; in the event any of them has no child or children or adopted child or children living at the time of my death, then to my living sons and daughters in equal shares.
The devise vested title to the farm in Carl subject to the associational limitation. Thus Carl took the farm subject to a condition subsequent. As we explained in a similar situation:
It will be noted that Item VII, while first giving to the plaintiff what, standing alone, would be a fee simple absolute, closes with the words “subject to the contingency as hereinafter set forth”. This makes the title granted subject to a condition or conditions. It creates what is variously known in the law as a conditional, or defeasible, or base or qualified fee.
Rodenburg v. Rodenburg, 247 Iowa 444, 447, 74 N.W.2d 241, 243 (1956). The will of Albert Helms gave to Carl a defeasible interest in the farm.
The import of the limitation in Albert’s will being a condition subsequent cannot be overstated. It is clearly the law in this state that a testamentary condition subsequent is not self-executing and will fail if not enforced. DeRousse v. Williams, 181 Iowa 379, 386-87, 164 N.W. 896, 898-99 (1917). The trial court found that the' condition had never been enforced during the probate proceedings or thereafter. Our examination of the record leads us to a like conclusion. Carl took title to the farm under the terms of the will and the condition went unenforced throughout his lifetime. Accordingly, Carl held an interest in the property to which Algene’s dower interest attached. See section 633.211, The Code.
This conclusion is further supported by the probate proceedings in Albert’s estate. Pursuant to the final report filed in Albert’s estate, a change of title issued showing Carl to be the owner of the tract in question. The will also included a provision which gave each of Carl’s two sisters a cash bequest of ten percent of the appraised value of the estate, and further provided that if the cash remaining in the estate following the payment of expenses was inadequate to meet the aforementioned bequests, then the testator’s three sons would each be liable for one-third of any deficiency. In the event any of the sons failed to pay the appropriate amount, “the real estate bequeathed to him in this Will shall be subject to the payment of his one-third share of said deficiency”. When it became apparent that there were not sufficient assets in the estate to satisfy the bequests to Anna Helten and Louise Cummings, Carl executed a note, which was later honored, for his share of the necessary amount. If the condition had been enforced, Carl would have had no real estate interest to maintain under the will. These activities clearly indicate that Carl took title to the property under the will and that the condition subsequent was not enforced during the probate proceedings.
We conclude that the condition attached to the farm in question was a condition subsequent and that it was not enforced. Therefore, Carl took title to the property under the will and Algene’s dower interest, inchoate at that time, was established. Having decided that Carl held title to the tract in question, we must now determine the validity of the transaction in which he transferred his interest; apparently in exchange for a life estate in the premises.
II. The defendants contend that plaintiffs’ action, at least to the extent it alleges fraud, is barred by section 614.1(4), The Code, which establishes a five-year statute of limitations for actions based on fraud. The trial court concluded that the action was properly brought as one for the *881recovery of real estate under section 614.-1(5), subject to a ten-year period of limitation. Although plaintiffs had alleged fraud as an alternative basis for the relief sought, the trial court did not find a fraud had been perpetrated. Nor do we. The action, as developed at trial, was simply one for the recovery of real estate. As the defendants concede that the action was not barred by the real estate limitation period, we find further discussion of this issue unnecessary.
III. Despite the fact that the warranty deed recited consideration of “one dollar and other valuable consideration”, the trial court found that the actual consideration was the forgoing of the enforcement of the condition attached to the bequest of the farm to Carl. The transferees in the deed were those who would take title to the farm if the condition were enforced, and their spouses. The trial court concluded that the limitation contained in Albert Helm’s will was invalid and against public policy under the circumstances since it would have encouraged or required Carl’s separation or divorce from his common law wife. The court then concluded that the possibility or threat of enforcing the illegal limitation could not furnish valid consideration for the deed and therefore set aside the deed, quieting title in Algene and Carla. We are unable to agree with the trial court and must reverse the judgment of the trial court quieting title in Algene and Carla.
The defendants challenge the trial court’s analysis in setting aside the deed in several respects. Included are questions of the validity of the associational-matrimonial condition in the will of Albert Helms, the applicability of the parol evidence rule in going behind the consideration stated in the deed, and whether there was sufficient consideration to support the transaction. Particularly, the defendants contend that the trial court erred in characterizing the nonenforcement of the will condition as illegal consideration. We find resolution of this issue dispositive of that portion of the trial court’s judgment and decree setting aside the deed. We thus do not find it necessary to discuss defendants’ alternative bases for reversal of the trial court and reserve comment upon those issues, although we note that, subject to some limited exceptions such as fraud or illegality, a deed valid on its face need not be supported by consideration. See, e. g., Timberman v. Timberman, 229 Iowa 835, 295 N.W. 158 (1940).
The defendants contend that the transfer of property was the result of a compromise “settlement” regarding enforcement of the limitation attached to the devise of the 105-acre farm to Carl. They testified that it was agreed Carl would retain a life estate while transferring the remainder interest to those who would otherwise take under the will, rather than enforce the condition and force Carl to leave the farm on which he and his family were living. Citing In re Estate of Swanson, 239 Iowa 294, 31 N.W.2d 385 (1948), for the proposition that law favors peaceable settlements of estate disputes among family members, and noting the unsettled legal status of the will condition at the time of the transfer, the defendants argue that the deed merely evidences a familial settlement of an unresolved legal claim. We find this contention persuasive and reverse the ruling of the trial court setting aside the deed.
In so doing we find it unnecessary to address the validity of the condition subsequent attached to Carl’s devise. Even assuming that the trial court was correct in finding the condition invalid and against public policy as encouraging divorce or separation, the facts of this case do not require the setting , aside of the deed. There is no indication in the record that any of the parties knew of the invalidity of the will provision or that the transaction was the result of anything but good faith bargaining between the parties. The fact that the provision was later determined to be invalid is not dispositive of the question of the adequacy of consideration. As we. said in Rowe v. Barnes, 101 Iowa 302, 306, 70 N.W. 197, 198 (1897) (citations omitted):
It is well settled that such a [sufficient] consideration exists when a note is given to compromise or settle a disputed claim, *882the validity of which is doubtful. And the validity of the compromise, if entered into in good faith by all the parties to it, will not be affected by the subsequent ascertainment of the fact that the claim is without foundation.
We have previously held that forbearance to contest or probate a will may provide adequate and legal consideration to support a contract so long as the position is taken in good faith. White v. Flood, 258 Iowa 402, 409, 138 N.W.2d 863, 867 (1965); Watrous v. Watrous, 180 Iowa 884, 905-06, 163 N.W. 439, 447 (1917). We believe that a similar analysis is applicable to the case at bar. In determining the legality or validity of consideration, we find an agreement not to enforce a condition subsequent indistinguishable from an agreement not to contest a will so long as the position is held in good faith. As is stated in 1 A. Corbin, Corbin on Contracts, § 140, pp. 603-04 (1963):
In order that forbearance to press for a legal remedy may be sufficient consideration, it is not necessary that the promise should have had a “fair chance” of success in his action. It can hardly be said that there is any case known to man in which a claimant has absolutely no chance of success. If he believes that his proposed action is just and believes that he may succeed, his forbearance is sufficient. It is quite unnecessary to determine the degree of probability that he would be successful. Forbearance to contest a will is sufficient consideration, without the promisee’s having looked into the facts or law to see whether or not he has a chance.
Accord, 1 S. Williston, A Treatise on the Law of Contracts, § 1353 (3d ed. W. Jaeger 1957).
The record in the case before us here does not indicate the existence of anything other than a good faith belief on the part of the defendants that the condition subsequent was legal and enforceable. Additionally, before the legality or enforceability of the condition subsequent could be determined, the court first was required to decide whether a valid common law marriage existed between Carl and Algene such that the effect of the provision was to encourage a divorce or separation. The marital status of Carl and Algene had not been judicially determined at the time of Albert’s death, nor does the record disclose that the parties to the transfer were completely certain of Carl’s marital status. This ambiguity further supports the conclusion that the invalidity of the condition was not obvious and that the opposite position could easily have been held in good faith. That the condition was later determined to be illegal does not affect the validity of the transaction.
We hold that the trial court erred in finding the consideration supporting the warranty deed was illegal and thus invalid. As any invalidity of the condition subsequent was not obvious and the defendants in good faith thought the provision to be valid and enforceable at the time of the transaction, a promise not to enforce the condition was not an illegal consideration. In effect what we have in the case before us here is a familial attempt to reach a compromise settlement regarding enforcement of a will provision. We have in the past encouraged these settlements, see, e. g., White v. Flood, 258 Iowa at 409, 138 N.W.2d at 867, In re Swanson’s Estate, 239 Iowa at 300, 31 N.W.2d at 389, and continue to do so.
IV. The trial court rendered judgment for the plaintiffs on the first division of their petition and therefore did not reach the plaintiffs’ alternative ground for relief. Having concluded that the trial court erred in finding for the plaintiffs on the basis asserted in the first division, we now address the second division of plaintiffs’ petition in which Algene sought to assert her dower interest in the farm.1 We find the record supports Algene’s claim in this regard and remand this case to the district court for entry of judgment effectuating the relief sought on her alternative ground.
*883The trial court correctly found that Carl and Algene entered into a common law marriage and that they did so prior to the death of Albert Helms. The requisite elements of a common law marriage were established. See, e. g., Winegard v. Winegard, 278 N.W.2d 505, 510-11 (Iowa 1979). We have determined that Carl took title to the farm in question under the will, subject to the condition subsequent which was not enforced during his lifetime. Thus, Carl held an interest in the property and Al-gene’s dower interest, inchoate until his death, attached thereto. See section 633.-211, The Code; Bowman v. Bennett, 250 N.W.2d 47, 51 (Iowa 1977). The fact that the marriage was at common law is of no consequence regarding her dower interest so long as common law marriages are recognized in Iowa. See 1 American Law of Property, § 5.7 (A. J. Casner ed. 1952).
Algene did not join in the deed by which Carl purported to transfer title to the 105-acre farm while retaining á life estate. Her dower interest was not severed by the deed and, while inchoate, remained in the nature of an encumbrance on the property. Peddicord v. Peddicord, 242 Iowa 555, 561-62, 47 N.W.2d 264, 268 (1951). Upon CarFs death, Algene’s interest ceased to be inchoate and she became the owner of an undivided one-third interest in the farm. Section 633.211, The Code. She is therefore entitled to appropriate relief as sought in division two of her petition.
V. We now address the counterclaimant Edward Helms’ assertions of error regarding the trial court’s ruling, on his counterclaim. He first contends the trial court erred in overruling his motion to amend his counterclaim to conform to proof after the close of the evidence. He sought all of the proceeds from the crops for the year 1975 rather than one-half of the proceeds as initially claimed. The trial court, concluding that the amendment to conform to proof was not timely and did not conform the evidence introduced at trial, overruled the motion. Without passing upon the former of the alternative grounds, we affirm the trial court’s ruling on the latter basis.
Allowance of amendments to claims to conform to proof is a matter which lies in the sound discretion of the trial court and the ruling of the trial court will be reversed only when a clear abuse of discretion is shown. B & B Asphalt Co. v. T. S. McShane Co., 242 N.W.2d 279, 284 (Iowa 1977). Edward, apparently assuming the fact that the crop had not been harvested at the time of Carl’s death to be disposi-tive,' sought all of the proceeds from the crop as surviving joint tenant. If there had been proof introduced at trial showing that the crops had matured at the time of Carl’s death, then the amendment may have been appropriate. See In re Estate of Luke, 184 N.W.2d 42, 47 (Iowa 1971); In re Rahfeldt’s Estate, 253 Iowa 432, 435-36, 112 N.W.2d 858, 860-61 (1962). No such evidence was introduced and the record does not disclose whether the crops had matured or were still growing. The trial court did not abuse its discretion in overruling Edward’s motion to conform to the proof.
VI. Edward next argues that the trial court erred in finding for the plaintiffs on his counterclaim for one-half of the proceeds from the 1975 crop. The trial court based its ruling on alternative grounds. It first found that the claim was not timely as it was filed more than six months from the date of the second publication of the notice to creditors in the estate of Carl Helms and was barred by section 633.410, The Code. Alternatively, the court held that Edward had failed to sustain his burden of proof regarding the net lease income value of the farm. Once again we affirm the ruling of the trial court on the' latter basis and find it unnecessary to comment upon the alternative ground.
The burden of proof was on Edward to prove the measure of his damages with a reasonable amount of certainty. As we stated in B-W Acceptance Corporation v. Saluri, 258 Iowa 489, 497-98, 139 N.W.2d 399, 404 (1966):
In order to be entitled to an award of damages, the claiming party has the burden of proving the value of the damages *884as to each item with some reasonable measure of certainty. “The rule that uncertainty as to the amount of the damages will not prevent a recovery does not mean that there need be no proof of the amount of the damage. To authorize a recovery of more than nominal damages, facts must exist and be shown by the evidence which afford a reasonable basis for measuring the plaintiff’s loss. The damages must be susceptible of ascertainment in some manner other than by mere speculation, conjecture, or surmise and by reference to some fairly definite standard, such as market value, established experience, or direct inference from known circumstances.” 22 Am.Jur.2d, Damages, Section 26, page 46.
Edward, as joint tenant with Carl of the farmland in question, sought $14,-816.12 as his share of the crop income from the land. This amount represents roughly one-half the amount received by Algene as administrator of Carl’s estate from the Lamont Elevator Company. The record discloses that it was Carl who shared the expenses with the tenant and acted as manager of the property. The record also shows that Edward never received income from the land, but trusted Carl to use the money to maintain and improve the farmland and the buildings thereon. Any attempt to establish Edward’s share of the money received by Carl's estate would have to take into account Carl’s share-cropping expenses as well as other sums expended in maintaining the property, such as property taxes.
In an attempt to show the crop share expenses, Edward called the tenant of the farm for 1975, who gave his opinion as to the approximate expenses per acre for land planted with corn or beans. On cross-examination, the tenant admitted that he had based his estimates on the whole of the 640 acres he farmed that year and not on the 250 acres in question. He further admitted that expenses such as fertilizer could vary greatly among different tracts. No records of expenses were submitted into evidence. Nor was the breakdown of acres of corn and acres of beans planted, between which the difference in estimated expenses per acre was considerable, shown. Neither does the record disclose exactly who paid the property taxes or the amount thereof, although Edward’s disclaimer of financial involvement with the farm would indicate that they were paid by Carl.
We agree with the trial court that the record developed at trial is inadequate to enable a trier of fact to determine a reasonable measure of recovery without engaging in gross speculation. Even assuming that Edward’s claim was not barred by section 633.410, The Code, an issue on which we specifically reserve comment, the trial record would not entitle Edward to any relief. The trial court did not err in finding for the plaintiffs on the counterclaim.
VII. In summary we hold: (1) the limitation attached to Carl’s devise in his father’s will was a condition subsequent which required specific enforcement to be effective; (2) the plaintiffs’ claim as developed at trial did not involve fraud and was therefore not barred by section 614.1(4); (3)' the trial court erred in determining that an agreement not to enforce a condition subsequent which was later determined to be invalid constituted illegal consideration; (4) Algene retained a dower interest in the farm when she did not join in the warranty deed; (5) the trial court did not abuse its discretion in denying counterclaimant’s motion to amend his counterclaim to conform to proof when the record would not support the amendment; and (6) the trial court did not err in finding for the plaintiffs on defendant’s counterclaim due to the failure of the counterclaimant to prove the measure of his damages with a reasonable degree of certainty.
Accordingly the judgment of the trial court is affirmed in part, reversed in part and remanded for further proceedings not inconsistent with this opinion.
AFFIRMED IN PART, REVERSED IN PART AND REMANDED FOR FURTHER PROCEEDINGS.
All Justices concur, except UHLEN-HOPP and McCORMICK, JJ., who concur specially.
. No issue regarding the applicability of section 561.13, The Code, to these facts is raised by the parties. We thus have no occasion to apply the statute in resolving this controversy.

=== CASE 9738650 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:59:38.200397+00 ===

*885UHLENHOPP, Justice
(concurring specially).
I think paragraph seven of the will purports to create an estate in fee simple determinable with a provision that on the happening of the stated event the land passes to specified persons. Restatement of Property § 44 and Comment o (1936). See Reichard v. Chicago, Burlington & Quincy Railroad Co., 231 Iowa 563, 568-74, 1 N.W .2d 721, 728-29 (1942); Des Moines City Railway v. City of Des Moines, 183 Iowa 1261, 1267-71, 159 N.W. 450, 452-54 (1916), modified, 183 Iowa 1261, 165 N.W. 398 (1918); R. Swenson, Possessory Estates and Future Interests in Iowa, 36 Iowa Code Ann. 73, 79-83 (1950). In addition I think the limitation is invalid under the circumstances of this case, as the trial court held; Carl and Algene were husband and wife at all times material to this case. Restatement of Property § 427 (1936).
Carl’s deed to defendants, growing out of the family settlement, was valid so far as his ownership of the land was concerned, but Algene did not execute the deed or otherwise release her dower. She is entitled to dower and I therefore concur in the result.
McCORMICK, J., concurs in this special concurrence.

=== CASE 9738651 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:59:40.95125+00 ===

WILLIAM G. CALLOW, J.
We granted review in order to consider whether the trial courts of this state have the inherent authority to dismiss with prejudice a criminal case prior to the attachment of jeopardy. We conclude that, except for those situations in which a defendant’s constitutional right to a speedy trial is implicated, the trial court possesses no such inherent authority; and we therefore affirm the decision of the court of appeals.
Defendant-respondent-petitioner Sharon Braunsdorf (defendant) was charged with welfare fraud; and after a preliminary examination, the case was scheduled for a jury trial as the number two case on the calendar for December 19, 1978. On the morning of December 15, 1978, the trial court was informed that the number one case for December 19, 1978, had been disposed by plea. The judge then ordered the assistant district attorney for Brown county and the defendant’s counsel be informed that this case had become the number one case for December 19, 1978, and that the matter was expected to proceed to trial at 9 a.m. On the morning of December 18, 1978, the assistant district attorney, without informing the trial court, directed the clerk of courts to call off the jury panel scheduled for the following morning. Later that afternoon, after approximately twenty-eight of *571the thirty-two jurors had been advised not to appear, the trial court learned about the action of the assistant district attorney and because of the late hour concluded that an effort to recall them would be unavailing. He informed counsel for both sides that the next morning he would “seriously consider . . . any motion that was made on behalf of the defendant to dismiss this matter and to dismiss it with prejudice.”
On the morning of the trial date, December 19, 1978, the assistant district attorney, Royce Finne, moved the court for an adjournment. In response to the court’s inquiries, Finne stated that although he had been aware of the forthcoming trial date since late November, he had not undertaken any action to contact witnesses and place them on standby or otherwise to prepare for the trial of the case. He also stated that ordinarily preparation for trial begins some seven to ten days before the scheduled date, but in this case no such preparation was made because he had been informed by a person in his department that the case which had been scheduled as the number one case was “firm” and its early disposition was not anticipated. The court then inquired as to the actions undertaken by the assistant district attorney to prepare for trial after learning, on December 15, 1978, that this case had been moved up to the number one case. Finne indicated he had attempted to locate certain records in possession of the Department of Industry, Labor and Human Relations but that they were not available except, perhaps, in the form of a computer printout which could possibly be available by Monday, December 18, the day before trial. With respect to a representative from a local bank who was one of two critical witnesses not then present, Finne stated that in view of his experience, there would not have been sufficient time for the necessary bank records to be located, so he did not contact the witness at all. *572Neither critical witness was subpoenaed. The trial court denied the motion for adjournment, whereupon the assistant district attorney moved to dismiss the case “[b]ased on the discretion which lies in the District Attorney’s office to prosecute or not to prosecute a matter.”
The trial court requested argument from counsel on whether the case should be dismissed with or without prejudice, and the following colloquy ensued:
“Mr. Finne: That is not the District Attorney’s motion, Your Honor. We do not recognize the Court’s authority to do that.
“The Court: You’re just moving to dismiss?
“Mr. Finne: Yes, we do not recognize the Court’s authority to dismiss with prejudice.”
The defendant took the position that the case should be dismissed with prejudice and that the trial court had the authority to do so. Upon the conclusion of the arguments of counsel, the trial court relying upon this court’s opinions in State v. Kenyon, 85 Wis.2d 36, 270 N.W.2d 160 (1978) ; State v. Stoeckle, 41 Wis.2d 378, 164 N.W. 2d 303 (1969); and Wittke v. State ex rel. Smith, 80 Wis.2d 332, 259 N.W.2d 515 (1977), concluded “the position of the District Attorney in regard to dismissal should be granted. However, that dismissal is to be with prejudice.”
The court of appeals concluded that, in the absence of statutory authority, a trial court did not possess the inherent power to dismiss a criminal case with prejudice on nonconstitutional grounds prior to the attachment of jeopardy, and it modified the order of dismissal accordingly. State v. Braunsdorf, 92 Wis.2d 849, 853-54, 286 N.W.2d 14 (Ct. App. 1979).
I.
Prosecutors enjoy largely unfettered discretion in the initiation of criminal proceedings. Sears v. State, 94 *573Wis.2d 128, 133, 287 N.W.2d 785 (1980) ; State v. Karpinski, 92 Wis.2d 599, 607-08, 285 N.W.2d 729 (1979). In English common law that discretion extended to the entry of a nolle prosequi or voluntary dismissal,1 the use of which was exclusively under the control of the attorney general, Rex v. Cranmer, 1 Ld. Raym. 721, 91 Eng. Rep. 1381 (K.B. 1701), and acceptance by the court was obligatory, R. ex rel. Gregory v. Allen, 1 B. & S. 850, 121 Eng. Rep. 929 (Q.B. 1862). The prosecutor’s discretion to enter a nolle prosequi in a criminal case was subject only to the narrow exception, occurring infrequently in English cases, where the court sought to avoid “mischief or oppression,” King v. Webb, 1 W. Bl. 460, 461, 97 Eng. Rep. 931 (1764), or to further the interests of justice, Mervyn Broad, 68 Crim. App. 281, 285 (1978),2 in which situations the court may decline to accept the prosecutor’s nolle prosequi.
The practice of using the nolle prosequi was carried to this country, but its use has become increasingly subject to the court’s approval.3 In Guinther v. Milwaukee, 217 *574Wis. 334, 258 N.W. 865 (1935), this court approved the action of a trial court denying the city attorney’s motion to dismiss an ordinance violation charge and appointing counsel to continue on behalf of the city when the city attorney refused to participate further. That case was our initial recognition of the court’s limited supervisory role over prosecutorial motions to dismiss. In State v. Kenyon, 85 Wis.2d at 45, we emphatically reaffirmed Guinther and removed any doubt whether its rule extended to criminal cases. It was there stated:
“In sum, we believe the holding in Guinther is clear and conclusive. Prosecutorial discretion to. terminate a pending prosecution in Wisconsin is subject to the independent authority of the trial court to grant or refuse a motion to dismiss ‘in the public interest.’ ”
But we also set forth certain guidelines to ensure that a trial court’s decision to deny a motion to dismiss is firmly grounded upon considerations of public interest.
(A)
Against this background of considerable prosecutorial discretion, tempered by Guinther and Kenyon, we turn to the defendant’s contention that trial courts possess an independent, inherent power to dismiss criminal cases with prejudice. First, we note, as did the court of appeals, that only sec. 976.05(1), Stats., gives trial courts the power to dismiss a case with prejudice. Otherwise, dismissals prior to the attachment of jeopardy are without prejudice. See: Secs. 968.03, 970.03, 970.04, 971.01(2). Second, also as noted by the court of appeals, ‘here has been no claim in this case that the de*575fendant has been deprived of her constitutional right to a speedy trial. Therefore, the reliance of the trial court and the defendant on State v. Stoeckle, supra, is misplaced. In Stoeckle we stated:
“The right to a speedy trial is guaranteed by art. I, sec. 7 of the Wisconsin Constitution and the sixth and fourteenth amendments of the United States Constitution. Wisconsin recognizes the right to a dismissal with prejudice to the state if this right is violated, but such right accrues only after a defendant has taken affirmative steps to bring his case to trial.” 41 Wis.2d at 384.
Our cases make it clear that the power to dismiss with prejudice contemplated in Stoeckle is not some latent or residual power which is invoked in the presence of a constitutional speedy trial violation. Rather, it is a power implicit in the speedy trial guarantee because it is necessary to the protection of “[t]he amorphous quality of the right.” See: Barker v. Wingo, 407 U.S. 514, 522 (1972). Since that power exists only to safeguard a defendant’s constitutional right to a speedy trial, in the absence of statutory authority it cannot be extended to effectuate other purposes.
We are left with three cases, State v. Kenyon, supra, Wittke v. State ex rel. Smith, supra, and City of Madison v. Two Crow, 88 Wis.2d 156, 276 N.W.2d 359 (Ct. App. 1979), which the defendant claims embody the proposition that a trial court may dismiss a criminal case with prejudice, prior to jeopardy.
In Two Crow the court of appeals summarily approved the dismissal of an ordinance complaint with prejudice. The court determined the defendant had been improperly detained because he had not been advised of his option to post either a bond or cash bail. This case was treated by the appellate court as one of first impression, and it cited no precedent for the result. We do not accept the conclusion of the court of appeals.
*576The defendant argues that unless Kenyon can be taken to authorize a dismissal with prejudice, then in situations such as the instant case, where a previous motion for continuance has been denied, a subsequent motion to dismiss granted without prejudice amounts to a continuance. In so doing, it is argued, the prosecutor may effectively circumvent the trial court’s discretion to grant or deny the continuance. Even assuming the trial court granted a subsequent motion to dismiss, which under Kenyon it is not obligated to do, we do not concur in the defendant’s conclusion that “the prosecutor has secured his continuance in any event.” A continuance operates only as a temporary cessation of the proceedings, generally for a time certain, after which the matter resumes from the point at which it was adjourned. But a dismissal upon the motion of the prosecutor is not merely a temporary break in the proceeding; it is a complete termination of the matter which can only be recommenced by filing a second complaint and repeating all the procedures attendant upon the initiation of a criminal prosecution. Also, the granting of a continuance, including its duration, is committed exclusively to the sound discretion of the trial court. State v. Wollman, 86 Wis.2d 459, 278 N.W.2d 225 (1979) ; State v. O’Connor, 77 Wis.2d 261, 252 N.W.2d 671 (1977). In a dismissal, however, the burden is upon the prosecutor regarding reissue, and he bears the responsibility as well as the onus of his actions. Because of these differences, we are not convinced that a dismissal is the same as a continuance.
It is also argued that, should the trial court deny a motion to dismiss in a case where a continuance had previously been denied, thus forcing the case to trial, the resulting trial would be no more than a “sham” or “hollow ritual” which this court should not countenance and which a dismissal with prejudice under Kenyon could *577avoid. But even assuming, as does the defendant, that the outcome of such a trial would necessarily be a dismissal on the merits for lack of evidence, we feel there is a purpose to be served by such a proceeding. We have often stated that in the discharge of the duties under sec. 59.47, Stats., a district attorney generally is answerable not to the courts or the legislature but to the people. State v. Karpinski, 92 Wis.2d at 608. In State ex rel. Kurkierewicz v. Cannon, 42 Wis.2d 368, 378-79, 166 N.W.2d 255 (1969), we said:
“In general, the district attorney is not answerable to any other officer of the state in respect to the manner in which he exercises those powers. True, he is answerable to the people, for if he fails in his trust he can be recalled or defeated at the polls. In the event he wilfully fails to perform his duties or is involved in crime, he may be suspended from office by the governor and removed for cause. These, however, are political remedies that go not to directing the performance of specific duties but rather go to the question of fitness for office.”
It would be inappropriate for a trial court, by means of a pretrial dismissal with prejudice, to insulate a district attorney from accountability for the manner in which he fulfills his public trust. Although we have recognized that a district attorney’s duty is to administer justice rather than to secure convictions, Karpinski, 92 Wis.2d at 607, the success with which that duty is accomplished depends in part upon the prosecutorial skills a district attorney demonstrates in the criminal courts of this state. If a criminal prosecution fails for lack of prose-cutorial diligence, it is the district attorney’s responsibility. The court should not intercede unless the defendant’s right to a speedy trial is denied.
The defendant next argues that, unless trial courts are found to have the power to dismiss with prejudice, our holding in Wittke would be eviscerated. In that case we *578held that, where a complaint is dismissed after a preliminary examination for want of probable cause, a prosecutor may reissue only upon additional evidence; otherwise, the state’s remedy is appeal of the order of dismissal. We reasoned that repeated filings based upon the same evidence would lead to duplicative and harassing litigation. But the considerations which underlie Wittke are not present in this case. The concern we expressed in that case was “that controversies once decided on their merits remain in repose and that inconsistent judicial decisions not be made on the same set of facts,” 80 Wis.2d at 342. The vexation and harassment contemplated in such a situation is that which results from repeated attempts to establish probable cause upon evidence which has already been found, and is likely to continue to be found, insufficient. Such is not the case here. Accordingly, we do not see our decision in Wittlce as requiring or implying that a trial court may dismiss with prejudice.
(B)
Having concluded that none of our cases accord trial courts the power to dismiss a criminal case with prejudice prior to jeopardy, with the narrow exception involving the constitutional right to a speedy trial, we now consider the defendant’s argument that such power is inherent, that is, deriving not from statute or judicial decision but from a court’s power to control its own judicial business.
We had occasion to review our previous statements on the doctrine of inherent power in Jacobson v. Avestruz, 81 Wis.2d 240, 244-46, 260 N.W.2d 267 (1977), wherein it is stated:
“This court has previously discussed the scope of the inherent powers of the courts of this state, but not direct*579ly in relation to the imposition of jury impaneling costs. In State v. Cannon, 196 Wis. 534, 536-37, 221 N.W. 603 (1928) this court summarized the nature of the powers inherent to the courts as follows
“ ‘In order that any human agency may accomplish its purposes, it is necessary that it possess power. The executive must have power to direct and control his business. The superintendent of the works must have power to direct his men. In order to accomplish the purposes for which they are created, courts must also possess powers. From time immemorial, certain powers have been conceded to courts because they are courts. Such powers have been conceded because without them they could neither maintain their dignity, transact their business, nor accomplish the purposes of their existence. These powers are called inherent powers. In In re Court Room, 148 Wis. 109, 121, 134 N.W. 490, it was said:
“ ‘ “The authorities, in so far as any can be found on the subject, are to the effect that a constitutional court of general jurisdiction has inherent power to protect itself against any action that would unreasonably curtail its powers or materially impair its efficiency. A county board has no power to even attempt to impede the functions of such a court, and no such power could be conferred upon it.”
“ ‘In In re Bruen, 102 Wash. 472, 172 Pac. 1152, the supreme court of Washington said:
“ ‘ “The inherent power of the court is the power to protect itself; the power to administer justice whether any previous form of remedy had been granted or not; the power to promulgate rules for its practice; and the power to provide process where none exists. It is true that the judicial power of this court was created by the constitution, but upon coming into being under the constitution, this court came into being with inherent powers.” ’
“Since State v. Cannon, this court has made reference to the inherent powers of the courts in various contexts. In In re Cannon, 206 Wis. 374, 393, 240 N.W. 441 (1932), this court discussed the concept of the judiciary’s inherent powers and the immunity of these powers from legislative abrogation. In Latham v. Casey & King Corp., supra at 314-15, this court stated:
*580“ ‘It is considered well established that a court has the inherent power to resort to a dismissal of an action in the orderly administration of justice. The general control of the judicial business before it is essential to the court if it is to function. “Every court has inherent power, exercisable in its sound discretion, consistent within the Constitution and statutes, to control disposition of causes on its docket with economy of time and effort.” 14 Am. Jur., Courts, p. 371, sec. 171, Inherent Powers of Courts, 1963 Supp., p. 77.’ (Emphasis supplied.)”
These cases teach that an inherent power is one without which a court cannot properly function. The court of appeals did not find the power to dismiss with prejudice in a criminal case to be vital to a court’s existence, concluding “Courts have traditionally not had this power, and they have been able to function efficiently without it.” State v. Braunsdorf, 92 Wis.2d at 851. Since no decision of this court has ever recognized the existence of such an inherent power, the defendant directs our attention to decisions from several other jurisdictions in which it has been recognized.
The principal case relied upon is United States v. Furey, 514 F.2d 1098 (2d Cir. 1975), in which the court of appeals upheld a trial court’s dismissal with prejudice pursuant to a district court rule governing the prompt disposition of criminal cases. The court stated:
“The federal courts also possess the inherent power, derived from the common law, to dismiss a case for want of prosecution, whether or not there has been a Sixth Amendment violation, e.g., Mann v. United States, 113 U.S. App. D.C. 27, 304 F.2d 394, cert. denied, 371 U.S. 896, 83 S. Ct. 194, 9 L. Ed.2d 127 (1962) ; District of Columbia v. Weams, 208 A.2d 617 (D.C. Mun. App. 1965) ; Ex parte Altman, 34 F. Supp. 106 (S.D. Cal. 1940) ; cf. United States v. Cartano, 420 F.2d 362, 363 (1st Cir. 1969), cert. denied, 397 U.S. 1054, 90 S. Ct. 1398, 25 L. Ed.2d 671 (1970); Mathies v. United States, 126 U.S. App. D.C. 98, 374 F.2d 312, 314-15 (1967). Restated in *581Rule 48(b), F.R. Cr. P., see Advisory Committee Notes to Rule 48, 8A Moore’s Federal Practice ¶48.01, this power is independent of Sixth Amendment considerations, being an outgrowth of the court’s supervisory authority with respect to its own jurisdiction. Its exercise has traditionally been within the court’s discretion, United States v. Aberson, 419 F.2d 820 (2d Cir.), cert. denied, 397 U.S. 1066, 90 S. Ct. 1497, 25 L. Ed.2d 687 (1970).” Id. at 1103.
Citing White v. United States, 377 F.2d 948 (D.C. Cir. 1967), and District of Columbia v. Weams, 208 A.2d 617 (D.C. 1965), it further concluded that this power extended to dismissals with prejudice. 514 F.2d at 1103. Because it is imperative that the source of this inherent power be uncovered, we must closely examine Furey and the cases which purport to support it.
White upheld the dismissal of a second indictment for a vehicle code violation on the ground that the first indictment had been dismissed with prejudice. The District of Columbia circuit court of appeals relied upon United States v. Oppenheimer, 242 U.S. 85 (1916), for the proposition that an adjudication of the merits of the first indictment bars the second, and also upon Weams. Weams involved a fact situation similar to this case. There the prosecution had requested a continuance because of the absence of a government witness. After a recess during which counsel for the parties apparently attempted to reach a stipulation on the testimony of the absent witness, the prosecution informed the court that it had decided to enter a nolle prosequi. The trial court declined to accept the nolle prosequi and dismissed the case with prejudice. When the prosecution attempted to recommence the action, the second indictments were dismissed and the government appealed. The District of Columbia court of appeals held that the trial court’s dismissal with prejudice was a proper application of the *582court’s power to curb the use of nolle prosequi “in a manner that is ‘scandalous,’ ‘corrupt,’ or ‘capricious and vexatiously repetitious.’ ” 208 A.2d at 618. In support of that proposition, the court cites six cases,4 none of which do we find supportive of the existence of a trial court’s power to dismiss a case with prejudice. Instead, five of them state only what we stated in Kenyon, which is that under certain circumstances a trial court may deny a prosecutor’s motion to dismiss a criminal case. The sixth case, Ex Parte Altman, 34 F. Supp. 106 (S.D. Cal. 1940), involved a petition for writ of habeas corpus by Altman who had been indicted in Michigan. The Michigan trial court dismissed the indictment for want of prosecution, and then three months later reinstated it upon the motion of the government. Altman, challenging the reinstated indictment in the California court, argued that the indictment, once dismissed, was a bar to further action. The court, without citation to any authority stated: “But it is not questioned that the Court, in the exercise of its jurisdiction, has the inherent power to order a dismissal for failure to prosecute.” Id. at 108. The opinion further states: “But the order of dismissal was neither a judgment nor was it final. A dismissal or nolle prosequi does not work an acquittal. Or bar a second prosecution for the same offense.” (Citations omitted.) Id. at 108-09.
Thus by its express language even Altman does not purport to go as far as Wearns, since it expressly indicates that such dismissals are without prejudice. Because we do not believe the cases relied upon in Weams *583really support its holding, we have serious reservations about its authoritative value for the proposition that a trial court possesses an inherent power to dismiss with prejudice. And because Furey, upon which the defendant herein relies, is built squarely upon Wearns and Altman, its precedential underpinnings are likewise suspect. Moreover, our reservations are corroborated by commentators who have concluded that before Furey and Weams dismissal with prejudice on nonconstitutional grounds was unknown. See: Frase, The Speedy Trial Act of 1974, 43 U. Chi. L. Rev. 667, 704 n. 177 (1976) ; Note, 41 N.Y.U. L. Rev. 996, 998 (1966).
The defendant also cites two Florida cases, State v. Romano, 300 So.2d 22 (Fla. App. 1974), and State v. Fattorusso, 228 So.2d 630 (Fla. App. 1969). In Fattorusso the court of appeals reversed a trial court’s dismissal of an information with prejudice, but in the course of its opinion recognized, without citing authority, “the inherent right of the trial court to dismiss an action because of non-compliance with its orders in the interests of the orderly administration of justice.” Id. at 633. The court further stated that a dismissal should be with prejudice only where there has been “a deliberate and contumacious disregard of the court’s authority.” Id. Because these statements come without supporting authority, we find Fattorusso and Romano, which cites Fattorusso, of no help in our search to uncover the source of this inherent authority.
Finally, we turn our attention to those cases which discuss the court’s authority to dismiss with prejudice on nonconstitutional grounds pursuant to Fed. R. Crim. P. 48.5 In United States v. Simmons, 536 F.2d 827 (9th *584Cir. 1976), the trial court dismissed a forgery indictment on alternative grounds that the defendant had been denied his constitutional right to a speedy trial and that the court was authorized to dismiss pursuant to Rule 48(b), Fed. R. Crim. P. Although the court of appeals found the dismissals unwarranted, it expressly recognized that Rule 48(b) authorizes a court to dismiss a criminal case with prejudice independent of a constitutional violation. See also: United States v. Stoker, 522 F.2d 576 (10th Cir. 1975) ; United States v. Towill, 548 F.2d 1363 (9th Cir. 1977) ; United States v. Clay, 481 F. 2d 133 (7th Cir. 1973). The Federal Advisory Committee Notes to Rule 48(b) state that “[t]his rule is a restatement of the inherent power of the court to dismiss a case for want of prosecution.” Yet the only case cited in the notes in support of that statement is one we have considered and distinguished: Ex parte Altman, supra.
The defendant’s authorities do not enable us to trace the source of this inherent power back beyond Weams and Furey. If those cases express some inherent power of a court which has long resided with the tribunals of this land, we are unaware of any preceding authority where the power of dismissal with prejudice has been invoked in a nonconstitutional setting. We are satisfied that this power was not inherited from English common law, since it was not until Director of Public Prosecutions v. Humphrys, [1976] 2 All E.R. 497, that the English courts recognized the power of a trial court to dismiss a case with prejudice, and even then, the majority, *585over a vigorous dissent, could cite no criminal cases for authority.
Because we find that (1) the existence of this inherent power has only recently been articulated in American jurisprudence, and (2) it arises frequently in connection with a procedural rule or statute authorizing dismissals, we conclude that the power to dismiss a criminal case with prejudice prior to jeopardy on nonconsti-tutional grounds is not essential to the existence or the orderly functioning of a trial court, and it is not, therefore, an inherent power of the trial courts of this state.
(C)
This conclusion notwithstanding, the defendant urges us to recognize such a power in the trial court for reasons of policy and economy of judicial resources. We acknowledge that we have sanctioned dismissals for want of prosecution in civil cases, Furrenes v. Ford Motor Co., 79 Wis.2d 260, 255 N.W.2d 511 (1977) ; Cukrowski v. Mt. Sinai Hospital, 67 Wis.2d 487, 227 N.W.2d 95 (1975) ; Zeis v. Fruehauf Corp., 56 Wis.2d 486, 202 N.W.2d 225 (1972) ; Lawrence v. MacIntyre, 48 Wis.2d 550, 180 N.W.2d 538 (1970), and recognize that the existence of a statute authorizing such a dismissal of civil cases does not negate the court’s inherent authority. Jacobson v. Avestruz, 81 Wis.2d at 246; Trispel v. Haefer, 89 Wis. 2d 725, 733, 279 N.W.2d 242 (1979), But while dismissal in a civil case affects only the litigating parties, a dismissal in a criminal case has broader implications for society as a whole. Here the defendant’s constitutional rights are not implicated, so the competing interests involved are the need of the court to have a remedy for the sort of conduct shown here by the assistant district attorney, as well as to exercise control over its calendar, and that of society to be secure from crime through the *586regular enforcement of the criminal laws. The balance weighs heavily in favor of society’s interests, and for this reason we do not recognize such a power of dismissal with prejudice in criminal cases to be necessary by reason of public policy or economy of judicial resources.
The defendant argues that both these interests can be accommodated by the use of a “public interest” standard such as we expressed in Kenyon. While we have little doubt that our trial courts could ably apply such a standard, we believe that the power to dismiss a criminal case with prejudice before the attachment of jeopardy, regardless of how judiciously it is used by trial courts, is too great an intrusion into the realm of prosecutorial discretion. See: United States v. Cowan, 524 F. 2d 504 (5th Cir. 1975); Newman v. United States, 382 F.2d 479 (D.C. Cir. 1967). Comment, The Nolle Prosequi Under Rule 48 (a) of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure, 1978 Det. C.L. Rev. 491, 498-504 (1978) ; Note, Reviewability of Prosecutorial Discretion: Failure to Prosecute, 75 Colum. L. Rev. 130, 136-38 (1975). Accordingly, we hold that the trial courts of this state do not possess the power to dismiss a criminal case with prejudice prior to the attachment of jeopardy except in the case of a violation of a constitutional right to a speedy trial.
II.
Our holding, however, does not mean we approve of the district attorney’s conduct in this case. His lack of preparation and unauthorized discharge of the jury panel were an affront to the dignity of the court and the respect which he is sworn to observe. Sec. 757.29 (1), Stats. In such situations the court is not without power to act.
*587Standard 7 of the Code of Judicial Ethics, 36 Wis.2d 252, 257, 158 N.W.2d 873 (1967), provides as follows:
“A judge should utilize his opportunities to criticize and correct unprofessional conduct of attorneys and counsellors, brought to his attention; and, if adverse comment is not a sufficient corrective, should send the matter at once to the proper investigating disciplinary authorities.”
In addition, we have approved the use of contempt power to protect the dignity and authority of the court. In re Hon. Charles E. Kading, 74 Wis.2d 405, 411, 246 N.W.2d 903 (1976) ; Appeal of Cichon, 227 Wis. 62, 68, 278 N.W. 1 (1938); Bihlmire v. Hahn, 31 Wis.2d 537, 543, 143 N.W.2d 433 (1966). While this power should be used sparingly and with great deliberation, In re Adam’s Rib, Inc. (Kaminsky), 39 Wis.2d 741, 746, 159 N.W.2d 643 (1968), it may nonetheless be invoked against an offending attorney. Rubin v. State, 192 Wis. 1, 211 N.W. 926 (1927) ; McKinnon v. State, 526 P.2d 18 (Alaska 1974).
By the Court. — The decision of the court of appeals is affirmed.
For a thorough discussion of this area, see, State ex rel. Butler v. Moise, 48 La. Ann. 109, 18 So. 943, 35 L.R.A. 701 (1895). See also: 1 Bishop’s, New Criminal Procedure, secs. 1387-86, 843-47 (1895); 16 C.J. Criminal Law, secs. 778-90, 432-38 (1918).
In Broad Lord Justice Roskill cited no authority in support of his conclusion that the trial judge was acting properly when he refused to permit the prosecutor to withdraw the case. But see: R. v. Comptroller-General of Patents, 1 Q.B. 909, 68 L.J. Q.B. 568, 574 (1899) : “In a prosecution by one man against another for a crime the Attorney-General can, if he thinks fit, enter a nolle prosequi, and nobody can say anything to him as to whether he enters a nolle prosequi or not. He is supreme in that matter, and there is no appeal.”
See, e.g., Fed. R. Crim. P. 48; Ariz. Rev. Stat., Rules of Crim. Proc. 16.5; Cal. Penal Code sec. 1386 (Deering); Ga. Code Ann. sec. 27-1801; Idaho Code Ann. sec. 19-3505; Minn. Stat. Ann., Rules of Crim. Proc. 30.01 (West); N.Y. Crim. Proc. Law sec. 210.40 (McKinney); Ohio Rev. Code Ann., Rules of Crim. Proc. 48 (Page); Or. Rev. Stat. sec. 135.757; 42 Pa. Cons. Stat. Ann. *574sec. 8932 (Supp. 1980). See also: A.L.I. Code of Criminal Procedure, sec. 295 Commentary 895-97 (1931) ; 3 Wharton’s Criminal Procedure, sec. 518 (12th ed. 1975).
People ex rel. Elliott v. Covelli, 415 Ill. 79, 112 N.E.2d 156 (1958); State v. Charles, 183 S.C. 188, 190 S.E. 466 (1937); Commonwealth v. Dascalakis, 246 Mass. 12, 140 N.E. 470 (1923); State on Inf. of McKittrick v. Graves, 346 Mo. 990, 144 S.W.2d 91 (1940); United States v. Krakowitz, 52 F. Supp. 774 (S.D. Ohio 1943); Ex Parte Altman, 34 F. Supp. 106 (S.D. Cal. 1940).
Fed. R. Crim. P. 48 states:
“(a) By attorney for government. The Attorney General or the United States attorney may by leave of court file a dismissal of an indictment, information or complaint and the prosecution *584shall thereupon terminate. Such a dismissal may not be filed during the trial without the consent of the defendant.
“(b) By court. If there is unnecessary delay in presenting the charge to a grand jury or in filing an information against a defendant who has been held to answer to the district court, or if there is unnecessary delay in bringing a defendant to trial, the court may dismiss the indictment, information or complaint.”

=== CASE 9738652 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:59:40.956633+00 ===

DAY, J.
(dissenting). I dissent. When the public prosecutor moves to dismiss a criminal case before jeopardy attaches, a trial court, if it grants the motion, has the inherent power to do so with prejudice. The question is not power, but whether there is an abuse of discretion in such dismissal. It is a matter of balancing the interest of the state against fundamental fairness to a defendant with the added ingredient of the orderly functioning of the court system. When the motion to dismiss becomes abusive of judicial process, as it was here, the court properly exercised its inherent power in granting the district attorney’s motion to dismiss but doing so with prejudice.
*588Sharon Braunsdorf was charged with welfare fraud pursuant to secs. 49.12(6) and 943.20(1) (c), Stats. 1977. She agreed to repay the amounts overpaid to her at the rate of $100 per month, and had repaid $800 before this prosecution was initiated.
She had retained private counsel and was prepared for trial on the scheduled date. By then, however, the assistant district attorney had directed the clerk of courts to discharge the jury panel because he was unprepared to go to trial. This was done without the knowledge of the trial court and without authority.
At the time of trial, the assistant district attorney sought a continuance, which the trial court denied. The prosecutor then moved to dismiss with a view to reinstating prosecution later. The court granted that motion, but made its dismissal with prejudice.
A renewed prosecution, following dismissal without prejudice, would have subjected Braunsdorf to a second arrest, a second bail hearing, a second preliminary hearing, a second plea and finally a trial on these charges. All of this because of the inexcusable unpreparedness of the prosecutor.
Under these circumstances, the trial court’s decision to grant the district attorney’s motion to dismiss but with prejudice was fully justified.
Under Article VII, section 2 of the Wisconsin Constitution, the judicial power of the state is vested in a unified system of courts. This constitutional authority carries with it the inherent power to regulate proceedings to facilitate the administration of justice. 20 Am. Jur. 2d, Courts, sec. 78. See also, Currie, The Separation of Powers: Control Of Courts And Lawyers, 47 Wis. Bar. Bull. 7, 14 (December, 1974).
In Latham v. Casey & King Corp., 23 Wis.2d 311, 314, 127 N.W.2d 225 (1964), this court held:
*589"... a court has the inherent power to resort to a dismissal of an action in the orderly administration of justice. The general control of the orderly judicial business before it is essential to the court if it is to function. ‘Every court has inherent power, exercisable in its sound discretion, consistent within the Constitution and statutes, to control disposition of causes on its docket with economy of time and effort.’ ” (Emphasis added.)
The majority refers to the broad discretion possessed by a prosecutor in instituting prosecutions under the criminal code but then wrongly concludes that when the district attorney moves to dismiss such a prosecution with a view to reprosecution, a trial court has no authority to dismiss such action with prejudice for cause, either sua sponte or on motion of the defendant, unless jeopardy has attached or some constitutional right of the defendant is involved.
Society has a strong interest in punishing criminal conduct. But society also has an interest in protecting the integrity of the judicial process and in ensuring fairness to defendants in judicial proceedings. Where those fundamental interests are threatened, the “discretion” of the prosecutor must be subject to the power and responsibility of the court.
The majority on page 586 states that:
“. . . We believe that the power to dismiss a criminal case with prejudice before the attachment of jeopardy, regardless of how judiciously it is used by trial courts, is too great an intrusion into the realm of prosecutorial discretion.”
But this statement sweeps too broadly. We are not concerned here with whether a trial court can sua sponte or on motion of a defendant dismiss a criminal case with prejudice regardless of any action on the part of the district attorney. Here the issue is much narrower and *590involves the court’s authority to act where it is the district attorney who moves to dismiss with the right to start over.
The majority sees a “broad” discretion on the part of the district attorney as to when to commence a prosecution. But this court has not equated the power to start with the power to stop. On the contrary, this court has held that before the district attorney can stop (nolle prosequi) a prosecution once started, approval must be obtained from the trial court, who is to make such determination “in the public interest.” State v. Kenyon, 85 Wis.2d 36, 45, 270 N.W.2d 160 (1978). The discretion of the district attorney in this area is not absolute.
This was not a prosecution for first-degree murder where the societal interest in prosecution could be found by a trial court to outweigh the issues of fairness to the defendant and the court’s orderly functioning. There was no abuse of discretion by the trial court.
The idea that the trial court has this power is hardly a novel proposition. While it is a question of first impression in this court, the power is widely recognized in federal courts. In United States v. Furey, 514 F.2d 1098 (2d Cir. 1975), the court held the power of a federal court to dismiss with prejudice a part of the inherent powers derived from the common law. The court further stated that:
“. . . this power is independent of Sixth Amendment considerations, being an outgrowth of the court’s supervisory authority with respect to its own jurisdiction. Its exercise has traditionally been within the court’s discretion, United States v. Aberson, 419 F.2d 820 (2d Cir.), cert. denied, 397 U.S. 1066, 90 S. Ct. 1497, 25 L. Ed.2d 687 (1970). It has been used, for instance, . . . to protect the public interest ‘in the prosecution of those accused of crime without the procrastination of which the processes of law are sometimes guilty,’ United States *591v. Mark II Electronics of Louisiana, Inc., 283 F. Supp. 280, 283 (E.D. La. 1968), . . . Dismissal under this power may he without prejudice, ... or with prejudice, White v. United States, 126 U.S. App. D.C. 309, 377, F.2d 948 (1967); District of Columbia v. Weams, supra; 3 Wright, Federal Practice and Procedure §814, at 319 (1969).
“Cases cited by the government for the proposition that dismissal with prejudice is proper only when the Sixth Amendment is invoked are not only distinguishable but do not support such a rule.” 514 F.2d at 1103. (Emphasis added.)
In England, the House of Lords has also recognized this power. In Director Of Public Prosecutions v. Hum-phrys, [1976] 2 All E.R. 497, 527-528, Lord Salmon wrote:
“. . . a judge has not and should not appear to have any responsibility for the institution of prosecutions; nor has he any power to refuse to allow a prosecution to proceed merely because he considers that, as a matter of policy, it ought not to have been brought. It is only if the prosecution amounts to an abuse of the process of the court and is oppressive and vexatious that the judge has the power to intervene.”
Lord Edmund-Davies expressed a concurring view:
“I am now satisfied that, in the words of Lord Parker, C.J. in Mills v. Cooper, ‘every court has undoubtedly a right in its discretion to decline to hear proceedings on the ground that they are oppressive and an abuse of the process of the court.’ ” Humphrys at 533.
I find these cases persuasive, and believe the crucial question is not the existence of the power, but the propriety of its exercise on the facts of a particular case.
The majority recognizes the power of the trial court to deny the motion to dismiss without prejudice, and thus force the unprepared prosecutor to trial. But such a decision on the part of a trial judge is merely the ex*592ercise of discretion and would constitute abuse if not justified under the circumstances. Plainly a prosecutor with no evidence or witnesses will fail to meet his burden of proof, and a dismissal on the merits will follow. The majority defends this hollow exercise because the resulting dismissal will properly place the blame on the shoulders of the prosecutor, who is accountable to the electorate. But will it? Forcing the state to go to “trial” under such circumstances serves to bring discredit on the system of justice.
I would reverse the court of appeals and affirm the order of the trial court.
I am authorized to state that Justice Heffernan and Justice Abrahamson join in this dissent.

=== CASE 2217165 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:22.599478+00 ===

256 Cal.App.2d 6 (1967)
THE PEOPLE, Plaintiff and Appellant,
v.
CHRISTOPHER B. CLARK et al., Defendants and Respondents.
Crim. No. 13052.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. Two.
Nov. 15, 1967.
Thomas C. Lynch, Attorney General, William E. James, Assistant Attorney General, Evelle J. Younger, District Attorney, Harry Wood and Donald J. Kaplan, Deputy District Attorneys, for Plaintiff and Appellant.
Gordon P. Levy, Rose, Klein & Marias, Barry I. Goldman and Carl Burkow for Defendants and Respondents.
ROTH, P. J.
Respondents were each charged by information with one count of violating Penal Code, section 459 (burglary). Their motion to set aside the information under Penal Code, section 995 was granted. The People appeal from the order granting the motion. (Pen. Code,  1238, subd. 1).
On August 4, 1966 between 9:30 and 10 p.m., Dean Hummer, the manager of a Harley-Davidson motorcycle shop in Van Nuys locked the premises and left. At approximately 3:05 a.m., Officer Meyerhoff was in the vicinity of the shop when he heard a burglar alarm from the motorcycle shop. He saw that the front door was open and called for a sergeant to be sent to the location.
At about 3:10 a.m., while the officer was awaiting the arrival of the sergeant, a citizen in an automobile stopped at the store and identified himself as a Mr. Nichols. Mr. Nichols told Meyerhoff that a motorcycle that he had observed there on a previous occasion was missing, and described the motorcycle as "a Harley-Davidson, blue, with chrome, and ... that he believed he knew who had taken the motorcycle." Nichols said that he "kind of figured" it was taken by his neighbor and gave the neighbor's address. Nichols said "that he didn't know the fellow's name, but he lived next door to him, describing him as a Caucasian, approximately 20 years old, a tattoo on his arm, a panther head." He stated that he thought his neighbor may have taken the machine because he "had also admired the motorcycle." Nichols then drove off. *9
Nichols testified at the preliminary hearing that at approximately 2 a.m. he picked up his wife from her place of employment and was driving past the motorcycle shop when he heard the burglar alarm. He approached the officer at the store and told him that he believed he knew where the allegedly missing bike was located. Nichols then left the motorcycle shop with his wife and went home. Upon returning to his apartment building, he went to respondent Clark's apartment, knocked on the door and Clark let him in. Mr. Nichols saw respondent Earls sitting in a chair. There was another person on the other side of the room, but he was unable to identify that person. Clark laughed and pulled Mr. Nichols into an unlit bedroom after Nichols told him that a motorcycle was missing from the shop. Nichols testified that he saw the back of a motorcycle in the dim light of the bedroom. After leaving Clark's apartment, Mr. Nichols saw the officer to whom he had previously spoken accompanied by others and told them that the allegedly missing motorcycle was in the apartment.
Meyerhoff testified that he had never seen Nichols prior to this time.
Meyerhoff proceeded to check the inside of the shop and then went to the apartment address given to him by Nichols. Arriving at the apartment, Meyerhoff, who had been joined by other officers, saw Nichols coming from the apartment. Nichols approached the officers and told Meyerhoff that he had just left the apartment, the address of which he had given Meyerhoff, that there were three men in the apartment and that he had seen the motorcycle that was originally in the shop in the bedroom of respondent Clark's apartment.
The officers went to Clark's apartment. Meyerhoff knocked on the door and identified himself. Clark opened the door and Meyerhoff and three other officers entered the apartment. The police officers did not possess a search warrant nor did they ask for or receive permission to enter the apartment. Respondent Earls, completely dressed, was seated in a chair in the living room and respondent Giesseman, dressed except for a shirt, was lying on the couch. Upon entering, Officer Meyerhoff walked into the bedroom, discovered the motorcycle there, and placed all three respondents under arrest.
[1] Penal Code, section 995 requires that an information be set aside if the defendant was committed "without reasonable and probable cause." To be sufficient, the evidence at the preliminary examination must support a reasonable belief that the offense charged was committed and that the accused *10 committed it. In other words, the evidence must establish a prima facie case. It is clear, however, that such evidence must be competent. Thus, an information based entirely on incompetent evidence will be set aside. (Rogers v. Superior Court, 46 Cal.2d 3, 8 [291 P.2d 929]; People v. Prewitt, 52 Cal.2d 330, 335-336 [341 P.2d 1].)
[2a, 3a] The basic question presented here is whether sufficient competent evidence was presented that the crime charged was committed and that respondents committed it. This may be divided into two parts: (1) whether the arrest of respondents was valid and therefore whether evidence acquired by the search incident thereto constituted competent evidence; and (2) assuming arguendo that the arrest was invalid, thereby invalidating the search, whether there was other sufficient competent evidence to warrant bringing respondents to trial.
[4] Penal Code, section 836, subdivision 3 provides that a police officer may make an arrest without a warrant where he had reasonable cause to believe that the person to be arrested has committed a felony. If reasonable cause exists to arrest a person, the search  [fn. 1] made incident to the arrest is lawful even though it precedes rather than follows the arrest. (People v. Brown, 45 Cal.2d 640 [290 P.2d 528]; People v. Torres, 56 Cal.2d 864, 866 [17 Cal.Rptr. 495, 366 P.2d 823]; People v. Holmes, 237 Cal.App.2d 795, 799 [47 Cal.Rptr. 246].)
The important consideration is "whether the officer had reasonable cause before the search to make an arrest ..." (People v. Simon, 45 Cal.2d 645, 648 [290 P.2d 531]).
"Reasonable or probable cause for an arrest has been the subject of much judicial scrutiny and decision. [5] There is no exact formula for the determination of reasonableness. Each case must be decided on its own facts and circumstances ... and on the total atmosphere of the case. ... [6] Reasonable cause has been generally defined to be such a state of facts as would lead a man of ordinary care and prudence to believe and conscientiously entertain an honest and strong suspicion that the person is guilty of a crime." (People v. Lara, 67 Cal.2d 365, 373-374 [62 Cal.Rptr. 586, 432 P.2d 202]; *11 People v. Ingle, 53 Cal.2d 407, 412-413 [2 Cal.Rptr. 14, 348 P.2d 577]; People v. Privett, 55 Cal.2d 698, 701 [12 Cal.Rptr. 874, 361 P.2d 602]; People v. Talley, 65 Cal.2d 830, 835 [56 Cal.Rptr. 492, 423 P.2d 564].)
[2b] Although the officer who made the arrest had not interviewed the proprietor of the store prior to the arrest, he did know that a burglar alarm had sounded and it appeared reasonable to him as it would to any person, that the store had been broken into and a burglary committed. He was informed as he approached the apartment building by the same person who had accosted him at the store which he had been investigating, that this person had seen the motorcycle in question in the bedroom of the apartment. In these circumstances, the decisive question is not the reliability of an untested informer. In Lara the court says at pages 374-375: "But information given by an untested informant or arrestee is nevertheless sufficient if it is 'corroborated, in essential respects, by other facts, sources or circumstances.' (People v. Reeves (1964) 61 Cal.2d 268, 274 [38 Cal.Rptr. 1, 391 P.2d 393].) [7] Such corroboration need not itself amount to reasonable cause to arrest; its only purpose is to provide the element of 'reliability' missing when the police have had no prior experience with the informant. Accordingly, it is enough if it gives the officers reasonable grounds to believe the informant is telling the truth, for in this type of case the issue is 'not whether the information obtained by the officers emanated from a reliable source, but whether the officers could reasonably rely upon that information under the circumstances.' (People v. Sandoval (1966) 65 Cal.2d 303, 308-309 [54 Cal.Rptr. 123, 419 P.2d 187], citing Willson v. Superior Court (1956) 46 Cal.2d 291, 294-295 [294 P.2d 36].)"
[2c] The arrest and search were proper.
[3b] Wholly aside from the evidence obtained as a result of the arrest and search above detailed, there is enough competent evidence to support the charge. Since there is, the charge will not be set aside simply because some incompetent evidence was also received. (People v. Rissman, 143 Cal.App.2d 488, 496 [299 P.2d 944].) The testimony presented at the preliminary hearing was as follows: Mr. Hummer, the manager of the shop, testified that when he arrived at the shop he noticed that a certain motorcycle was missing and that it was the only one in the shop at that time. Officer Meyerhoff testified as to the condition of the shop and the alarm. Nichols stated that he told the officers that he believed *12 a bike was stolen and that he believed respondent Clark had stolen it. He further testified that after he told Clark that a motorcycle was missing from the shop Clark pulled him into an unlit room and he saw what he later stated was a motorcycle.
Sufficient competent evidence was presented to the magistrate to warrant an inference that a burglary was committed and that the respondents committed the burglary. The testimony of Hummer and Officer Meyerhoff was sufficient to establish a reasonable inference that a crime was committed. Nichols' testimony, apart from that of the arresting officer, to the effect that he saw a motorcycle in the apartment shortly after the alleged burglary; that it was in the bedroom rather than in a more usual location; and the manner in which Clark showed it to Nichols constituted sufficient circumstantial evidence to hold respondents over for trial.
The committing magistrate could reasonably draw the inference that respondents Giesseman and Earls were acting in concert with Clark in the commission of a burglary, from the fact that they were in the Clark apartment at that time in the morning.
People v. Platt, 124 Cal.App.2d 123, 131 [268 P.2d 529] states: [8] "On a motion to set aside an information, the question of the guilt or innocence of the defendant is not before the court, nor does the issue concern the quantum of evidence necessary to sustain a judgment of conviction. The court is only to determine whether the magistrate, acting as a man of ordinary caution or prudence, could conscientiously entertain a reasonable suspicion that a public offense had been committed in which the defendant had participated. (Weber v. Superior Court, 35 Cal.2d 68, 69 [216 P.2d 871].)"
[9] Under Penal Code, section 995, the information will be set aside only where there is no evidence that a crime has been committed or there is no evidence to connect the defendant with a crime shown to have been committed. (Lorenson v. Superior Court, 35 Cal.2d 49, 55-57 [216 P.2d 859].)
The evidence was sufficient to hold the respondents for trial.
The order is reversed.
Herndon, J., and Fleming, J., concurred.
NOTES
[fn. 1]  1. Whether the activities of the police in the instant case constituted a search in the technical sense of "viewing ... that which was not only intended to be private or hidden, but that which was ... made concealed or closed from open veiwing." (People v. Holloway, 230 Cal.App.2d 834, 839 [41 Cal.Rptr. 325]) or a mere observation is purely semantic. In applying either term to the present case, its validity will depend upon the legality of the arrest. For the sake of simplicity, we have referred to the police activities here as a "search."

=== CASE 2217118 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:22.013756+00 ===

256 Cal.App.2d 552 (1967)
WM. E. DOUD & CO., INC., et al., Plaintiffs and Appellants,
v.
MARTIN V. SMITH et al., Defendants and Respondents.
Civ. No. 30810.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. Two.
Nov. 30, 1967.
Rich & Ezer and Mitchel J. Ezer for Plaintiffs and Appellants.
Henry A. Fox for Defendants and Respondents. *554
FOX, J.  [fn. *]
This is an action to recover a real estate commission. Defendants' demurrer was sustained to counts II, III and IV of the second amended complaint without leave to amend.  [fn. 1]plaintiffs  [fn. 2] have appealed from the ensuing judgment of dismissal.
In the second cause of action it is alleged that Smith and Siegel were the owners of a large tract of unimproved land in Ventura County suitable for subdivision. They indicated to plaintiffs their desire to sell this property, but refused to give plaintiffs a general brokers listing, stating that the price and terms at which they would sell the property would depend on the financial strength of the prospective purchasers and their experience as subdivision developers. It was orally agreed that if plaintiffs located a prospective purchaser satisfactory to Smith and Siegel and negotiations were entered into, Smith and Siegel would issue a written memorandum to plaintiffs acknowledging the beginning of such negotiations and agreeing to pay plaintiffs, upon consummation of a sale of the property to such prospective purchasers, a commission.
Plaintiffs obtained expressions of interest in the purchase of this property from Mark Kornwasser, and Byron Lasky representing the firm of Kaufman and Broad. On July 28, 1964, Smith and Siegel provided plaintiffs with a writing  [fn. 3]*555 acknowledging that plaintiffs had brought Kaufman and Broad and an individual, Mark Kornwasser, into negotiations with defendants and agreeing to pay certain commissions to plaintiffs if the property was sold to either of these prospective buyers.
At some time during August or September 1964, Byron Lasky ceased the representation of Kaufman and Broad, and thereafter he and Harlan Lee agreed to purchase the property from Smith and Siegel. On or about November 10, 1964, Smith and Siegel sold the land to Lasky and Lee.plaintiffs' second cause of action is based on this agreement--quoted in footnote 3.
In their third cause of action plaintiffs alleged that Smith and Siegel did not furnish them with a writing acknowledging that plaintiffs had brought Lasky into negotiations with them for the purchase of the property and agreeing that plaintiffs would be entitled to a commission upon the sale of it to Lasky and Lee; that as a result plaintiffs are without a writing which evidences their right to commissions on a sale to Lasky.plaintiffs further allege that they and defendants had an oral agreement that plaintiffs would be entitled to the commission if the land was sold to any buyers produced by plaintiffs. They therefore demand payment of the commission based upon Smith and Siegel's failure to pay the commission due pursuant to the alleged oral agreement.
The fourth cause of action is on the theory of quantum meruit for work and labor performed by plaintiffs.
In Denbo v. Weston Inv. Co., 112 Cal.App.2d 153, the court stated at page 157 [245 P.2d 650] these established principles: "The right of a broker to recover his commission must be measured primarily by the terms of his employment [citation]. The broker may, by special agreement, make his compensation depend upon a contingency or the happening of a condition precedent, and unless such contingency occurs, he has no right of recovery. [Citations.]" (Quoted in Williams v. United Cal. Bank, 223 Cal.App.2d 309, 313 [35 Cal.Rptr. 788].)
In passing upon the sufficiency of the allegations in count II to state a cause of action we must bear in mind the distinction between a general and special contract of employment of a real estate broker when it comes to the performance which will entitle him to a commission. This distinction is well stated in Denbo v. Weston Inv. Co., supra. At page 158 the court pointed out that the general rule is that a broker *556 performs his part of a general contract of employment when he produces a purchaser able, ready, and willing to buy upon the terms specified by the owner. The court then quoted from Backman v. Guadalupe Realty Co., 78 Cal.App. 347, at page 352 [248 P. 296]: " '... Upon a general (italics added) contract of employment, certainly, the owner may make concessions to a purchaser without loss of the commission to the broker, but there is a distinction in fact recognized by the authorities, between a general and special contract of employment in a matter of this kind. It appears that where the broker has undertaken a special (italics added) task by his contract of employment and fails to perform it, the fact of having first introduced the buyer and seller will not entitle him to recover. ...' "
This quotation from Backman is again quoted in the later case of Ridgway v. Chase, 122 Cal.App.2d 840, at page 851 [265 P.2d 603].
[1] Applying these principles to the writing in the instant case (fn. 3) it is apparent from the face of the document that it is a special and not a general contract of employment for it clearly provides for the payment of a compensation upon the sale of the property in question "to either of these buyers"; viz., "Kaufman and Broad and an individual named Mark Kornwasser." Furthermore, plaintiffs do not allege in their pleading that this writing constitutes a general employment. They allege in their second amended complaint that "... the parties agreed that Smith and Siegel would not give plaintiffs a general brokers listing. ..."
The second count of the amended complaint shows on its face that the property in question was not sold to either Kaufman and Broad or to Mark Kornwasser. This count therefore does not state a cause of action for recovery of a realtor's commission. (Denbo v. Weston Inv. Co., 112 Cal.App.2d 153 [245 P.2d 650]; Ridgway v. Chase, supra, 122 Cal.App.2d 840; Williams v. United Cal.Bank, supra, 223 Cal.App.2d 309; Augustine v. Trucco, 124 Cal.App.2d 229, 237 [268 P.2d 780]; Backman v. Guadalupe Realty Co., supra, 78 Cal.App. 347.)
Plaintiffs' reliance on Needham v. Abbot Kinney Co., 217 Cal. 72, 74 [17 P.2d 109], is misplaced. In that case the last paragraph of the listing agreement stated: "In any deal satisfactory to us we would expect to pay the usual Realty Board Commission." The court found, in effect, that this language amounted to a general listing agreement, and authorized *557 the broker to negotiate with parties other than those named in the letter for any deal satisfactory to the owner. There is no comparable language in the writing on which plaintiffs rely.
Plaintiffs' reliance on Porter v. Cirod, Inc., 242 Cal.App.2d 761 [51 Cal.Rptr. 784], is also misplaced. Civil Code, section 1624, subdivision 5 and Code of Civil Procedure, section 1973, subdivision 5, were each amended in 1963  [fn. 4] to require a broker who is employed to "find a purchaser ... of real estate" to have authority in writing therefor in order to collect a commission.
[2a] Plaintiffs vainly seek to enlarge the scope of the listing agreement by alleging that "it was intended by Smith and Siegel in delivering the memorandum and plaintiffs in accepting it that the reference to Kaufman & Broad was intended to cover personnel affiliated with Kaufman & Broad, specifically including Lasky, in whatever capacity such personnel might act."
Plaintiffs cannot escape the plain meaning of the language used in the writing by alleging that they intended to include persons other than those named in the agreement by virtue of a prior oral agreement. More explicit language could hardly have been used to state that plaintiffs' commission would become due only upon a sale to Kaufman and Broad or to Mark Kornwasser.
Apposite here is the decision of the court in Beazell v. Schrader, 59 Cal.2d 577 [30 Cal.Rptr. 534, 381 P.2d 390]. This was also an attempt to collect a real estate commission. At pages 581-582 the court stated: "... Without question if plaintiff is permitted to establish a different agreement than that evidenced by the escrow instructions his purpose and the effect of such a showing would be to vary and contradict the terms of the document which he urges as a sufficient memorandum, or to show a different contract than that to which such memorandum relates."
"* * *"
" '... It is not permissible for the broker to resort to the escrow document for a ratification of his employment and then, in contradiction of the other provisions thereof, establish by parol a different contract as to the conditions under which the commission is to become due. To permit such a course *558 would be to defeat the very object the statute of frauds was designed to accomplish.' [Citations.]"
In Waverly Productions, Inc. v. RKO General, Inc., 217 Cal.App.2d 721, at page 729 [32 Cal.Rptr. 73], the court stated: "Out of all the qualifications and uncertainties of the parol evidence rule one proposition emerges clear and decisive, namely, that the exclusionary rule is applicable 'where the intention of the parties with respect to their obligations and rights is clearly stated in the writing, and parol evidence of a contrary intention is offered.' (Witkin, California Evidence,  374, p. 417.)"
In Brant v. California Dairies, Inc., 4 Cal.2d 128, the court stated at page 133 [48 P.2d 13]: "Other statements of similar character were admitted. Together they amount to nothing more than a statement of what Carver personally believed the agreement of the parties to be. But it is now a settled principle of the law of contract that the undisclosed intentions of the parties are, in the absence of mistake, fraud, etc., immaterial; and that the outward manifestation or expression of assent is controlling. This is the 'objective' standard, established by the modern decisions and approved by authoritative writers. ... As the court said in Payne v. Commercial Nat. Bank, 177 Cal. 68, 72 [169 P. 1007, L.R.A. 1918C 328]: '... no authority sustains the proposition that under the guise of construction or explanation, a meaning can be given to the instrument which is not to be found in the instrument itself, but is based entirely upon direct evidence of intention independent of the instrument.' [Citations.]"
[3] Imbach v. Schultz, 58 Cal.2d 858, 860- 861 [27 Cal.Rptr. 160, 377 P.2d 272]: "Although parol evidence is ordinarily admissible to explain the meaning of an agreement, it is not admissible when it is offered, as here, to give the terms of the agreement a meaning to which they are not reasonably susceptible, and this is especially true where the evidence consists of a declaration of a party as to what he intended the language of the specific document to mean. [Citations.]"
[4] From these authorities it is clear that in construing a contract which purports on its face to be the complete expression of the entire agreement between the parties, courts will not add another item about which the agreement is silent.parol evidence will not be admitted to enlarge or modify that which the writing specifies. [2b] Here, the writing specifically authorized the payment of a commission to plaintiffs in the event that the property in question was sold to Kaufman *559 and Broad or Mark Kornwasser. There is nothing in the writing to suggest that it was intended to cover personnel affiliated with Kaufman and Broad. This attempt to enlarge the scope of the agreement must, under the decisions, fail.
[5] Plaintiffs' third cause of action is an attempt to recover their real estate commissions on an oral contract. The statute of frauds bars any recovery upon that cause of action. (Code Civ. Proc.,  1972, subd. 5; Civ. Code,  1624, subd. 5; Augustine v. Trucco, supra, 124 Cal.App.2d 229; Kraemer v. Smith, 179 Cal.App.2d 52 [3 Cal.Rptr. 471]; King v. Tilden Park Estates, 156 Cal.App.2d 824 [320 P.2d 109].) In Kraemer, the court stated at page 55: "A real estate broker as a professional man, is presumed to know that contracts for real estate commissions are unenforceable unless in writing. He assumes the risk of relying on oral promises and has no reason to complain if his efforts are unrewarded. [Citation.] ..."
[6] Plaintiffs seek to recover on their fourth cause of action on the theory of quantum meruit. In Ford v. Palisades Corp., 101 Cal.App.2d 491, 498 [225 P.2d 545], the court pointed out that where an agreement to pay a broker's commission is unenforceable because of the statute of frauds, he cannot recover the reasonable value of time and money laid out under the agreement. In Beazell v. Schrader, 59 Cal.2d 577, a cause of action was alleged in quantum meruit, and the court stated on page 582 [30 Cal.Rptr. 534, 381 P.2d 390]: "The complaint alleges a second cause of action in quantum meruit for the reasonable value of plaintiff's services in effecting the sale of defendant's property. This cause of action is also barred by the statute of frauds."
[7] In this connection it is appropriate to note that where one cause of action is based upon a written contract and a demurrer is sustained to such a count without leave to amend, it is proper to sustain a demurrer to a common count pleaded as an additional cause of action which is based on the same set of facts that are pleaded in the count on the written contract. (Fruns v. Albertsworth, 71 Cal.App.2d 318, 321 [162 P.2d 666].) In Jamison v. Hyde, 141 Cal. 109, the court stated at page 113 [74 P. 695]: "There being no contract of employment in writing, it is clear also that plaintiff is not entitled to recover the reasonable value of services under the second count of his complaint. This question has long been settled by the decisions of this court. ..."
The judgment is affirmed.
Herndon, Acting P. J., and Fleming, J., concurred.
"July 28, 1964"
Mr. John J. Phillips
22 Esteban Drive
Camarillo, California
Dear Mr. Phillips:
"As brokers, you and the Wm. E. Doud Company Realtors, have brought Kaufman and Broad and an individual named Mark Kornwasser into negotiations regarding Tract Nos. 1527 and 1646, as well as the approximately forty (40) acres, zoned RPD-10, lying immediately south of Tract 1646. This is to advise you that if the lots which make up Tracts 1527 and 1646 are sold to either of these buyers, the commission to be paid to you and the Wm. E. Doud Company, co-brokers, will amount to $200.00 per lot whether the lots are sold as unfinished or finished lots, at $3400.00 per lot, or the excess above $3200.00 per lot, whichever is the lesser amount."
"If the land is sold on an acreage basis rather than on a lot basis, your commission will be five (5%) per cent of the selling price."
"The commission of five per cent of the selling price will also apply to the above named forty acres zoned RPD-10."
"Very truly yours,"
/s/ Martin V. Smith
Martin V. Smith.""
NOTES
[fn. *]  *. Retired Presiding Justice of the Court of Appeal sitting under assignment by the Chairman of the Judicial Council.
[fn. 1]  1. Other counts were abandoned by plaintiffs.
[fn. 2]  2. Plaintiff John J. Phillips had previously dismissed the action as to all defendants.
[fn. 3]  3. The writing in question reads as follows:
[fn. 4]  4. This amendment was subsequent to the transaction involved in Porter, and prior to the transaction at bench.

=== CASE 2217128 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:22.137753+00 ===

92 Ill. App.2d 302 (1968)
234 N.E.2d 558
Herman R. Schloegl, Gertrude Schloegl and Karen Schloegl, a Minor, by Herman R. Schloegl, Her Father and Next Friend, Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v.
Lola Gertrude Nardi and Besse Lee Estrop, Executors of the Estate of Albert L. Perrine, Deceased, Defendants-Appellees. In the Matter of the Estate of Albert Lee Perrine, Deceased.
Gen. No. 10,897.
Illinois Appellate Court  Fourth District.
February 15, 1968.
Rehearing denied and opinion modified March 18, 1968.
*303 Joseph P. Jenkins, of Chicago, for appellants.
Foreman, Rammelkamp, Bradney & Hall, of Jacksonville (Robert E. Bradney, of counsel), for appellees.
AS MODIFIED ON DENIAL OF PETITION FOR REHEARING.
CRAVEN, J., delivered the opinion of the court.
This appeal seeks reversal of a judgment which quashed service of summons upon Lola Gertrude Nardi and Besse Lee Estrop, executors of the estate of Albert L. Perrine, deceased, and declared that estate closed. The facts are simple. The decedent, Albert Lee Perrine, prior to his death, was involved in an automobile accident on July 13, 1963, with a vehicle driven by plaintiff, Herman R. Schloegl, in which the other plaintiffs were passengers. On January 31, 1964, Albert Lee Perrine died testate of causes unrelated to the accident. An estate was opened and letters testamentary were issued to the defendants on February 5, 1964. A claim date was duly published in the "Winchester Times" on February 13, 20, and 27, 1964, setting the claim date as Monday, April 6, 1964. On June 19, 1964, a supplementary inventory was filed which listed as personal estate other than cash, goods, and chattels, the following:
"Insurance Policy #583-790, issued by Pekin Farmers Insurance, dated 7-18-62, effective to 1-18-64, *304 affording coverage for personal liability and property damage of $20,000.00 per person, $80,000.00 per occurrence plus $10,000.00 property damage and $500.00 medical payment, as well as other coverage; plus the obligation to defend Albert Lee Perrine, his heirs, executors and administrators, against liability within the policy limits, as a result of an automobile collision in which Albert Lee Perrine was involved on July 13, 1963."
Thereafter, the estate was duly administered and closed. The final report of the executors was filed November 13, 1964. On July 9, 1965, the plaintiffs herein filed a complaint alleging a tort action for each plaintiff against the decedent for injuries and damages suffered as a result of the auto accident of July 13, 1963. Plaintiff, Herman R. Schloegl, also filed a petition in the probate division of the court, which alleged that he was a bona fide creditor of the estate of Albert Lee Perrine, deceased; he had a claim for personal injuries because of the accident with decedent on July 13, 1963; that he had no notice of the opening or closing of the estate; that he was unaware of the death of Perrine; his wife and daughter also sustained injuries in the occurrence; and that the decedent was insured by an automobile liability insurance policy at the time of the occurrence. (Schloegl misnamed the insurance company involved in his petition, a fact which is of no consequence in determining this appeal.) The petition prayed that the estate be reopened and the defendants reinstated as executors. This petition was allowed without notice to the defendants or to the insurance company. Service of summons in the personal injury action was had on both defendants on July 15, 1965.
On August 12, 1965, the defendants filed a special appearance, moving to quash the service of summons and to quash any order entered in connection with both the law and the probate proceedings. On March 10, 1967, the *305 court entered orders quashing the service of summons on the defendants in both the negligence action and in the probate division. The order in the probate division also vacated its prior order which had both reopened the estate and reinstated the executors, and further, declared the estate closed.
Thereafter, plaintiff Schloegl filed motions for rehearing and for leave to file an amended petition, which were denied by the trial court. This appeal resulted.
The central issue presented by these facts is: Were the plaintiffs required to file their lawsuit for personal injuries during the original administration of the decedent's estate in order to have any judgment which they might receive in those actions satisfied out of the insurance policy which was inventoried?
This issue may be approached from two directions. First, is the time for filing of an action to recover damages because of the tortious acts of a deceased person in his lifetime limited to the period of administration of that deceased person's estate? Second, did the act of inventorying the liability insurance policy have the effect of requiring the plaintiffs to file their suits for injuries received at the hands of the decedent during the original period of administration of his estate in order to receive satisfaction of any judgments they might receive in those actions out of the proceeds of the inventoried policy?
[1-3] The question of whether the period of administration became the period of limitation for filing the action for injuries must be answered in the negative. What if Perrine had died 23 months after the accident in question  would the statute of limitations have been extended until nine months after letters of administration had issued in that case? What if letters did not issue for years? In these events, substituting the claim date in the estate for the statute of limitations would result in potential claims remaining alive as a matter of right for *306 many years beyond the period specified by the legislature. The general statute of limitations is the sole governing statute which operates as an absolute bar to the filing of the action for the personal injuries. The administration of the decedent's estate here bars the plaintiffs from collecting on any judgment that may be obtained from the property of the decedent which was inventoried and distributed. Union Trust Co. v. Shoemaker, 258 Ill. 564, 101 NE 1050 (1913). See section 204 of the Probate Act (Ill Rev Stats 1963, c 3, § 204). If the causes of action asserted in the counts of the complaint filed by the plaintiffs are ever reduced to judgment, any satisfaction of those judgments must be obtained from assets of the decedent not inventoried and properly administered. Austin v. City Bank of Milwaukee, 288 Ill. App. 36, 5 NE2d 585 (1st Dist 1937). However, the prior administration of this estate is no bar to reopening the estate so closed to assert an action for damages otherwise properly brought within the ordinary statute of limitations applicable to the cause of action sought to be asserted. 4 James, Illinois Probate Law and Practice, § 204.4. It was, therefore, error for the probate division of the circuit court of Scott County to vacate its previous order which had reopened the estate of Perrine and reappointed the executors, and since the two-year statute of limitations applicable to actions for personal injury had not expired when the lawsuit was filed and summons issued for service upon the reappointed executors, it was error to quash said summons and dismiss the personal injury action.
[4] Was the insurance policy an asset of the estate which has been administered and consequently is now no longer available to satisfy any judgment these plaintiffs might obtain? No. Section 172 of the Probate Act (Ill Rev Stats 1963, c 3, § 172) requires the administrator or executor to inventory the real or personal estate of the decedent. This policy was neither. It provided no funds *307 for distribution to heirs or legatees. It provided no funds for the payment of claims of general creditors of the estate. It was, in the language of the plaintiffs, a "unique" asset. Insofar as it provided for indemnification from harm for judgments obtained, it protected the assets of the decedent. Within its limits and insuring clause it provided a potential fund for the satisfaction of any judgment obtained by a claimant asserting a timely claim under the general statute of limitations. It was, at best, an inchoate asset of the estate of no intrinsic value which would make it subject to administration or distribution as an "asset" by the decedent's personal representative. The refund for unearned premium which the executors obtained had no effect upon any rights or obligations incurred by virtue of the existence of this insurance prior to the decedent's death.
The third-party beneficiary aspects of liability insurance contracts have been recognized by both the legislature and the courts. The legislature has provided that bankruptcy or insolvency of the insured shall not constitute a defense to the insurance carrier (Ill Rev Stats 1963, c 73, § 1000; Scott v. Freeport Motor Cas. Co., 392 Ill. 332, 64 NE2d 542 (1946)), that companies writing automobile casualty coverage shall provide certain minimum amounts of coverage, and also cover all persons using a vehicle with the express or implied permission of the named insured. (Ill Rev Stats 1963, c 95 1/2, § 7-317.)
Section 7-317(f) of the Financial Responsibility Act (Ill Rev Stats 1963, c 95 1/2, § 7-317(f)) provides, in part, that no policy shall be cancelled or annulled by any agreement between the carrier and the insured after the insured has become responsible for loss or damage.
The Supreme Court of Illinois has stated:
"... under our statutes, ... liability insurance is not merely a private matter for the sole knowledge of the carrier and the insured, but is also for the *308 benefit of persons injured by the negligent operation of insured's motor vehicle. (Citing case.)...." People ex rel. Terry v. Fisher, 12 Ill.2d 231, 238 (145 NE2d 588, 592-93 (1957)).
The effect of allowing the combined action of the executors and the insurance company to be effective in treating the policy as an asset of the estate is to allow their unilateral action to reduce the time within which the claimants were required to file a lawsuit to protect their cause of action. While not a violation of the above-cited statute, since the claims had not been liquidated and the insured's responsibility to pay the loss fixed, this action is contrary to the rights of the Schloegls as potential third-party beneficiaries under the contract of insurance whose claims were known to the insurance company as disclosed by the supplemental inventory, and is contrary to the public policy of Illinois which recognizes that insurance policies are written for the benefit of both the person insured and the persons who have claims against that insured. The time for the Schloegls to file their lawsuits for personal injuries was governed by the two-year statute of limitations. Since the insurance policy insuring the liability of Albert Lee Perrine was in effect on the day of the accident, neither the insurance company nor Perrine's executors, singly or in combination, could reduce the time for filing lawsuits to recover damages and reach the funds provided by the policy in the event of judgment by attempting to treat the policy as an ordinary personal asset of the decedent.
The concept of a liability insurance policy as a "unique" inchoate asset of the decedent's estate finds support in prior Illinois cases. In Furst v. Brady, 375 Ill. 425, 31 NE2d 606, 133 ALR 558 (1941), the existence of such a policy, issued by a company licensed to do business in Illinois, which insured a nonresident who had been involved in an auto accident in Illinois and subsequently *309 died with no other assets in Illinois, was held to be sufficient to support the appointment of an administrator in Illinois for the nonresident in order to allow an injured party to assert an injury action against the decedent here in Illinois. That decision was not based upon the concept that the insurance policy was property of the decedent subject to ordinary administration, but was bottomed on the concept that the insuring clause provided the personal representative with a chose in action with a situs in Illinois which would ripen against the insurance company in the event of judgment against the administrator in the underlying personal injury action.
In the Matter of Estate of Lawson, 18 Ill. App.2d 586, 153 NE2d 87 (3rd Dist 1958), reached the same result as Furst v. Brady, 375 Ill. 425, 31 NE2d 606, 133 ALR 558 (1941), even though the insurance company covering the nonresident's alleged liability was not licensed to do business in Illinois. The company in that case had appointed the Secretary of State of the State of Illinois as its agent to accept service of process upon it. This act was the only act connecting the issued policy to an Illinois situs.
We are not concerned, in the instant case, with the troublesome concept of whether the decedent had a sufficient connection with this state to justify appointing an administrator for him. In his lifetime, he was an Illinois resident with Illinois property, a fact which we have already held justified the reopening of his estate, even absent insurance, to furnish a legal representative against or through whom the alleged rights of the plaintiffs can be determined. Furst v. Brady, 375 Ill. 425, 31 NE2d 606, 133 ALR 558 (1941); In the Matter of Estate of Lawson, 18 Ill. App.2d 586, 153 NE2d 87 (3rd Dist 1958).
In the Matter of Estate of Palmer, 41 Ill. App.2d 234, 190 NE2d 500 (3rd Dist 1963), held that a closed estate must be reopened, upon application of a tort-claimant, to *310 allow such claimant to assert a cause of action for personal injuries and property damage where the decedent's liability was allegedly covered by insurance. In that case, the policy was not inventoried during administration and the trial court was instructed to determine whether the estate should be reopened upon the ground that the policy was an "after discovered" asset which had not been inventoried, or if the cause of action to the extent of insurance constituted a settled portion of the decedent's estate. To the extent that this case appears to indicate that the inventorying of an insurance policy during the course of administration of a decedent's estate could have the effect of barring a personal injury action not brought during the course of such administration, we decline to follow it.
The order of the circuit court of the Seventh Judicial Circuit, Scott County, quashing service of summons on the defendants, is reversed. The order vacating the order of said court which reopened the estate of Albert Lee Perrine, deceased, and reappointed the defendants as executors is reversed, and these causes are remanded to that court for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
Reversed and remanded with directions.
SMITH, P.J. and TRAPP, J., concur.

=== CASE 9738653 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:59:55.553975+00 ===

FOX, J.*
Plaintiff was granted an interlocutory decree of divorce and was given custody of the minor child of the parties. She was awarded $1,000 per month alimony and $150 per month for support of the child. Plaintiff also received all of the community property.
Being dissatisfied with the financial aspects of the judgment, plaintiff has appealed.
*617The parties were married in November 1950 and separated in October 1963. A daughter was born in April 1955. The interlocutory decree was rendered in February 1965,1 on the ground of extreme cruelty.
Defendant is a man of considerable wealth, largely acquired by gift and inheritance. During the period of this marriage defendant does not appear to have had any sustained employment or to have been engaged in any regular business. He appears to be a great devotee of golf and to have spent a large portion of his time in the pursuit of that sport.
Plaintiff complains that the award of $1,000 per month alimony is wholly inadequate. This, of course, is a matter that is committed to the sound discretion of the trial judge, and will not be disturbed on appeal, absent a showing of an abuse of discretion, and there is no such showing here. But, argues plaintiff, the court should have considered defendant’s adultery in fixing her alimony award, and its failure to take this factor into account was error and prevented her from getting the benefit of a penalty that should have been imposed on defendant because of his social misconduct. That is to say, the more serious the husband’s misconduct the greater the alimony award to the wife should be. There is no merit in this theory insofar as the award of alimony is concerned. This is made clear in Whitney v. Whitney, 164 Cal.App.2d 577 [330 P.2d 947] (hear. den.). At page 580 the court stated: “Appellant’s argument starts with the premise that ‘one aspect of alimony is that it is a penalty.’ She contends that here the penalty is not in due proportion to the degree of cruelty which, she asserts, respondent committed.
“A mere reading of the applicable statute demonstrates the fallacy of her premise. ‘In any interlocutory . . . decree . . . the court may compel the party against whom the decree ... is granted to make such suitable allowance for support and maintenance of the other party for his or her life, or for such shorter period as the court may deem just, having regard for the circumstances of the respective parties. . . .’ (Civ. Code, § 139.) This does not speak of punishment of the guilty party measured by the degree of guilt. It speaks only of legal consequences which flow from conduct which causes dissolution of the marriage. In such a case the law imposes a duty to compensate the opposite party. This compensation *618does not take the form of exemplary or punitive damages. Instead, the trial court in its exercise of sound discretion is to grant a ‘suitable allowance for the support’ of the other party, for life or a shorter period ‘ as the court may deem just, having regard for the circumstances of the respective parties. ’ “Appellant cites cases in which the word ‘penalty’ was used when referring to the duty imposed by this statute. But it does not appear that the courts in those eases measured the duty in terms of the degree of the so-called offense. We think, therefore, that they used the word ‘penalty’ as if it meant no more than the expression ‘legal consequence. ’ It is more accurate to say, as the Supreme Court said in Hall v. Superior Court, 45 Cal.2d 377, 384 [289 P.2d 431] : ‘In theory, alimony is considered to be compensation to the injured spouse for the loss resulting from the other’s breach of the obligations of the marital relationship. [Citation.] ...”
The trial court found that the only community property consisted of the home in Beverly Hills and the furniture and furnishings therein. This property was awarded to plaintiff. The court was authorized to award all of the community property to plaintiff since the decree was granted on the ground of extreme cruelty under the provisions of section 146, subdivision (a), of the .Civil Code.
Plaintiff argues, however, that the court erred in failing to find that she had a community interest in certain other property. She first mentions an executor’s fee of between $10,000 and $11,000 which she claims that her husband had received as executor of his father’s estate. The record, however, discloses that the estate had not been closed and no final accounting had been submitted to the probate court, and defendant had not received and could not legally receive the fee as an executor. This point is emphasized in Estate of Heck, 160 Cal.App.2d 162 [324 P.2d 733]. At page 166 the court stated: “. . . it is said that the amount to be allowed an attorney as compensation for ordinary probate proceedings cannot be ascertained until the amount of the estate accounted for in the administration is known, and unless the whole amount of the compensation can be ascertained, it is impossible to arrive at the proportionate amount to be allowed for a part of such services; that it is settled that an executor or administrator is not entitled to the commissions allowed by law until the settlement of his final account, and that the same rule is applicable to the allowance of attorney’s fees.” Plaintiff argues that such executor’s fee should have been *619treated as community property as to that portion thereof which represented compensation for services defendant performed during the marriage. The difficulty with accepting this argument is two-fold. First, as is stated in Estate of Heck, supra, it is impossible to arrive at a proportionate amount to be allowed for an executor’s services and second, plaintiff fails to direct the court’s attention to any evidence in the record upon which the court could have made such an allocation. Under these circumstances, the executor’s fee, no portion of which was due or owing at the time of trial, was a mere expectancy, not subject to division as community property. (See French v. French, 17 Cal.2d 775, 778 [112 P.2d 235, 134 A.L.R.366].)
Plaintiff also argues that certain motel properties and a restaurant, which were the separate property of defendant, had increased in value and that a portion of this increase was the result of defendant’s community effort and was therefore community property. There is a conflict in the evidence as to whether these properties had, in fact, increased in value. Defendant’s witness, Mr. Swoboda, testified to the effect that there had been no particular increase in the market value of these properties.  Plaintiff, however, vainly attacks Mr. Swoboda’s qualifications to testify as an expert in the evaluation of such properties. Mr. Swoboda sold two of the motels involved here as a broker and had seen the third. He had been a motel broker exclusively for the past 10 years. In the three years preceding the trial he had sold, as a broker, motels having a sales price of $6,000,000. In light of Mr. Swoboda’s extensive, activity in the sale of motels, it would seem that the trial court did not abuse its discretion in permitting Mm to testify as an expert as to the value of the motel properties.
In arguing that there was an increase in the value of the motels and the restaurant, plaintiff is, in effect, asking this court to reweigh the testimony on this point. We, of course, cannot do that.  Furthermore, the evidence justifies the inference that defendant devoted his time almost exclusively to golf, and that he visited these properties only on infrequent occasions. The trial court could therefore reasonably conclude that defendant “expended only minimal effort’’ (Estate of Neilson, 57 Cal.2d 733, 740 [22 Cal.Rptr. 1. 371 P.2d 745]) in connection with these ventures. (See. also. Weinberg v. Weinberg, 67 Cal.2d 557, 566-568 [63 Cal.Rptr. 13, 432 P.2d 709].) Also, plaintiff offered no admissible evidence to establish any value for defendant’s asserted services. There is *620ample support for the trial court’s determination that there was no community interest in these properties.
Plaintiff vainly argues that defendant’s separate property was changed to community property by oral agreement on the theory that her testimony of such an agreement was not controverted.
In Tidlund v. Seven Up Bottling Co., 154 Cal.App.2d 663, this court pointed out (pp. 666-667 [316 P.2d 656]) : . . It is elementary that the jury, in passing upon the credibility of a witness, is entitled to consider his interest in the result of the case, his motive, and the manner in which he testifies [citations], and the jury may disbelieve the testimony of the witness even though it is uneontradieted if there is any rational ground for doing so. [Citations.] . . .’’In Hicks v. Reis, 21 Cal.2d 654, the court stated (pp. 659-660 [134 P.2d 788]) : “. . .in passing on credibility, the trier of the facts is entitled to take into consideration the interest of the witness in the result of the case. [Citations.] Provided the trier of the facts does not act arbitrarily, he may reject in toto the testimony of a witness, even though the witness is uneontradieted. [Citations.] ...” Plaintiff was obviously interested in establishing a community interest in defendant’s separate property. The court was entitled to take this into consideration in passing on her credibility and to “reject in tota” her testimony as to such an oral agreement even if her testimony was1 ‘ uneontradieted. ’ ’
Plaintiff argues that the trial court’s award for attorneys’ fees was so inadequate as to constitute an abuse of discretion. We cannot agree. At the conclusion of the trial, the court rendered an oral opinion disposing of the various matters that were involved, including the amount of fees that might properly be awarded plaintiff’s counsel. It is quite apparent that the court recognized its duty and responsibility to award proper fees for the professional services that were reasonably necessary in this ease. He was, however, critical of the waste of time in the trial of the ease and in the rendition of services that did not appear to be either necessary or justified. In arriving at a fee, the court stated, inter dim: “. . . I have gone through patiently and with some care all of the proceedings before me and tried to fix a fair fee for each necessary step. . . .
- “ I have assigned to the different tasks what I believe to be a fair rate of charge. I certainly am not adopting any $125 an hour for any time expended in a divorce case of this sort. It'is *621not a case that in my view demands any type of service that could not be rendered by an experienced and energetic lawyer whose charges are far less than indicated.
“In doing this I have also held it necessary to determine how much of this court’s time has been fruitfully occupied.”
An examination of the record supports the trial judge’s appraisal of the case and his observations with respect to the trial.
The trial court awarded plaintiff’s counsel a fee of $11,000. In light of the total circumstances, this court cannot say that such a fee was not reasonable. Certainly, there was no abuse of discretion on the part of the trial court in fixing the fee at this amount.
Plaintiff also argues that the court committed an abuse of discretion in the award of costs. Prior to the trial, the court appointed an accountant to go over the financial affairs of the parties and to make a report to the court, the expense thereof to be paid by the defendant. The accountant made such a report which the court thought was 1 ‘ quite helpful. ’ ’ A fee of $3,500 was awarded for the accountant’s services. Plaintiff’s attorneys incurred more than $7,000 in additional costs. Over $1,000 of this amount was incurred for investigative services. The court analyzed the items with respect to expenses other than investigative charges and came to the conclusion that $1,991.21 was “ample to cover those expenses.” The court rounded off this item at $2,000. The court only allowed $1,000 on account of investigative services. It thus appears that the court allowed $3,000 for expenses and investigators’ fees. No question appears to be raised as to the allowance of $2,000 for expenses. Plaintiff’s complaint therefore centers on the failure of the court to allow the additional investigative expense. We find no basis for holding that the court abused its discretion in fixing the costs and expenses at $3,000.
We come now to the propriety of the order awarding $150 per month for the support of Terry who was approximately 10 years of age at the time of the trial. The record reveals that she is the beneficiary of a trust set up by her grandfather which produces an annual income of some $2,200. Terry is also the beneficiary of another trust set up by an aunt that produces approximately $500 of income annually.
The trial court took the position that Terry’s trust fund income might properly be taken into account in determining the child’s needs and therefore the amount defendant should be required to pay for her support, maintenance and educa*622tion. The position of the trial judge was made clear in his oral decision immediately following the submission of the ease. He stated: “As I conceive the law to be, despite the fact that Terry has a very comfortable income by reason of gifts and the trust of her grandfather, that does not erase the obligation of both of her parents to support her. I do believe that I may consider her circumstances and her prospective circumstances in fixing the amount which Mr. Lakenan should pay and in doing so having in mind the provision made by her grandfather for her private schooling which seems to be enjoyed now.
“It seems to me that an award of $150.00 a month on account of the support of Terry is proper. ...”
In order to clarify the use that might be made of the income from the trust created by Terry’s grandfather, paragraph X of that instrument was read into the record. It empowers the trustee: “To distribute or expand [sic] all or any part of the accumulated income or the trust principal to or for the benefit of the Beneficiary whenever the Trust [sic] in his sole and absolute discretion shall determine that such distribution or expenditure is necessary for the proper education, support or maintenance of the Beneficiary and in any such event the Trustee shall be fully protected by the receipt of the Beneficiary or his [sic] guardian, or of the parent receiving and expending such funds for the benefit of said Beneficiary, or of the persons conserving such benefit. ’ ’
Terry has been attending a private school. Her father testified that it had been his practice since the establishment of the trust to pay Terry’s tuition at the private school from this fund and also to pay for certain uniforms and certain lessons that she required and other miscellaneous items of expense in connection with her school attendance.
It is thus apparent (1) that the trust document authorizes the use of the trust funds for Terry’s education, and (2) that such funds have been used consistently for that purpose. It therefore appears that the court exercised a reasonable discretion in treating this trust fund as a part of the pattern of Terry’s educational development, and therefore properly to be talien into account in determining the additional amount defendant should be required to pay for her support and maintenance.
In seeking a reversal on this point plaintiff concedes: “We know of no case which expressly holds that in the context of a divorce proceeding, the child’s separate income does not *623reduce the amount of support the father would otherwise be required to pay.” Nonetheless, the subject is not without precedent.  The general rule seems to be that if a trust is created for the specific purpose of the education, support, and maintenance of a child, at least the income of such a trust may be so expended without regard to the parents’ ability to provide support and maintenance. (Cleveland Clinic Foundation v. Humphrys (6th Cir. 1938) 97 F.2d 849 [121 A.L.R. 163,175]. See Annotation, 121 A.L.R. 197-198.)
The judgment is affirmed.
Fleming, J., concurred.
Retired Presiding Justice of the Court of Appeal sitting under assignment by the Chairman of the Judicial Council.
The trial consumed some 24 days. The clerk’s transcript consisted of 2,331 pages, and there are more than 100 exhibits.

=== CASE 2217152 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:22.404971+00 ===

297 N.W.2d 375 (1980)
Larry FRANCKSEN, Appellee,
v.
Ernest Dean MILLER, Appellant.
No. 63542.
Supreme Court of Iowa.
October 15, 1980.
*376 Bruce G. Thomas, Sioux City, for appellant.
Joe Cosgrove of Yaneff & Cosgrove, Sioux City, for appellee.
Considered by UHLENHOPP, P. J., and HARRIS, McCORMICK, LARSON and SCHULTZ, JJ.
McCORMICK, Justice.
This appeal concerns the effect of one spouse's homestead rights on a forcible entry and detainer action brought against the other spouse. Plaintiff Larry Francksen purchased a 100-acre Plymouth County farm owned by defendant Ernest Dean Miller at a sheriff's sale executing a foreclosure judgment. Plaintiff brought the present forcible entry and detainer action against defendant in an effort to obtain possession of the land. Defendant contended the foreclosure judgment and sheriff's deed were void because the premises included his homestead and his wife was not a party to the foreclosure proceedings. The trial court rejected this contention and entered judgment of possession. Because we believe defendant's wife was an indispensable party in plaintiff's action for possession of the homestead portion of the premises, we affirm plaintiff's judgment as to the rest of the land, reverse as to the homestead, and remand.
The court files in the foreclosure action and a subsequent action by defendant to enjoin delivery of the sheriff's deed were made part of the record in the present case by agreement of the parties. The record in the foreclosure action shows title to the farmland was in defendant's name alone. The foreclosure action was initiated against him by a mechanic's lienholder. Defendant did not assert homestead rights in defending the action. The trial court held that the lien was established and ordered it foreclosed, subject to senior liens.
Defendant filed notice of appeal from the foreclosure judgment, but the judgment creditor commenced execution proceedings. When defendant received notice of sheriff's sale, he platted and filed a designation of homestead with the recorder. The sheriff's sale was held and plaintiff purchased the land. Defendant dismissed his appeal to this court. He then filed an application in the foreclosure suit to set aside the sheriff's sale. After a hearing, the application was denied. The trial court held that defendant had waived his homestead claim by failing to assert it as a defense in the foreclosure action. The court subsequently overruled defendant's "motion for new trial" of his application.
Two months later, defendant filed an action against plaintiff and the sheriff seeking an injunction to prevent issuance of the sheriff's deed and to prohibit plaintiff from taking possession. Plaintiff obtained a summary judgment against the defendant in that action based on the prior adjudication. Defendant attempted an appeal which was dismissed as interlocutory because the action was still pending as to the sheriff.
Next in the sequence of events was plaintiff's present forcible entry and detainer action. In addition to the files from the prior litigation, the record includes a stipulation of the parties that defendant resides with his wife Jane Miller on the 40-acre portion of the premises designated by him *377 as his homestead. Jane has not been a party in any of the lawsuits.
In appealing from the judgment of possession in this case, defendant renews his trial court contention that the failure to join his wife in the foreclosure action makes the foreclosure judgment and sheriff's sale void. We do not agree. Rather, we agree with the trial court that those proceedings were valid against defendant. We hold, however, that the failure to join defendant's wife in the foreclosure suit makes her an indispensable party in the present action.
I. Defendant's homestead defense. Defendant acknowledges that Dodd v. Scott, 81 Iowa 319, 46 N.W. 1057 (1890), is authority against his position concerning the validity of the foreclosure judgment and sheriff's deed. We believe it is dispositive. In Dodd the plaintiff brought a forcible entry action against a judgment debtor on the strength of a sheriff's deed obtained in a foreclosure sale. The defendant asserted the property was his homestead and he could not be removed because his wife had not been a party in the foreclosure suit. The court held that his homestead claim was a personal defense which he had waived by failing to urge it in the foreclosure action:
Being a party to the foreclosure suit, if he had a homestead right available to him as a defense therein, he must interpose it, or the right is lost. Now the wife was not a party to that proceeding, and any rights he had available to him because of the wife's homestead right (if there could be any) was just as available for defense in that suit as in this, and just as available then as any other right he had. We must assume, then, that all rights personal to the defendant have been adjudicated or waived, and that under the claim of the demurrer, because of the wife not being a party to the suit, no claims based on her homestead rights are available as a defense.
81 Iowa at 320-21, 46 N.W. at 1058. See Hemenway v. Wood, 53 Iowa 21, 3 N.W. 794 (1879); Collins v. Chantland, 48 Iowa 241 (1878).
The record of the foreclosure suit shows defendant did not assert his homestead claim until after the sheriff's sale. The trial court held the claim was untimely and refused to set the sale aside. No appeal was taken from that adjudication. Therefore, under Dodd, defendant is precluded from raising a homestead defense in the present action, whether grounded on his own right or derived from his wife's right. This is based on the principle of res judicata. See B & B Asphalt Co. v. T. S. McShane Co., 242 N.W.2d 279, 286 (Iowa 1976).
We hold that the failure to join defendant's wife in the foreclosure action did not void the foreclosure judgment or sheriff's deed. Rather, the judgment and deed are valid against defendant's present assertion of homestead rights. He had his opportunity for a day in court on that defense and it is unavailable to him now.
II. Defendant's wife's homestead rights. We must nevertheless recognize that the judgment of possession assumes either that Jane Miller's homestead rights were adjudicated with her husband's or that his homestead rights are severable from hers. However, neither assumption is warranted. The record shows she was not a party to any of the litigation, and her homestead rights have not been adjudicated. Nor are defendant's homestead rights severable from those of his wife. This court has long held that one spouse cannot be divested of homestead rights by judicial proceedings in which only the other spouse is a party. See Larson v. Reynolds & Parkard, 13 Iowa 579, 587 (1862) ("[W]hile the decree would be good, as against the husband, it would not as to her.").
The early case of Chase v. Abbott, 20 Iowa 154 (1866), is instructive. Chase borrowed money from Abbott, giving a note secured by a deed for certain real estate as security. Abbott executed a bond to assure his reconveyance upon payment of the note. Chase was single at the time of this transaction. He later married and lived on the real estate as a homestead. Abbott *378 brought an action on the note against Chase, obtained a judgment, ordered execution against the real estate, and purchased the premises at sheriff's sale. Later Abbott brought a separate action for recovery of the real estate against Chase and obtained a judgment based only on the deed executed to secure the note. Chase then sued to enjoin execution of the second judgment, asserting in part that the property was the homestead of himself and his wife. The trial court granted the injunction, and this court affirmed. In affirming, however, the court gave Abbott leave to institute foreclosure proceedings against Chase and his wife as if execution and sale on the first judgment had not occurred.
The court said:
The right of the wife in the homestead, being, as before stated, a vested right, she cannot be fully and completely barred or divested of that right by judicial proceedings, except upon making her a party thereto.... It would, therefore, be the safer practice, in all controversies affecting the homestead, to make her a party, and generally she should be a party.
Id. at 160. Even though Abbott could seek to enjoin the sale of the homestead without joining his wife, the court held that a judgment against him in that action "would not conclude the wife." Id.
By analogy, the proceedings which antedated the present action have not adjudicated the homestead rights of defendant's wife. As in Chase the foreclosure decree and sheriff's deed are valid against the husband but do not entitle plaintiff to possession of the homestead because they do not conclude his wife's rights.
The severability issue was settled in Merchants Mutual Bonding Co. v. Underberg, 291 N.W.2d 19, 21 (Iowa 1980). In that case we said:
There can be no splitting of homestead rights. The very nature of the doctrine makes such a result intolerable. It is just as destructive of family security to lose half a homestead as all of it. Therefore if Elizabeth's interest is not subject to execution, neither is Irwin's.
......
... A creditor who seeks to satisfy his debt out of a homestead must be certain he has a right against the whole property, not just part of it.
Plaintiff has not established his right against both parties in the present case. His right to possession is subject to Jane Miller's homestead rights. In accordance with the holding in Chase, her rights cannot be adjudicated unless she is made a party to the action.
At this stage of the proceedings, defendant's wife is an indispensable party. Applicable principles are discussed in Ditch v. Hess, 212 N.W.2d 442, 447-50 (Iowa 1973). Under Iowa R.Civ.P. 25(b), a party is indispensable "if his interest is not severable, and his absence will prevent the court from rendering any judgment between the parties before it; ...." When an indispensable party is not before the court, "it shall order him brought in." Rule 25(c).
Because homestead rights are indivisible, Jane's interests cannot be severed from those of defendant. It was wrong for the court to enter a judgment for possession of the homestead when she was not a party to the suit. See Cleaver v. Bigelow, 61 Mich. 47, 53, 27 N.W. 851, 852 (1886) ("Under these circumstances, we think the wife was a necessary party in the case, and should have been made a defendant with her husband."). The present case is distinguishable from Van Emmerick v. Vuille, 249 Iowa 911, 88 N.W.2d 47 (1958), a forcible entry case in which the wife of the defendant was held not to be an indispensable party. That case concerned a leasehold, and no homestead rights were involved.
We do not intimate any view of the merits of plaintiff's claim that the homestead exemption is unavailable to either of the Millers because the debt on which the foreclosure judgment was based was "incurred for work done or material furnished exclusively for the homestead" as provided in section 561.21(3), The Code. Although the parties in the original foreclosure action stipulated that most of the work was done *379 on the 40-acre homestead, the issue under section 561.21(3) was not reached in the prior litigation. We therefore have no occasion to decide whether the rights of either plaintiff or Jane Miller, who were not parties in the foreclosure action, would be affected if the issue had been reached. The section 561.21(3) issue and any other relevant issue concerning Jane Miller's homestead rights can be adjudicated after she is made a party.
We affirm the judgment for possession as to the 60 acres exclusive of the homestead. We reverse the judgment as to the 40-acre homestead and remand the case. Upon remand, plaintiff has leave to join Jane Miller as a party defendant.
AFFIRMED IN PART, REVERSED IN PART, AND REMANDED.

=== CASE 2217156 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:22.446862+00 ===

297 N.W.2d 320 (1980)
HOSPITAL SERVICES, INC., a corporation, Plaintiff and Appellant,
v.
Albert J. DUMAS, Jr., and County of Ramsey, State of North Dakota, Defendants and Appellees.
Civ. No. 9776.
Supreme Court of North Dakota.
October 6, 1980.
Pearson & Christensen, Grand Forks, for plaintiff and appellant; argued by Douglas A. Christensen, Grand Forks.
Duane Schurman, Walhalla, for Albert J. Dumas, Jr.
Lewis C. Jorgenson, State's Atty., Devils Lake, for County of Ramsey (no appearance on oral argument).
PEDERSON, Justice.
This is an appeal from a district court dismissal[1] of appellant Hospital Services' *321 suit against Albert Dumas and Ramsey County for recovery of $729.40 for services furnished Dumas by the North Dakota State Hospital. We reverse and direct entry of judgment against Ramsey County.
There is no material dispute as to the facts. In the early morning of November 19, 1975, Dumas was arrested and jailed for disorderly conduct. He appeared quite intoxicated. Later that same morning he was ordered to appear in the Ramsey County Court of Increased Jurisdiction. Claiming paralysis of his lower extremities, Dumas was unable to leave his cell. A physician examined Dumas and expressed the opinion that his condition was not serious. The judge of the county court, being unwilling to have Dumas carried into the courtroom, remanded Dumas to the custody of the Ramsey County sheriff and drafted an order committing him to the State Hospital in Jamestown.
The record is bare of any evidence, medical or otherwise, that Dumas's mental state left him unable to appear in his own defense. The committal order recites that Dumas's commitment was for treatment of alcoholism. In custody of the Ramsey County sheriff, Dumas arrived at the State Hospital on November 20 and was not allowed to leave until December 10. During that period he received services and supplies worth $729.40. Upon completion of treatment, Dumas was remanded to the custody of the Ramsey County sheriff and returned to Devils Lake.
The disorderly conduct charge was dismissed. On October 27, 1976, the State Hospital assigned the claim against Dumas of $729.40 to appellant Hospital Services, Inc.
A patient of the State Hospital is ordinarily responsible for the cost of treatment received. Section 25-09-02, NDCC, provides that the Hospital "shall recover monthly from the patient, if possible, or from the person who has been a patient in such institution after he has been discharged from the institution, expenses for care and treatment." No distinction is made between those who are patients voluntarily and those who are not. And there is authority for the proposition that a patient or his estate may, without offending constitutional safeguards, be charged for expenses arising from commitments to a health care facility. 20 A.L.R.3d 363.
Dumas is thus technically liable under the statute. The assignment of the claim by the State Hospital to Hospital Services is lawful, § 25-09-07(2), NDCC, and does not alter the obligation, which can be reduced to a judgment against the patient. Hospital Services, Inc. v. Brackey, 283 N.W.2d 174, 177 (N.D. 1979).
We conclude that Dumas's liability under the statute is, in this case, precluded by the fact that he was a prisoner in the custody of the Ramsey County sheriff. Chapter 12-44, NDCC, in force at the time of Dumas's commitment, when read together with the jail rules promulgated by the District Court for Ramsey County, requires that expenses for medical care furnished to Dumas be paid by the County.
Section 12-44-04, NDCC, states that the district courts "shall prescribe, in writing, rules for the regulation and government of the jail in the several counties within their respective districts, upon the following subjects:... 5. The employment of medical and surgical aid when necessary." Section 12-44-16 obligates counties to supply prisoners with "nursing when required ... and all necessaries for the comfort and welfare of the prisoners, as the judge of the district court shall designate by his rules." This statutory scheme plainly intends that within certain broad limits the district court has authority to define the terms upon which prisoners will receive medical care.
The rules adopted by the District Court for Ramsey County, of which we take judicial notice, establish that:
*322 "The Jailer shall see that any prisoner requiring medical attention receives the same promptly. Cost of same shall be paid by the governmental agency committing such prisoner and reimbursement sought from the prisoner." Rule 9, Jail Rules in and for the Second Judicial District, State of North Dakota. [Emphasis supplied.]
Clearly, Ramsey County is responsible for providing medical services to its prisoners and must, as the committing agency, pay for Dumas's expenses.
That Dumas's expenses were incurred at a state institution is of little consequence. The State Hospital is under a statutory duty to recover expenses from its patients. Thus its operation, insofar as it bills patients for services, is similar to any ordinary private facility. Counsel for Ramsey County asserts that the County should be spared liability simply because it would involve one governmental agency paying another for its services. Why this is improper is not made clear and no authority is cited. The County contends that had the Legislature intended agencies of government to reimburse the State Hospital for services it would have expressly said so. This argument, of course, works both ways, i. e., that by providing no exceptions in its directive that the Hospital recover expenses, the Legislature intended payment from government agencies as well as others that may be liable. Ramsey County's argument is not convincing.
Ramsey County's liability depends on whether or not it had custody of Dumas. The obligation exists only if the person receiving care is in custody as a prisoner. It was not, and cannot be reasonably denied, that Dumas was in "custody" from the time of his arrest until after his hospitalization and return to Ramsey County. See Chapter 29-08, NDCC; Rule 46, North Dakota Rules of Criminal Procedure. The fact that Dumas was under arrest and in custody upon arriving at the hospital is probably sufficient alone to make Ramsey County liable. See Mt. Carmel Med. Center v. Bd. of Cty. Com'rs, 1 Kan.App.2d 374, 566 P.2d 384, 388 (1977). In addition, however, Dumas's stay at the hospital was pursuant to an involuntary commitment and was ended by his return to the Ramsey County sheriff. It is clear that custody was continuous and effective even if not formal. See Mercy Medical Center, Inc. v. Douglas Cty., 28 Or.App. 557, 559 P.2d 1286, 1287 (1977).
Finally, we note under Jail Rule 9, above, that Dumas may be responsible for reimbursing Ramsey County whatever it pays for his medical expenses. That question is not before us. In any event, this does not relieve Ramsey County of the obligation.
Dumas has made constitutional objections to the commitment procedure itself. The order pursuant to which Dumas was committed states that the court's authority derives from § 12.1-32-02(1)(g), NDCC. However, this provision is for post-conviction commitment only, and the judge issuing the order testified at trial that his intent was to commit Dumas under § 12.1-04-06, NDCC. This statute authorizes a pretrial judicial commitment where the defendant's mental condition may constitute a defense or issue in the case, or where such condition so disables the defendant that he cannot reasonably proceed. Because the judge had authority to make a lawful commitment, we will not find his act invalid simply because of a mistaken citation. In light of our decision that Ramsey County must pay Dumas's expenses, we need not confront those issues.
The judgment of the district court is reversed and, upon remand, we direct the entry of judgment for Hospital Services, Inc., against Ramsey County.
ERICKSTAD, C. J., and PAULSON, SAND and VANDE WALLE, JJ., concur.
NOTES
[1]  The notice of appeal recites that the appeal is from a memorandum opinion, from which no appeal is permitted. Chas. F. Ellis Agency, Inc. v. Berg, 214 N.W.2d 507 (N.D. 1974). In this case the memorandum opinion contained an order of dismissal, from which an appeal is permitted. United Plainsmen Assn. v. North Dakota State Water Conservation Commission, 247 N.W.2d 457 (N.D. 1976).

=== CASE 9738655 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:59:59.162213+00 ===

Buckley, District Judge.
This action arises from a 1966 contract for the sale of certain real estate in Merrick County, Nebraska, by Irene Lovelace and her husband, Clifford Lovelace, to Irene’s nephew, Raymond T. Stern. The written contract provided for a total purchase price of $48,000 payable by annual payments of $4,000 until paid.
Stern made 12 annual $4,000 payments and contended that he had paid the purchase price in full. He refused to make further payments. The Lovelaces contended that interest accrued on the unpaid balance of the purchase price and that, therefore, the purchase price was not fully paid, and proceeded to bring this action to regain possession and title to the property or, in the alternative, for a judgment for the unpaid balance of the purchase price. Defendant Stern counterclaimed for title to be quieted in his name.
The sole question presented is whether the written contract, required interest to be paid on the unpaid balance of the purchase price. The trial court found for the plaintiffs, entered judgment for the amount of the unpaid purchase price, namely, $27,833.71, and dismissed defendant’s counterclaim.
The agreement in question was executed on January *1764, 1966. However, the same parties only months before, namely on September 14, 1965, had executed an agreement for the sale of the same property, utilizing a preprinted form entitled “Agreement for Warranty Deed.” This agreement did not specify a total purchase price but provided that “The second parties [Stern] shall pay to the first parties [Lovelace], the sum of $4,000.00 per year during the life of Irene Johnson Lovelace. Second parties will pay the sum of $2,000.00 January 1, 1966 and $2,000.00 July 1, 1966 and $4,000.00 on January 1, 1967 and each January 1st thereafter during the lifetime of the said Irene Johnson Lovelace.”
The new agreement, the one in question, utilized the same preprinted form as the earlier one. After the usual recitation as to the parties and a typed-in description of the premises being sold, the agreement then recited (typing indicated by italics): “And the said party of the second part covenants and agrees to pay to said party of the first part, the sum of Forty Eight Thousand Dollars ($1+8,000.00) DOLLARS in the manner following: Two Thousand Dollars (2,000.00 Dollars, cash in hand paid, the receipt whereof is hereby acknowledged, and the balance $2,000.00 July 1, 1966, $1+,000.00, January 1, 1967 and each January 1st thereafter until paid.” Then, continuing in the large blank space provided for payment provisions, there is typed: “First parties agree to pay the first half of the 1965 real estate taxes and second party shall pay the second half and all future real estate taxes.”
Following this provision, and considerably below it, the preprinted form resumed as follows: “with interest at the rate of_per cent per annum, payable _ annually on 'the whole sum remaining from time to time unpaid, and to pay all taxes, assessments or impositions that may be legally levied or imposed upon said land, subsequent to the year__”
The agreement provided that, when the purchase price was paid, the plaintiffs would convey the property by warranty deed to the defendant. However, for *177reasons unknown, such a warranty deed was executed, delivered, and recorded on January 4, 1966, simultaneously with the execution of the agreement to sell. The deed did not mention the agreement to sell and recited a consideration of $48,000, “in hand paid.”
The interest clause in the contract did not provide for any specific rate of interest to be paid. It is true, as plaintiffs contend, that as a general rule, a written instrument which provides for payment of interest on an unpaid balance, but without specifying the rate, carries interest at the legal rate prescribed by law. See, Hornstein v. Cifuno, 86 Neb. 103, 125 N.W. 136 (1910); Praest v. Quesner, 113 Neb. 485, 203 N.W. 549 (1925); Bank v. Roberts, 168 N.C. 473, 84 S.E. 706 (1915). In each of these cases, it was clear from the terms of the instrument that interest was to be paid but the specific rate of interest was omitted. However, where the terms of the agreement do not clearly indicate that interest is to be paid, then parol evidence may be considered to first determine, as a finding of fact, whether the parties intended that interest be paid, before the general rule would apply.
A written instrument is open to explanation by parol evidence when its terms are susceptible to two constructions, or where the language employed is vague or ambiguous. Olds v. Jamison, 195 Neb. 388, 238 N.W.2d 459 (1976). A provision of a contract is ambiguous when, considered with other pertinent provisions as a whole, it is capable of being understood in more senses than one. Frank McGill, Inc. v. Nucor Corp., 195 Neb. 448, 238 N.W.2d 894 (1976).
Examining the agreement in question, we see that the preprinted form that was used obviously was designed to provide a blank space for the insertion of the payment provisions for the balance of the total purchase price, to be followed immediately thereafter with a designated rate of interest. The blank space was not designed to include the provisions for the payment of taxes inserted by the parties inasmuch as there is *178already a preprinted provision for the payment of taxes by the purchaser. The inserted tax provision is in conflict with the preprinted tax provision, and its position in the agreement, namely, between the payment provisions and the preprinted interest clause, makes it unclear whether the interest clause would pertain to the unpaid balance of the purchase price, or any unpaid taxes, or both. We, therefore, conclude that the provisions involved and their relative positions in the agreement are vague, and as such, are capable of being understood in more senses than one and are susceptible to more than one construction. The contract is ambiguous and parol evidence was properly admitted by the trial court and should be considered by this court.
This action was instituted as an equity action and prayed for equitable relief, as did also the counterclaim. “Actions in equity, on appeal to this court, are triable de novo in conformity with section 25-1925, R. S. 1943, subject, however, to the condition that when the evidence on material questions of fact is in irreconcilable conflict this court will, in determining the weight of the evidence, consider the fact that the trial court observed the witnesses and their manner of testifying and must have accepted one version of the facts rather than the opposite.” Sopcich v. Tangeman, 153 Neb. 506, 510-11, 45 N.W.2d 478, 481-82 (1951). See, also, Tilden v. Beckmann, 203 Neb. 293, 278 N.W.2d 581 (1979). Giving such deference to the trial court, nonetheless, after considering all the evidence, we are convinced that the parties did not intend that any interest be paid on the unpaid balance of the purchase price, and, accordingly, we must reverse.
The attorney handling the two agreements had no independent recollection of anything whatsoever. Clifford Lovelace testified that no discussion was had regarding interest when the agreement in question was executed. Irene Lovelace could recall nothing regarding interest. The defendant testified that when the agreement in question was signed, Irene stated that no interest was to be charged on the sale.
*179The earlier agreement between the parties becomes very significant. There the agreement simply provided that the defendant would pay to Irene, his aunt, $4,000 per year during her life. The same preprinted form was utilized and the same payment of tax provision was inserted, followed again by the preprinted interest clause with no interest inserted. It is obvious that such a payment provision would not draw interest inasmuch as there could be no unpaid balance upon which interest could accrue (unless the required payments became delinquent, a matter the parties would be presumed not to contemplate).
The second agreement is identical to the first, except that the total purchase price became fixed at $48,000. The parties and their lawyer could not recall why the second agreement was substituted for the first except that there is evidence that it was done for tax purposes. The determination of $48,000 as the fixed amount is not difficult to understand when one considers that at the time of the first agreement, Irene Lovelace had a mortality table life expectancy of 12 years, making the total annual payments based on such expectancy $48,000. There was no evidence whatsoever that would suggest that, between the execution of the first and second agreements, the parties decided to impose interest on the unpaid balance.
The defendant’s testimony that his aunt stated that no interest was to be paid is indirectly corroborated by her testimony. At the time of trial, she was 77 years old and her testimony clearly shows that she not only had no understanding of why the second agreement was substituted for the first, but had little understanding of why the litigation and trial ensued. She was very fond of her nephew, even at time of trial, wanted him to have the land, and only understood that she was to be paid $4,000 per year so she would have something to live on.
The court may also look on the interpretation placed on the contract during the period of performance. Knight Bros., Inc. v. State, 189 Neb. 64, 199 N.W.2d *180720 (1972). Defendant made the required annual payments promptly. There is no evidence that, at any time following the execution of the agreement in question, the matter of interest was ever discussed between the parties or otherwise. Defendant made his 12th and last payment on January 2, 1977. The following year, in January 1978, Irene’s husband inquired about the missing payment and was advised by defendant that he had completed his required payments on the contract. No claim that there was any balance due because of interest accrued was made at that time, but shortly thereafter defendant received a letter from an attorney plaintiffs had contacted, stating that the contract required interest at 6 percent per annum on the unpaid balance and enclosing a payment schedule which he prepared showing the amount allocated to principal and interest on the payments made and showing a balance due of $26,000. This was the first indication of any claimed payment schedule or any indication of a declining unpaid balance for allocation of principal and interest on the $4,000 annual payments. It is a reasonable conclusion that the plaintiff and her husband were always under the misunderstanding that plaintiff would receive, in effect, a lifetime annuity of $4,000 per year, whether she died a year after the execution of the agreement or 30 years later.
The warranty deed delivered at the time of the agreement to sell, rather than after the total purchase price was paid, acknowledged a total consideration of $48,000, “in hand paid.” While that was not the fact then, it suggests the total sum plaintiffs were to receive.
In addition, the fact that in this case the preprinted interest clause is totally out of any grammatical context with the payment provisions, with the space for insertion of the rate of interest left blank, is evidence that the interest clause was not intended to be operative, any more than the preprinted payment of taxes clause immediately thereafter was intended to be operative.
We, therefore, conclude that the parties intended that the defendant pay his aunt a total of $48,000 in *18112 annual $4,000 payments, the equivalent of the lifetime annuity provided for in the first agreement, and that, therefore, no interest was to accrue on any unpaid balance. The judgment is reversed with directions to dismiss plaintiffs’ petition and to enter judgment for the defendant on his counterclaim.
Reversed and remanded with directions.

=== CASE 9738656 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:59:59.166323+00 ===

Windrum, District Judge,
concurring.
I concur in the opinion of the Honorable Judge Buckley and adopt his reasoning as expressed therein, with additional comments, except where in conflict herewith.
I have no quarrel with the general principle of law that where interest is provided for but the rate is not mentioned, the legal rate is to be paid. I do believe, however, that where interest is provided for but the rate thereof is “_,” there is a patent ambiguity.
In 1910, in the case entitled Hornstein v. Cifuno, 86 Neb. 103, 125 N.W. 136 (1910), the court was called upon to determine whether or not the legal rate of interest was due and payable from the maker of the following note, to wit: “$400. Omaha, Neb., Jan. 4,1907. One year after date we promise to pay to the order of Liberato Varriano four hundred and no-100 dollars at Omaha, Nebraska. Value received with interest at the rate of_per cent, per annum from_ until paid. . . .” Id. at 104, 125 N.W. at 136.
Chief Justice Reese, in writing the opinion, stated that the legal effect of such a note was the same as if there had been a period after the word “interest” and all the rest of the note would be disregarded. Many cases cite this case with approval. I submit that the court changed the agreement of the parties by placing a period after the word “interest” as the note still said “Value received with interest at the rate of_per cent, per annum from_until paid,” no matter what the court said it said. That is entirely different than stating “Value received with interest.” The ambiguity lies in that the parties could have intended that the note draw interest at the legal rate or that the *182parties could have intended that the note draw interest at the rate of_percent, which, in effect, would be no interest.
From the Hornstein v. Cifuno case it was an easy step to announce as a principle of law “A promissory note which, by its terms, provides for interest from date, without any specified rate, bears interest at the rate of 7 per cent. per annum from its date.” Such was syllabus point no. 2 in Praest v. Quesner, 113 Neb. 485, 203 N.W. 549 (1925).
The notes there construed provided for interest at the printed rate of 10 percent. However, the word “ten,” indicating the rate of interest, was stricken and nothing was inserted in lieu thereof.
Obviously, the legal rate of interest in 1925, at the time that case was decided, was 7 percent. Suppose that the printed rate in the note had been 7 percent: would the holding have been the same? I do not believe so, as it would have resulted in the anomalous situation of determining that, while the rate of interest was stricken by the parties, the parties intended the note to draw interest at the same rate, notwithstanding that the rate of interest was so stricken by the parties. Such reasoning would be ludicrous. However, the case cited as authority was Hornstein v. Cifuno, supra.
I realize that the two cases involved different situations. However, Praest v. Quesner is analyzed to point out the fallacious reasoning thereof, which is an extension of the fallacious reasoning in the case of Hornstein v. Cifuno.
It is the experience of the writer of this opinion that these problems are generally generated when printed notes are utilized between close members of the family and, oftentimes, there is no interest whatsoever intended. It would seem to the writer of this concurring opinion that it would be a better rule of law that, where a note provides for interest at the rate of “_ percent,” it shall be construed as patently ambiguous and parol evidence would be admissible *183to determine the intent of the parties. Anyone signing such a note or receiving such a note could expect that a lawsuit would ensue. Both the payee and the maker would be inconvenienced by their carelessness. Under the present rule of law in Nebraska, the payee of the note always recovers interest at the legal rate, regardless of the actual intent of the parties, and the maker has no recourse whatsoever. Such a rule is patently unfair. Why should the law favor one over the other? To do so completely ignores the common experience of mankind.
The legal principles announced in Hornstein v. Cifuno, supra, and Praest v. Quesner, supra, were erroneous when pronounced and should be overruled. The principles therein announced do not become more valid with age.

=== CASE 9738657 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:59:59.17012+00 ===

Brodkey, J.,
dissenting.
I must respectfully dissent from the opinion of the majority of the division in this court. Not only do I feel that it has applied incorrect legal principles concerning Nebraska statutory provisions, but I feel the result is highly inequitable.
I start my discussion with a consideration of the scope of review by this court applicable to this case. This action was initiated as an equity action and prayed for equitable relief, as does also the counterclaim. The rule is well established that: “Actions in equity, on appeal to this court, are triable de novo in conformity with section 25-1925, R. S. 1943, subject, however, to the condition that when the evidence on material questions of fact is in irreconcilable conflict this court will, in determining the weight of the evidence, consider the fact that the trial court observed the witnesses and their manner of testifying and must have accepted one version of the facts rather than the opposite.” Sopcich v. Tangeman, 153 Neb. 506, 510-11, 45 N.W.2d 478, 481-82 (1951). See, also, Tilden v. Beckmann, 203 Neb. 293, 278 N.W.2d 581 (1979).
*184The record evidences that conflicting testimony was adduced with regard to whether interest was payable under the January 4, 1966, contract. The attorney who drafted both of the agreements, and the deed, had no independent recollection of the transaction. Irene Lovelace testified that at the time the second contract was executed she could not remember any discussion regarding interest or payment in regard to the sale of the land. Clifford Lovelace’s testimony is conflicting with regard to whether or not he was present at the execution of the second contract, and he offered no testimony with regard to the payment of interest under the terms of the contract. Only the defendant, Raymond Stern, testified that at the signing of the January 4, 1966, contract, Irene Lovelace stated that no interest was to be charged on the sale of the land. Keeping in mind the aforementioned standard of review, we conclude that the evidence is conflicting, and that the conclusion of the trial court, to wit, that the parties intended that interest should be paid, must be given deference by this court.
Under the facts of this case, I believe that Stern is liable as a matter of law for the payment of interest on the unpaid purchase price. Neb. Rev. Stat. § 45-104 (Reissue 1978) provided, in pertinent part: “On money due on any instrument in writing, . . . interest shall be allowed at the rate of six per cent per annum.” It is a general rule that contracting parties are presumed to contract in reference to existing law and that all applicable and valid statutes existing at the time a contract is made, become a part of the contract and must be read into it. McWilliams v. Griffin, 132 Neb. 753, 273 N.W. 209 (1937).
This court has also had the opportunity to examine and rule upon a situation very similar to that presented in this action. Hornstein v. Cifuno, 86 Neb. 103, 125 N.W. 136 (1910), involved an action which was instituted to foreclose a real estate mortgage given as security for a note wherein the rate of interest to be *185charged was left blank. The provision in question read as follows: “Value received with interest at the rate of_per cent, per annum from_until paid.” In finding that the note drew interest at the legal rate from the date of the decree, the court stated: “As is shown by the copy of the note above set out, the blanks for the statement of the rate of interest and the date from which the interest would run were not filled in at the time of the execution of the note, and the legal effect would be the same as if there had been nothing written or printed after the word ‘interest’, and the reading of the note would be to pay ‘interest until paid.’ This would cause the debt to draw interest at the legal rate of 7 per cent, per annum from the date of the note. [Citations omitted.]” Id. at 104, 125 N.W. at 136. See, also, Praest v. Quesner, 113 Neb. 485, 203 N.W. 549 (1925); Traudt v. Nebraska P. P. Dist., 197 Neb. 765, 251 N.W. 2d 148 (1977).
In his concurring opinion, Windrum, District Judge, would have us overrule our previously announced law as set forth in the foregoing cases, which has been the law of this state for over 40 years. I see no reason for doing so and would be opposed to his suggestion that we do so in this case. The rule stated in Hornstein v. Cifuno, supra, is clearly the general rule in this country, and should be adhered to. See 45 Am. Jur. 2d Interest and Usury §68 (1969).
The majority opinion argues and would have us conclude that it was not intended that interest be paid by the defendant under the contract dated January 4, 1966. In support of this proposition, the majority argues that a tax provision inserted by the parties is in conflict with the preprinted tax provision and that its position in the contract, between the payment provision and the preprinted interest clause, creates ambiguity so as to open the contract to parol evidence on the issue of whether interest is payable under the contract. I find this argument untenable. The rule is well settled that where part of a contract is written or typed and *186part is printed, and the typed parts appear to be inconsistent with the preprinted provisions, the typed provisions prevail. First Nat. Bank v. Greenlee, 102 Neb. 180, 166 N.W. 559 (1918). The rationale for this rule is that the typed words are the immediate language and terms selected by the parties themselves for the expression of their meaning. This rule, however, is resorted to only from necessity when the typed clauses and the printed clauses cannot be reconciled. When the typed and printed parts may be reconciled by reasonable construction, that construction must be given effect, because it cannot be assumed that the parties intended to insert ineffective provisions. 17 Am. Jur. 2d Contracts §271 (1964). I am of the opinion that the tax provision inserted by the parties in the January 4,1966, contract is a clear expression of their respective obligations thereunder, and the terms do not create “irreconcilable” conflict so as to make the contract ambiguous as to the payment of interest. I cannot agree with the argument that the location of the tax provision, or the punctuation used, creates ambiguity within the contract terms. While punctuation in a contract may be resorted to in order to solve an ambiguity, punctuation or the absence thereof, cannot of itself create ambiguity. 17 Am. Jur. 2d Contracts §279 (1964).
We must also bear in mind the general rule that: “Absent any stipulation to the contrary, the purchaser has a right to possession or the rents and profits of the land and the vendor a right to interest on the unpaid purchase price. The' fruits of possession and the interest are mutually exclusive — there is no right upon the part of either to have both.” Bembridge v. Miller, 235 Or. 396, 408, 385 P. 2d 172, 178 (1963) (emphasis supplied). See, also, McCleneghan v. Powell, 105 Neb. 306, 180 N.W. 576 (1920). The trial court found from the evidence that the parties intended interest to be included in the contract. I agree, and would find that Stern should be obligated to pay interest at the legal rate of 6 percent on the unpaid balance of the contract.

=== CASE 9738658 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:59:59.428574+00 ===

Arterburn, J.
This is an original action to compel the respondent court to expunge and strike from its record an order made on September 20, 1966, against the relator “to answer all questions put to him by physicians and each of them pursuant to statute.” This order results from proceedings to have the relator determined to be a sexual psychopathic person under the Acts of 1949, ch. 124, as amended by the Acts of 1959, ch. 356, being Burns’ Ind. Stat. Anno. § 9-3401, et seq. The court had previously appointed two qualified physicians to examine the relator. The relator had previously been charged by affidavit with the criminal offense of “peeping in house.”
The relator, by his petition, seeks to challenge the constitutionality of the Indiana law providing for the determination *231and declaration of a person charged with a sexual offense of being a sexual psychopathic person.
The specific section involved herein is Burns’ Ind. Stat. Anno. § 9-3404 [1967 Cum. Supp.] which reads as follows:
“(a) Upon the filing of such statement by the prosecuting attorney the court shall, or if filed on behalf of the accused the court may, appoint two [2] qualified physicians to make a personal examination of such alleged criminal sexual psychopathic person, which physicians shall file with the court a written report of the results of their examination, together with their conclusions. Such reports shall be open to inspection by the accused and by legal counsel for the accused, but shall not be considered to be competent evidence in any other proceeding filed against the accused except in the hearing, as hereinafter provided, to inquire into the alleged psychopathy of the accused. The alleged psychopathic person who is examined by the two [2] physicians is required to answer the questions propounded by the physicians under penalty of contempt of court.
“(b) In the event that both of the examining physicians in their reports concluded that the person examined is a criminal sexual psychopath, then proceedings shall be had, as in this act [§§ 9-3401 — 9-3412] provided, to determine the psychopathy of such person.Such proceedings shall be had prior to a trial of such person upon the criminal offense with which he then stands charged, or prior to sentence if he then stands convicted and has not been placed on probation, or prior to the completion of any probationary sentence imposed.
“(c) Upon the filing of the reports of the two [2] examining physicians, the judge of the court shall examine the reports. If the statement containing the allegation of the psychopathy of the accused and the reports of the two [2] examining physicians are found to be in legal form, the judge shall fix a time and place for a hearing for the determination of the alleged psychopathy of the accused. The court shall order and direct the sheriff of the county to notify the accused of the nature of the proceedings and the time and place of the hearing. The judge may issue subpoenas for any witnesses who may have a knowledge of any facts relevant to the nature of the proceedings. At the time and place appointed, unless an adjournment to another time and place has been ordered, the judge shall proceed to hear such proceedings, and shall examine the *232witnesses under oath concerning the matter of the alleged psychopathy of the accused.
“(d) If, upon the conclusion of the hearing and examination, it shall appear to the judge that the person so alleged to be a criminal sexual psychopath is probably a criminal sexual psychopath, the judge shall commit such person to the division of mental health, such person to be confined by the division in an appropriate state psychiatric institution for an indeterminate period of not to exceed sixty [60] days, for the purpose of observation, evaluation and diagnosis of such person by the psychiatric staff of such institution. The superintendent of the institution shall, within sixty [60] days from the date of admission, file with court a written report of the findings, conclusions and recommendations of the psychiatric staff. Such report shall be open for inspection by the accused and by the legal counsel for the accused, but it shall not be deemed to be competent evidence in any other proceeding brought against the accused except in the proceeding to inquire into the alleged psychopathy of the accused.
“In the event the psychiatric staff in its report concludes that the accused person is a criminal sexual psychopath, the court shall then determine the question of the psychopathy of the accused person and shall enter an order and judgment in accordance with such finding and determination. If such person is found by the court to be a criminal sexual psychopath, the court shall in its order and judgment commit such person to the division of mental health, to be confined by the division in an appropriate state psychiatric institution until such person shall have fully and permanently recovered from such psychopathy.”
There is no dispute between the parties that the procedural steps were followed in order to invoke the authority of the court to act pursuant to the statute.
It is the contention of the relator that although the respondent was acting pursuant to the language of the appropriate statute, such language is unconstitutional and void and constitutes a violation of his privilege against self-incrimination and the information he will be required to give to the physicians will be used against him in a subsequent hearing where his alleged criminal sexual psychopathy is to be determined.
*233In support of this assertion relators call the attention of this court to two United States Supreme Court cases: Miranda v. Arizona (1936), 384 U. S. 436, 86 S. C. 1602, 16 L. Ed. 2d 694; Application of Gault (1967), 387 U. S. 1, 87 S. Ct. 1428, 18 L. Ed. 2d 527.
In Miranda v. Arizona, supra, we understand this case to emphasize the new rule for police interrogations was founded upon the privilege of an accused under the Fifth Amendment of the Constitution not to be compelled to incriminate himself. Under said rule there were four essential requirements: (1) the right to remain silent; (2) the effect of making a statement; (3) the right to an attorney; and (4) the right to an appointed attorney.
The facts in the Miranda case, by way of summary, were these: Miranda was taken into custody and after two hours of interrogation he executed a signed statement. He had not been advised that he had a right to have an attorney present during the questioning, but an introductory paragraph at the beginning of his written confession stated that he had made the confession voluntarily and with full knowledge of his legal rights, with the understanding that the statement could be used against him. The written confession was admitted into evidence over the objection of defense counsel. The Supreme Court reversed because Miranda was not in any way apprised of his right to consultation with an. attorney and to have one present during the interrogation.
In the Gault case, a fifteen-year-old boy was arrested for making lewd and indecent remarks to a woman neighbor. He was held in a detention home until the following day, at which time a petition was filed against him indicating that he was under the age of eighteen and was a delinquent minor. The boy’s mother was present at the hearing, but the complaining neighbor was not. No one was sworn at the hearing and no transcript or record was made. The mother of the juvenile indicated that the juvenile had said he dialed the number, but that a friend with him had made the lewd re*234marks. The hearing was concluded and the juvenile was released. The mother of the juvenile received a plain letter from the probation officer indicating a hearing was set for a specific date and at that time the juvenile was in the company of his mother and father. At this hearing a request by the mother to have the complaining witnesses present was denied by the court. The juvenile was committed for the period of his minority to the State Industrial School. Since no appeal was permitted by Arizona law, the juvenile filed a petition for a writ of habeas corpus in the state court, which was denied. On appeal, the United States Supreme Court reversed. Gault, supra.
In the case of People of the State of Illinois v. Forest G. English (1964), 31 Ill. 2d 301, 201 N. E. 2d 455, the Illinois Supreme Court examined a similar question presented by the relator’s petition. In this case a defendant was ordered to appear before two qualified psychiatrists for examination pursuant to the Illinois Sexually Dangerous Persons Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 38, pars. 105-1.01 to 105-12). The defendant appeared before the psychiatrist and informed that he felt the compulsory examination was a violation of his constitutional rights. The court proceeded to hold the defendant in contempt of court and he appealed directly to the Supreme Court of Illinois. The court then extensively reviewed the authorities relating to this question:
“As we view the case the issues that must be considered are: (1) whether defendant is protected by the privilege against self-incrimination or by due process from submitting to the mental examination because the information he gives to the psychiatrists will be used in the commitment proceedings under the act; (2) whether he is privileged because the compelled information could be used in a subsequent criminal proceeding; and (3) if the defendant is privileged from submitting to the examination because it may tend to incriminate him, can this privilege be removed by a judcial grant of immunity.
“It is well established that the privilege against self-incrimination protects against disclosure of facts involving *235criminal liability and not against civil liability. (Wigmore, Evidence (McNaughton, rev’d 1961) Secs. 2253, 2254). This raises the question, therefore, of the nature of the consequences imposed by the act upon a person found to be sexually dangerous.
“The status of mental illness cannot be made criminal offense for which the offender can be prosecuted and imprisoned. (See Robinson v. California, 370 U. S. 660, 82 S. Ct. 1417, 8 L. Ed. 2d 758.) A state may, however, in a civil proceeding adjudicate the status of mental illness and require involuntary confinement of the mentally ill person for treatment and for the protection of society. (See Robinson v. California, 370 U. S. 660, 82 S. Ct. 1417, 8 L. Ed. 2d 758; Lynch v. Overholser, 369 U. S. 705, 82 S. Ct. 1063, 8 L. Ed. 2d 211.) Specifically, the Supreme Court has upheld a Minnesota statute providing for the involuntary commitment of a sexual psychopath in a civil proceeding. (See Minnesota ex rel. Pearson v. Probate Court, 309 U. S. 270, 60 S. Ct. 523, 84 L. Ed. 744.) Section 3.01 of the Sexually Dangerous Persons Act (par. 105-3.01) provides that the proceeding is civil in nature and this court has so construed it. People v. Sims, 382 Ill. 472, 47 N. E. 2d 203; People v. Redlich, 402 Ill. 270, 83 N. E. 2d 736; People v. Capoldi, 10 Ill. 2d 261, 139 N. E. 2d 776.
“Defendant relies heavily, nevertheless, on the statement in People v. Nastasio, 19 Ill. 2d 524, 529, 168 N. E. 2d 728, 731, that the proceedings under the act ‘closely resemble criminal prosecutions in many critical respects.’ That case held that procedural due process requires that a defendant be given the opportunity to confront the witnesses as in a criminal prosecution.
“The fundamental procedural safeguards of the criminal law are explained by history, not by logic. Basic in most of these safeguards is the fear of abuses to the individual’s liberty. Since the Sexually Dangerous Persons Act provides for involuntary confinement, although it be for the treatment of the defendant rather than punishment for a crime, it is natural that some of the same safeguards which are applicable in a criminal prosecution be applied to the proceedings under the act. This does not mean, however, that the commitment proceeding is a criminal prosecution or that criminal procedure as a whole must be followed in the proceeding. This is the thrust of the statement in the Nastasio case.
“The Supreme Court in upholding the Minnesota statute stated, ‘We fully recognize the danger of a deprivation of *236due process in proceedings dealing with persons charged with insanity or, as here, with a psychopathic personality as defined in the statute, and the special importance of maintaining the basic interests of liberty in a class of cases where the law though “fair on its face and impartial in appearance” may be open to serious abuses in administration and courts may be imposed upon if the substantial rights of the persons charged are not adequately safeguarded at every stage of the proceedings.’ (Minnesota ex rel. Pearson v. Probate Court, 309 U. S. 270, 276-277, 60 S. Ct. 523, 527, 84 L. Ed. 744, 751). Indeed, it was this ‘special importance of maintaining the basic interests of liberty’ in this type of case which led this court to hold in People v. Capoldi, 10 Ill. 2d 261, 139 N. E. 2d 776, that the admission in evidence of a confession of crime, without preliminary proof of its voluntary character.
“While the nature of the proceeding under the act is such that due process requires a preliminary hearing to determine the voluntariness of an allegedly coerced confession and the confrontation of witnesses in order to protect defendant from the abuses at which these safeguards are aimed, the same is not true with regard to compelling a psychiatric examination to determine his status as a sexually dangerous person. Since no criminal liability is attached to the status of a sexually dangerous person, the evil at which the privilege is aimed is not present when the compelled examination shows no more than the existence or nonexistence of this status. The same conclusion has been reached in other jurisdictions as to sanity proceedings, in general (8 Wigmore, Evidence, (McNaughton, rev’d 1961) Sec. 2257), sanity proceedings in connection with a criminal case, in particular, (Annotation, 32 A.L.R. 2d 437, 444) and specifically as to proceedings under statutes similar to ours. Annotation, 24 A.L.R. 2d 350, 362.” (Our emphasis)
It is to be noted in the Illinois case that the act did not specifically protect the defendant against self-incrimination. However, the Indiana statute that we have under consideration specifically provides that the information or admissions obtained in the medical examination “shall not be deemed to be competent evidence in any other proceeding brought against the accused. . . .” It therefore follows that there can be no violation of the constitutional pro*237vision against self-incrimination under the Indiana statute, since the testimony or evidence given is by statute no longer incrimination. (Burns’ Ind. Stat. Anno. § 9-8403 (d) [1967 Supp.])
Under the Indiana statute, and in this particular case, the relator has at all times been represented by counsel, has the right to be confronted by witness, is protected by the immunity clause of the statute and has a specific right of appeal. See Burns’ Ind. Stat. Anno. § 9-3404, supra; also Bums’ Ind. Stat. Anno., § 9-3406 [1956 Repl.].
“An appeal may be taken from any final order or judgment of the court herein in the manner provided by law for appeals in criminal cases.” [Acts 1949, ch. 124, § 6, p. 328.]
There is no question that there are many problems arising with psychiatric examinations. In a recent publication, Psychiatry for Laioyers Handbook by Dr. Melvin L. Selzer, published by the Institute of Continuing Legal Education, University of Michigan, there is reprinted an article “Psychiatric Examination of the Sexual Psychopath” published in the journal of Northwestern School of Law, Vol. 56, No. 1, p. 27, which states:
“A continuing and somewhat disturbing problem in medico-legal matters is the accurate determination of sexual psychopathy. It is surprising that more insistence upon accuracy does not prevail when it concerns the lives of those involved to such a major degree. A label of sexual psychopathy carries with it an immediate penalty which may take freedom from the individual for periods varying from months to a lifetime and in addition place a social stigma that possibly may never be removed. It is a process that is easy to impose, but very difficult to erase. A dire responsibility rests upon those entrusted to render opinions in this area, for an error will either continue a threat to society or deprive the accused of his way of life. Laws were made to accomplish a purpose, to protect society from those who are hazards or potentially so. Sexual psychopathy laws are designed to cope with a difficult situation and are intended to be fair, as well as supply the protection needed.”
*238We believe that the Indiana statute has been designed to cope with this difficult situation and is equitable. It also supplies the constitutional protection needed. The statute in question was examined in State ex rel. Savery etc. v. Marion Cr. C., etc. (1955), 234 Ind. 632, 130 N. E. 2d 128. In that case the relator sought to compel a lower court ruling to proceed under the statute although the proceedings were not requested by the prosecuting attorney for the court. The court held that the proceedings under the statute were civil in nature although they may have been instituted as the result of criminal proceedings. The purpose of the law was described as follows: (234 Ind. 632, 637.)
“The purpose of the proceedings and confinement under the act is primarily to protect society against such persons regardless of criminal guilt. Courts have upheld analogous proceedings for commitment of drug addicts, inebriates, delinquents, dipsomaniacs and similar persons. Through the entire field of legislation dealing with this human wreckage of society, there is a pervading feeling that sexual offenders and similar persons require special treatment since punishment normally is not a deterrent to a repetition of the offense. Institutional treatment offers also better protection to society. Although it is no panacea, it, at least, is a more enlightened approach in search of a better solution of an old social problem. Such proceedings are civil in nature even though they may have their origin or be instituted as a result of criminal proceedings. 25 Indiana L. J. 186.”
In the same opinion this court reviewed such cases from other jurisdictions which supported the court’s conclusion that the proceedings under the statute are civil in nature rather than criminal although originating in a criminal proceeding.
Laws providing compulsory medical treatment for the mentally ill, drug addicts and other similar persons have as their purpose the treatment of individuals regardless of criminal guilt and with emphasis on rehabilitation for the individual involved.
*239It is likewise true in regard to due process of law. 24 A.L.R. 2d 350, 362. In Noelke v. State of Indiana (1938), 214 Ind. 427, 15 N. E. 2d 950, this court held that our statute authorizing the court to appoint physicians to examine a defendant who has pleaded insanity and to testify as to their conclusions in the criminal trial was not unconstitutional as compelling defendant to incriminate himself. Attacks on the constitutionality of statutes authorizing courts to appoint impartial examiners to determine the mental condition of a defendant have generally been unsuccessful and particularly on the theory of self-incrimination. See 32 A.L.R. 2d 434, p. 445. Alabama, Arkansas, California, Colorado, Indiana, Louisiana, Massachusetts, South Carolina and Wisconsin have held similar statutes constitutional.
There is still another reason why the relator cannot prevail in this case, namely, the statute specifically gives the defendant in the proceedings in question the right to appeal. It states: “An appeal may be taken from any final order or judgment of court in the manner provided by law for appeals in criminal cases.” (Burns’ Ind. Stat. Anno. § 9-3406.)
Rule 2-35 of this Court further provides: “Writs will be granted only where extreme hardship would otherwise result if not granted.” It is fundamental that extraordinary writs may not be used as a short-cut for an appeal. State ex rel. Wireman v. City of Lafayette (1967), 249 Ind. 490, 230 N. E. 2d 776.
The temporary writ heretofore issued is dissolved, and the permanent writ is denied.
Lewis, C. J. concurs.
Mote, J. concurs with opinion.
Jackson, J. dissents with opinion, in which Hunter, J. concurs.
Note. — Reported in 234 N. E. 2d 636.

=== CASE 9738659 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:59:59.432982+00 ===

*240Concurring Opinion
Mote, J.
I concur in the opinion and the conclusion of Judge Arterburn. In doing so, it appears appropriate to express my views upon the general subject before us, as presented by a Petition for Writ of Mandate and Prohibition and the Response thereto.
The factual situation already is clearly presented. There is involved, however, an overall philosophy to which I wish to address myself.
In these times of abrupt and almost complete reversal of attitudes regarding constitutional government, it seems to me that too often we have been compelled by enigmatic forces to adjust our solutions to perplexing moral, philosophical and economic problems for the benefit of the thorough non-conformist at the expense of conformity, that is, an ordered society with reasonable rules and regulations for our guidance. For one, I do not read the provisions of our Bill of Rights, the various amendments to our Federal Constitution, to have the import so often thereto attributed in high places.
It has been said that a prerequisite to the favorable acceptance of the proposed Constitution of the United States was the prompt adoption thereafter of our Bill of Rights. Careful study of the times, the reasons, the sense and feeling of the early colonists reasonably should induce the objective conclusion that those residing in the early colonies were solicitous of their own local rights and powers in relation to the central government. Little did they expect or contemplate that what they sought and were granted, much in mysterious and deceiving ways, eventually would operate as a sword instead of a shield.
While we do not here criticize the often-cited and relied upon Escobedo and Miranda Cases, we must remark that the pitfall in to which they have lead us produces a good example of the “adjustment” referred to above when, in order to1 pre*241vent an avalanche of court proceedings for freedom, a “cutoff” date had to be employed.
The field of mental health long has been the subject of much consideration. Full enlightenment surely has not yet been achieved; however, our society appears to have made great strides in the field of treatment and in the protection and attempt to help those poor unfortunates who, through no fault of their own, are unable to fully participate and to compete in citizenship.
It is my considered opinion that Relator herein has been accorded the fullest protection under our statutes and that he has not been harmed by the order of the trial court, Respondent herein, which carefully has followed the provisions of the governing statutes. Nor will the Relator be harmed by the questions likely to be propounded and answered by him.
First, he may be heard in the trial forum before admission of the questions and his answers. Second, being civil in nature, his answers may not be used against him in any proceeding, criminal or otherwise, but the one designed to determine whether he is a sexual psychopathic person under the provisions of § 9-3401, et seq., Burns’ Ind. Stat. Anno. Third, as above stated, Relator has not yet been harmed, nor will he be, in light of the protective measures afforded him, to-wit: appropriate if not availing objections at the trial on the issues of whether he is a sexual psychopathic person and his right of appeal, wherein this Court will have before it the full and complete record for review.
In my opinion, the authorities in Indiana and elsewhere, cited by Judge Arterbum, amply support his conclusion to deny the Petition and I therefore concur with him.

=== CASE 9738660 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:59:59.436691+00 ===

Dissenting
Jackson, J.
I am unable to agree with the conclusions reached in the majority opinion and dissent thereto.
*242Criminal proceedings were instituted against the relator on November 27, 1961, when an affidavit was filed in the respondent court charging him with being a “Peeping Tom.”
On November 30, 1961, the State of Indiana filed a petition to determine whether the relator was a criminal sexual psychopath pursuant to the Criminal Sexual Psychopathic Persons Act, Acts 1949, ch. 124, p. 328, as amended, being § 9-3401, et seq. Burns’. On April 4, 1962, after two qualified physicians filed their reports, the respondent court found relator to be a criminal sexual psychopath and ordered him committed to the Division of Mental Health of the State of Indiana. Subsequently the relator filed a belated motion for new trial which was sustained by the respondent court on July 20, 1967. On July 28, 1967, the prosecuting attorney filed a motion for the appointment of physicians to examine relator. On September 20, 1967, the respondent court ordered the relator to be re-examined by two' qualified physicians. By the terms of the order the relator was required to* answer all questions propounded to him by the physicians. Relator filed a motion to strike the words “and to answer all questions put to him by said physicians and each of them” from the order. The motion to strike was overruled. The relator now seeks this Court to mandate the respondent court to sustain the motion to strike.
The language of the statute and the order of the respondent court violates the relator’s right against self-incrimination as guaranteed by the 5th and 14th Amendments to the Constitution of the United States. The majority holds that the statute does not constitute a violation of relator’s privilege against self-incrimination because “the proceedings under the statute are civil in nature rather than criminal although originating in a criminal proceeding.” It is of little significance that the proceedings are civil in nature. A person found to be a sexual psychopath under the Act is deprived of his liberty as a consequence, and must be accorded the protections of due process. Neither sound logic nor fundamental *243justice dictates that the constitutional protectives may be ignored in civil proceedings and must be followed in criminal proceedings. The end result under the Act is incarceration for an indeterminate period of time against one’s will. An individual exposed to a procedure that can result in his incarceration is entitled to his privilege against self-incrimination regardless of the euphemistic characterization of that procedure.
The very title of the Act negates the argument that the proceedings are civil rather than criminal. The determination, if and when made, is that “such person is ... a criminal sexual psychopath.” Acts 1949, ch. 124, § 4, p. 328, as amended, being § 9-3404 Burns’. The Act also provides for appeals “in the manner provided by law for appeals in criminal cases.” Acts 1949, ch. 124, § 6, p. 328, being § 9-3406 Burns’.
Section 3 of the Act, § 9-3403 Burns’, provides:
“When any person is charged with a criminal offense, except the crime of murder or manslaughter, or rape on a female child under the age of twelve . . . and it shall appear that such person is a criminal sexual psychopathic person, then the prosecuting attorney of such county, or someone on behalf of the person charged, may file with the clerk of the court in the same proceeding wherein such person stands charged with . . . such criminal offense, a statement in writing setting forth facts tending to show that such person is a criminal sexual psychopathic person.” (Emphasis supplied)
If the purpose of the statute is to protect society against sexual psychopaths and to provide medical treatment for them, regardless of criminal guilt, the above section is an arbitrary classification of the group to be covered by the statute. It is well known that many murders are committed as a result of a criminal sexual psychopathic mind. Certainly a large number of statutory rapes are committed by persons who are suffering from mental abnormalities. If the statute is to apply to some sexual deviates, it must apply to all.
*244The above section is further defective because of vagueness. The statute is silent as to whom “it shall appear that such person is a criminal sexual psychopathic person.”
The unconstitutionality of the Act has been further pointed out by Judge Emmert in his concurring opinion in State ex rel. Savery v. Marion Criminal Court (1955), 234 Ind. 632, 643, 130 N. E. 2d 128.
“Section 4, § 9-3404, Burns’ 1942 Replacement, Supp., places a mandatory duty upon the court to appoint two physicians if the statement is made by the prosecuting attorney, but gives the court a discretionary power to appoint the physicians if the statement is filed in behalf of the defendant. This section further makes it clear that unless the two physicians agree in their written reports to the court that the defendant is a criminal sexual psychopathic person, the issue cannot be tried and determined. Section 5, § 9-3405, Burns’ 1942 Replacement, Supp., provides for notice and hearing by the court without a jury, and a commitment to the Indiana Council for Mental Health if the defendant is found to be a criminal sexual psychopathic person.
Section 9 of the act, § 9-3409, Burns’ 1942 Replacement, Supp., provides as follows:
‘No person who is found in such original hearing to be a criminal sexual psychopathic person, and such finding having become final, may thereafter be tried or sentenced upon the offense with which he originally stood charged, or convicted, in the committing court at the time of the filing of the original petition.’
It is impossible to construe the statement alleging the defendant is a criminal sexual psychopathic person as a defense to a criminal charge as is the case under § 9-1132 and § 9-1701, Burns’ 1942 Replacement. It cannot be a defense to the action, because it puts it within the power of the prosecuting attorney, the court and the two examining physicians to say whether the issue shall be tried. That denial of the defendant of the right to present such defense would certainly be a denial of due process of law under the Fourteenth Amendment and due course of law under § 12 of Art. I of the Indiana Constitution. Moreover, the statement can be filed after conviction or a plea of guilty, which makes it perfectly clear the matter is not one of defense *245to the action. Nor is the defendant given the right to present evidence that he is in fact a criminal sexual psychopathic person, even if he obtains the most eminent and distinguished psychiatrists in the land as his witnesses, if the two physicians appointed by the court fail to agree he is such a psychopathic person.
Since the issue is not one of defense, and since finding that the defendant is such a psychopathic person brings into operation § 9 of the act which prohibits a trial, or sentence on the original charge even after conviction, the act is clearly unconstitutional in that it gives the court the power to grant a pardon after conviction, in violation of § 17 of Art. V of our Constitution which vests the sole power of pardon in the governor. We cannot construe the act as one granting amnesty. 89 Am. Jur., p. 525, _ § 10. There have been various definitions as to what constitutes pardon. In substance ‘a pardon is a declaration on record by the chief magistrate of a state or country that a person named is relieved from the legal consequences of a specific crime.’ 39 Am. Jur. 523. See also Biddle v. Perovich (1927), 274 U. S. 480, 47 S. Ct. 664, 71 L. Ed. 1161, 52 A.L.R. 832. But under the act the Governor does not declare of record the defendant is to be relieved from the legal consequences of his specific crime charged, hence the act’s unconstitutionality.
Sections 3 and 4 also offend § 23 of Art. I of our Bill of Rights, by granting a privilege and immunity to one defendant not granted on equal terms to other defendants. Many different crimes may be the result of a criminal sexual psychopathic mind. For instance, two defendants who are in fact criminal sexual psychopathic persons may each be charged with arson, which can be the product of a sexual psychopathic mind. W. Norwood East, Sexual Offenders— A British View, 55 Yale Law JI. 527, 551. In one prosecution the prosecuting attorney may file a statement that the defendant is a sexual psychopathic person, in which event the court must appoint two physicians, who may both confirm the statement. But in the other case, the prosecuting attorney may refuse to file a statement, and the court may refuse to appoint the two physicians on the statement of the defendant, yet both defendants are sadists, and one obtains a privilege and immunity not afforded the other. If a statute should declare that a convicted defendant had the right of appeal if the prosecuting attorney consented, but no right of appeal on a defendant’s own motion without the consent of the prosecuting attorney, such a statute would *246clearly be a denial of equal protection of the laws under the Fourteenth Amendment.
This court is not in a position to say the General Assembly would have passed the act had they known that § 9, granting the power to pardon, was unconstitutional, nor is the remainder of the act workable without the jurisdictional provisions concerning the filing of the statement presenting the issue to the court. In the absence of such procedure the entire act becomes unworkable. Where certain provisions of an act are unconstitutional, ‘and the remainder of the act is not complete and not possible of performance, the whole act is void and invalid. Kelso v. Cook (1916), 184 Ind. 173, 181, 110 N. E. 987, Ann. Cas. 1918E 68.’ Keane v. Remy (1929), 201 Ind. 286, 295, 168 N. E. 10.” 234 Ind. at 646-648, 649.
The Act is unconstitutional for several other reasons. It violates Article I, Sec. 19 of the Constitution of Indiana which guarantees a criminal defendant the right to have a jury determine the law and the facts. The Act also flies in the face of Article I, Sec. 13 of the Indiana Constitution which provides that a criminal defendant has the right to know definitely the charge he is compelled to meet and the right to have a trial by an impartial jury. In Indiana all crimes are statutory, and the defendant’s guilt must be proved beyond a reasonable doubt. Yet under the terms of this Act it is possible, even probable, that the accused can be involuntarily incarcerated for life by commitment to the Indiana Council for Mental Health without ever having committed any crime nor having been convicted of committing any crime.
This Court, here sitting in equity, should grant relator not only the relief prayed for in his petition but the complete relief to which he is entitled, viz: a finding and judgment that the entire Act, Acts 1949, ch. 124 as amended by Acts 1959, ch. 356, is unconstitutional and void. A permanent writ should be granted prohibiting the respondent from enforcing or attempting to enforce any of the provisions of the Act.
*247Hunter, J. concurs.
Note. — Reported in 234 N. E. 2d 636.

=== CASE 2217167 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:22.612506+00 ===

297 N.W.2d 785 (1980)
A. R. MINCH, Plaintiff and Appellant,
v.
CITY OF FARGO, Defendant and Appellee.
Civ. No. 9779.
Supreme Court of North Dakota.
October 6, 1980.
*787 Tenneson, Serkland, Lundberg, Erickson & Marcil, Fargo, for plaintiff and appellant; argued by Ronald H. McLean.
Solberg, Stewart & Boulger, Fargo, for defendant and appellee; argued by Wayne O. Solberg, Fargo.
PEDERSON, Justice.
This is an attempted appeal from a summary judgment which disposed of some of the claims for relief, but where no express determination was made that there is no just reason for delay and no express direction for entry of judgment as contemplated by Rule 54(b), NDRCivP. Because the decision is interlocutory, even though in the form of a final judgment, we dismiss the appeal.
Minch owns property in Fargo in an area which, prior to 1976, was zoned "R-3 Multiple Dwelling District." In 1976, after Minch had commenced with physical improvements in accord with the R-3 designation, Fargo rezoned the area "R-1 One and Two Family Dwelling District." Minch sued, seeking alternatively: (1) $100,000 damages for a taking or damaging of property without compensation; (2) a declaration that a valid nonconforming use existed and $20,000 damages for increased costs and loss of profits; or (3) a permanent injunction preventing enforcement of the ordinance because it was unconstitutional, and $20,000 damages for increased costs and loss of profits.
Fargo's answer denied the pertinent allegations and counterclaimed, asking for dismissal and for an order restraining Minch from certain commercial uses of the property, and requiring that he correct specified structural defects.
Both sides moved for summary judgment and, thereafter, the trial court dismissed all of Minch's claims for damagein effect leaving for trial the issues:
(1) Was there a taking or damaging in the constitutional sense?
(2) Did a nonconforming use exist?
(3) Is the change in the ordinance unconstitutional?
(4) Should Minch be restrained from certain commercial uses of the property? and
(5) Should Minch be required to correct structural defects?
There is no claim that controverted facts make a partial summary judgment inappropriate. Despite the fact that no 54(b) order accompanied the dismissal of the damage claims, review of that ruling is now sought in this court.
"In furtherance of convenience or to avoid prejudice," courts may order separate trials and separate issues, and may direct a separate "final judgment" in accordance with Rule 54(b). See Rules 21 and 42(b), NDRCivP.
Rule 54(b), NDRCivP, states:
"When more than one claim for relief is presented in an action, whether as a claim, counterclaim, crossclaim, or third party claim, or when multiple parties are involved, the court may direct the entry of a final judgment as to one or more but fewer than all of the claims or parties only upon an express determination that there is no just reason for delay and upon an express direction for the entry of judgment. In the absence of such determination and direction, any order or other form of decision, however designated, which adjudicates fewer than all of the claims or the rights and liabilities of fewer than all of the parties shall not terminate the action as to any of the claims or parties, and the order or other form of decision is subject to revision at any time before the entry of judgment adjudicating all the claims and the rights and liabilities of all the parties."
*788 Since the adoption of Rule 54(b) in 1957, the decisions of this court have not left a clear or consistent path for practitioners to follow.
After a full analysis of the rule and its purpose, authored by now Chief Justice Erickstad, this court held:
"A judgment which adjudicates less than all claims is not appealable unless an order has been rendered under Rule 54(b), N.D.R.Civ.P." Kack v. Kack, 142 N.W.2d 754, 755 (N.D.1966), Syllabus 1.
Relying upon cases interpreting the identical federal rule, Justice Erickstad pointed out that, although it was not good practice, "at least in the relatively earlier stage of the general enforcement of Rule 54(b)," the court would nevertheless hear the appeal rather than remand and require parties to start anew. Kack v. Kack, supra, 142 N.W.2d at 761.
During the period immediately following Kack, where Rule 54(b) was considered, this court consistently dismissed appeals where the appropriate Rule 54(b) order was missing. Perdue v. Knudson, 154 N.W.2d 908 (N.D.1967), dismissal; Perdue v. Knudson, 179 N.W.2d 416 (N.D.1970), on the merits; Berg v. Kremers, 154 N.W.2d 911 (N.D. 1967), dismissal; Berg v. Kremers, 181 N.W.2d 730 (N.D.1970), and Berg v. Kremers, 193 N.W.2d 129 (N.D.1972), on the merits; Mitzel v. Schatz, 167 N.W.2d 519 (N.D. 1968), dismissal; and Mitzel v. Schatz, 175 N.W.2d 659 (N.D.1970), on the merits.
Berg v. Kremers, supra, 154 N.W.2d at 912, stating that the rule discourages piecemeal disposal of multipleclaim litigation, held that in the absence of a 54(b) order, "this court has no jurisdiction to hear such appeal."
Giese v. Engelhardt, 175 N.W.2d 578 (N.D.1970), and Schollmeyer v. Saxowsky, 211 N.W.2d 377 (N.D.1973), were partial disposition cases where appropriate Rule 54(b) orders had been entered.
Consistency is more difficult to recognize in subsequent cases, starting with Luithle v. Taverna, 214 N.W.2d 117 (N.D.1974), where this court concluded that when the judgment disposed of all the claims in which the plaintiffappellant had an interest, no Rule 54(b) order was necessary even though a crossclaim amongst defendantsappellees remained undecided.
Rogelstad v. Farmers Union Grain Term. Ass'n, 224 N.W.2d 544, 548 (N.D.1974), said:
"We have considered this matter, and believe that Rule 54 applies to decisions which finally dispose of causes of action, as opposed to matters collateral to the merits of a case, such as the determination that an action may not be maintained as a class action. See 6 Moore's Federal Practice, § 54.31 (2d Ed. 1974)."
Hodny v. Hoyt, 224 N.W.2d 826 (N.D. 1974), dismissed for want of a 54(b) order, was back on the merits after the final judgment had been entered. Hodny v. Hoyt, 243 N.W.2d 350 (N.D.1976).
In Fisher v. Golden Valley Bd. of County Com'rs., 226 N.W.2d 636, 642 (N.D.1975), we did not dismiss an appeal which would have been required by Rule 54(b) where there was a stipulation that neither party objected to the absence of the 54(b) order, but we said:
"... we do not mean to lessen the importance of a Rule 54(b) order, nor do we mean to indicate that we will hereafter necessarily recognize this case as precedent for a departure from Rule 54(b) of the North Dakota Rules of Civil Procedure."
In Melland Firestone, Inc. v. Streich, 226 N.W.2d 141 (N.D.1975), we dismissed an appeal from a judgment which did not dispose of a counterclaim because there was no 54(b) order. About the same time, in Hubbard v. Libi, 229 N.W.2d 82 (N.D.1975), we used Fisher v. Golden Valley Bd. of County Com'rs, supra, as a precedent for departing from Rule 54(b) and reaching the merits without a 54(b) order because the parties stipulated that we should. In reaching the merits on an appeal from a partial judgment in Danks v. Holland, 246 N.W.2d 86 (N.D.1976), we merely pointed out, in a footnote, the absence of a Rule 54(b) order.
*789 Again, in Zuraff v. Empire Fire & Marine Ins. Co., 252 N.W.2d 302, 304 (N.D.1977), where counsel, after oral argument, stipulated that noncompliance with Rule 54(b) be waived, we said:
"We need not, therefore, determine the issue of appealability ..."
In Crandall v. N.D. High School Activities Ass'n, 261 N.W.2d 921, 923 (N.D.1978), we relied on a stipulation and "confirmation by the court that the order was final" as obvious efforts to satisfy Rule 54(b).
Boone v. Estate of Nelson, 264 N.W.2d 881, 884 (N.D.1978), held:
"In the instant case, the probate court did not make an express determination, pursuant to Rule 54(b), N.D.R.Civ.P., that there was no just reason for delay. We conclude that the summary judgment of the probate court was not a final judgment and was not appealable."
In City of Williston v. Beede, 289 N.W.2d 235, 238 (N.D.1980), we granted a petition that we exercise our original jurisdiction in order to "prevent unwarranted, complicated and bifurcated appeals to this court which do not promote the ends of justice." Justice Sand, in authoring that opinion, noted the significance of Rule 54(b) to the question.
We have not searched for decisions where no mention was made of Rule 54(b) but where an appeal from a judgment on a portion of a complaint has been decided on the merits. We know there are some, e.g., Morgel v. Winger, 290 N.W.2d 266 (N.D. 1980). This court can hardly be faulted for not deciding issues that are not raised by the parties.
However checkered the history of Rule 54(b) may appear, from a declaration that compliance is jurisdictional, Berg v. Kremers, 154 N.W.2d 911 (N.D.1967), to ignoring the rule completely, Morgel v. Winger, supra, it does have a legitimate role in jurisprudence. The district court has not made the requisite determination that there is no just reason for delay. The partial judgment that was entered is interlocutory and the question of damages, which appears to be finally determined, may have to again be considered by the trial court, depending upon the conclusion reached on the other issues. The rule does not recognize any type of stipulation to nullify its operation.[1] Furthermore, the facts of this case do not compel us to ignore the rule and assume jurisdiction. Even were we able to reach the merits, it appears that certain findings would have to be made by a lower court before we could review even the damages issue. Therefore the case must be remanded to the district court but, in the interest of judicial economy, we will attempt to make clear our position concerning remedies for grievances arising from municipal zoning actions.
While public officials in their discretionary acts and decisions have immunity from claims founded in tort, Kitto v. Minot Park District, 224 N.W.2d 795 (N.D.1974), § 14 of the North Dakota Constitution guarantees that a person will be recompensed for any taking or damaging of his property by the public. Section 14 authorizes a claim for inverse condemnation, Donaldson v. City of Bismarck, 71 N.D. 592, 3 N.W.2d 808, 817 (N.D.1942), which is not barred by the immunity discussed in Kitto. Such a claim proceeds from a constitutional right and must be distinguished from claims grounded in tort theory only. See, Kinnischtzke v. City of Glen Ullin, 79 N.D. 495, 57 N.W.2d 588 (1953); Armstrong v. Ross Tp., 82 Mich.App. 77, 266 N.W.2d 674, 676 (1978).
If an action for inverse condemnation lies for a taking or damaging under § 14, it still must be determined what is necessary for a zoning ordinance to effect a "taking or damaging." The scope of § 14 is clearly broader than that of the federal constitution. In this state a public entity can cause compensable damage to property without fully taking it. We said in King v. *790 Stark County, 67 N.D. 260, 271 N.W. 771, 774 (N.D.1937):
"It is not necessary that there be a direct injury to the property itself in order to create this liability [for damages]. It is sufficient to warrant a recovery if there be `some direct physical disturbance of a right, either public or private, which the plaintiff enjoys in connection with his property, and which gives to it an additional value, and that by reason of such disturbance he has sustained a special damage with respect to his property in excess of that sustained by the public generally.' [Cites omitted.] And the diminution in value of property resulting from the acts complained of is special and peculiar within the meaning of the rule."
A remedy in inverse condemnation then does not require a taking or total destruction of the property.
A land use regulation would not result in an obligation to pay damages if it can legitimately be designated as an exercise of police power.
"Statutory enactments and municipal ordinances having for their purpose the protection of the public health, safety, morals and public welfare are founded upon the police power inherent in the state." Soderfelt v. City of Drayton, 79 N.D. 742, 59 N.W.2d 502, 507 (1953).
Distinguishing between use of the police power and a compensable damaging may not be easy in certain cases. The general rule appears to be that compensation is due where the official act is to create a public benefit or convenience, while the police power enables noncompensable regulation to prevent disputes and violation of rights. See, Hagman, Urban Planning and Land Development Control Law, § 180 (1971). Of course, the extent of the owner's loss is inevitably a factor in any attempt to identify an act as either a damaging or a police function.
This court has counted zoning as a manifestation of the police power. Eck v. City of Bismarck, 283 N.W.2d 193, 197 (N.D. 1979). A decrease in the monetary value of property as a result of a zoning action does not necessarily amount to a taking or even a damaging which would oblige the governmental entity to pay compensation. Eck, supra, 283 N.W.2d at 197. Only where the zoning ordinance "forbids substantially all use of regulated property" will a suit in inverse condemnation be appropriate. Eck, supra, 283 N.W.2d at 201. If the ordinance is arbitrary, discriminatory or otherwise illegal but does not effect a taking or damaging, declaratory relief must be sought. Eck, supra, 283 N.W.2d at 201. Thus zoning is relatively insulated from claims for damages.
However, Minch has alleged substantial reliance on the prior zoning provision and on representations made by certain city officials before the rezoning. In City of Fargo, Cass County v. Harwood Tp., 256 N.W.2d 694, 700 (N.D.1977), we said that "a landowner who has made substantial expenditures in reliance upon existing zoning or otherwise committed himself to his substantial disadvantage before the zoning change may be protected." Harwood was a declaratory action. Nevertheless, substantial reliance could in effect substitute for the requirement above mentioned in inverse condemnation actions that almost all use of the zoned property be forbidden. In a given instance, a trial court could well find reliance considerable enough to declare a taking or damaging.
Thus in any case where a taking or damaging in the constitutional sense is alleged, blanket immunity for public officials is inappropriate. The court must determine whether or not, as a matter of law, there has been a taking or damaging. Yegen v. City of Bismarck, 291 N.W.2d 422, 424 (N.D. 1980). And in the instant case, that issue unavoidably entails an inquiry into Minch's reliance or the principle of estoppel. See the discussion of estoppel elements in Farmers Cooperative Ass'n of Churchs Ferry v. Cole, 239 N.W.2d 808, 813 (N.D.1976).
The case is remanded to the district court for proceedings in accord with this opinion. No costs will be allowed on this appeal.
ERICKSTAD, C. J., and PAULSON, SAND and VANDE WALLE, JJ., concur.
NOTES
[1]  The parties, through their counsel, orally stipulated before this court that the absence of a Rule 54(b) order was waived. For reasons stated herein, we cannot give full effect to that stipulation.

=== CASE 9738661 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:00:04.283864+00 ===

MORGAN, Justice.
This is a rate case which arises from the July 17, 1975, filing of a notice and application for a general increase in electric rates by the Northwestern Public Service Company (company). The proposed rates would have raised company’s electric revenues by approximately $8,450,000 per annum. At the hearing staged before the Public Utilities Commission (PUC), the South Dakota Electric Consumers, a consortium of seven municipalities (cities), intervened and actively participated in the proceedings. The PUC issued its initial decision on September 27, 1976, purportedly allowing company approximately $4,800,000 per annum revenue increase. Company appealed this decision to the circuit court which remanded the case to the PUC for a rehearing. The rehearing was limited to various filings of information. The rehearing decision affirmed the initial decision except for a minor correction of a previous error in calculation. Company then appealed the rehearing decision to the circuit court which affirmed the PUC and dismissed company’s appeal, which action was then appealed to this court. We affirm in part, reverse in part, and remand for further proceedings.1
The rate-making power is vested in the PUC under SDCL 49 -34A. The statutes place the responsibility on the PUC to balance the need of the utility for adequate revenue with the protection of the public from unjust or unreasonable rates. To.this end it is neither a consumer advocate nor a utility advocate. The burden of proving that the rate sought is just and reasonable is on the utility.
Our scope of review has been discussed many times. Most recently it has been thoroughly reviewed in South Dakota Public Utilities v. Otter Tail, 291 N.W.2d 291 (S.D.1980), so that we will not go into such detail in this opinion.2 Succinctly stated, we (1) determine whether the PUC’s order viewed in light of the relevant facts and of the PUC’s broad regulatory duties abused or exceeded its authority; (2) examine the manner in which the PUC has employed the methods of regulation which it has itself selected and determine whether each of the order’s essential elements are supported by substantial evidence; and (3) determine whether the order may reasonably be expected to maintain financial integrity, attract necessary capital, and fairly compensate investors for the risks they have assumed, by providing appropriate protection to the relevant public interest both existing and foreseeable. Permian Basin Area Rate Cases, 390 U.S. 747, 88 S.Ct. 1344, 20 L.Ed.2d 312 (1968).
Before discussing the various issues, we make some general observations. The PUC has adopted the “cost of service” method of rate making. This method entails four steps as follows: (1) Properly determine company’s rate base, i. e., investment devoted to public service; (2) determine a fair and reasonable rate of return; (3) multiply the base [(1) above] by the rate [(2) above]; and (4) add to company’s cost of operations *465referred to above (including taxes and depreciation). To assist in the computation of the steps above, a historical test year is adopted.3 The data from this year must be adjusted as to the cost of operations and the rate base to reflect changes which will be in effect subsequent to the historical test year. The adjustments in this case were considerably complicated by the effect of the Big Stone Power Plant (plant) on company’s operations when it became operational.4 This plant was erected by a consortium of three power suppliers: company, Montana Dakota Utilities Company, and Otter Tail Power Company, each of whom share proportionately in the output of the plant and in the expenses of the construction, maintenance, and other costs of operations. Company, which had formerly been only a purchasing company, became a generating company when the power plant went on line. This event occurred during the course of the test year. While company does not dispute, for the purposes of this appeal, the PUC’s determination in step (2), that a fair and reasonable rate of return would be 9.23%, they argue that because of errors by the PUC in the determination of the rate base in step (1) and the costs of operation in step (3), the net result was to allow a return of only 7.31%.
The disputed issues fall into two categories: (1) Those relating to rate base, of which there are three: (a) disallowance of CWIP; (b) the deduction of “negative working capital”; and (c) the determination of AFUDC. (2) Those related to cost of operations, of which there are three: (a) the determination of power supply costs; (b) deduction for ad valorem taxes on CWIP; and (c) the exclusion of annual payroll and pension expenses. We will treat them in that order.
DISALLOWANCE OF CWIP ON WHICH NO AFUDC WAS TAKEN
We first examine company’s argument that the PUC erred in excluding $303,607 from rate base, the value of certain “construction work in progress” (CWIP) at the end of the test year for which the in-service date was imminent. CWIP can represent a considerable investment by the utility. Yet under the PUC’s rate-making theory the newly constructed asset does not become a part of company’s base until it is actually in use. To compensate company for the investment during the interim the value of the investment is categorized as allowance for funds used during construction (AFUDC), and company is permitted to capitalize this investment. Contrary to the generally accepted concept of capitalization, i. e., record it as an asset and depreciate it out, the term as used in rate making means to calculate a rate of return representing the cost of the capital, considering the various capital components, which rate is applied to the investment figure and the result included in the rate base. While it may sound as though capitalization of AFUDC and the alternative of including CWIP in rate base while the work is under construction are equivalent methods of compensation, this is not so as far as cost recovery from the ratepayers. The capitalization of AFUDC matches the cost reflected in utility rates with the benefits concurrently received by ratepayers, whereas inclusion of CWIP in the base would require current ratepayers to pay for construction that will result in service in the future.
In its application company opted to treat the $303,607 as a capital asset and include the entire sum in its computation of base rate, rather than capitalize it as AFUDC, and the PUC excluded it from company’s rate base. In doing so the PUC stated in its rehearing decision that it is proper to exclude all CWIP from rate base.
*466This court has previously quoted with approval Columbus Gas & Fuel Co. v. Public Utilities Commission of Ohio, 292 U.S. 398, 54 S.Ct. 763, 78 L.Ed. 1327 (1934), 91 A.L.R. 1403, wherein the Supreme Court said: “ ‘There will be no need in the computation of the rate base to include the . . . value of (assets) not presently in use, unless the time for using them is so near that they may be said, at least by analogy, to have the quality of working capital. . . . ’ ” Application of Northwestern Bell Telephone Co., 78 S.D. 15, 30, 98 N.W.2d 170, 178 (1959) (emphasis added). The PUC made no finding as to the imminence of the use of the CWIP in question. The circuit court, after quoting the correct rule from Columbus Gas & Fuel Co., supra, noted that other than a conclusory statement by a company witness there was no showing that the CWIP in question was soon to be in service, and that company had therefore failed to meet its burden in showing imminent service. We agree with the determination of the circuit court and hold that although the PUC was in error as to its narrow statement of the rule, the error was nonprejudicial for the reason that there is insufficient evidence in the record to sustain company’s argument that the use of the CWIP was in fact imminent.
DEDUCTION OF NEGATIVE WORKING CAPITAL
The next issue that goes to the rate base „ is the action of the PUC in adopting cities’ working capital allowance, actually a negative allowance, thereby diminishing the rate base by $1,292,435. This relates to the accruals on company’s books of account for taxes payable and tax collections payable but not due, which actually are the equivalent of funds contributed by ratepayers on which company is not entitled to earn a rate of return by inclusion in the base as working capital. While it would seem to be a fairly routine adjustment, we instead find three divergent views, with company and cities at opposite extremes and the PUC staff in between.
In the first instance company did not claim any working capital allowance in its rate base, asserting that such a small allowance was needed that it did not justify the expense of an analysis to support the claim. Cities, however, recommended an allowance for working capital, but then claimed that because certain accruals in company’s books for tax liabilities were ratepayer-contributed funds, and because the average of such accruals for the test year exceeded their proposed allowance, company’s rate base should be reduced by such excess. In arriving at the figure proposed by cities, they used a standard formula hereinafter referred to as the “FPC Formula,” as used before the Federal Power Commission, which was applied to company’s operation and maintenance expenses for the test year to arrive at a working-capital allowance from which figure were deducted what cities claimed were the accruals for tax liabilities, which amounted to ratepayer-contributed funds. While company acknowledges this court’s holding in N. W. Pub. Serv. v. Cities of Chamberlain, Etc., 265 N.W.2d 867 (S.D.1978), which approved treating accrual taxes as rate base deductions, company contested cities’ computation on two principal bases: (1) That the accruals on the books represent bookkeeping accruals and were not the equivalent of funds provided by ratepayers available to company for use as working capital; and (2) that the “FPC Formula” already takes into account the various accruals so the deduction amounted to an improper double-counting deduction.
A review of the record discloses that this item was a battle of the experts with testimony supporting all views, and in that respect this court, claiming no expertise in rate making, normally gives credence to the PUC decision. Here we are faced with the PUC’s total disregard of the computations of its own staff which fall midway between company’s and cities’. Staff urged that the cities’ computation was in error because the calculations failed to properly impact the plant’s effect on working-capital requirements. It is undisputed that the effect of sales of surplus capacity from the plant very dramatically increased operation and *467maintenance expenses which resulted in an increase of working-capital requirement after application of the FPC Formula. Neither of the PUC decisions indicates that there is any error in the staff computation.
As to company’s principal argument that the book accruals do not represent actual cash available for company’s use as capital, company has failed to present any evidence to prove such discrepancy. Company has the burden of justifying their rate base. Company started out ignoring working-capital allowance as too insignificant to warrant the cost of analysis. Company was certainly aware of the negative impact of the accruals from its previous experience and should have been prepared to meet the issue with actual figures. Cities and the PUC used the figures available from company’s books and we are not inclined to say they had to go further. The PUC had the evidence before it and made their decision. It is not for this court to weigh the evidence. There appears to be substantial evidence on the whole record to support the PUC’s decision.
DETERMINATION OF AFUDC
The last rate base issue we deal with is the disposition of such AFUDC as company did capitalize and include in their computations of rate base. As previously noted, capitalization in this instance means to determine a rate representing the estimated cost of capital calculated from the weighted costs of the various capital components, i. e., common equity, stocks, bonds, etc., which rate is then multiplied by the investment in construction work, thus arriving at the AFUDC to be capitalized.
The PUC staff and cities both disagreed with company’s calculation. The disagreement came as to the treatment of income tax deductions for construction related interest expense. One of two alternative methods is used in the industry: normalized treatment or flow-through treatment. The selection of method dictates how the income tax deduction is handled. Under the normalized treatment the cost-of-debt component in the AFUDC rate is calculated net-of-tax deduction for interest. This is a lower rate which in effect passes the benefit of the tax deduction to ratepayers over the life of the newly constructed property. The alternative, flow-through treatment, uses the interest deduction in calculating the income tax expense included in the cost of services thereby reducing that component, leaving AFUDC to be calculated on a gross basis. The benefit from the interest deduction is “flowed through” to current ratepayers and is not available for deferral for the benefit of future ratepayers.
The method selected by the PUC was normalized treatment. Cities disputed the validity of company’s computation of net-of-tax rate as arbitrary and argued that the rate used was a gross rate. Staff urged that a net-of-tax rate results in a disservice to the ratepayers and recalculated the AFUDC rate at a gross rate calling for a flow-through treatment. The PUC decided to reject company’s computation as not a net-of-tax rate and then also rejected the recommendation of its own staff and adopted cities’ view. In its findings of fact the PUC stated that company had not proven its AFUDC computation was net-of-tax and went on apparently to treat it as a gross rate. However, no findings of fact or conclusions of law were made to that end.
This dispute was again a battle of the experts. In fact, what should have been a routine accounting exercise of determining the various costs of capital invested turned into a donnybrook with company saying “ ’tis” and cities saying “ ’taint.” Staff apparently took off in a third direction, suggesting that gross base should be used, but nevertheless asserting that company’s proposed rate was not net-of-tax. Each side can point to inconsistencies in the expert testimony of the other. The rehearing decision fails to shed any light on the problem. The PUC merely adopted cities’ argument.
It is not for this court to weigh the evidence. We must rely on the PUC’s expertise. We cannot say that on this issue they were arbitrary or capricious; nor do we agree with company’s contention that contradictions in the record render the evi*468dence unsubstantial. This is true only where there is clear evidence on the other side. Universal Camera Corp. v. Labor Bd., 340 U.S. 474, 71 S.Ct. 456, 95 L.Ed. 456 (1951). In this case evidence on both sides was contradictory. We hold, therefore, that there appears to be substantial evidence on the whole record to support the PUC’s decision.
POWER SUPPLY COSTS
In the category of operation and maintenance expenses, company’s most spirited attack is launched against the PUC’s decrease in power supply costs which deleted more than $3,200,000 from company’s claim for those costs. Again, PUC adopted cities’ computation entirely without regard for the showing of their own staff. Company argues that the decision is not supported by substantial evidence and is arbitrary and capricious. We agree.
Much of the disparity in this instance arises from the going on line of the Big Stone Plant as previously mentioned and the conversion of company from a purchasing company to a generating company at the end of the test year. As 32.5% owner of the plant, company need no longer purchase power from other sources for resale since the plant provides all the power that company requires plus additional off-peak power which can be sold to other electrical utilities. All parties agree that the plant should be included in the test year rate base because of its obvious impact on company’s rates. Inclusion of the plant in rate base, however, requires a corresponding pro for-ma adjustment in the form of a credit to power supply costs for the test year to reflect the additional income company will receive from the sale of off-peak energy. The controversy relates to the magnitude of the adjustment which depends on a determination of how much electric power the plant can generate and how much of the surplus generated power can be sold.
Cities calculated the credit to company’s power supply costs using data contained in a letter written by the plant’s superintendent, Mr. Johnson, to an official of one of the other co-owners of the plant. This letter (hereinafter sometimes called the Johnson letter) was written on March 26, 1975, before the plant was operational. The letter is concerned with, as appears under “Subject” at the top of it, operating and maintenance costs. The letter contains Mr. Johnson’s prediction of the plant’s operating and maintenance costs assuming the plant operated “for the full year in 1975 at an unrestricted load.” The unrestricted load assumed by Mr. Johnson was 337 days at 396 MW with a heat rate of 10,500 BTU/KWH. Using these figures, Mr. Johnson concluded that the plant could produce 3,202,800 MWHs of generation. Not only did cities adopt the data in the Johnson letter to calculate the plant’s generating capacity, it used the same figures to compute company’s power pool sales, that is, the amount of excess power available for sale to other electric companies in the MAPP pool. Cities’ power pool sales estimate further assumed that 100% of the plant’s surplus output could be sold.
Staff disagreed with cities’ approach. As pointed out by the staff witness, cities’ calculations did not take into consideration the peaks and valleys of electric usage. Demand for power is greater during some seasons than others; in fact, during certain hours of the day. Common sense dictates that a plant the size of Big Stone would not be built merely to meet the present power needs, but rather to handle expanded future needs. Staff and company urged a less simplistic approach based on existing contracts and historical sales data. Company points out that power sales are a matter of supply and demand, but while the Johnson letter may give an indication of the available supply, it does not address the factor of demand.
Another point of attack by company on the computation of credit for wholesale sales is described as a mismatch in the use of two different costs of fuel. Computation based on the Johnson letter resulted in the figure of 5.41 mills per KWH. A November 1975 actual figure of fuel costs of 6.89 mills per KWH was established in the rec*469ord. The deductive process of computation was first to determine the fuel costs per KWH of electricity generated; second to determine the fuel costs per KWH of the power that is wholesaled- and then to deduct the latter from the former which results in the costs to be passed on to the retail customers as an add-on in the operation and expense category.
Cities’ witness used the lower figure of 5.41 mills in his calculation of the total cost of power generated, but used the higher actual cost figure in his calculation of costs of wholesale power to be deducted. Company urges that this results in a mismatch, and we agree. On appeal, counsel for the PUC urges that the November cost figure is not accurate, that it is too short a period to reflect the true cost. In this he may be correct, but he fails to explain why it is so inaccurate that it cannot be used in one step but accurate enough to be used in the second. Whichever figure is used it should be used in both steps, otherwise they are comparing apples with oranges.
By the time the rate increase hearing began in April of 1976,. the plant had been in operation for nearly a year. Company presented evidence of its actual experience with the plant during that year which showed that the power production prediction contained in the Johnson letter was highly overestimated. Company’s evidence also showed that sales of 100% of excess power to other electric companies was not being realized as forecast by cities, but that only 65% of the excess output was being sold. The assumptions on which the Johnson prediction was based were neither verified nor proven to exist. The PUC adopted all of cities’ calculations and rejected all of the evidence presented by company, ignoring company’s actual experience with the plant for nearly a year which had elapsed between the test year and the hearings. We conclude that the PUC’s decision in this regard was arbitrary, since the result was a drastic underestimation of company’s power supply costs and a concomitant overestimation of the wholesale revenues which would stem from the operation of the plant.
“The purpose of using a test year is to establish with a reasonable degree of accuracy the revenue and expenses that a utility will experience during the period when the new rates will be in effect.” N. W. Pub. Serv. v. Cities of Chamberlain, Etc., supra, at 879. It is well-settled, however, that when reliable evidence of actual experience is available, it should supplant evidence of a purely theoretical and predictive nature. This principle was recognized and applied by this court in N. W. Pub. Serv. v. Cities of Chamberlain, Etc., supra, at 878 and 879. This principle was enunciated in West Ohio Gas Co. v. Public Utilities Com., 294 U.S. 79, 55 S.Ct. 324, 79 L.Ed. 773 (1935), wherein the United States Supreme Court held that the public utilities commission acted arbitrarily by using predictions of income and expenses based on test-year data and ignoring available evidence of actual post test-year earnings.
We think the adoption of a single year as an exclusive test or standard imposed upon the company an arbitrary restriction in contravention of the Fourteenth Amendment and of “the rudiments of fair play” made necessary thereby. The earnings of the later years were exhibited in the record and told their own tale as to the possibilities of profit. To shut one’s eyes to them altogether, to exclude them from the reckoning, is as much arbitrary action as to build a schedule upon guesswork with evidence available.
294 U.S. at 81 -82, 55 S.Ct. at 325, 79 L.Ed. at 776 (citations omitted).
We find the Court’s reasoning in that case equally applicable to the instant case when cities and the PUC relied almost entirely on the data contained in the Johnson letter. That letter was nothing more than a prediction based upon certain assumptions which were never verified or proven to exist. Company, on the other hand, presented concrete evidence of actual post test-year experience with the plant, which was in sharp contrast to the Johnson letter data. We conclude that the PUC’s reliance in this case on the speculative data presented by cities and its refusal to con*470sider company’s evidence of actual results and the recommendation of its own staff was arbitrary and that the decision on this issue was not supported by the evidence.
AD VALOREM TAXES RELATED TO CWIP
The next item of cost in dispute is the PUC’s exclusion of $57,944 from company’s cost of services, representing the amount of ad valorem taxes related to CWIP. Company sought to include ad valorem taxes on CWIP in its cost of services because of the bookkeeping burden of capitalizing small amounts. The PUC ruled, however, that such taxes had to be capitalized and made the deduction. Company does not dispute the PUC’s ruling regarding method; however, it asserts that the amount deducted greatly exceeds the amount that should have been deducted.
The figure was arrived at by one of the expert witnesses for cities, purportedly from information furnished by company. Company disputes his basis for computation and denominates it as guesswork. Company had estimated total ad valorem taxes of over 1.5 million. When broken down the valuations upon which the taxes were computed were found to contain some 2 million dollars plus in the CWIP category. Under the PUC’s ruling such could not be included. Company does not dispute the method of computation but only the basic figure of 2 million dollars plus. Nowhere does company point to a more accurate figure; instead it refers to a “de minimus” amount. The figure appears to have been taken from company’s computation for tax deduction. The PUC had the expert testimony upon which to base its decision, and we find that to be substantial evidence and will not overturn it.
EXCLUSION OF INCREASE OF ANNUAL PAYROLL AND PENSION EXPENSES
The PUC excluded $355,017 of increased payroll and pension expenses from company’s cost of service, having found that the increased salary expense resulted in increased productivity.
It is settled that the PUC is allowed to exclude increased payroll expense where it is shown to be offset by increased productivity. N. W. Pub. Serv. v. Cities of Chamberlain, Etc., supra.
At the first hearing the testimony of members of the PUC’s staff indicated their beliefs that such would be the case here. The report upon which staff relied showed that between 1965 and 1974 company’s per-unit cost of producing power went only from 5.36 mills per KWH in 1965 to 5.72 mills per KWH in 1974, with fluctuations in between. Company does not dispute the report, they simply argue that this increase of .36 mills for KWH over a nine-year period is a huge increase and that the PUC’s finding is without basis. On rehearing staff apparently completely changed its position, as summarized in the findings of fact proposed to the PUC on the rehearing, as indicated by the following: “We have reviewed the record of this proceeding and are inclined to modify our decision and order in this respect.... Initially our review of staff exhibit No. 9 does not conclusively indicate a trend of decreasing wage and salary costs per KWH sold and upon reconsideration, we conclude that this expense appears to be justified on record.” And further “these expenses appear on the record to be somewhat justified, and since the commission recently approved a comparable adjustment in Northern States Power, F-3062, October 6, 1976, where the factual allegations were similar, we conclude in the sound exercise of our discretion in this matter, that it is proper to recognize a pro forma wage and salary adjustment of $355,-017.”
In spite of this stance of their own staff, in the rehearing decision the PUC stated: “The evidence before the commission fully supports this finding that increased productivity has, in fact, offset payroll and related increases.” They make no reference whatever to their own staff’s change of posture, nor do they suggest any distinction between this case and the Northern States Power case cited by staff.
*471On appeal counsel for the PUC states in his brief that the staff witnesses’ testimony is fully supported on the record. Company’s witness attempted to controvert portions of staff witnesses’ testimony but was unsuccessful. On the basis of staff witnesses’ testimony and detailed study, the PUC was fully justified in finding that increased productivity would offset the payroll and related expenses claimed by NWPS in this proceeding. But nowhere does he allude to or explain the impact of the change of the posture of staff as indicated above.
We hold, therefore, that upon the face of the record the determination by the PUC on rehearing was wholly unsupported by substantial evidence and was arbitrary and capricious.
SUMMARY
We affirm the PUC rehearing decision with respect to disallowance of CWIP, deduction of negative working capital, determination of AFUDC, and determination of ad valorem taxes on CWIP. We reverse with respect to the determination of power supply costs, and the disallowance of increased payroll and pension expenses.
The case is remanded to the circuit court with directions to remand to the PUC for further action consistent with this opinion.
WOLLMAN, C. J., concurs.
FOSHEIM, J., concurs specially.
DUNN and HENDERSON, JJ., concur in part and dissent in part.
. Because the PUC later granted company another electric rate increase during the course of the proceedings below, the rates under consideration here are for a “locked-in” period from October 18, 1975, to August 25, 1977.
. This case having arisen prior to 1978 Amendment, we also used the “substantial evidence” standard.
. In this case the twelve-month period up to and including April 30, 1975, the date of company’s filing, was selected as the test year.
. As counsel explained at oral argument, one of the reasons for the request for a rate hike of the magnitude sought (42%) was the going on line of the Big Stone Plant by virtue of which company’s investment jumped from 40 million to 100 million in one leap, which entitles company to a commensurate increase in rate base. This is attributable to the PUC’s decision not to include any CWIP until it is in use or imminent. This is a policy decision entirely within the purview of the PUC.

=== CASE 9738747 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:01:59.041337+00 ===

WOLLMAN, Chief Justice.
Appellant appeals from the judgment of the circuit court affirming, the decision of the Division of Labor and Management denying appellant’s claim for worker’s compensation against appellees L. W. Tyler, Custom Combiners (employer), and Fireman’s Fund American Insurance Companies (insurer). We reverse and remand.
*180Appellant and employer are residents of the state of Oklahoma. Appellant began working for employer as a truck driver in employer’s custom combining operations on July 5, 1973. The employment agreement was entered into in the state of Kansas.
On July 24, 1973, appellant was injured near Martin, South Dakota, when he was run over by employer’s truck. Appellant sustained multiple fractures to his pelvis, lower back and right ankle as a result of the accident. Appellant was 17 years of age at the time of the accident.
On July 26, 1973, employer filed an employer’s first report of injury with the Kansas Workmen’s Compensation Authority.1 Following certain proceedings before the Kansas Workmen’s Compensation Authority, the matter was dismissed for the reason that the Kansas worker’s compensation statutes provide no coverage for agricultural pursuits, including custom combining.2 Prior to dismissal of the proceeding, however, appellant had received from insurer benefit payments under Kansas law amounting to $1,194.66 in temporary total disability payments through January 31, 1974, and $5,045 in medical expenses.
In February 1976, the South Dakota Division of Labor and Management (Division) received a letter dated February 17, 1976, representing the first filing of a claim by appellant under the South Dakota worker’s compensation statutes. The Division denied appellant’s claim on the ground that it had not been timely filed.3 The decision of the Division was affirmed by the circuit court. This appeal followed.
It is a general rule that worker’s compensation statutes should be liberally construed in favor of injured employees. “The Workmen’s Compensation Act is remedial, and should be liberally construed to effectuate its purpose.” Meyer v. Roettele, 64 S.D. 36, 40, 264 N.W. 191, 193 (1935); see also Johnson v. Skelly Oil Co., 288 N.W.2d 493 (S.D.1980); Bearshield v. City of Gregory, 278 N.W.2d 166 (S.D.1979).
Employer had knowledge of claimant’s injury on the date of the injury. Accordingly, the specter of having to defend against a stale claim does not overshadow these proceedings.
This court has previously stated the reason for the statute of limitations in Workmen’s Compensation cases: “The purpose of requiring a claim for compensation to be filed by an injured employee, like notice of injury, is to protect employers against stale claims which cannot be promptly investigated.”
Novak v. C. J. Grossenburg & Son, 89 S.D. 308, 317, 232 N.W.2d 463, 468 (1975), quoting Tegels v. Western Chevrolet Co., 81 S.D. 592, 596, 139 N.W.2d 281, 283 (1965). What we said in Tegels is applicable here: “The employee’s failure to file a formal timely claim ... in no way prejudiced the employer or its insurer. Both had notice of the injury and it was promptly and continually investigated.” 81 S.D. at 596, 139 N.W.2d at 283.
Although we have characterized the filing of a claim as a condition precedent to the right of an injured employee to prosecute proceedings seeking compensation, we have recognized reasons or excuses for non-filing and late filing. Tegels, supra, 81 S.D. at 596, 139 N.W.2d at 283. For example, in Bailey v. Hess, 55 S.D. 602, 227 N.W. 69 (1929), an employee’s failure to file a formal claim was excused on the grounds that a settlement agreement between the employer and employee filed with the Industrial Commissioner could be substituted for the required claim.
*181When, however, the employer and employee have reached an agreement in regard to the compensation under the Workmen’s Compensation Law, filed- a memorandum thereof with the Industrial Commissioner, and secured his approval of the agreement . . . [t]o permit the employer to thereafter avoid liability merely because no claim for compensation had been filed with the Industrial Commissioner . .. would neither be just nor reasonable.
55 S.D. at 606, 227 N.W. at 71. Likewise, in Middleton v. City of Watertown, 70 S.D. 158, 160, 16 N.W.2d 39, 40 (1944), we called a similar compensation agreement “the equivalent of a claim for compensation.”
In Tegels we held that where an employer had notice of an injury and its insurer had made payments to a claimant, the employee’s right to compensation was not barred by his failure to file a formal claim within the statutory period. There, compensation was paid claimant weekly and receipts were filed with the Industrial Commissioner. Correspondence from the insurer revealed that claimant was told that payments would continue until he returned to work or was discharged by a doctor. Payments were made for some thirteen weeks. This series of events created a situation tantamount to an agreement to pay compensation, which the Court held obviated the necessity of filing a formal claim.
Appellees argue, however, that our subsequent holding in Klein v. Menke, 83 S.D. 511, 162 N.W .2d 219 (1968), limited Tegels to its facts. Klein, however, lacked the element of the voluntary payment of substantial benefits, and to that extent is distinguishable from Tegels. Accordingly, we decline to construe Klein as constituting a limitation upon the increasingly liberal interpretation this Court has placed upon those acts that are tantamount to the filing of a claim under SDCL 62-7-35.
We conclude that the filing of the employer’s first report of injury with the Kansas equivalent of our Division of Labor and Management and the payment of substantial sums in the way of disability benefits and medical payments constituted the functional equivalent of what occurred in Te-gels. Admittedly, the elements of the filing of correspondence from the insurer to the claimant, receipts for weekly payments, and medical reports are not present in the instant case. What is lacking, however, should not overshadow that which is present-the immediate knowledge on the part of the employer of the fact of the injury; the immediate filing by the employer with the Kansas authorities of the report of the injury; and, most important, the voluntary commencement by insurer of the payment of substantial benefits on appellant’s behalf. Indeed, the actual payment of more than $6,000 in benefits speaks as loudly as did the correspondence in the Te-gels case concerning the insurer’s intention to continue payments. Accordingly, we hold that the facts here support a determination that at the very least a tacit agreement had been reached regarding compensation.
There remains the question whether the Tegels holding is inapposite because the filing of the report of injury and the payment of benefits occurred in Kansas rather than in this state. We conclude not. Although it may be true that the requirement of a timely filed claim cannot be avoided on the equitable grounds of waiver or estoppel, Klein v. Menke, supra, nevertheless the spirit of our holdings in the Tegels, Bailey, and Middleton cases, supra, mandates that we accept a less than literal compliance with the provisions of SDCL 62-7-35 as being jurisdictionally adequate. This is not a case of forum shopping by appellant. It was employer and insurer who chose the initial forum whose statutes relieved them of the liability for the payment of benefits. To hold that the actions of the employer and insurer vis-a-vis appellant constituted an agreement for compensation that satisfied the requirements of SDCL 62-7-35 does no violence to the underlying purpose of that statute, which, as we stated in No-vak and Tegels, supra, is to protect employers against stale claims. To that extent, SDCL 62-7-35 is more a statute of limita*182tions, which, as we held in Arbach v. Graba, 89 S.D. 322, 232 N.W.2d 842 (1975), is a defense that can be avoided on the basis of waiver or estoppel, than an embodiment of a jurisdictional prerequisite to the prosecution of a claim for compensation. Indeed, in Klein, supra, the Court referred to the predecessor statute to SDCL 62-7—35 as a statute of limitations. 83 S.D. at 516-517, 162 N.W.2d at 222. Even if the filing of a claim is considered jurisdictional, however, what constitutes a filing is subject to broad interpretation. Although our holding that the acts by employer and insurer in the instant case constituted a satisfaction of the requirements of SDCL 62-7-35 represents an extension of our holdings in Tegels, Bailey, and Middleton, we believe that our holding is consistent with the spirit of those decisions and with our liberal interpretation of the worker’s compensation statute and is warranted by the facts before us.
The judgment appealed from is reversed, and the case is remanded to the circuit court with directions to remand the matter to the Division of Labor and Management for further proceedings.
DUNN, MORGAN and FOSHEIM, JJ., concur.
HENDERSON, J., concurs specially.
. Kan.Stat.Ann. § 44-557 (1973).
. Kan.Stat.Ann. § 44-505 (1973).
. SDCL 62-7-35 states:
The right to compensation under this title shall be forever barred unless within two years after an injury, or if death results therefrom, within two years after the death, a claim for compensation thereunder is filed with the department. However, if either payment of compensation or reimbursement or payment of medical and hospital expenses under § 62-4-1 has been made on account of an injury or death, a claim may be filed within two years from the date of the last payment.

=== CASE 2217158 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:22.520535+00 ===

256 Cal.App.2d 663 (1967)
THE PEOPLE, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
JOSEPH RODRIGUEZ, Defendant and Appellant.
Crim. No. 12866.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. Three.
Dec. 5, 1967.
Bruce P. Wolfe for Defendant and Appellant.
Thomas C. Lynch, Attorney General, William E. James, Assistant Attorney General, and James H. Kline, Deputy Attorney General, for Plaintiff and Respondent.
MOSS, J.
Defendant, a 17-year-old boy at the time of the killing, appeals from a judgment entered upon a jury verdict finding him guilty of murder in the second degree following a trial which commenced on April 25, 1966. The jury rejected defendant's plea of not guilty by reason of insanity.  [fn. 1] The principal question presented by this appeal is whether an exculpatory statement made by the defendant shortly after the killing while in police custody and after he had been advised of his rights as required by People v. Dorado, 62 Cal.2d 338 [42 Cal.Rptr. 169, 398 P.2d 361], was inadmissible by reason of the fact that defendant was 17 years old. A second question is whether the court committed reversible error in admitting evidence of defendant's participation in a purse-snatching incident which occurred 30 minutes before the killing.
At about 7:30 p.m. on September 26, 1965, defendant was in an alley. He was staggering and whistling. He leaned against a building and picked up a tree limb approximately 4 feet in length and 3 to 4 inches in circumference. An old man who had just emptied some garbage was returning to his house. Defendant walked toward the old man dragging the club and turned into the yard where the old man had gone. Then the *666 old man and defendant came out in the alley and started arguing. Defendant lifted up the club with one hand and the old man tried to grab it from him. Defendant knocked the old man in the head and he fell down and hit his head. Defendant leaned over the old man and started hitting him in the head. Then a woman ran screaming out of the yard where the old man and defendant had entered. Defendant grabbed her hand with one hand and held the club in the other. The woman shouted, "Let me go." Defendant let the woman go and she ran back into the yard. Defendant then went back where the old man was lying and started beating him in the head again. He hit him more than three times. Greg Webb, who had witnessed the foregoing events, then hailed some friends of his who were nearby in a car. As they got out of the car they saw defendant running down the alley. He was staggering and yelling, "Get out of my way. I am crazy. Get out of my way. I will kill you." They chased defendant about half a block where one of them knocked the club away from him and the others knocked defendant down. A police officer arrived upon the scene as the scuffle was going on. The tree limb described above was found near defendant covered with the blood of the victim. The victim had a .20 alcohol content in the blood as of the time of his death.
Over defense objection the trial court received in evidence testimony that about one-half hour before the homicide took place, in the same vicinity, defendant and two other boys approached Mrs. Betty Knapp and her two children. One of the other boys grabbed Mrs. Knapp's purse. Mrs. Knapp yelled for help while the boy was wrestling for the purse. Defendant stood about 6 feet away and watched what was happening. In response to Mrs. Knapp's call for help, Mr. Cordero ran out of the house and the three boys departed in different directions. Defendant walked away.
Defendant testified that at about 7 o'clock in the evening (one-half hour before the homicide was committed) he was walking to a bus stop with Jimmy Garcia and a friend of Jimmy. Jimmy grabbed a lady's purse. When the lady yelled, defendant got scared and walked away. He then ran to an alley where he started to urinate between some bushes and a garage. A man grabbed him from behind. The man was yelling at him. Defendant was frightened and picked up a nearby stick and hit the man. Defendant thought the old man was trying to engage in a homosexual act. Because he was dizzy and his head hurt at that point, he did not remember if he hit *667 the old man again. On cross-examination defendant denied that he had told a different story to the police. Dr. Tweed testified for the defense that in his opinion defendant did not know the nature and quality of his act at the time of the attack and was acting as a result of an acute homosexual panic brought on him by the fear that the victim was molesting him sexually.
In rebuttal, Dr. Abe testified for the prosecution that in his opinion the defendant was sane at the time of the commission of the offense and that defendant was not acting as the result of an acute homosexual panic.
Also on rebuttal, the investigating officer testified that he had interrogated defendant about two hours after the killing in the juvenile detention room of the police station. He knew defendant was 17 years old. The officer testified that before talking to defendant he advised defendant of his constitutional rights, that defendant said he understood his rights and that thereafter defendant talked freely and voluntarily and appeared to be unfrightened.  [fn. 2] The defense offered no evidence tending to show that defendant did not understand his rights as stated to him or that his statement was not made voluntarily. The officer then advised defendant that he was under arrest for murder. Defendant stated that he had been with Frank Molina and Eddie Garcia, that all three of them were in the alley, that Frank had hit the old man over the head again and again, and that defendant had tried to stop him but could not.
The trial commenced in April 1966, i.e., after the decisions in Escobedo v. Illinois (1964) 378 U.S. 478 [12 L.Ed.2d 977, 84 S.Ct. 1758], and People v. Dorado, supra, 62 Cal.2d 338, *668 but before the decision in Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436 [16 L.Ed.2d 694, 86 S.Ct. 1602, 10 A.L.R.3d 974] and, therefore, the rules of Dorado rather than the more stringent rules of Miranda apply. (People v. Rollins, 65 Cal.2d 681, 691 [56 Cal.Rptr. 293, 423 P.2d 221].)
[1] Under the Dorado rules a finding that the defendant has knowingly and intelligently waived his constitutionally guaranteed rights to counsel and to remain silent may not be made except upon proof that before the interrogation the defendant was informed by the interrogating officer of these rights (or that he otherwise had a conscious knowledge of them). The burden of proof is upon the prosecution to show that the defendant's waiver of his rights to counsel and to remain silent was knowingly and intelligently made. (People v. Hildabrandt, 244 Cal.App.2d 423, 430 [53 Cal.Rptr. 99]; cf. People v. Davis, 66 Cal.2d 175, 180 [57 Cal.Rptr. 130, 424 P.2d 682].) [2] In the case of an adult defendant proof that he was advised of his rights, that he said he understood them, and that he thereafter made a statement is sufficient to support a finding of waiver in cases to which Dorado applies. (People v. Thomas, 65 Cal.2d 698, 704-705 [56 Cal.Rptr. 305, 423 P.2d 233]; People v. Saterfield, 65 Cal.2d 752, 755 [56 Cal.Rptr. 338, 423 P.2d 266].) The finding of waiver may be based upon the testimony of a single officer. (People v. Thomas, supra.) [3] Although it is good practice for the trial court to make an explicit finding that a defendant waived his constitutional rights, no such finding is required; a finding of waiver may be implied from the fact that the trial court received a defendant's extrajudicial statement in evidence after receiving proof that the defendant had been advised of his rights as required by Dorado before the statement was made. (People v. Oats, 239 Cal.App.2d 261, 265 [48 Cal.Rptr. 579].)
[4] Recently, in People v. Lara, 67 Cal.2d 365 [62 Cal.Rptr. 586, 432 P.2d 202], the Supreme Court rejected the suggestion that every minor is incompetent as a matter of law to waive his constitutional rights to remain silent and to an attorney unless the waiver is consented to by an attorney or by a parent or guardian who has himself been advised of such rights. (67 Cal.2d at pp. 378- 379.) Therefore, the fact that defendant was interrogated in the absence of his parents or an attorney does not of itself require a finding that defendant did not waive his rights. [5] Under the rule stated in People v. Lara the admissibility of a voluntary extrajudicial *669 statement made by a minor in the absence of counsel or other responsible adult "depends not on his age alone but on a combination of that factor with such other circumstances as his intelligence, education, experience, and ability to comprehend the meaning and effect of his statement." (67 Cal.2d at p. 383.)
Evidence of "such other circumstances" was not developed in this case. As noted earlier defendant, although he took the stand, did not dispute the testimony of the interrogating officer that defendant said he understood his constitutional rights as explained to him and thereafter spoke freely. These facts distinguish this case from People v. Hildabrandt, supra, 244 Cal.App.2d 423, in which the interrogating officer merely "assumed" that the defendant understood an admonition as to his rights to counsel and to remain silent, the defendant "steadfastly refused to sign" any statement in writing, and the evidence disclosed his "lack of prior experience in criminal matters."
This case is similar on its facts to People v. Gomez, 252 Cal.App.2d 844 [60 Cal.Rptr. 881], (hearing denied), in which it was held that two minor defendants effectively waived their rights to counsel and to remain silent after having been advised thereof as required by Dorado. The defendants were arrested on charges of robbery, kidnapping for purposes of robbery, and sex perversion after their automobile had been traced through the license number obtained by the victim. One of the officers advised the defendants of their constitutional rights by reading from a card designed for that purpose. The officer then asked the defendants if they understood what he had read and whether they wanted him to repeat it. They said they did not want to be readvised of their rights. Both defendants then made exculpatory statements which created a conflict in the evidence to their detriment. On appeal the defendants conceded that the admonition given before interrogation complied with the Dorado requirements (which were applicable to the case) but contended that the record did not reflect that they understood their rights. In holding that the prosecution had made a sufficient prima facie showing that the defendants had knowingly waived their rights the court stated: "Whether a defendant has understood and intelligently waived a right is largely a subjective determination, presenting the trial judge with a difficult task at best, affected, undoubtedly to a degree, by the appearance and demeanor of the witnesses. An objection to evidence supporting *670 this subjective finding, when raised in the trial court, can be explored by additional voir dire; on the other hand, when this contention is made for the first time on appeal, the appellate court, restricted to the printed word, is unable to go behind the prima facie sufficiency of the foundational evidence." (252 Cal.App.2d at p. 852.)
[6] In this case the interrogation took place only two hours after defendant had beaten a man to death and had warned his captors, "Get out of my way. I am crazy. Get out of my way. I will kill you." We might infer from this evidence that defendant must have been in such a state of emotional turmoil that he did not understand his rights when he spoke to the police. Such an inference was contradicted by the testimony of the interrogating officer that defendant stated that he understood his rights and appeared to be calm and unfrightened when he made his statement. At the time he was called upon to rule on the admissibility of defendant's statement the trial judge had heard and observed defendant on the witness stand. Defendant at no time in the trial denied that he understood his rights. The trial court resolved the conflict in favor of the prosecution. We cannot say from the record before us that the finding of the trial court was, as a matter of law, erroneous.
[7a] The evidence of the purse-snatching incident was offered to prove that defendant intended to rob the old man at the time defendant attacked him. The evidence was received over defense objection. The defense did not request the court to instruct the jury that the evidence was received for the sole purpose of showing the intent and motive of the defendant at the time of the killing and no such instruction was given.
[8] Evidence is admissible that tends logically, by reasonable inference, to establish any fact material for the prosecution or to disprove any material fact sought to be proved by the defense even if it reveals the commission of a crime other than that charged. (People v. Peete, 28 Cal.2d 306, 314-315 [169 P.2d 924].) Evidence is inadmissible which tends to prove criminal disposition and is not relevant to a material issue in the case. (People v. Glass, 158 Cal. 650, 658 [112 P. 281]; People v. Cook, 148 Cal. 334, 340 [83 P. 43].) [7b] Defendant's state of mind at the time of the killing was a material issue in the case: the prosecution sought to prove that he killed the victim in the course of a robbery and therefore was guilty of murder in the first degree; defendant sought to prove that he killed in self defense or that he did not have *671 the requisite intent to commit murder. A legitimate inference from Mrs. Knapp's testimony is that all three boys, including the defendant, intended to rob her. Evidence of the purse- snatching incident was therefore relevant to show that defendant intended to rob the old man when he followed him into his yard and attacked him. The relevancy is strengthened by the fact that the two incidents occurred close together in point of time. (cf. People v. Buice, 230 Cal.App.2d 324, 341-342 [40 Cal.Rptr. 877].) The evidence was therefore admissible.
[9] Defendant may not complain of the failure of the trial court to give a limiting instruction with respect to the purse snatching evidence because he did not request one and therefore may be supposed to have waived it as unnecessary for his protection. (People v. Miller, 245 Cal.App.2d 112, 152 [53 Cal.Rptr. 720]; People v. White, 50 Cal.2d 428, 430 [325 P.2d 985]; see Adkins v. Brett, 184 Cal. 252, 258-259 [193 P. 251].) Furthermore, the failure to give a limiting instruction cannot have resulted in prejudice to defendant since the evidence did little to establish defendant's guilt in comparison to the direct evidence of the killing.
The judgment is affirmed.
Ford, P. J., and Cobey, J., concurred.
On voir dire examination by defense counsel the officer testified as follows: "Q. Officer, did you ask him if he wished to contact an attorney? A. I just stated, as I have just testified, that those were the questions I asked him and the only questions I asked him. Q. Did you tell him that a telephone was available for him to call an attorney? A. I did not. Q. Did you tell him that he could have his parents present? A. I did not. Q. Were his parents present? A. Do you mean in the building or present as I was talking to him? Q. In the room. A. No, they were not. Q. Did you make any effort to have his parents present? A. I did not."
NOTES
[fn. 1]  1. The defense of diminished capacity to achieve the state of mind requisite for the commission of murder was presented at the trial. No question concerning that defense is presented by this appeal.
[fn. 2]  2. The officer testified on direct examination as follows: "Q. Did you inform the defendant of his constitutional rights? A. I did. Q. What did you tell him? A. I told the defendant that he had a right to remain silent, that he had a right to be represented by an attorney at all stages of the proceedings, and that anything he might tell me could be used against him in further court proceedings. Q. Did he then after that talk to you freely and voluntarily? A. He did. Q. Did you ask the defendant whether he understood what you told him? A. I did. Q. What did he say? A. He said he did."

=== CASE 2220861 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:59.192267+00 ===

654 N.E.2d 731 (1995)
In the Matter of Raymond S. ROBAK.
No. 30S00-9203-DI-139.
Supreme Court of Indiana.
August 3, 1995.
Kevin P. McGoff, Kiefer & McGoff, Indianapolis, for respondent.
Donald R. Lundberg, Executive Secretary and Charles M. Kidd, Staff Attorney, Indianapolis, for the Indiana Supreme Court Disciplinary Commission.
*732 DISCIPLINARY ACTION
PER CURIAM.
Raymond S. Robak is charged with several violations of the Rules of Professional Conduct for Attorneys at Law arising from his representation of a client with interests adverse to those of a former client. Following the Disciplinary Commission's filing of a formal complaint, this Court appointed a hearing officer pursuant to Ind-Admission and Discipline Rule 23, Section 11. After an evidentiary hearing on the charges, the hearing officer submitted her findings of fact and conclusions of law to this Court, therein finding that Respondent engaged in misconduct as charged. Respondent has petitioned this Court for review of the hearing officer's report, challenging the hearing officer's findings. Our review of disciplinary cases is de novo in nature and involves review of the entire record submitted in this case In re Blackwelder (1993), Ind., 615 N.E.2d 106. The hearing officer's report, being a product of direct observation of witnesses, will be given appropriate emphasis, but this Court is the final arbiter of disputed facts and ultimate conclusions. In re Levinson (1992), Ind., 604 N.E.2d 599; In re Gemmer (1991), Ind., 566 N.E.2d 528. To support a finding of misconduct, this Court must be satisfied that such is based on clear and convincing evidence. Admis.Disc.R. 23(14)(f); In re Heamon (1993), Ind., 622 N.E.2d 484; In re Oliver (1986), Ind., 493 N.E.2d 1237. Respondent's challenges will be addressed within the context of this review process.
Accordingly, we now find that Respondent was admitted to the practice of law in this state in 1965, and is therefore subject to this Court's disciplinary jurisdiction. Respondent represented a client ("client") regarding numerous legal matters beginning in the early 1980s. The client had married for a second time on July 15, 1978, and soon thereafter, he and his new wife ("wife") signed a "Marital Property Agreement" which purported to allow each to maintain a separate right to property brought into the marriage and any assets acquired in their own names during the marriage. The agreement, which was not drafted by Respondent, also provided that any will made before or after execution of the agreement need not contain provisions in favor of the other person and that neither party would contest the terms of the other's will or make claims contrary to the intent of the agreement.
At various times after execution of the marital property agreement, Respondent drafted wills for his client. One such will was executed on May 19, 1988. It provided no bequests in favor of the wife and indicated that it was made "with full cognizance of the terms of the marital property agreement. . ." The client also executed a trust agreement on May 19, 1988, which provided that the wife would receive an income from the trust's corpus and the right to live in the marital residence.
Respondent drafted a will for the wife in September, 1981. She was alone with Respondent in his office when that will was prepared. It was executed on September 23, 1981, and contained no bequests in favor of the client, but named her as executor of the estate.
The client died in November, 1989. His children from his first marriage, as executors of the estate, employed Respondent to represent the estate. In May of 1989, Respondent offered the client's May 19, 1988 will for probate.
In late 1989, the wife employed counsel in an effort to obtain her one-third Indiana statutory spouse's share[1] or a significant amount of cash, certain real estate, furnishings, and personal items from the estate in settlement. One of the issues explored by the wife's counsel was the validity of the marital property agreement, since it purported to restrict each spouse from challenging the other's will or taking other action contrary to the agreement. In response to the wife's efforts, Respondent filed a Petition to Determine Heirship and Determine Rights of Parties on January 9, 1990, stating, inter alia, that
Counsel for the estate and your personal representatives have been advised by *733 Counsel for [the wife] that the property settlement agreement is void and of no force or effect alleging various reasons . . . your personal representatives are of the opinion that . . . said property settlement agreement is based on existing Indiana law and therefore, valid.
That due to the nature of the claims of [the wife], uncertainty has arisen as to her interest in said estate and until such time as a determination is made as to the validity of said property settlement agreement,. . . the orderly administration of said estate will be disturbed.
The wife alleged that she had not received a full disclosure of assets at the time the marital property agreement was entered and that it was therefore void.
Respondent questioned the wife at a deposition on February 20, 1990, in the presence of the wife's counsel. The following colloquy occurred:
[Respondent]: Have you made a will subsequent to the one that I prepared?
[Wife]: No.
[Respondent]: And do you recall what provisions you made for [client] in that will?
[Wife]: No.
[Respondent]: And do you recall discussion about the marital property agreement at the time that Will was signed?
[Wife]: No. To be truthful I don't. The making of the Will was an emotional thing for me and I'mI probably cried in your office at that time.
[Respondent]: If I would suggest you didn't, would that refresh your recollection?
[Wife]: If you what?
[Respondent]: Would refresh [sic] your recollection that you didn't cry when you did that? [Wife]: Oh dear. I don't remember. I knowI know it was emotional for me because those things always are.
(Emphasis supplied).
The hearing officer found that Respondent, through his questioning, sought to establish that the wife understood the effect of the marital property agreement and relied upon it when creating her own will.[2]
On April 4,1990, the wife's attorney sent a letter to Respondent, which stated in part:
I do want to confirm to you that if it is necessary to litigate the Post Nuptial issues in the estate . . ., we will ask the Court to disqualify you because you more than likely will be a witness and because of conflict of interest.
The wife ultimately entered an agreement with the executors of the estate settling the contested issues. Under the terms of the agreement, the wife received that which she would have received under the terms of the trust agreement. Respondent remained as counsel to the estate until the conclusion of the matter and filed a final accounting on July 13, 1990.
The Commission charged that Respondent, by representing the estate in direct opposition of his former client, the wife, violated Ind.Professional Conduct Rules 1.9[3] and 8.4(a).[4] The hearing officer found that an *734 attorney-client relationship was formed between Respondent and the wife and that Respondent violated Prof.Cond.R. 1.9(a) by representing the wife during preparation of her will, and then by representing the estate of his client, her late husband, in a substantially related matter in which the estate's interests were materially adverse. The hearing officer also concluded that Respondent violated Prof.Cond.R. 1.9(b) by questioning the wife about the representation he provided to her during the creation of her 1981 will with the intention of using that information to her disadvantage. The hearing officer also found Respondent violated Prof.Cond.R. 8.4(a) by violating the Rules of Professional Conduct. Respondent claims that the hearing officer's findings of misconduct are erroneous because the Commission failed to meet its burden of proof and because the factual findings of the hearing officer are incomplete and do not support her legal conclusions.
Respondent contends that the Commission offered no evidence that the wife's claims against the estate were "substantially related" to Respondent's prior representation of her. He also claims the Commission failed to prove the interests of the estate and the wife were "materially adverse," stating that, in fact, his representation of the wife had nothing to do with her claims against the estate. The wife, he argues, ultimately received precisely what was provided for her in the client's estate plan and that, therefore, the position of the estate representatives and the wife were not materially adverse.
This Court has not had occasion to specifically define "substantially related matter" within the context of Prof.Cond.R. 1.9(a). However, in regard to serial representation by a lawyer, we have said the lawyer must be disqualified in a present action if the issues of a prior and present case are "essentially the same or are closely interwoven therewith." State v. Tippecanoe County Court (1982), Ind., 432 N.E.2d 1377. See also In re Zinman (1983), Ind., 450 N.E.2d 1000, 1002 (citing Tippecanoe County Court in finding violation of DR 5-105(C)); Shuttleworth v. State (1984), Ind-App., 469 N.E.2d 1210,1217 (suggesting that "substantially related" in the context of ethical rules must be ascertained in regard to avoiding an "appearance of impropriety.")[5] The Comment to Rule 1.9 provides further guidance:
When a lawyer has been directly involved in a specific transaction, subsequent representation of other clients with materially adverse interests clearly is prohibited. On the other hand, a lawyer who recurrently handled a type of problem for a former client is not precluded from representing another client in a wholly distinct problem of that type even though the subsequent representation involves a position adverse to the prior client. The underlying question is whether the lawyer was so involved in the matter that the subsequent representation can be justly regarded as a changing of sides in the matter in question.
The hearing officer found that the Commission met its burden of proof by showing that Respondent represented the wife in preparation of her will and then represented the estate in a substantially related matter. After examining the record in this matter, we are satisfied that the preparation and execution of the wife's will in 1981, being by nature a provision for the ultimate disposition of her property in accord with the existing marital property agreement, was sufficiently interwoven with her later attempts in the estate action to challenge the validity of the marital property agreement so as to satisfy the "substantially related" element of Prof.Cond.R. 1.9.
We are also satisfied that the wife's claim against the estate was "materially adverse" to the interests of the estate. The principles of Prof.Cond.R. 1.7 determine whether the interests of the present and former client are adverse. Comment to Prof. *735 Cond.R. 1.9. Factors to be considered in this assessment include the duration and intimacy of the lawyer's relationship with the clients, the functions being performed by the lawyer, the likelihood that actual conflict will arise, and the likely prejudice to the client if conflict does arise. Id The question often is one of proximity and degree. Id In the present case, Respondent represented the estate, and, more specifically, the co-executors of the estate. An executor is dutybound to manage and protect those assets of which he has possession for both the creditors and the distributees by employing reasonable precautions against loss to the estate. In re Estate of Kingseed (1980), Ind. App., 413 N.E.2d 917. See also I.C. 29-1-13 et seq. In a general sense, Respondent's duty to aid in the preservation the estate's assets was materially adverse to the wife's objective of seeking more from the estate than was originally provided to her in the client's estate plan. More specifically, Respondent sought to establish the validity of the marital property agreement to preserve estate assets. The wife sought to invalidate the same agreement. As such, we conclude that Respondent's representation of the estate was materially adverse to his prior representation of the wife and therefore violative of Prof.Cond.R. 1.9(a).
Respondent also disputes the hearing officer's finding that he violated Prof.Cond.R. 1.9(b). Respondent claims that, since the service he provided to the wife in drafting her will in 1981 had nothing to do with the wife's subsequent challenge of the client's will, the information gained during the prior representation could not have been used to the wife's disadvantage. Further, Respondent asserts that his questions during the deposition were open-ended, not leading, and concerned with "information relating to the [prior] representation," as required by Prof. Cond.R. 1.9(b). We disagree. As stated above, Respondent's representations of the wife and the estate were substantially related. During questioning, Respondent sought to elicit from the wife testimony about events which occurred during their meeting in 1981. Specifically, Respondent's statement that "If I would suggest you didn't [cry during our meeting], would that refresh your recollection?" is, in effect, an assertion that the wife did not cry during their meeting and is thus "information relating to the [prior] representation." This information was apparently elicited to prove that the wife was relying on the provisions of the marital property agreement as part of her estate plan, ie., that eliminating the client as an heir was not an emotional decision, but one based only on the terms of the marital property agreement. Such information would work to the disadvantage of the wife by tending to invalidate her contention that the marital property agreement was void due to inadequate disclosure. Further, by suggesting the wife did not cry after she stated that she did not remember, Respondent was attempting to impeach her credibility as a witness by using confidential client information. Such use of attorney-client information was to her disadvantage. Generally, a lawyer has a legal and ethical duty to maintain confidences and secrets of a client, both during and subsequent to the attorney-client relationship. Washington v. State (1982), Ind., 441 N.E.2d 1355. Respondent failed to do so. We find that he violated Prof.Cond.R. 1.9(b). By violating the Rules of Professional Conduct, Respondent violated Prof.Cond.R. 8.4(a).
Now that we have found misconduct, it is the duty of this Court to assess an appropriate disciplinary sanction. In this regard, we examine several relevant factors, among them the nature of the misconduct, actual or potential injury flowing from the misconduct, the state of mind of Respondent, the duty of this Court to preserve the integrity of the profession, the potential injury to the public in permitting the Respondent to continue in the profession, and matters in mitigation, extenuation, or aggravation. In re Cawley, Jr. (1992), Ind., 602 N.E.2d 1022; In re Wells (1991), Ind., 572 N.E.2d 1290.
Respondent violated a fundamental tenet of the lawyer-client relationship, that of loyalty. One of the cornerstones of competent legal service is an attorney-client relationship wherein the client is assured of having confidences kept and loyalties preserved. The Rules of Professional Conduct require that every lawyer extend undivided loyalty to *736 every client. In re Colestock (1984), Ind., 461 N.E.2d 137, 140. Conduct such as Respondent's threatens individual clients' interests and the efficacy of the legal profession generally. At the very least, it suggested that Respondent used confidential information of a former client to make himself more valuable to a subsequent adverse client.
It is imperative that attorneys be familiar with and faithful to ethical constraints to ensure that the public and Bar are protected from abuses, both intentional and merely negligent. In re Gerde (1994), Ind., 634 N.E.2d 494. We also recognize, however, that Respondent's conflict appears to have been an isolated occurrence and that his professional actions have never before been formally called into question. We thus believe that he does not present a continuing threat to the public or the profession and that a public reprimand is an appropriate disciplinary sanction for his misconduct. Respondent Raymond T. Robak is therefore reprimanded and admonished for the misconduct set out above.
Costs of this proceeding are assessed against Respondent.
NOTES
[1]  I.C. 29-1-3-1.
[2]  The testimony at hearing of this matter is illustrative of Respondent's motive underlying his questioning of the wife:
[Commission]: Well, how was [the wife's] property disposition relevant?
[Respondent]: Because if she cut [the client] out of her will, she was taking advantage of the marital property agreement. In other words, she was acknowledging that it was a valid document.
[Commission]: Don't you think the disposition of her testamentary property is a matter of some confidence between her and her lawyer?
[Respondent]: Sure.
Tr. at 83-84.
[3]  Professional Conduct Rule 1.9 provides:
A lawyer who has formerly represented a client in a matter shall not thereafter:
(a) represent another person in the same or a substantially related matter in which that person's interests are materially adverse to the interests of the former client unless the former client consents after consultation; or
(b) use information relating to the representation to the disadvantage of the former client except as Rule 1.6 would permit with respect to a client or when the information has become generally known.
[4]  Professional Conduct Rule 8.4(a) provides: It is professional misconduct for a lawyer to: (a) violate or attempt to violate the Rules of Professional Conduct, knowingly assist or induce another to do so, or do so through the acts of another;
. . .
[5]  For a similar description, see Flo-Con Systems, Inc. v. Servsteel, Inc. (1990), N.D.Ind., 759 F. Supp. 456, 459 ("whether the subject matter of the two representations Eire substantially related turns on whether a law firm `could have obtained confidential information in the first representation that would have been relevant to the second.'") (citations omitted).