=== CASE 9739306 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:12:00.315866+00 ===

JUSTICE McMORROW, dissenting: Plaintiff, Detroy Marshall, Jr., as administrator of the estate of the decedent, Detroy Marshall III, filed a complaint in the circuit court of Winnebago County alleging that the defendants, Burger King Corporation, and Davekiz, Inc., negligently caused the death of the decedent. According to the complaint, the decedent was sitting in the dining room of the defendants’ restaurant when a third person, Pamela Fritz, “attempted to exit said restaurant in her vehicle, backed into a lamp pole in the parking lot of the restaurant, and drove forward from the lamp pole, hit the sidewalk adjacent to said Burger King Restaurant, causing her vehicle to become air born [sic] and crash into the north wall and windows of the restaurant building, trapping the Plaintiffs Decendent, DETROY MARSHALL, III, under the vehicle and over a half wall of the north wall of the restaurant.” The complaint alleged that defendants failed to “use due care in the design, construction, and maintenance of the building, parking lot and sidewalk involved in this occurrence” and, specifically, that defendants “[flailed to place vertical concrete pillars or poles in the sidewalk by the entrance of said restaurant” when defendants knew or should have known that these precautions “would have prevented the vehicle driven by Pamela H. Fritz” from causing the decedent’s injuries. The complaint alleged that “as a direct and proximate result” of defendants’ negligent acts or omissions, Pamela Fritz’s vehicle crashed into the restaurant and fatally injured the decedent. Defendants filed a motion to dismiss plaintiff’s complaint pursuant to section 2 — 615 of the Code of Civil Procedure (735 ILCS 5/2 — 615 (West 2002)). The circuit court granted the motion. The court stated: “I have attempted to undertake a duty analysis. This was largely done by comparing the likelihood of this type of occurrence against the burden of protecting against it. As the court stated in [Simmons v. Aldi-Brenner Co., 162 Ill. App. 3d 238, 244 (1987)], ‘anything is foreseeable...’ but the likelihood of this scenario is so minor that to guard against it in the manner suggested would require fortifying every building within striking distance of any crazed or incredibly inept driver, and the result would be to require foregoing [sic] any hope of aesthetically pleasing or business-enticing buildings. Obviously these two factors are less important than the safety of invitees, but the Court is required to do a balancing test and in doing so, I find that the duty stated by the plaintiffs is too high in this instance.” The appellate court, with one justice dissenting, reversed. 355 Ill. App. 3d 685. While recognizing the “relevant [sic] rarity” of incidents such as the one at issue here, the appellate court nevertheless held that under Ray v. Cock Robin, Inc., 57 Ill. 2d 19 (1974), and Marquardt v. Cernocky, 18 Ill. App. 2d 135 (1958), plaintiffs complaint alleged a duty owed by defendants to the decedent. 355 Ill. App. 3d at 689. Rejecting the circuit court’s duty analysis, the appellate court emphasized that plaintiff’s complaint contained allegations that defendants had violated the Building Officials and Code Administrators’ building code and had departed from custom and practice in the building industry. 355 Ill. App. 3d at 689. The appellate court concluded that these allegations created a fact question as to whether defendants’ failure to take precautions against out-of-control vehicles was a breach of the duty owed to the decedent. 355 Ill. App. 3d at 690, 692. The majority affirms the judgment of the appellate court. Unlike the appellate court, however, the majority does not hold that plaintiffs complaint alleges a duty under Ray or Marquardt. According to the majority, these decisions are inapposite. See 222 Ill. 2d at 434-35. Moreover, the majority does not discuss plaintiffs allegations that defendants violated building code standards and expressly declines to address the possibility that plaintiffs complaint alleges a duty under theories of negligent design or construction (see 222 Ill. 2d at 432-33, 449-50). Instead, relying on Hills v. Bridgeview Little League Ass’n, 195 Ill. 2d 210 (2000), the majority holds that the circuit court erred in dismissing plaintiff’s complaint because defendants owed an affirmative duty to the decedent to protect him from the negligent driving of Pamela Fritz. The majority reasons that the duty to protect arose in this case because defendants and the decedent stood in the special relationship of business invitor and invitee. As the majority explains, “the duty of care that arises from the business invitor-invitee relationship encompasses the type of risk — i.e., the negligent act of a third person — that led to the decedent’s injuries.” 222 Ill. 2d at 440; see also 222 Ill. 2d at 437 (“the special relationship between a business invitor and invitee does indeed give rise to a duty of reasonable care that is applicable to this case”). Thus, the majority holds that plaintiff’s complaint adequately alleges a duty to protect owed by defendants to the decedent. 222 Ill. 2d at 439-40. After holding that the special relationship in this case imposed an affirmative duty on defendants to protect the decedent from a third person’s negligence, the majority then states that this conclusion “does not end our inquiry into the duty issue.” 222 Ill. 2d at 441. The majority goes on to consider whether defendants have shown that they are entitled to an “exemption” from the duty of protection owed to the decedent. Addressing this question, the majority examines “the four factors this court traditionally considers in its duty analysis,” i.e, the foreseeability of the accident, the likelihood of injury occurring as a result of the accident, the magnitude of the burden to guard against it, and the consequences of imposing that burden. 222 Ill. 2d at 441-43. The majority concludes that defendants have failed to rebut the existence of the duty to protect owed to the decedent and that “the factors relied on by defendants do not support the creation of an exemption from that duty.” 222 Ill. 2d at 437. While the majority states that it is relying on the rationale of Hills for its duty analysis,1 the majority opinion departs significantly from that decision. In Hills we stated: “The common law recognizes an exception to the rule that a landholder owes no duty to protect entrants from criminal attacks where the landholder and the entrant stand in a special relationship with each other that warrants imposing such a duty. [Citations.] The existence of a special relationship does not, by itself, impose a duty upon the possessor of land to protect lawful entrants from the criminal attacks of third parties. Before a duty to protect will be imposed it must also be shown that the criminal attack was reasonably foreseeable. [Citation.] In addition, whether a duty to protect exists will depend upon a ‘consideration of the likelihood of injury, the magnitude of the burden to guard against it, and the consequences of placing that burden upon the defendant.’ [Citation.]” Hills, 195 Ill. 2d at 243. Hills holds that a special relationship, by itself, is not enough to establish an affirmative duty to protect. Other considerations must be taken into account as well. The majority here, however, holds the opposite. According to the majority, a special relationship, standing alone, is sufficient to establish the affirmative duty to protect a business invitee from the tortious misconduct of a third person. See 222 Ill. 2d at 440-41. Hills also expressly holds, in conformance with long-standing case law, that a court must examine the traditional duty factors before it may impose an affirmative duty to protect on a defendant. In this case, the majority considers the factors, but only after concluding that an affirmative duty exists and only as part of a new, “exemption” analysis.2 This is a substantial departure from Hills. The doctrine of “stare decisis is not an inexorable command.” Vitro v. Mihelcic, 209 Ill. 2d 76, 82 (2004). It does require, however, that the court offer appropriate justification for the reversal of previous decisions. Vitro, 209 Ill. 2d at 82. The majority in this case fails to explain why it is overruling the framework set out in Hills for analyzing affirmative duties to protect. In my view, this is error. The overruling of Hills and the creation of a new framework for analyzing the affirmative duty to protect are not the only troubling aspects of the majority opinion. Of equal concern is the majority’s “exemption” analysis and its application of the four traditional duty factors. The majority first holds that foreseeability exists in this case as a matter of law.3 The majority states: “it is reasonably foreseeable, given the pervasiveness of automobiles, roadways, and parking lots, that business invitees will, from time to time, be placed at risk by automobile-related accidents.” 222 Ill. 2d at 442. The majority cites two cases to support this conclusion, one from California, Bigbee v. Pacific Telephone & Telegraph Co., 34 Cal. 3d 49, 57-58, 665 P.2d 947, 952, 192 Cal. Rptr. 857, 862 (1983), and one from this court, Blue v. St. Clair Country Club, 7 Ill. 2d 359 (1955). The majority’s reliance on these cases is misplaced because both are clearly distinguishable from the case at bar. In Blue, a patron at a country club was injured when an outdoor table umbrella was caught by a gust of wind, knocking the table against the patron. On appeal, the question was whether the evidence, which included testimony that the table umbrellas were frequently blown over by the wind, supported a finding of foreseeability. Blue, 7 Ill. 2d at 362-65. Blue says nothing about the foreseeability of automobile accidents and nothing about the foreseeability of third-party misconduct. Bigbee is similarly unhelpful. In Bigbee, the plaintiff was injured when the telephone booth in which he was standing, located approximately 15 feet from a six-lane roadway, was struck by an automobile driven by a drunken driver. The plaintiff filed a complaint against the telephone company, alleging that the company had negligently placed the telephone booth too close to a major thoroughfare where “ ‘traffic ... travelling easterly, generally and habitually speeded in excess of the posted speed limit,’ thereby creating an unreasonable risk of harm to anyone who used the telephone booth.” Bigbee, 34 Cal. 3d at 53, 665 E2d at 948, 192 Cal. Rptr. at 858. Summary judgment was granted in favor of the telephone company. On appeal, the sole issue was whether foreseeability remained a question of fact for the jury under the evidence presented. Bigbee, 34 Cal. 3d at 52, 665 E2d at 948, 192 Cal. Rptr. at 858. Addressing this question, the court noted that there was evidence which showed that a telephone booth at the same location had previously been struck. Bigbee, 34 Cal. 3d at 54-55, 58, 665 E2d at 949, 952, 192 Cal. Rptr. at 859, 862. In addition, the court noted that “[s]wift traffic on a major thoroughfare late at night” was to be expected, as were intoxicated drivers. Bigbee, 34 Cal. 3d at 58, 665 E2d at 952,192 Cal. Rptr. at 862. Further, the court concluded that “it is not uncommon for speeding and/or intoxicated drivers to lose control of their cars and crash into poles, buildings or whatever else may be standing alongside the road they travel — no matter how straight and level that road may be.” Bigbee, 34 Cal. 3d at 58, 665 E2d at 952, 192 Cal. Rptr. at 862. Based on these considerations, the court held that foreseeability remained a question of fact for the jury and that summary judgment had been improperly granted. In this case, unlike Bigbee, there are no allegations of prior incidents of negligent driving similar to the one which caused the decedent’s injuries. Moreover, the accident in this case involved a building, not a telephone booth, and it happened next to a parking lot, not next to a heavily traveled thoroughfare where cars regularly travel in excess of the speed limit. Further, the court in Bigbee held only that foreseeability remained a question for the jury under the particular facts presented, not, as the majority holds here, that automobile-related accidents are foreseeable as a matter of law. Bigbee and Blue do not address the foreseeability of parking lot accidents such as the one at issue here. Numerous other cases, however, do. The majority of these cases, while recognizing that the duty to protect is part of the general duty of care owed to business invitees, also recognize that landowners are not the insurers of their invitees’ safety. These cases hold that landowners are liable for injuries caused by third-party misconduct only when that misconduct is reasonably foreseeable and, further, that automobile-related accidents such as the one that occurred in this case are not foreseeable as a matter of law. A representative case adopting this position is Albert v. Hsu, 602 So. 2d 895 (Ala. 1992). In Albert, a driver backed her car across the parking lot from a parking space, over a six-inch curb, across a sidewalk, and through the wall of a Chinese restaurant. A 10-year-old girl seated inside the restaurant was struck and killed. The girl’s mother sued the owners of the restaurant, alleging that the restaurant building was negligently designed and that the restaurant owners should have erected barricades around the building. There was no evidence of any similar prior incidents and the premises were constructed in accordance with the relevant building code requirements. Summary judgment was granted in favor of the owners. On appeal, the Supreme Court of Alabama affirmed. In so holding, the court noted the majority view regarding the legal foreseeability of out-of-control automobiles penetrating buildings and striking business invitees: “ ‘We are not unmindful of the obvious fact that at times operators lose control over the forward progress and direction of their vehicles either through negligence or as a result of defective mechanisms, which sometimes results in damage or injury to others. In a sense all such occurrences are foreseeable. They are not, however, incidents to ordinary operation of vehicles, and do not happen in the ordinary and normal course of events. When they happen, the consequences resulting therefrom are matters of chance and speculation. If as a matter of law such occurrences are held to be foreseeable and therefore to be guarded against, there would be no limitation on the duty owed by the owners of establishments into which people are invited to enter. Such occurrences fall within the category of the unusual or extraordinary, and are therefore unforeseeable in contemplation of the law.’ ” Albert, 602 So. 2d at 898, quoting Schatz v. 7-Eleven, Inc., 128 So. 2d 901, 904 (Fla. App. 1961). Adhering to this view, the court concluded that “[iJnsofar as foreseeability is an element of duty, any foreseeability inferred from the facts of this case is too remote to give rise to a duty owed and breached.” Albert, 602 So. 2d at 897. Accordingly, the court concluded that the restaurant owners owed no duty to the decedent and affirmed the lower court. Like the court in Albert, a majority of courts throughout the country have concluded that landowners are not liable for injuries caused to business invitees by out-of-control drivers under facts similar to this case, because such incidents are unforeseeable as a matter of law. See, e.g., Simmons v. Aldi-Brenner Co., 162 Ill. App. 3d 238, 244 (1987); Stutz v. Kamm, 204 Ill. App. 3d 898, 906 (1990); Sotomayor v. TAMA I, LLC, 274 Ga. App. 323, 327, 617 S.E.2d 606, 610 (2005); Heard v. Intervest Corp., 856 So. 2d 359, 362 (Miss. App. 2003); Jefferson v. Qwik Korner Market, Inc., 28 Cal. App. 4th 990, 996-97, 34 Cal. Rptr. 2d 171, 174-75 (1994); Fawley v. Martin’s Supermarkets, Inc., 618 N.E.2d 10, 13 (Ind. App. 1993); Carpenter v. Stop-N-Go Markets of Georgia, Inc., 512 So. 2d 708, 709 (Miss. 1987); Grandy v. Bavaro, 134 A.D.2d 957, 958, 521 N.Y.S.2d 956, 957 (1987); Hendricks v. Todora, 722 S.W.2d 458, 460-62 (Tex. App. 1986); Krispy Kreme Doughnut Co. v. Cornett, 312 So. 2d 771, 772-73 (Fla. App. 1975); Nicholson v. MGM Corp., 555 P.2d 39, 41 (Alaska 1976); Eckerd-Walton, Inc. v. Adams, 126 Ga. App. 210, 213, 190 S.E.2d 490, 492 (1972); Mack v. McGrath, 276 Minn. 419, 427, 150 N.W.2d 681, 686 (1967); Schatz v. 7-Eleven, Inc., 128 So. 2d 901, 904 (Fla. App. 1961); Watkins v. Davis, 308 S.W.2d 906, 909 (Tex. Civ. App. 1957). In contrast to the foregoing, a minority of cases have affirmed lower court findings of foreseeability, or have held that foreseeability is a question of fact for the jury, in cases involving business invitees and automobile-related accidents. However, the facts of these cases differ significantly from those present here. For example, it has been held that foreseeability is a question of fact for the jury where there were prior similar incidents involving automobiles and, thus, the landowner had notice of the potential for automobile-related accidents. See, e.g., Ray v. Cock Robin, Inc., 57 Ill. 2d 19, 23 (1974);4 Dalmo Sales of Wheaton, Inc. v. Steinberg, 43 Md.. App. 659, 666-67, 407 A.2d 339, 343 (1979). In addition, it has been held that foreseeability is a question of fact for the jury where the landowner’s own conduct contributed to the risk of harm to the plaintiff, either because the landowner failed to provide any protection from encroaching vehicles whatsoever (see, e.g., Dalmo, 43 Md. App. at 663, 407 A.2d at 341 (absence of any barrier was “critical fact”)), or because the landowner required patrons to stand at a service window next to a parking lot or driveway (see, e.g., Barker v. Wah Low, 19 Cal. App. 3d 710, 711, 721, 97 Cal. Rptr. 85, 85, 92 (1971)). See generally Qwik Korner Market, 28 Cal. App. 4th at 995, 34 Cal. Rptr. 2d at 174 (listing cases in these categories). None of these situations are present here. Citing to several of the decisions noted above which held that the automobile accidents were unforeseeable, defendants contend that the accident at issue in this case was unforeseeable as a matter of law. The majority, however, disagrees and rejects the cases cited by defendants. According to the majority, the cases upon which defendants rely on are unpersuasive, primarily because most of them address the issue of foreseeability within the context of deciding the correctness of a summary judgment or jury verdict, rather than, as in this case, the dismissal of a complaint. See 222 Ill. 2d at 450. In addition, the majority states that “to the extent these decisions create no-duty exemptions, they provide no reasons for doing so beyond those we have already rejected above.” 222 Ill. 2d at 450. This is an inadequate basis for setting defendants’ cases aside. The two decisions relied upon by the majority in its foreseeability analysis, Bigbee and Blue, concerned, respectively, the propriety of a summary judgment (Big-bee, 34 Cal. 3d at 52, 665 E2d at 948, 192 Cal. Rptr. at 858), and the correctness of a jury verdict (Blue, 7 111. 2d at 361, 366). Thus, at the same time the majority rejects cases cited by defendants because those decisions address the correctness of summary judgments or jury verdicts, the majority cites to, and relies upon, cases which do the same thing. This treatment of the cases is inconsistent. If Bigbee and Blue may be relied upon by the court despite their procedural postures, then the cases cited by defendants should not be rejected because of theirs. Further, the majority’s summary dismissal of the entire line of authority relied upon by defendants is unpersuasive, particularly since the cases relied upon by the majority, Bigbee and Blue, are distinguishable on their facts. The majority opinion is at odds with the clear weight of authority with respect to legal foreseeability. Moreover, because of the nature of the duty being imposed in this case, the majority’s resolution of the foreseeability issue raises significant public policy concerns. As noted, by the majority, negligent design and construction are not part of its duty analysis. That is, in its duty analysis, the majority does not conclude that defendants’ premises were inherently dangerous or that defendants’ own conduct created a risk of harm to the decedent through negligently designing or constructing the restaurant. Rather, it was the driver, Pamela Fritz, whose conduct created a risk of harm to the decedent. The alleged duty owed by defendants in this case was to protect the decedent against the risk of harm created by Fritz’s driving. Thus, as framed by the majority, this is not a case concerning ordinary duty and negligence. It is, instead, a “pure” affirmative-duty case, so called because when such a duty is imposed, the defendant is compelled to take affirmative action — in this case, to protect the decedent from a third person’s misconduct. By its nature, the affirmative duty to protect implicates important policy concerns because it requires a defendant to take unusual action, i.e., to police the conduct of other people. See Restatement (Third) of Torts: Liability for Physical Harm § 37, Comment e, at 714 (Proposed Final Draft No. 1, April 6, 2005) (there is a “distinction between placing limits on conduct and requiring affirmative conduct. This distinction in turn relies on the liberal tradition of individual freedom and autonomy. Liberalism is wary of laws that regulate conduct that does not infringe on the freedom of others”). For this reason, courts have traditionally moved cautiously in this area: “Judicial reliance on foreseeability under specific facts occurs more frequently and aggressively in cases involving an affirmative duty than in other cases. This suggests that courts more carefully supervise these cases than cases in which the actor’s conduct creates a risk of harm. This tendency is even more pronounced in cases in which the alleged duty involves protecting the plaintiff from third parties, especially the criminal acts of third parties. Sometimes, courts develop specific rules or balancing tests about the quantity, quality, and similarity of prior episodes required to satisfy foreseeability.” Restatement (Third) of Torts: Liability for Physical Harm § 37, Comment f, at 715 (Proposed Final Draft No. 1, April 6, 2005). See also, e.g., Posecai v. Wal-Mart Stores, Inc., 752 So. 2d 762, 766-68 (La. 1999) (discussing the various tests courts have applied in deciding the foreseeability of third-party crime); Dalmo, 43 Md. App. at 670, 407 A.2d at 345 (“where the injury arises from the negligent or deliberate act of a third party committed on the storekeeper’s property but does not involve any defect in the property itself. *** [Ejxcept in rather extreme circumstances, the principles of reasonableness, ordinary care, proximate cause, and foreseeability have often combined to prevent a recovery”). Like other courts, this court has also taken a narrow view of legal foreseeability when asked to impose a duty upon a landowner to guard against the negligence of others. This is particularly true in cases involving negligent driving. For example, in Gouge v. Central Illinois Public Service Co., 144 Ill. 2d 535 (1991), a car drove off a road and struck a utility pole, located some 15 feet from the roadway. A transformer attached to the pole collapsed onto the car, severely injuring the driver. Gouge, 144 Ill. 2d at 539. The driver filed a complaint against the power company which owned the pole, alleging that the pole had been negligently located and that the pole should have been installed so that it would fall away from the roadway if struck by a motorist. As in this case, the circuit court dismissed the complaint for failure to state a cause of action. The appellate court, however, reversed the circuit court and reinstated the complaint. On appeal, this court held that the power company owed no duty to the driver. In so holding, this court noted the long-standing rule that there is no “ ‘general duty to anticipate and guard against the negligence of others’ ” because the imposition of such a duty “ ‘would place an intolerable burden on society.’ ” Gouge, 144 Ill. 2d at 547, quoting Dunn v. Baltimore & Ohio R.R. Co., 127 Ill. 2d 350, 366 (1989). This court further noted that, while it is common knowledge that vehicles on occasion leave roadways and strike objects adjacent to roadways, “ ‘there must be reasonable anticipation of such deviation from the roadway as a normal incident of travel’ ” before a duty to guard against such negligence will be imposed. Gouge, 144 Ill. 2d at 545, quoting Boylan v. Martindale, 103 Ill. App. 3d 335, 346 (1982). We observed that plaintiffs had “alleged no facts in their complaint, nor are any facts apparent, which would indicate that it was reasonably foreseeable” that the driver would deviate from the roadway and strike the utility pole. Gouge, 144 Ill. 2d at 545. Accordingly, because “it is not reasonably foreseeable that a motorist will leave the traveled portion of a roadway and strike a particular utility pole” (Gouge, 144 Ill. 2d at 546), this court concluded that the power company owed no duty to the driver and reversed the appellate court. Another representative case is Ziemba v. Mierzwa, 142 Ill. 2d 42 (1991). In Ziemba, a cyclist on a roadway was injured when a dump-truck driver negligently exited the driveway of a landowner. The driveway was obscured by foliage and was not visible from the road. The cyclist filed a complaint against the landowner, alleging that the landowner had failed to use “ ‘reasonable care in the conduct of activities on his property, so as not to cause damage or injury to persons on the adjacent roadway.’ ” Ziemba, 142 Ill. 2d at 46. The landowner filed a section 2 — 615 motion to dismiss, which was granted by the circuit court. The appellate court reversed. On appeal, this court reversed the appellate court. Initially, this court noted that, to determine if the landowner’s property was unreasonably dangerous to the cyclist, it was necessary to consider whether it was reasonably foreseeable that the condition of the property would result in the type of accident that occurred. As in this case, the court observed that the condition of the landowner’s property was not, by itself, dangerous to the cyclist. Rather, it only posed a danger to the cyclist “by operation of the driver’s intervening negligent act” of exiting the driveway without warning and without yielding the right-of-way. Ziemba, 142 Ill. 2d at 50. This court also noted that a property owner generally cannot control and has no right to control the drivers of vehicles and, further, that a property owner has a right to expect drivers to look before they back out of driveways. Ziemba, 142 Ill. 2d at 52, quoting Zimmermann v. Netemeyer, 122 Ill. App. 3d 1042, 1054 (1984), quoting Safeway Stores, Inc. v. Musfelt, 349 P.2d 756, 758 (Okla. 1960). This court concluded that, “[bjecause the condition on defendant’s land posed no danger to plaintiff absent the independent, negligent act of the driver,” the accident “was not a reasonably foreseeable result of the condition on defendant’s land.” Ziemba, 142 Ill. 2d at 52. As in Gouge, this court in Ziemba stressed that there is no duty to “ ‘guard against the negligence of others’ ” because such a duty “ ‘would place an intolerable burden on society.’ ” Ziemba, 142 Ill. 2d at 52-53, quoting Dunn, 127 Ill. 2d at 366. In addition, this court stated: “The underlying rationale for holding a landowner liable for injuries occurring as a result of conditions on his land is that the landowner is in the best position to prevent the injury. However, in this case, we find that the truck driver was in the best position to prevent the injury. Thus the usual justification for imposing landowner liability is not present in this case.” Ziemba, 142 Ill. 2d at 53. Given these considerations, the court in Ziemba concluded that the landowner owed no duty to the cyclist and reversed the appellate court. The majority in this case does not acknowledge the traditional, narrow view of legal foreseeability that this court has employed when asked to impose a duty upon a landowner to guard against the misconduct of others. Indeed, while most courts have exercised caution in this area of the law, allowing foreseeability of third-party misconduct to remain a question of fact for the jury only under specific tests or circumstances, the majority in this case goes in the opposite direction. The majority does not adopt a case-by-case approach and hold only that, in this particular case, plaintiff has alleged sufficient facts regarding foreseeability to survive dismissal. Cf. Bigbee, 34 Cal. 3d at 52, 665 P.2d at 948, 192 Cal. Rptr. at 858 (stating that the sole question presented was whether, under the evidence presented, “foreseeability remains a question of fact for the jury”). Instead, the majority adopts a categorical approach and holds that it is foreseeable, as a matter of law and without limitation, that automobile-related accidents will place business invitees at risk of harm. 222 Ill. 2d at 442. Of course, if it is categorically foreseeable that negligently driven automobiles will place business invitees at risk of harm, then it is categorically unreasonable for landowners to fail to take action to protect invitees from that risk. In this way, the majority is holding all landowners with property abutting roads or parking lots to be the insurers of their business invitees’ safety. This broad holding is unwarranted and, in my view, erroneous. The second traditional duty factor that the majority considers is the likelihood of injury resulting from accidents such as the one that occurred in this case. The majority concludes that it “is quite high, as even a cursory glance at a selection of the cases the parties have cited to us demonstrates.” 222 Ill. 2d at 442. Although I agree that, in general, there is a likelihood of injury when an automobile is negligently driven onto premises open to the public, I note that the sample of cases cited by the majority is self-selecting. That is, these cases would not be in the court system in the first place if the accident had not resulted in injury. It is possible, of course, that there may be instances when an automobile driven onto business premises may not cause injury. The likelihood of injury will depend on the type of business and vehicle involved, the time of day the accident occurs, and other factors. That said, I certainly agree that, in general, there is a likelihood of injury when an automobile is negligently driven onto premises open to the public. With respect to the third traditional duty factor, defendants contend that the imposition of a duty to protect in this case would impose an unreasonable burden on themselves and other similarly situated businesses. Citing to Simmons v. Aldi-Brenner Co., 162 Ill. App. 3d 238 (1987), defendants argue that “protecting every storefront business and every store adjoining a parking lot with the necessary barriers to stop any vehicle from being driven into the building would be a gargantuan task.” Further, according to defendants, “one could never be certain whether the protection would be sufficient to stop every vehicle,” including trucks and SUVs, from crashing through the building. Thus, defendants maintain that the burden imposed in this case is unreasonable. Defendants’ position is supported by a number of cases. One court has observed: “Imposing a duty on a convenience store to protect a customer from every imaginable incident is an unreasonable burden: a motorcycle can pass between metal posts and a large truck can break through a cement wall. Only an impregnable barrier would suffice, in essence holding the store owner as the insurer of its customers’ safety. The law does not impose such a burden.” Qwik Korner Market, 28 Cal. App. 4th at 996, 34 Cal. Rptr. 2d at 175. Similarly, another court has stated: “ ‘To erect an impregnable barrier around all of the buildings would both obstruct normal pedestrian traffic and impose on the owners a burden completely out of proportion to the anticipated risk. We agree that liability cannot be predicated on the fact that out of the many thousands of vehicles which use parking areas in a normal way, one or two may occasionally jump the curb and expose pedestrians as well as tenants to the remote possibility of injury.’ ” Albert, 602 So. 2d at 897-98, quoting Mack v. McGrath, 276 Minn. 419, 427-28, 150 N.W.2d 681, 686 (1967). See also Simmons, 162 Ill. App. 3d at 244 (imposing a duty “would place a burden on every store, near a street or parking lot, of constructing barriers adequate to prevent any car from being driven into the building”); Stutz, 204 Ill. App. 3d at 906; Heard, 856 So. 2d at 362 (if the court were to recognize a duty to protect it “would mean that property owners throughout the state of Mississippi would need to build barriers between their premises and streets and parking lots. This Court simply cannot make that the public policy of this State”); Fawley, 618 N.E.2d at 14 (“to require that business owners erect impregnable barriers separating the parking lots from their sidewalks would very likely increase the inconvenience and hazard to pedestrians and impose upon the owners a burden completely out of proportion to the anticipated risk”); Grandy, 134 A.D.2d at 958, 521 N.Y.S.2d at 957. Despite this authority, the majority rejects defendants’ burden argument. The majority concludes that defendants’ concerns are “speculative at best” and are “based on mistaken assumptions about the nature of a duty of care.” 222 Ill. 2d at 443. According to the majority, defendants’ burden argument is of no moment because the court in this case is only holding that defendants owed a duty of care to the decedent and not making a “broad-based declaration of negligence liability.” 222 Ill. 2d at 443. In other words, in the view of the majority, burden concerns arise only when there is a finding of liability, not when a duty is recognized. The majority’s burden analysis is at odds with case law. This court has frequently discussed the burdens placed upon a defendant in cases addressing solely whether a duty exists. See, e.g., City of Chicago v. Beretta U.S.A. Corp., 213 Ill. 2d 351, 393 (2004) (deciding the propriety of a judgment dismissing a complaint under section 2 — 615 and concluding that “the magnitude of the burden that plaintiffs seek to impose on the manufacturer and distributor defendants by altering their business practices is immense”); Gouge, 144 Ill. 2d at 547-48 (discussing costs and burdens of imposing a duty). Further, it is inconsistent for the majority to address foreseeability and the likelihood of injury in deciding whether to recognize a duty in this case and, at the same time, not address the burdens that result from imposing that duty. Later in its opinion the majority provides another answer to defendants’ burden argument. Rejecting defendants’ contentions regarding duty, the majority states that this case is not about “whether defendants had a duty to install protective poles, or a duty to prevent a car from entering the restaurant, or some such other fact-specific formulation” but, instead, is only about recognizing “a duty of reasonable care” to protect business invitees. 222 Ill. 2d at 443. This reasoning is unpersuasive. The duty imposed by the majority necessarily encompasses the duty to provide protective barriers. Neither party to this appeal has suggested any means of protecting business invitees from out-of-control automobiles other than protective poles or some other type of barrier. Indeed, plaintiff’s primary allegation of negligence in this case is that defendants failed to install such barriers. As plaintiff alleged in his complaint: “a. [Defendants] [flailed to place vertical concrete pillars or poles in the sidewalk by the entrance of said restaurant, which vertical pillars or poles would have prevented the vehicle *** from becoming air born [sic] and coming to rest over the brick half wall, when the Defendant [s] knew or should have known that failing to put concrete pillars or poles in the sidewalk by the entrance to the restaurant would allow a vehicle to become air born [szc] when driven over the sidewalk, thereby causing the vehicle to come down on top of the brick half wall ***.” The majority holds that all landowners owe a duty of reasonable care to their business invitees which includes the affirmative duty to protect the invitees from the risk of negligently driven automobiles. See, e.g., 222 Ill. 2d at 442 (declining to find an exemption from the “duty to protect invitees against out-of-control drivers”). This affirmative duty to protect necessarily applies in this case— where an automobile penetrated a building. The only way that a landowner can protect an invitee from an automobile penetrating its building is either by relocating the business away from all roads and parking lots or, more plausibly, by constructing an impenetrable barrier around the building. This is precisely the burden that other courts have recognized to be at issue in cases such as this and, as noted, have found to be unreasonable. Finally, the majority does not address the substantial consequences of its decision to impose a duty here. Every business open to the public that abuts a road or parking lot now has an unqualified duty to protect business invitees from out-of-control drivers. This is an unprecedented expansion of premises liability. See, e.g., Beretta U.S.A. Corp., 213 Ill. 2d at 393 (declining to impose a duty upon commercial enterprises to guard against the criminal misuse of their products by others in part because such a duty would be an “unprecedented expansion of the law of public nuisance”). Further, barriers which make it impossible for vehicles to enter a building also make it more difficult for invitees to get out of a building during a fire or other emergency. Heard, 856 So. 2d at 362. Thus, while the justification given for imposing a duty to protect in cases such as this is to improve the safety of business invitees, the recognition of such a duty may, on balance, have the opposite effect. The majority is correct to observe that courts should be cautious when holding that no duty exists. See 222 Ill. 2d at 441-42. But the affirmative duty to protect is itself an exception to the general rule that one owes no duty to police the conduct of other people. Further, consider the nature of the majority’s holding in this case. According to the majority, a duty to protect a business invitee from the negligent driving of a third person exists where: the landowner’s property is not inherently dangerous or defective and the landowner’s own conduct has not created any risk of harm to the invitee through negligent design or construction; the landowner has complied with all applicable building codes and safety regulations; the landowner has experienced no previous incidents of any sort involving automobile-related accidents, whether similar or not; the parking lot is unremarkable, a sidewalk is present, and the invitee is inside a building behind a half-brick wall; and the only means of protecting the invitee from the negligent driving is to construct an impregnable barrier around the building that, even if possible to construct, may have a negative effect on the safety of business invitees in other circumstances. If there is an affirmative duty to protect a business invitee from out-of-control vehicles on these facts, then such a duty exists for every business which owns a building that abuts a road or parking lot. The majority’s holding is exceptionally broad and has the potential to alter substantially the function and appearance of every city in the state. With its far-reaching implications, I do not believe that the adoption of the duty of protect, as described by the majority, is an appropriate undertaking for this court. I would hold, in accordance with the weight of authority, that no affirmative duty to protect exists on these facts. Accordingly, I dissent. JUSTICE FREEMAN joins in this dissent.  Athough the issue in Hills involved a landholder’s liability for the criminal conduct of a third person, the majority concludes that the rationale of Hills applies “with equal force where, as here, the negligent act of a third person is at issue.” 222 Ill. 2d at 439.   Contrary to the majority’s assertions, defendants at no time ask this court “to create an exemption from the duty of care that stems from the special relationship between a business invitor and invitee.” 222 Ill. 2d at 441. Rather, in accord with existing case law, defendants argue that “the four factors this court traditionally considers in its duty analysis” (222 Ill. 2d at 441) must be addressed before an affirmative duty may be imposed.   Contemporary tort scholarship, including the proposed Restatement (Third) of Torts, takes the position that foreseeability should not play any part in the ordinary duty, or affirmative duty analysis. See Restatement (Third) of Torts: Liability for Physical Harm § 7, Comment j, at 97-98, § 37, Comment f, at 715 (Proposed Final Draft No. 1, April 6, 2005); see also W. Cardi, Purging Foreseeability: The New Vision of Duty and Judicial Power in the Proposed Restatement (Third) of Torts, 58 Vand. L. Rev. 739 (2005). The majority does not adopt this position, which would be a departure from our case law, and I express no opinion on its merits.    4The majority distinguishes Ray on the basis that the case addressed foreseeability as a matter of proximate cause, rather than duty. See 222 Ill. 2d at 434-35. However, whether couched in terms of duty or proximate cause, the determinative issue for courts to decide with respect to foreseeability in cases such as this is whether it may be said that foreseeability does not exist as a matter of law. See, e.g., Bigbee, 34 Cal. 3d at 55-56, 665 P.2d at 950, 192 Cal. Rptr. at 860 (defendants’ contentions that they owed no duty and that there was no proximate cause presented “the same issue in different guises,” i.e., whether the risk was unforeseeable as a matter of law). Nevertheless, as noted in the text, Ray is distinguishable on its facts.

=== CASE 9739307 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:12:00.590407+00 ===

JUSTICE KARMEIER delivered the judgment of the court, with opinion. Chief Justice Thomas and Justices Fitzgerald and Garman concurred in the judgment and opinion. Justice Freeman dissented, with opinion, joined by Justices McMorrow and Kilbride. OPINION After a jury trial in the circuit court of Will County, defendant, Peri Allen, was found guilty of burglary and was sentenced to a four-year term of imprisonment. The appellate court reversed and remanded for a new trial, holding that defendant had “adequately alleged plain error” where the trial court abused its discretion in requiring defendant to wear an electronic stun belt as a restraining device at trial without the explicit analysis and finding of necessity required by People v. Boose, 66 Ill. 2d 261 (1977). 354 Ill. App. 3d 442, 446. We granted the State’s petition for leave to appeal under Rule 315 (177 Ill. 2d R. 315), and granted Paul J. Kaupas, Will County sheriff, permission to file an amicus curiae brief in support of the State (155 Ill. 2d R. 345(a)). Defendant was indicted for the offense of burglary for entering a motor vehicle, belonging to Will County Auto Wreckers, with the intent to commit a theft. Prior to jury selection on February 11, 2003, defense counsel asked to approach the bench for a sidebar conference with the trial judge, after which the judge stated: “Apparently the defendant still has his handcuffs on. They have been under the table there, so the jurors didn’t get all the way into the courtroom so there should be no problem, but if we can take them off now. Okay. Thank you.” Two days later, after the trial court’s denial of defendant’s motion for a directed verdict and immediately prior to the State resting and defense counsel calling defendant to the stand, the following colloquy occurred: “[Defense Counsel]: Oh, your Honor, one thing. I don’t know exactly what it is that [defendant] has. There is something that he is wearing on his back and— THE COURT: Well, it is under his clothes, correct? [Defense Counsel]: Right, but even standing here I can notice it. It is a fairly noticeable object. THE COURT: Would you prefer to just have him seated in the witness stand at this point? [Defense Counsel]: I would prefer unless that can be removed somehow. THE COURT OFFICER: No. THE COURT: That’s a security device. The deputy has control of it. [Defendant] does not have shackles on. He does not have handcuffs on. He is in custody and he is restrained in no other manner whatsoever, so for security purposes we keep that on him. At this time it has been out of view. It is under his clothes, but I think that if he did walk across the room, [the jury] may view something or a form of some kind under his clothes, so if you prefer to have him seated in the box, we can do that now. [Defense Counsel]: Can we do that now? THE COURT: Have a seat right up here, sir. When you’re sworn in, I suppose you can just sit. You don’t have to stand to be sworn in. DEFENDANT: Right. THE COURT: That way they’ll never see it. All right, bring the jurors in.” (Emphasis added.) No further mention of the “security device” was made at trial, and defendant did not include any issue concerning the restraint in his posttrial motion. On direct appeal, the sole issue raised by defendant was “whether it was error for the defendant to be forced to wear an electronic security belt as a restraining device at trial.” 354 Ill. App. 3d at 443. Initially, we agree with the appellate court that while the trial court never referred to the “security device” as an electronic stun belt, “we feel confident in our assessment that it was indeed that type of restraining device.” 354 Ill. App. 3d at 443. The State does not suggest what the bulging security device under defendant’s shirt might have been, other than a stun belt. The appellate court’s finding is especially probable where, in People v. Martinez, 347 Ill. App. 3d 1001, 1003 (2004), another recent Will County circuit court case, the State asked the appellate court to validate the Will County sheriff’s “standard operating procedure” of requiring all felony defendants in custody to wear a stun belt while appearing in court. Even the dissent agrees that such a “blanket policy” existed in the Will County sheriffs department. 222 Ill. 2d at 379 n.6 (Freeman, J., dissenting, joined by McMorrow and Kilbride, JJ.). In addition, there is at least one other case pending before this court involving the use of electronic stun belts on felony defendants in Will County. See People v. Johnson, 356 Ill. App. 3d 208 (3d Dist. 2005), appeal denied, 221 Ill. 2d 655 (2006). Having agreed with the appellate court that defendant was wearing an electronic stun belt, we now examine whether Boose, which generally applies to the “physical restraint” of defendants in the courtroom (Boose, 66 Ill. 2d at 266), also applies to the concealed electronic restraint involved in this case. First, the Will County sheriff, as amicus curiae, argues, inter alia, that an electronic “security belt” is not a restraining device that lends itself to due process scrutiny pursuant to Boose, citing Deck v. Missouri, 544 U.S. 622, 161 L. Ed. 2d 953, 125 S. Ct. 2007 (2005). However, Deck does not speak to the circumstances present here. In Deck, the United States Supreme Court concluded that due process “prohibit[s] the use of physical restraints visible to the jury absent a trial court determination, in the exercise of its discretion, that they are justified by a state interest specific to a particular trial.” (Emphasis added.) Deck, 544 U.S. at 629, 161 L. Ed. 2d at 963, 125 S. Ct. at 2012. Nowhere in Deck does the Court consider the question raised herein, i.e., whether a concealed electronic stun belt worn under a defendant’s garments should be classified as a “physical restraint” which lends itself to due process scrutiny. Accordingly, Deck does not support the argument of amicus, as it does not even address concealed restraints. Indeed, we find that the Deck Court’s stated reasons which prompt due process scrutiny in visible restraint cases — the presumption of innocence, securing a meaningful defense, and maintaining dignified proceedings — may be applied with like force to stun belts which are not necessarily visible to the jury. See Deck, 544 U.S. at 631, 161 L. Ed. 2d at 963-64, 125 S. Ct. at 2013. In In re Staley, 67 Ill. 2d 33, 37 (1977), this court stated: “The possibility of prejudicing a jury, however, is not the only reason why courts should not allow the shackling of an accused in the absence of a strong necessity for doing so. The presumption of innocence is central to our administration of criminal justice. In the absence of exceptional circumstances, an accused has the right to stand trial ‘with the appearance, dignity, and self-respect of a free and innocent man.’ [Citation.] It jeopardizes the presumption’s value and protection and demeans our justice for an accused without clear cause to be required to stand in a courtroom in manacles or other restraints while he is being judged.” Thus, even when there is no jury, any unnecessary restraint is impermissible because it hinders the defendant’s ability to assist his counsel, runs afoul of the presumption of innocence, and demeans both the defendant and the proceedings. See Staley, 67 Ill. 2d at 36-37; Martinez, 347 Ill. App. 3d at 1005-06. We therefore agree with the appellate court herein which, citing Martinez, concluded that an electronic stun belt “is no less a restraint than manacles or handcuffs.” 354 Ill. App. 3d at 445. As noted by defendant, it appears that almost every court which has reviewed this issue has held that electronic stun belts are restraining devices, the use of which is subject to the same restrictions as shackles. See, e.g., United States v. McKissick, 204 F.3d 1282, 1299 (10th Cir. 2000); People v. Mar, 28 Cal. 4th 1201, 1219-20, 52 P.3d 95, 106, 124 Cal. Rptr. 2d 161, 175 (2002); People v. Melanson, 937 P.2d 826, 835 (Colo. App. 1996); Young v. State, 269 Ga. 478, 479, 499 S.E.2d 60, 61 (1998); State v. Adams, 103 Ohio St. 3d 508, 529-30, 817 N.E.2d 29, 52-53 (2004). One exception to this approach for dealing with electronic stun belts is found in Wrinkles v. State, 749 N.E.2d 1179, 1194 (Ind. 2001), wherein the Supreme Court of Indiana banned the use of such restraints from its courtrooms altogether. However, contrary to the dissent’s contention, in this case we are not faced with the question of whether stun belts should continue to be used in Illinois courtrooms. Rather, we are asked to determine whether, and we find that, this court’s holdings in Boose and Staley regarding shackles apply equally to those defendants who are restrained by means of an electronic stun belt worn under their clothing at trial, and that nothing in Deck precludes applica- • tion of due process protections to such cases. Given these findings, we hold that the use of electronic stun belts in the courts of this state is warranted only where there has been a showing of manifest need for the restraint. See Boose, 66 Ill. 2d at 265-66. This holding comes with the understanding that there are certain circumstances that will require restraint of a defendant at trial. Factors to be considered by the trial court in making this determination may include: (1) the seriousness of the present charge against the defendant, (2) the defendant’s temperament and character, (3) the defendant’s age and physical characteristics, (4) the defendant’s past record, (5) any past escapes or attempted escapes by the defendant, (6) evidence of a present plan of escape by the defendant, (7) any threats by the defendant to harm others or create a disturbance, (8) evidence of self-destructive tendencies on the part of the defendant, (9) the risk of mob violence or of attempted revenge by others, (10) the possibility of rescue attempts by other offenders still at large, (11) the size and mood of the audience, (12) the nature and physical security of the courtroom, and (13) the adequacy and availability of alternative remedies. Boose, 66 Ill. 2d at 266-67. The determination of whether and how to restrain a defendant is left to the discretion of the trial court, and a reviewing court examines whether the trial court has abused that discretion. Boose, 66 Ill. 2d at 267. The trial court should state for the record its reasons for allowing the defendant to remain physically restrained, and it should give the defendant’s counsel an opportunity to present reasons why the defendant should not be restrained. Boose, 66 Ill. 2d at 266. In this case, the State argues that the trial court did not abuse its discretion in ordering the stun belt to remain on defendant without conducting a Boose hearing. However, based on the record presented, we disagree. The only reason given by the court to sustain its ruling was that the restraint was necessary “for security purposes.” While the security of the courtroom is indeed one of the factors to be considered, without further explanation or justification by the court and where it appears that no other “Boose factors” supported this decision, we find the trial court’s ruling to be an abuse of its discretion. Here, as in Martinez, the trial court never made a Boose analysis; it simply deferred to the judgment of the sheriff. We agree with the Martinez court that this abdication of the trial court’s responsibility is not acceptable. “The court must rigorously control its own courtroom procedures and, consistent with the mandates of due process, protect the rights of the parties and the public.” Martinez, 347 Ill. App. 3d at 1004. Indeed, the type of policy adopted by the Will County sheriff, requiring all custodial felony defendants to wear stun belts while in court, was frowned upon by this court almost 30 years ago in Boose. “ ‘The fact that defendant was a state prison inmate who had been convicted of robbery and was charged with a violent crime did not, without more, justify the use of physical restraints. *** [T]he trial judge must make the decision to use physical restraints on a case-by-case basis. The court cannot adopt a general policy of imposing such restraints *** unless there is a showing of necessity on the record. The court’s summary denial of the motion to release defendant from his shackles was not based upon such a showing of record and implies a general policy of shackling all inmate defendants accused of violent crimes.’ ” (Emphasis added.) Boose, 66 Ill. 2d at 268, quoting People v. Duran, 16 Cal. 3d 282, 293, 545 P.2d 1322, 1329, 127 Cal. Rptr. 618, 625 (1976). Accordingly, we hold that the trial court’s failure to follow the procedures set forth in Boose before ordering that defendant continue to wear an electronic stun belt during his trial constitutes a due process violation. See People v. Crutchfield, 353 Ill. App. 3d 1014, 1021 (2004); Martinez; 347 Ill. App. 3d at 1004. In Martinez, the appellate court, upon finding that the trial court had abdicated its responsibility to determine the measures necessary to assure courtroom security, reversed the defendant’s conviction and remanded for a new trial. Martinez, 347 Ill. App. 3d at 1005. However, in this case, as the appellate court noted, defendant did not even mention the electronic restraint at any time until the third day of his trial, while the defendant in Martinez objected vigorously. 354 Ill. App. 3d at 445; see also Staley, 67 Ill. 2d at 35-38 (reversal and remand for new adjudicatory hearing required where no Boose hearing conducted by trial court after defense counsel moved that defendant’s handcuffs be removed during adjudicatory hearing). Defense counsel’s statement “I would prefer [defendant be seated in the witness stand before the jury returns] unless [the stun belt] can be removed somehow” does not constitute an objection, but merely an alternative to the court’s suggestion on how to keep the jury from seeing the device under defendant’s clothing. After the court rejected counsel’s alternative suggestion to remove the restraint, counsel did not ask that an objection be noted on the record or that a Boose hearing be held, but simply deferred to the procedure suggested by the court. The failure to object to alleged error at trial and raise the issue in a posttrial motion ordinarily results in the forfeiture of the issue on appeal. People v. Enoch, 122 Ill. 2d 176, 186-87 (1988).1 The appellate court herein therefore reasoned that it must decide whether the trial court’s error “was so significant that it warrants plain error review.” 354 Ill. App. 3d at 445. The majority then determined that People v. Doss, 347 Ill. App. 3d 418 (2004), was controlling, as there “we found plain error, since the defendant was denied a fair trial because of the failure of the trial court to conduct the appropriate manifest need analysis before ordering the defendant to be shackled at trial.” 354 Ill. App. 3d at 446. Thereafter, the appellate court held that here, as in Doss, defendant had “adequately alleged plain error” which justified its review and also required the reversal of defendant’s conviction and remand for a new trial. 354 Ill. App. 3d at 446. We disagree with the appellate court’s reasoning and also its conclusions. Supreme Court Rule 615(a) provides: “Any error, defect, irregularity, or variance which does not affect substantial rights shall be disregarded. Plain errors or defects affecting substantial rights may be noticed although they were not brought to the attention of the trial court.” (Emphasis added.) 134 Ill. 2d R. 615(a). In People v. Herron, 215 Ill. 2d 167, 178-79 (2005), this court recently stated as follows: “The plain-error doctrine, as it has developed in Illinois, allows a reviewing court to reach a forfeited error affecting substantial rights in two circumstances. First, where the evidence in a case is so closely balanced that the jury’s guilty verdict may have resulted from the error and not the evidence, a reviewing court may consider a forfeited error in order to preclude an argument that an innocent person was wrongly convicted. [Citation.] Second, where the error is so serious that the defendant was denied a substantial right, and thus a fair trial, a reviewing court may consider a forfeited error in order to preserve the integrity of the judicial process. [Citations.] This so-called disjunctive test does not offer two divergent interpretations of plain error, but instead two different ways to ensure the same thing — namely, a fair trial.” (Emphasis added.) In another recent case, People v. Brown, 356 Ill. App. 3d 1088, 1090-91 (2005), the appellate court majority, as did the appellate court majority herein, cited Doss for the proposition that restraining defendants without a Boose hearing automatically constitutes plain error and is not subject to forfeiture. However, we agree with Justice Schmidt’s partial dissent in Brown, which argued that the majority was misreading Doss. Indeed, Justice Schmidt, who authored the Doss opinion, stated: “Doss did not hold that it is always plain error to shackle a defendant without a Boose hearing. Rather, the shackling issue was reviewed under the plain error doctrine because we found the evidence closely balanced.” Brown, 356 Ill. App. 3d at 1091 (Schmidt, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part). In the appeal before us, defendant appears to have accepted this interpretation of Doss. Indeed, defendant impliedly admits that the evidence was not closely balanced where he contends only that the second type of plain error occurred, stating: “[I]t was such a serious error that it threatened the fundamental fairness of the defendant’s trial and the integrity of the judicial process.” In Herron, 215 Ill. 2d at 187, this court further described the second prong of the plain error test, stating: “In the second instance, the defendant must prove there was plain error and that the error was so serious that it affected the fairness of the defendant’s trial and challenged the integrity of the judicial process. [Citation.] Prejudice to the defendant is presumed because of the importance of the right involved ***. *** [However,] the burden of persuasion remains with the defendant.” (Emphasis added.) Indeed, defendant, citing this passage from Herron, acknowledges that he bears the burden of persuasion as to whether the error was so serious that it affected the fairness of his trial and challenged the integrity of the judicial process. Thus, given the test for determining plain error under the “second prong” as set forth in Herron, we agree with Crutchfield, 353 Ill. App. 3d at 1021, a case from the Fifth District of the appellate court which, under facts similar to those presented here, held that even constitutional errors can be forfeited (see People v. Thurow, 203 Ill. 2d 352, 363-64 (2003)) if the error is not of such magnitude that it deprives the defendant of a fair trial. See People v. Graham, 206 Ill. 2d 465, 476 (2003). See also People v. Barney, 363 Ill. App. 3d 590 (2006); People v. DuPree, 353 Ill. App. 3d 1037 (2004) (both holding that the physical restraint of a defendant at trial does not automatically amount to plain error). Moreover, a fair trial is different from a perfect trial. Herron, 215 Ill. 2d at 177; People v. Bull, 185 Ill. 2d 179, 214 (1998). The plain-error doctrine is not “ ‘a general saving clause preserving for review all errors affecting substantial rights whether or not they have been brought to the attention of the trial court.’ ” Herron, 215 Ill. 2d at 177, quoting People v. Precup, 73 Ill. 2d 7, 16 (1978). Instead, it is a narrow and limited exception to the general rule of forfeiture, whose purpose is to protect the rights of the defendant and the integrity and reputation of the judicial process. Herron, 215 Ill. 2d at 177. Thus, while defendant herein has proven a due process violation which amounted to error by showing that he was required to wear an electronic stun belt at trial without the court having first determined that it was necessary, defendant has failed to persuade this court “that the error was so serious that it affected the fairness of [his] trial and challenged the integrity of the judicial process.” Herron, 215 Ill. 2d at 187; see also People v. Nicholas, 218 Ill. 2d 104, 121 (2005) (the burden of persuasion remains with the defendant under the second prong of the plain error test, but before the court may apply either prong, there must be a plain error). Here, defendant cannot, and does not, claim that the evidence presented was closely balanced. Further, he has not shown that his presumption of innocence, ability to assist his counsel, or the dignity of the proceedings was compromised. In fact, defendant wore the electronic device into the third day of his jury trial with no objection, complaint, or any apparent difficulty consulting with his counsel. Thus, we agree with the appellate court in Nicholas that although the failure to conduct a Boose hearing under these circumstances is an error, defendant’s failure to object and to carry his burden of persuasion amounts to forfeiture of the error, where he cannot establish that it prevented him from obtaining a fair trial. See Estelle v. Williams, 425 U.S. 501, 512-13, 48 L. Ed. 2d 126, 135, 96 S. Ct. 1691, 1697 (1976) (although the State cannot compel an accused to stand trial before a jury in prison clothes, the failure to make an objection to the court to being tried in such clothes, for whatever reason, is sufficient to negate the presence of compulsion necessary to establish a constitutional violation); see also People v. Hyche, 77 Ill. 2d 229, 241 (1979) (rejecting the defendant’s contention that his conviction should be reversed due to his appearance before the venire in handcuffs, where he “waived any error by failing to object”). Further, we reject the dissent’s attempt to distinguish Estelle and Hyche, where those cases, as here, recognized that a serious assault on the defendant’s presumption of innocence was implicated, but held that the defendant had failed to properly preserve the error for review. Estelle, 425 U.S. at 513, 48 L. Ed. 2d at 135, 96 S. Ct. at 1697; Hyche, 77 Ill. 2d at 241. While the dissent contrasts Hyche with People v. Buss, 187 Ill. 2d 144, 215 (1999), wherein the court chose to review a shackling issue on its merits, the dissent fails to note that the defendant in Buss had filed a pretrial motion to preclude shackling and had included the issue in his posttrial motion. Only in the alternative did he argue plain error or that his counsel was ineffective for failing to properly preserve the issue for review. Additionally, although the dissent states that this court, in Buss, “cited with approval People v. Bennett, 281 Ill. App. 3d 814 (1996)” (222 Ill. 2d at 370 (Freeman, J., dissenting, joined by McMorrow and Kilbride, JJ.)), the Bennett court held “it was plain error for the judge in this case to deny the defense request to have the defendant’s shackles removed,” when “the only reason the judge gave for refusing the defense motion related to the security of the courtroom” and the court failed to address the other Boose factors. Bennett, 281 Ill. App. 3d at 825. Next, we note that in his dissent, Justice Freeman agrees with the majority opinion that the issue presented in this case is “whether defendant is entitled to a new trial because he was made to wear, without a showing of manifest need, an electronic stun belt as a restraining device during his trial.” 222 Ill. 2d at 361 (Freeman, J., dissenting, joined by McMorrow and Kilbride, JJ.). However, after defining the parameters of the case, the dissent goes on to enlarge those parameters by contending that we should also address the propriety of using stun belts in any criminal trial. While we might agree with some of the medical and other important concerns identified in the lengthy dissent, as we previously noted, the issue of whether to continue to use such restraints in Illinois courts is, unfortunately, simply not raised in this case. Thus, despite the dissent’s desire for this court to determine whether stun belts are an acceptable form of restraint in Illinois, until a case comes before us which actually raises that particular issue, any attempt to answer such an abstract question would be improper. See People v. Campa, 217 Ill. 2d 243, 269 (2005) (as a general rule, a court of review will not decide moot or abstract questions or render advisory opinions). Therefore, the dissent’s claim that this court’s opinion has “the effect of countenancing the continued use of stun belts” in Illinois, simply because we decline to engage in dicta, is unfair at best. 222 Ill. 2d at 389 (Freeman, J., dissenting, joined by McMorrow and Kilbride, JJ.). Indeed, contrary to that assertion, the majority, in addressing the limited issues raised in this case of first impression, fully appreciates the impact that electronic restraints may have on a defendant’s trial rights. This opinion sends a clear message to the trial courts: control of the courtroom is vested in the trial judge. While the sheriff may be responsible for courtroom security, it is the trial judge who makes the determination as to how security involving a defendant who is on trial is handled, so as to fully protect his constitutional rights. Towards that end, a Boose hearing is required in stun belt cases, as in shackle or handcuff cases, because regardless of the differences between the types of restraints, they each implicate due process concerns and thus require strict limits be placed on their use. Additionally, this opinion takes judicial notice of the routine use of stun belts on felons in other Will County cases in order to establish the fact of their use here, and cites cases both in and outside our jurisdiction in support of our holding that stun belts should be subject to a Boose hearing. The dissent, however, relies on information outside the record and cases outside our jurisdiction to speculate as to the type and effect of the stun belt worn in this case and to proselytize for a ban on the use of stun belts in Illinois, an issue which we have clearly determined to be outside the scope of this appeal. The facts are that defendant himself did not ask that we determine whether the “medical impact” or anxiety which stun belts may create makes them an improper form of restraint under all circumstances, and there is nothing of record to show that the type of electronic device worn in the nonprecedential cases cited by the dissent are in any way similar to the device worn by defendant. Further, although the dissent agrees that defendant has forfeited the issues regarding the trial court’s requirement that he wear an electronic restraint where neither he nor his counsel made any overt complaint at trial or in a posttrial motion (People v. Enoch, 122 Ill. 2d 176, 186-87 (1988)), the dissent then invites speculation as to what defendant could have been experiencing. Such speculation is completely irrelevant and has no place in this court’s review, which must be based solely on the facts of record. See People v. Guerrero, 356 Ill. App. 3d 22, 28-29 (2005); People v. Colon, 20 Ill. App. 3d 858, 864 (1974) (reviewing court cannot speculate as to facts that do not appear in the record). A fair reading of the cold transcript leads us to the more likely conclusion that defendant was not suffering any of the anxiety or nervousness speculated upon by the dissent. As noted, what the record does show is that neither defendant nor his counsel objected to the use of the stun belt at any time. Counsel’s only expressed concern, made on the third day of trial, when defendant was about to take the witness stand, was that whatever defendant was wearing under his clothes might be visible to the jury as he walked across the room to take the stand. The colloquy between defense counsel and the trial judge clearly reveals that counsel did not even know what defendant was wearing under his clothes. This fact supports the inference that defendant never expressed any concern to his attorney about wearing the device, nor did it impinge on his ability to work with counsel. See Buss, 187 Ill. 2d at 217 (no error occurred where: (1) the trial court’s initial failure to state his reasons for requiring shackling was “presumably because defense counsel indicated that defendant did not object to leg shackles so long as the jury did not see them”; (2) the court explained its reasons for the shackling in detail during its denial of the defendant’s posttrial motion; (3) “the tables in the courtroom had been skirted so that the shackling *** was ‘never obvious to the jurors’ ”; and (4) defendant’s ability to consult with counsel had not been hindered by the shackling). Here, the dissent can point to nothing of record which demonstrates that defendant was made nervous or anxious by the fact that he was wearing the device. Thus, none of the actions of defendant, his counsel or the court support the conclusion that defendant’s presumption of innocence or the dignity of the court was effected by the error in failing to hold the requisite Boose hearing. Instead, counsel’s concern about the possibility of the jury’s seeing the bulky device under defendant’s clothing was resolved by the trial court’s action in seating defendant on the stand before the jury reentered the courtroom. Further, we disagree with the dissent’s claim that this procedure of “preseating” the defendant, because it was dissimilar to that used with previous witnesses, would cause the jury to “attach undue significance to such discrepancies.” 222 Ill. 2d at 377 (Freeman, J., dissenting, joined by McMorrow and Kilbride, JJ.). It is just as reasonable to draw the opposite conclusion, i.e., that while those of us “trained in the law” (222 Ill. 2d at 377 (Freeman, J., dissenting, joined by McMorrow and Kilbride, JJ.)) and familiar with court proceedings would know that it is somewhat unusual for witnesses to already be seated when court reconvenes and the jury reenters, few laypeople, not being involved in jury trials on a regular basis, would actually discern this difference, much less impute a negative connotation toward defendant from it. Nor does the dissent’s quotation from Illinois v. Allen, 397 U.S. 337, 344, 25 L. Ed. 2d 353, 359, 90 S. Ct. 1057, 1061 (1970), that disparate treatment of defendant from other witnesses not on trial “ ‘might have a significant effect on the jury’s feelings about the defendant’ ” support his theory. 222 Ill. 2d at 366, 377 (Freeman, J., dissenting, joined by McMorrow and Kilbride, JJ.), quoting Illinois v. Allen, 397 U.S. 337, 344, 25 L. Ed. 2d 353, 359, 90 S. Ct. 1057, 1061 (1970). This comment by the Court in Allen in no way dealt with any disparate treatment of defendant from other witnesses, but concerned the jury’s response to “the sight of shackles and gags” on that defendant after he displayed conduct which was disorderly, disruptive and disrespectful to the court. Allen, 397 U.S. at 343-44, 25 L. Ed. 2d at 359, 90 S. Ct. at 1061. Finally, we object to the dissent’s statement that “the unjustified use of the stun belt in this case is deemed inconsequential by a majority of this court.” 222 Ill. 2d at 389 (Freeman, J., dissenting, joined by McMorrow and Kilbride, JJ.). The instant matter presented a narrow issue which we have resolved through the consistent use of this court’s previous case law. We have cited as controlling this court’s findings in Boose and Staley that a trial court’s failure to examine the necessity of requiring a defendant to wear restraints at trial is a due process violation, and continued this line of reasoning to include not only visible restraints, but the type of “semi-hidden” electronic device used herein. Therefore, contrary to the dissent’s assertion, we have most definitely shown that an error such as occurred here has consequences. However, Boose and Staley, as well as Martinez and Deck, present a different factual situation which allows for a per se finding of reversible error which is not applicable under the facts presented in this case. Here, unlike the aforementioned cases where a trial objection was made, due to defendant’s complete forfeiture of the issue, not only the fact of the error but proof that the error “affected the fairness of the defendant’s trial and challenged the integrity of the judicial process” was necessary. Herron, 215 Ill. 2d at 187; see also Barney, 363 Ill. App. 3d at 597 (“The necessity to preserve the integrity and reputation of the judicial process is a purpose of the [plain error] doctrine, not a lone, triggering factor for its implementation”). Thus, simply because we follow the strict application of that doctrine as recently set forth in Herron and find that defendant has not met his burden of persuasion does not mean we are in conflict with our decisions in Boose and Staley, cases with different facts must be decided based on those facts. Nor is the Supreme Court’s holding in Deck that a defendant need not demonstrate actual prejudice to make out a due process violation contrary to our decision, which finds a due process violation but refuses to find plain error in the violation. As this court stated in People v. Blue, 189 Ill. 2d 99, 138 (2000), “[t]o determine whether defendant’s right to a fair trial has been compromised *** [under] the second prong of the plain error test *** [w]e ask whether a substantial right has been affected to such a degree that we cannot confidently state that defendant’s trial was fundamentally fair.” We thus agree with the dissent and with defendant that the trial court’s actions here amounted to error. However, under the circumstances presented, we are not persuaded that such error resulted in fundamental unfairness or caused a “severe threat” to the fairness of defendant’s trial. See People v. Durr, 215 Ill. 2d 283, 298, 308 (2005). Thus, where defendant has failed to establish plain error under the second prong as set forth in Herron, we hold that the procedural default of this issue must be honored. See Durr, 215 Ill. 2d at 308; see also Blair, 215 Ill. 2d at 444 n.2 (“procedural default” relates to the failure by counsel to comply with certain procedural requirements which results in the forfeiture of the defendant’s right to raise that error on appeal). Because we find that the right to review is forfeited in this case, we need not reach the question which divided the appellate court below, i.e., whether a new proceeding or merely a retrospective Boose hearing is the proper remedy where plain error has occurred. For these reasons, the judgment of the appellate court is reversed and the judgment of conviction entered by the circuit court is affirmed. Appellate court judgment reversed; circuit court judgment affirmed.   1 While courts often use the terms “forfeit,” “waive,” and “procedural default” interchangeably in criminal cases, for purposes of this opinion, we choose to use “forfeited” to mean issues that could have been raised, but were not, and are therefore barred. See People v. Blair, 215 Ill. 2d 427, 444 n.2 (2005).

=== CASE 9739308 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:12:00.600539+00 ===

JUSTICE FREEMAN, dissenting: The issue in this case is whether defendant is entitled to a new trial because he was made to wear, without a showing of manifest need, an electronic stun belt as a restraining device during his trial. This court has never addressed the propriety of using this particular kind of restraint at a criminal trial. However, as today’s opinion makes clear, there exists a body of our case law which addresses how other types of security devices impact upon a defendant’s trial rights. Indeed, the court acknowledges that the “stated reasons which prompt due process scrutiny in visible restraint cases — the presumption of innocence, securing a meaningful defense, and maintaining dignified proceedings — may be applied with like force to stun belts which are not necessarily visible to the jury.” (Emphasis added.) 222 Ill. 2d at 346. My colleagues in the majority then hold that this court’s holdings in People v. Boose, 66 Ill. 2d 261 (1977), and In re Staley, 67 Ill. 2d 33 (1977), “apply equally to those defendants who are restrained by means of an electronic stun belt worn under their clothing at trial, and that nothing *** precludes application of due process protections to such cases.” (Emphasis added.) 222 Ill. 2d at 347. The court further holds that a “trial court’s failure to follow the procedures set forth in Boose before ordering that defendant continue to wear an electronic stun belt during his trial constitutes a due process violation.” 222 Ill. 2d at 349. However, in finding that an error of constitutional proportions has occurred in this case, the court states that it is “not persuaded that such error resulted in fundamental unfairness or caused a ‘severe threat’ to the fairness of defendant’s trial.” 222 Ill. 2d at 360. After considering our case law on restraints and the nature of the electronic stun belt, I am persuaded that the error resulted in fundamental unfairness or caused a “severe threat” to the fairness of the trial. I would hold that defendant has satisfied the second prong of our plain-error rule, i.e., that the error was so serious that it affected the fairness of defendant’s trial and that it challenged the integrity of the judicial process. For these reasons, I dissent. I The court correctly notes that defendant did not properly preserve this issue for review. While my colleagues view the remarks between defense counsel and the trial judge as a failure to object, I view them somewhat differently. Defense counsel stated that his preference was for defendant not to wear the belt at all. As the excerpt from the transcript demonstrates, however (see 222 Ill. 2d at 344), the trial judge made clear that such a preference would be out of the question. In other words, the use of the belt was not open to argument. I would characterize the colloquy between the two as being enough to register a contemporaneous objection. This is an academic quibble, however, as defendant did not include the matter in his posttrial motion, and his failure to do so results in the issue’s procedural default on appeal. People v. Enoch, 122 Ill. 2d 176, 186 (1988). Nevertheless, this court has long recognized that the doctrine concerning procedural default is not absolute. People v. Carlson, 79 Ill. 2d 564, 576 (1980), citing People v. Burson, 11 Ill. 2d 360 (1957). Indeed, this court has developed a plain-error doctrine which allows a reviewing court to reach a forfeited error in certain circumstances. The doctrine, adopted formally as Supreme Court Rule 615, serves as a “ ‘narrow and limited exception to the general *** rule [of procedural default].’ ” People v. Szabo, 113 Ill. 2d 83, 94 (1986), quoting People v. Pastorino, 91 Ill. 2d 178, 188 (1982). This court has recently acknowledged that the purpose of the doctrine is “to protect the rights of the defendant and the integrity and reputation of the judicial process.” People v. Herron, 215 Ill. 2d 167, 177 (2005), citing People v. Howell, 60 Ill. 2d 117, 121 (1975). In Herron, we reaffirmed that our plain-error doctrine allows a reviewing court to consider unpreserved error in two distinct circumstances: (i) in instances of prejudicial error which may have affected the outcome in a closely balanced case, and (ii) in instances of presumptively prejudicial error which must be remedied even though it may not have affected the outcome. Herron, 215 Ill, 2d at 185. Under the first prong, a defendant must both prove that an error occurred (see People v. Sims, 192 Ill. 2d 592, 621 (2000) (“[bjefore invoking the plain error exception, however, ‘it is appropriate to determine whether error occurred at all’ ”), quoting People v. Wade, 131 Ill. 2d 370, 376 (1989)) and that “the evidence was so closely balanced that the error alone severely threatened to tip the scales of justice against him. The State, of course, can respond by arguing that the evidence was not closely balanced, but rather strongly weighted against the defendant.” Herron, 215 Ill. 2d at 187. Under the second prong, a defendant must prove both that an error occurred and that “the error was so serious that it affected the fairness of the defendant’s trial and challenged the integrity of the judicial process. [Citation.] Prejudice to the defendant is presumed because of the importance of the right involved [emphasis added], ‘regardless of the strength of the evidence.’ (Emphasis in original.) Blue, 189 Ill. 2d at 138. In both instances, the burden of persuasion remains with the defendant.” Herron, 215 Ill. 2d at 187. Under the first prong, a defendant must establish that he was prejudiced by the error. Under the second prong, defendant need not establish specific prejudice, but rather, must show that the error served to erode the integrity of the judicial process and undermined the fairness of the trial proceedings. It is important to distinguish between the two prongs of the rule. As this court noted in People v. Mullen, 141 Ill. 2d 394, 402 (1990), in cases “where the evidence is closely balanced, the probability that a defendant’s conviction was caused by even a minor trial error is greatly enhanced. Therefore, in those cases, the court will invoke the plain error rule so that it can determine whether an error, which was not objected to at trial and in post-trial motions, raises doubt as to the validity of the jury’s verdict.” Thus, the reviewing court concerns itself with the specific effect that an alleged error may have had on the jury. In contrast, the second prong of the rule encompasses those errors “of such magnitude that the commission thereof denies the accused a fair and impartial trial.” People v. Carlson, 79 111. 2d 564, 576-77 (1980). As Justice Ryan explained over 25 years ago, “under this second aspect of the plain error rule, the errors that will be considered as not having been waived, although not properly preserved, are those that are so fundamental to the integrity of the judicial process that they cannot be waived or forfeited by the failure to raise them in the trial court. I also believe that, being so fundamental to the integrity of the judicial process, they must be considered by the court regardless of the guilt of the defendant and therefore the harmless error test, even harmless error beyond a reasonable doubt, is not relevant.” People v. Green, 74 Ill. 2d 444, 456-57 (1979) (Ryan, J., specially concurring). Thus, this prong is designed to give the court the ability to act in those cases where systemic, structural errors serve to undermine the presumptions of fairness that normally attach to our criminal trials. As such, very few errors will fall within its ambit. The second prong of our test thus “guards against errors that erode the integrity of the judicial process and undermine the fairness of the defendant’s trial.” Herron, 215 Ill. 2d at 186. Relying on Herron, defendant argues that the error committed by the circuit court in this case eroded the integrity of the judicial process and undermined the fairness of his trial. He contends that he has satisfied his burden of persuasion because the error involved here is so serious that prejudice can be presumed. In other words, he argues that plain error occurred in this case pursuant to the second prong of our plain error rule. The court responds to this argument by noting “even constitutional errors can be forfeited [citation] if the error is not of such magnitude that it deprives the defendant of a fair trial.” 222 Ill. 2d at 352. Finding that defendant “has not shown that his presumption of innocence, ability to assist his counsel, or the dignity of the proceedings was compromised,” the court concludes that while error occurred, the error did not result in fundamental unfairness. 222 Ill. 2d at 353-54.1 disagree. It has long been recognized that an accused should never be placed in restraints in the presence of the jury “ ‘unless there is a showing of a manifest need for such restraints.’ ” Boose, 66 Ill. 2d at 265-66 , quoting People v. Duran, 16 Cal. 3d 282, 290-91, 545 E2d 1322, 1327, 127 Cal. Rptr. 618, 623 (1976); see also Deck v. Missouri, 544 U.S. 622, 629-30, 161 L. Ed. 2d 953, 963, 125 S. Ct. 2007, 2012 (2005) (acknowledging that “the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments prohibit the use of physical restraints visible to the jury absent a trial court determination, in the exercise of its discretion, that they are justified by a state interest specific to a particular trial”). This means that a defendant has the right to appear without restraints, unless such restraints are necessary to prevent escape, to protect the safety of those in the courtroom, and to maintain order during trial. Boose, 66 Ill. 2d at 266; Deck, 544 U.S. at 629, 161 L. Ed. 2d at 962, 125 S. Ct. at 2012. This determination is left to the discretion of the trial judge, who should select the type of restraint suitable in light of all of the circumstances. Boose, 66 Ill. 2d at 266. This court requires that, in such cases, the trial judge (i) allow a defendant to be heard on the question of restraint, (ii) state for the record the reasons for allowing a defendant to be placed in restraints, and (iii) make this determination outside of the presence of the jury. On appeal, such a decision will be reviewed for abuse of discretion. Boose, 66 Ill. 2d at 267. Courts from all jurisdictions have recognized that the foregoing procedures are necessary in restraint cases because placing a defendant in restraints impacts on a defendant’s right to due process in several different ways. Shackles and gags visible to the jury “might have a significant effect on the jury’s feelings about the defendant.” Illinois v. Allen, 397 U.S. 337, 344, 25 L. Ed. 2d 353, 359, 90 S. Ct. 1057, 1061 (1970). As such, the presumption of innocence that a defendant enjoys may be eroded. Courts have also found that restraints may restrict a defendant’s ability to assist counsel during the trial and offend the dignity of the judicial process. Deck, 544 U.S. at 631, 161 L. Ed. 2d at 963-64, 125 S. Ct. at 2013. This court has long acknowledged these very concerns in restraint cases. For example, in Boose, the defendant, a 15-year-old, was charged with murder. The juvenile court waived jurisdiction of the case and transferred it to the criminal division of the circuit court. Subsequent to the defendant’s indictment, the defendant successfully moved for a hearing to determine whether he was competent to stand trial. The defendant was brought to court wearing handcuffs which were threaded through shackles attached to a restraining belt wrapped around his waist. The defendant’s attorney moved that all of the restraints be removed whenever the jury was present. The trial judge denied the motion, stating that “due to the nature of the charges against the defendant, I believe it would be better to have the shackles remain.” See Boose, 66 Ill. 2d at 265. After the jury found the defendant competent to stand trial, his attorney moved for a new trial, arguing that the shackling of the defendant was not necessary. The trial judge denied the motion. Defendant then pled guilty to the charge of murder and was sentenced to a term of imprisonment. On appeal, the appellate court reversed, holding that the trial judge abused his discretion by ordering that the defendant appear shackled before the jury at the hearing on his competency. Boose, 66 Ill. 2d at 264. Noting that an “accused should never be placed in restraints in the presence of the jury ‘unless there is a showing of a manifest need for such restraints,’ ” this court affirmed the judgment of the appellate court. Boose, 66 Ill. 2d at 265-66, quoting People v. Duran, 16 Cal. 3d 282, 290-91, 545 P.2d 1322, 1327, 127 Cal. Rptr. 618, 623 (1976). The court emphasized the three distinct due process concerns the question raised and then described the various factors that should be considered by the trial judge when determining whether such a manifest need exists. Boose, 66 Ill. 2d at 266-67. In so holding, the court specifically rejected the notion that the nature of the charges alone could justify the use of restraints. Boose, 66 Ill. 2d at 267-68. Rather, the decision to use restraints must be made on a case-by-case basis, and should not be the product of a general policy of imposing restraints on all criminal defendants. Boose, 66 Ill. 2d at 267-68. In rejecting the State’s contention that the need for such standards on the question of shackling at a competency hearing is not as great as it might be at the actual trial to determine guilt or innocence, this court noted that a fair trial, in all its stages, “ ‘is a fundamental requirement in a criminal prosecution and when such requirement is not met, it amounts to a denial of due process of law’ ” no matter “ ‘how strong the evidence against an accused may be.’ ” Boose, 66 Ill. 2d at 269, quoting People v. Finn, 17 Ill. 2d 614, 617 (1959). Two months later, in Staley, this court reaffirmed its teaching in Boose. In Staley, a juvenile defendant was found delinquent for severely beating a teacher in the detention home where the defendant had been previously placed. At his initial hearing before the juvenile court, the assistant Attorney General recommended that the defendant remain handcuffed. The trial judge followed the recommendation, stating that he did not want the behavior that occurred at the detention home to occur in the courtroom. At the ensuing adjudicatory hearing held on the State’s petition for delinquency, the defendant’s attorney asked that the handcuffs be removed. The trial judge denied the motion, and ultimately found the defendant delinquent. On appeal, the appellate court reversed and remanded the matter for a new adjudicatory hearing because the trial judge erred in requiring the defendant to appear at the adjudicatory hearing in handcuffs. Staley, 67 Ill. 2d at 35-36. In affirming the appellate court’s judgment, this court noted, once again, the three distinct trial rights that restraints negatively impact, i.e., the presumption of innocence, the ability to assist in the defense, and the dignity of the judicial process. This court rejected the State’s contention that, because the adjudicatory hearing took place before a judge and not a jury, no error occurred. Prejudice to the jury, the court noted, was not the only reason why shackling had been disapproved: “In the absence of exceptional circumstances, an accused has the right to stand trial ‘with the appearance, dignity, and self-respect of a free and innocent man.’ [Citation.] It jeopardizes the presumption’s value and protection and demeans our justice for an accused without clear cause to be required to stand in a courtroom in manacles or other restraints while he is being judged.” Staley, 67 Ill. 2d at 37. The court emphasized that in the absence of a showing of manifest need, “which must be established clearly on the record,” an accused “cannot be tried in shackles whether there is to be a bench trial or a trial by jury.” Staley, 67 Ill. 2d at 38. The court did not engage in any type of harmless error analysis, despite the fact that the utility of such an inquiry was raised in the dissent. See Staley, 67 Ill. 2d at 41-42 (Ryan, J., dissenting) (arguing that defendant “should be required to demonstrate that he has in some manner suffered prejudice by being handcuffed during the trial”). In examining the holdings in both Boose and Staley, it becomes clear that the court was concerned with more than the effect that shackles would have on the fact finder’s ability to adjudicate guilt in light of a defendant’s right to the presumption of innocence. Both cases identify other trial rights that have the potential to be negatively impacted by the unjustified use of restraints, namely, the defendant’s right to participate and assist in his defense and the right to a dignified trial proceeding. The importance of the latter right, the right to a dignified trial proceeding, was certainly at the center of this court’s decision in Staley, where the court ordered a new trial despite the fact that the adjudicatory proceeding in question was tried by a judge and not a jury and where the court chose not to apply a harmless-error analysis to the case. Thus, the court in Staley considered the error to be so egregious that actual prejudice need not be shown and that it was of no import if the defendant was shackled in front of a jury or a judge. Since our decision in Staley, this court has not spoken with clarity with respect to what happens if a defendant raises the issue of unjust restraint on appeal without properly preserving it in the trial court. For example, in People v. Hyche, 77 Ill. 2d 229 (1979), the defendant claimed that his conviction must be reversed because he appeared before the venire in handcuffs on the first day of jury selection. This court held that defendant “waived any error by failing to object to his appearance in handcuffs.” Hyche, 77 Ill. 2d at 241. In so holding, this court found that the United States Supreme Court’s opinion in Estelle v. Williams, 425 U.S. 501, 48 L. Ed. 2d 126, 96 S. Ct. 1691 (1976), provided guidance on the question. In Estelle, the defendant appeared at trial in prison garb without objection. The Supreme Court held that the State cannot, consistent with the fourteenth amendment, compel an accused to stand trial before a jury while dressed in identifiable prison garb; however, the defendant’s failure to raise an objection “is sufficient to negate the presence of compulsion necessary to establish a constitutional violation.” Hyche, 77 Ill. 2d at 241. This court found that a similar conclusion was justified in Hyche “since similar considerations involving a defendant’s right to the presumption of innocence are implicated when the defendant appears before the jury in handcuffs.” Hyche, 77 Ill. 2d at 241. The court also rejected defendant’s contention that Staley and Boose mandated a different result: “[Those cases] are distinguishable in that the defendants there, unlike the defendant here, were improperly compelled to appear in handcuffs over objection.” Hyche, 77 Ill. 2d at 241. In contrast to Hyche, this court in People v. Buss, 187 Ill. 2d 144 (1999), declined to hold a shackling claim waived and, instead, elected to address the issue on the merits. In so doing, the court cited with approval People v. Bennett, 281 Ill. App. 3d 814 (1996), which found plain error existed when a defendant did not properly preserve the issue of unnecessary shackling. In Bennett, the defendant, like defendant here, asked that his restraints (shackles) be removed, and, just like defendant here, did not include the issue in his posttrial motion. The appellate court held that despite the defendant’s failure to properly preserve the issue, plain error allowed for the court to address the issue and provide relief. Bennett, 281 Ill. App. 3d at 823-25. In my view, the value of Hyche to today’s discussion is limited for several reasons. First, the case dealt with a question of pretrial restraint as opposed to the present case, which concerns a defendant who was restrained throughout the entirety of his adjudicatory proceeding. Specifically, the defendant in Hyche appeared in a single handcuff before members of the venire on the first day of jury selection. It is unclear from the court’s opinion in Hyche how many of the venire members who saw the defendant so restrained ultimately served on the jury, as the opinion indicates the jury was not selected in a single day. More importantly, however, Hyche is inconsistent with the principles announced in Boose and Staley. In contrast to those cases, the Hyche court focused on only one of the three trial rights previously identified in Staley and Boose as being the focus of the restraint issue, i.e., the presumption of innocence, and failed to mention the other two trial rights, the ability to assist and participate in the defense and the right to dignified proceedings. For this reason, the Hyche court’s observation that Estelle provided guidance to the question missed the mark. As I noted previously, Estelle addressed the propriety of appearing before a jury in prison garb without objection. While being seen by the jury in prison garb might well devalue the presumption of innocence, prison attire is not the equivalent of physical restraints. Unlike manacles, prison clothes do not restrict movement such that the ability to assist in the defense is compromised. Prison clothes also do not undermine the dignity of the courtroom in the same way that the use of shackles has traditionally been found to do. The United States Supreme Court has acknowledged the deep-rooted, historical aversion the judiciary has long had toward trying a criminal defendant in restraints: “The courtroom’s formal dignity, which includes the respectful treatment of defendants, reflects the importance of the matter at issue, guilt or innocence, and the gravity with which Americans consider any deprivation of an individual’s liberty through criminal punishment. And it reflects a seriousness of purpose that helps to explain the judicial system’s power to inspire the confidence and to affect the behavior of a general public whose demands for justice our courts seek to serve. The routine use of shackles in the presence of juries would undermine these symbolic yet concrete objectives. As this Court has said, the use of shackles at trial ‘affront[s]’ the ‘dignity and decorum of judicial proceedings that the judge is seeking to uphold.’ Allen, supra, at 344; see also Trial of Christopher Layer, 16 How. St. Tr., at 99 (statement of Mr. Hungerford) (‘[T]o have a man plead for his life’ in shackles before ‘a court of justice, the highest in the kingdom for criminal matters, where the king himself is supposed to be personally present,’ undermines the ‘dignity of the Court’).” Deck v. Missouri, 544 U.S. at 631-32, 161 L. Ed. 2d at 964, 125 S. Ct. at 2013. These concerns clearly underscore the critical differences between prison garb and physical restraints. For this reason, Hyche’s reliance on Estelle is not persuasive as the case is not truly relevant to the question presented in Hyche. Finally, the court in Hyche did not address plain error in any way. This court’s more recent opinion in Buss certainly does not follow the analysis set forth in Hyche. In Buss, as I noted previously, we rejected the defendant’s claim of improper shackling, but in so doing, we eschewed the State’s claims of waiver and decided the question on its merits. Our opinion did not cite to Hyche, but instead cited to an appellate court decision which found plain error in the unjustified use of restraints at trial even though the defendant had failed to include the issue in his posttrial motion. After reviewing our precedents, I find the Staley court’s refusal to subject the error to a harmless-error analysis to be important to today’s discussion regarding the second prong of the plain error rule. In essence, the court’s refusal to predicate a reversal on actual prejudice in Staley reveals that the court was more concerned with the error’s ramifications on the proceedings as a whole. As I noted previously, in Staley, the defendant was not tried by a jury, but by a judge. Surely a judge understands the presumption of innocence and would not equate the presence of restraints on a defendant with that defendant’s guilt of the charged crime. Yet, this court still reversed despite this fact and without a showing of prejudice because unjust shackling jeopardized more than the value and protection of the presumption of innocence. It also “demeans our justice for an accused without clear cause to be required to stand in a courtroom in manacles or other restraints while he is being judged.” (Emphasis added.) Staley, 67 Ill. 2d at 37. Thus, the error did not just affect the defendant’s substantial rights, it seriously affected the fairness, integrity and public reputation of the judicial proceedings and it was the systemic effect on the trial proceedings as a whole that warranted the new trial in Staley. If this is so, then why are not these same concerns, which clearly are present in all restraint-without-manifest-cause cases, not enough to satisfy the second prong of our plain error rule? As this court noted in People v. Blue, 189 Ill. 2d 99, 138 (2000), “prejudice to a defendant’s case is not the sole concern that drives our analysis of defendant’s appeal.” We further recognized in Blue that when a defendant’s right to a fair trial has been denied, “this court must take corrective action so that we may preserve the integrity of the judicial process.” Blue, 189 Ill. 2d at 138. In so doing, we pointed specifically to the second prong of the plain error rule: “To determine whether defendant’s right to a fair trial has been compromised, we employ the same test that this court uses whenever it applies the second prong of the plain error test. 134 Ill. 2d R. 615(a). We ask whether a substantial right has been affected to such a degree that we cannot confidently state that defendant’s trial was fundamentally fair. [Citations.] *** [W]hen an error arises at trial that is of such gravity that it threatens the very integrity of the judicial process, the court must act to correct the error, so that the fairness and the reputation of the process may be preserved and protected.” Blue, 189 Ill. 2d at 138. I note that these concerns echo the United States Supreme Court’s observations about the importance to the criminal justice system of maintaining dignified proceedings in which defendants are treated respectfully. Contrary to the court’s assertions, it today is not “follow[ing] the strict application of [the plain error] doctrine as recently set forth in Herron” (222 Ill. 2d at 359), rather it is corrupting the second prong of the rule by requiring defendant to establish that he was specifically prejudiced even though the rule itself does not require a showing of prejudice. In light of the above, it is unclear to me how this defendant’s failure to raise this matter in the posttrial motion transforms what would have been a due process violation not subject to a harmless error analysis into an error that now requires a showing of actual prejudice in order to warrant relief. To the extent that the court finds Estelle v. Williams relevant to this issue (222 Ill. 2d at 353-54), I strongly disagree. As I discussed above, in Estelle, the issue before the Supreme Court was whether an accused who is compelled to wear identifiable prison clothing at his trial by a jury is denied due process or equal protection of the laws. In addressing this issue, the Court acknowledged that the “particular evil” in these types of cases is “compelling a defendant, against his will, to be tried in jail attire.” Estelle, 425 U.S. at 507, 48 L. Ed. 2d at 133, 96 S. Ct. at 1694-95. However, the Court noted that case law showed that it was “not an uncommon defense tactic to produce the defendant in jail clothes in the hope of eliciting sympathy from the jury” especially in Texas, where the defendant had been tried. Estelle, 425 U.S. at 508, 48 L. Ed. 2d at 133, 96 S. Ct. at 1695. For this reason, the Court found that it was necessary for a defendant to register an objection to the jail attire before the trial judge so as to show the lack of compulsion. Unlike the Court in Estelle, I can point to no case law which reveals that it is a common defense tactic to produce a defendant in restraints in the hope of eliciting sympathy from the jury. I further note that the Court in Estelle in no way likened appearing before the jury in jail attire with the use of physical restraints. In fact, the Court pointed out that the decision to have a defendant appear in jail attire is one that belongs to defense counsel, not the trial judge.2 In contrast, case law makes clear that the decision to use restraints at trial lies solely in the discretion of the trial judge. A careful reading of Estelle thus demonstrates that it provides little guidance to the question presented in the case at bar.3  I believe that in order to determine whether the second prong of the plain error rule is satisfied in this case, it is essential for us to evaluate the general characteristics of a stun belt, especially in this case because it appears from the trial judge’s remarks that he believed that such a restraint was preferable to handcuffs or shackles. I believe we must assess what kind of impact a restraint such as an electronic stun belt has on a defendant’s trial rights, particularly those rights that have been traditionally recognized as having the most potential to be affected by the use of restraints at trial (i.e., the presumption of innocence, the right to consult with counsel, and the maintenance of dignity in the judicial process), and whether that impact results in fundamental unfairness or causes a severe threat to the fairness of the trial such that the second prong of our plain error rule is implicated. To answer these questions, I look to the same opinions from other jurisdictions where this issue has been previously addressed that my colleagues cite in their opinion. With respect to the presumption of innocence, courts have recognized that they must “guard against practices that unnecessarily mark the defendant as a dangerous character or suggest that his guilt is a foregone conclusion.” Wrinkles v. State, 749 N.E.2d 1179, 1193 (Ind. 2001) (and cases cited therein). In this case, the State claims that the electronic stun belt was not visible to the jury. The record, however, does not reflect that the belt was invisible. Indeed, the belt is described in the record as a “fairly noticeable object.”4 The fact that the belt is, in fact, somewhat noticeable has been a source of concern to the Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals, which has stated that “if the stun belt protrades from the defendant’s back to a noticeable degree, it is at least possible that it may be viewed by the jury. If seen, the belt ‘may be even more prejudicial than handcuffs or leg irons because it implies that unique force is necessary to control the defendant.’ [Citation.]” Durham, 287 F.3d at 1305. Moreover, the record here establishes that the bulge from the belt was noticeable enough to cause the trial judge to break from the usual trial protocol and have defendant preseated on the witness stand outside the presence of the jury. Thus, the use of the stun belt in this case necessitated the trial judge to treat defendant, upon his testifying, differently from the other witnesses who testified for the State at trial. Police officers Breen, Reid, Jensen, and Proschaska, in addition to auto yard owner Bill Clemmons, all walked up to the witness stand and were sworn in as witnesses in the presence of the jury, as is usually done in all criminal cases. Such things may mean little to those of us trained in the law, but jurors are not so trained and may well attach undue significance to such discrepancies. The disparate treatment of defendant from other witnesses who are not on trial “might have a significant effect on the jury’s feelings about the defendant” (see Illinois v. Allen, 397 U.S. 337, 344, 25 L. Ed. 2d 353, 359, 90 S. Ct. 1057, 1061 (1970)) and may cause jurors to believe that the difference in treatment is somehow related to defendant’s status as a defendant. Thus, the Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals’ acknowledgment, with respect to this facet of the due process inquiry, that “[t]he use of a stun belt as a security device undoubtedly raises some concern about possible prejudice to the defendant, and this is a concern that needs to be considered before the device is imposed on a defendant” (Durham, 287 F.3d at 1305) rings especially true in this case.5  Notwithstanding the above, the courts that have addressed this issue are more concerned with the electronic stun belt’s potential to “disrupt a different set of a defendant’s constitutionally guaranteed rights.” Durham,, 287 F.3d at 1305; see also People v. Mar, 28 Cal. 4th 1201, 1227, 52 P.3d 95, 112, 124 Cal. Rptr. 2d 161, 181 (2002) (acknowledging that the use of an electronic stun belt posed a significant risk of impairing a defendant’s ability to participate and assist in his or her defense); Wrinkles, 749 N.E.2d at 1194 (noting that the stun belt, even if not activated, has the “chilling effect” of “compromising the defense”). In order to adequately appreciate the concerns raised by these courts with respect to this set of rights, it is necessary to understand how the electronic stun belt works. In his brief, defendant reiterates the appellate court’s finding that the belt worn by defendant was the same type of belt described in another case from the Third District of our appellate court. According to defendant, the belt, when activated, delivers a 50,000 volt shock to the wearer which lasts for approximately eight seconds. The shock would knock the wearer to the ground and would incapacitate the wearer for 45 minutes. At oral argument, however, the State maintained that defendant could not point to the description in the Martinez case to argue against the use of the belt in his own case. I find the State’s argument particularly unpersuasive since the State does not deny defendant’s description of the belt nor does it attempt to otherwise enlighten this court about the belt in any meaningful way. The State, in its brief, does not once describe the device used in this case, yet argues nonetheless that its use at this trial should not be considered prejudicial in any way. The State’s amicus, the sheriff of Will County, represented by the State’s Attorney of Will County, speaks of his interest in “preserving the ability to use a stun belt as a security measure at trial,” but tells us little about the characteristics of the restraining device he advocates. The lack of such information from the sheriff is even more troubling since the record makes clear it was the Will County sheriff who insisted on the use of the electronic stun belt in this case.6  In any event, descriptions of the electronic belt can be readily found in opinions rendered in courts which have closely examined this issue. The following description is fairly representative: “As the Court of Appeal explained: ‘Stun belts are used to guard against escape and to ensure courtroom safety. This device, manufactured by Stun-Tech, is known as the Remote Electronically Activated Control Technology (REACT) belt. The type of stun belt which is used while a prisoner is in the courtroom consists of four-inch-wide elastic band, which is worn underneath the prisoner’s clothing. This band wraps around the prisoner’s waist and is secured by a Velcro fastener. The belt is powered by two 9-volt batteries connected to prongs which are attached to the wearer over the left kidney region. *** ‘The stun belt will deliver an eight-second, 50,000-volt electric shock if activated by a remote transmitter which is controlled by an attending officer. The shock contains enough amperage to immobilize a person temporarily and cause muscular weakness for approximately 30 to 45 minutes. The wearer is generally knocked to the ground by the shock and shakes uncontrollably. Activation may also cause immediate and uncontrolled defecation and urination, and the belt’s metal prongs may leave welts on the wearer’s skin requiring as long as six months to heal. An electrical jolt of this magnitude causes temporary debilitating pain and may cause some wearers to suffer heartbeat irregularities or seizures. [Citations.]’ ” Mar, 28 Cal. 4th at 1214-15, 52 P.3d at 103, 124 Cal. Rptr. 2d at 171. See also Wrinkles, 749 N.E.2d at 1193 (reciting same general description). Given these characteristics, a number of courts have been concerned about the effect such devices can have on a defendant’s ability to assist counsel and participate in the defense. For example, the Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals was particularly troubled about the adverse impact the device can have on a defendant’s sixth amendment and due process rights to be present at trial and participate in his defense: “Wearing a stun belt is a considerable impediment to a defendant’s ability to follow the proceedings and take an active interest in the presentation of his case. It is reasonable to assume that much of a defendant’s focus and attention when wearing one of these devices is occupied by anxiety over the possible triggering of the belt. A defendant is likely to concentrate on doing everything he can to prevent the belt from being activated, and is thus less likely to participate fully in his defense at trial. We have noted that the presence of shackles may ‘significantly affect the trial strategy [the defendant] chooses to follow.’ [Citation.] A stun belt is far more likely to have an impact on a defendant’s trial strategy than are shackles, as a belt may interfere with the defendant’s ability to direct his own defense.” Durham, 287 F.3d at 1306. Similarly, the Supreme Court of California has acknowledged that “it is by no means clear that the use of a stun belt upon any particular defendant will, as a general matter, be less debilitating or detrimental to the defendant’s ability fully to participate in his or her defense” than would be the use of the more traditional methods of restraint, such as handcuffs or shackles. Mar, 28 Cal. 4th at 1226, 52 E3d at 111, 124 Cal. Rptr. 2d at 181. On the contrary, the court warned that “[t]he psychological effect of wearing a device that at any moment can be activated remotely by a law enforcement officer (intentionally or accidentally), and that will result in a severe electrical shock that promises to be both injurious and humiliating, may vary greatly depending upon the personality and attitude of the particular defendant, and in many instances may impair the defendant’s ability to think clearly, concentrate on the testimony, communicate with counsel at trial, and maintain a positive demeanor before the jury.” Mar, 28 Cal. 4th at 1226, 52 E3d at Ill, 124 Cal. Rptr. 2d at 181. In this vein, the court was also deeply troubled by claims made in promotional literature from manufacturers of the belts that touted the belt’s ability “to provide law enforcement with ‘total psychological supremacy ... of potentially troubling prisoners.’ ” Mar, 28 Cal. 4th at 1226, 52 P.3d at 111, 124 Cal. Rptr. 2d at 181. Other courts have voiced similar concerns. See Hawkins v. Comparet-Cassani, 33 F. Supp. 2d 1244, 1262 (C.D. Cal. 1999) (stating that “a defendant may be reluctant to object or question the logic of a ruling — matters that a defendant has every right to do”); Wrinkles, 749 N.E.2d at 1195-96 (acknowledging that psychological impact of belt on a defendant can compromise the defense). Finally, I note that courts have found that stun belts possess “the potential to be highly detrimental to the dignified administration of criminal justice.” Durham, 287 F.3d at 1306. For example, the California Supreme Court acknowledged a “disturbing number of accidental activations” of stun belts across the country. The court specifically pointed to accidental activations recorded in judicial opinions from Idaho, Nevada, Ohio, and California. Mar, 28 Cal. 4th at 1228, 52 P.3d at 112-13, 124 Cal. Rptr. 2d at 182-83 (collecting cases).7 In the same opinion, the court expressed concern over the fact that the device can also be distracting, specifically referencing a quote from a stun belt use trainer that, “at trials, people notice that the defendant will be watching whoever has the monitor.” Mar, 28 Cal. 4th at 1226-27, 52 E3d at 111, 124 Cal. Rptr. 2d at 181. These examples demonstrate how this kind of device can be detrimental to dignified proceedings in a criminal trial. In light of the foregoing, I believe that stun belts plainly raise many of the same constitutional concerns that this court recognized in Boose and Staley, though in somewhat different ways. Although a stun belt may be less visible than devices such as handcuffs or shackles, the belt imposes a more substantial burden on the ability of a defendant to participate in his own defense and to confer with counsel during trial than do other devices. The stun belt also poses a serious threat to courtroom decorum and dignity. Because of the importance of these rights to our criminal justice system, the unjustified use of an electronic stun belt should result in plain error. Given the psychological effects the stun belt has on its wearer, as identified by courts in other jurisdictions, I am unwilling to hold, as my colleagues do, that because of defendant’s procedural default, defendant must establish prejudice with specific reference to the record in order to warrant relief on appeal. Such a holding is inconsistent with Boose and Staley, which do not require that specific prejudice be shown. Moreover, I am puzzled by the court’s holding that defendant here “has not shown that his presumption of innocence, ability to assist his counsel, or the dignity of the proceedings was compromised.” 222 Ill. 2d at 353. How exactly is a defendant to show that his presumption of innocence was compromised? What type of record evidence would support a finding of a compromised presumption of innocence? It is ironic that it is I, writing in my dissent, who has demonstrated with actual citation to the record how the use of the stun belt in this case affected the normal procedure of this criminal trial, where the record reveals that defendant was preseated in the witness box outside the presence of the jury. My colleagues’ response to the very type of record evidence that they demand throughout their opinion is that I am speculating about what kind of effect that had on the jury. 222 Ill. 2d at 356-57. I sincerely hope that my colleagues are not insinuating that an activation of the stun belt must occur before a defendant’s presumption of innocence will be deemed “compromised.” The court intimates that, because defendant “was before the jury for two days” with “no objection” and without “any apparent difficulty consulting with his counsel,” all was fine. As a reviewing court, we are left with a cold transcript of the proceedings from which we are unable to glean nuances in tone, demeanor, and appearance. That, of course, is why we defer to findings made by the trier of fact who, having been present at the trial, is in a better position to assess these particular things. For these reasons, I am unwilling to assume, as my colleagues appear to, that because the record does not reflect any overt signs of nervousness or distress on defendant’s part over the use of the belt, defendant did not experience any anxiety or suffer any prejudice. All people react to stress differently. The record may not reflect anxiety on a defendant’s part because he or she may not manifest anxiety in an outwardly discernable manner, e.g., nervous twitching, stuttering, shaking, and the like. Instead, a defendant may be the type of individual who internalizes anxiety in ways that are not visible to observers. Similarly, a defendant’s lack of outcry to the trial judge or his counsel does not necessarily establish a comfort level with the stun belt or acquiescence in its use. Rather, such a defendant may be afraid of saying anything to anyone, lest an objection lead to activation of the stun belt. The court’s resolution of this matter reveals that it has overlooked the most glaring problem that occurs when a stun belt is placed upon a criminal defendant without showing a manifest need. A defendant has the right to be free from restraint at trial because, as courts have long recognized, restraints unduly erode the trial protections afforded to a defendant by the Constitution. It is only when a defendant misbehaves or poses a great danger through past behavior that those trial protections are rightfully diminished. Such a defendant’s trial protections are less, but that is constitutionally permissible because just cause has been shown. The unjustified imposition upon a criminal defendant of a remote-controlled electronic restraint — a device which is designed to give “psychological supremacy” over its wearer to the person who holds its activation button — poses a “severe threat” to the fairness of the proceedings. This results in a benefit to the prosecution because the defendant unjustifiably enjoys lesser trial protections through no fault of his own. It is the prosecution, not the defense, which benefits when a defendant, without just cause, is — for a lack of better description — psychologically neutralized, e.g., his attention focused on the stun belt and not the trial, his demeanor affected by trying not to be shocked, and the like. Such a defendant stands at a disadvantage at trial, and the proceedings become tainted. This is precisely the kind of error that the second prong of the plain-error rule seeks to guard against. It is the type of error that “erode[s] the integrity of the judicial process and undermine [s] the fairness of the defendant’s trial.” See Herron, 215 Ill. 2d at 186. For these reasons, I believe that the second prong of the plain-error rule has been satisfied in this case. Frankly and with all due respect, I have difficulty understanding the court’s treatment of defendant’s argument in this case. The court stresses often in its opinion that it is not “addressing] the propriety of using stun belts in any criminal trial” and that the “use [of] such restraints in Illinois courts is *** not raised in this case.” 222 Ill. 2d at 355. However, that issue is clearly and necessarily raised in this case. Defendant argues that the use of electronic stun belts is so inherently prejudicial that it served to undermine the basic trial rights he has been afforded under our Constitution. On some level, the court must be concerned with the use of electronic stun belts because it does indeed hold that to restrain a defendant with such a device without first determining whether the Boose test is met violates due process. The court holds that Boose and Staley apply with equal force in electronic stun belt restraint cases. I point out that Boose and Staley allow for restraints to be used in cases where manifest need has been established on the record. Therefore, if Boose and Staley apply with equal force to stun belt restraints, as the court holds, then, ipso facto, electronic stun belts can be used in Illinois courtrooms consistent with the teachings of Boose and Staley. Given this ruling, I simply do not understand why the court states that today’s opinion does not address the use of stun belts at a criminal trial. I have similar difficulties understanding the court’s holding that putting a defendant in a restraint like the one at issue here, without first establishing just cause, constitutes a violation of due process. Why does the court rule in this manner? According to our opinions in Boose and Staley, the main concern the courts had was on the magnitude of the error to the proceedings on a whole and not on any actual prejudice to a defendant. It was that concern which prompted those courts to hold that the error violated due process. None of the defendants in Boose or Staley pointed to specific instances in the record where the presumption of innocence, the right to participate and assist at trial and the right to a dignified proceeding were actually compromised. Instead, it was this court that was concerned with the effect the unjustified use of the restraints would have on the integrity of the judicial proceedings because the restraints had the potential to compromise those important trial rights. Nevertheless, today’s opinion, while stating that a due process violation occurred here, demands actual proof of an impact on those rights even though, in our earlier cases, the due process violation was not predicated upon a finding of actual prejudice. Defendant’s procedural default does not lessen the due process violation since that violation, under Boose and Staley, is not dependent on actual prejudice.8  The court’s opinion also appears to be inconsistent. At the outset of its analysis, the court states that although the trial court never referred to the “security device” as an “electronic stun belt,” it, like the appellate court below, is “confident” in its assessment that “it was indeed that type of restraining device.” 222 Ill. 2d at 345. The court then states that its finding is “especially probable” because in another recent Will County circuit court case, People v. Martinez, the State asked the appellate court to validate the “Will County sheriffs ‘standard operating procedure, of requiring all felony defendants in custody to wear a stun belt while appearing in court.’ ” 222 Ill. 2d at 345. The court also cites to other cases currently pending before this court involving the use of stun belts in Will County. Thus, it appears that, from that point of its opinion on, the court is operating under the assumption that electronic stun belts are at issue in this case. The court cites to a number of cases from outside of our jurisdiction which hold that electronic stun belts are restraining devices, the use of which is subject to the same restrictions as shackles. 222 Ill. 2d at 347. The court further holds that, in this case, the trial court’s failure to follow the procedures set forth in Boose before ordering that defendant continue to wear an electronic stun belt constituted a due process violation. 222 Ill. 2d at 349. Notwithstanding all of the above, the court faults me for my use of “information outside the record and cases outside our jurisdiction to speculate as to the type and effect of the stun belt worn in this case and to proselytize for a ban on the use of stun belts in Illinois.” 222 Ill. 2d at 356. Clearly, the court has misapprehended my dissent as much as it has misapprehended the reasoning behind Boose and Staley. Nowhere in this dissent do I “proselytize for a ban on the use of stun belts” as the court erroneously charges. As stated below, I believe that stun belts can be used in our courtrooms at the discretion of our trial judges after application of the factors identified in Boose and additional factors associated with the unique nature of this particular restraining device. The court then states that “there is nothing of record to show that the type of electronic device worn in the nonprecedential cases cited by the dissent are in any way similar to the device worn by defendant.” 222 Ill. 2d at 356. If the court is, in fact, concerned with this defendant’s lack of establishing on the record the specific type of electronic stun belt that is at issue in this case, then I do not understand why the court accepted the speculation of the appellate court that the security device was an electronic stun belt in the first place. Why does the court look to “nonprecedential” Third District appellate court cases in order to determine the standard operating procedure of the Will County sheriff? Taking the court at its own word, I do not understand why the court takes note of the actions of the Will County sheriff in this case, but then does not take note of the actions of other Will County defendants. If the actions of the other Will County defendants are of no moment in this case, then the actions taken by the Will County sheriff in other cases should likewise be of no moment in this case. I do not understand the basis on which the court decides what facts outside the record can be relied upon in this case and what facts outside the record cannot be relied upon. I also have similar difficulties understanding why, if my colleagues are so troubled by the fact that the type of electronic restraint involved in this case is “not even known,” they would issue an opinion which establishes as precedent that electronic stun belts are devices that are the equivalent of physical restraints and must comply with Boose. How can the court rule that such a restraint is the equivalent of something else if the court does not take the time to understand how the device works and refuses to look to other opinions from other jurisdictions which have set forth this necessary information? In my view, it is appropriate, and indeed necessary, to look to other cases to understand what these devices are and how they work in order to address defendant’s argument that the use of these restraints compromised his trial such that the second prong of the plain error test is satisfied. The court’s criticism of my use of cases from outside the jurisdiction (some of which the court itself cites in the body of its opinion) in order to assess defendant’s plain error argument is simply not justified. II Despite its holding that a trial court must follow the procedures set forth in Boose before ordering that defendant continue to wear an electronic stun belt at trial and the failure to do so results in a due process violation, the court believes that its opinion does not have the effect of countenancing the continued use of stun belts in Will County or any other county in this state. See 222 Ill. 2d at 348-49. I do not believe that the court’s opinion will be read in the narrow manner it believes, especially when the unjustified use of the stun belt in this case is deemed inconsequential by a majority of this court. However, the use of such devices raises significant questions that generally have not been considered by trial courts when addressing the more traditional forms of trial restraints. Today’s opinion fails to consider these questions as well, despite its recognition that the Boose factors apply to stun belts. I note that the court does not acknowledge the potential health risks that are associated with the use of stun belts. The California Supreme Court has noted that “the manufacturer of the REACT stun belt and regular users of the device apparently recognize that the stun belt poses special danger when utilized on persons with particular medical conditions, such as serious heart problems.” Mar, 28 Cal. 4th at 1229, 52 P.3d at 113, 124 Cal. Rptr. 2d at 183. The court also pointed to a statement from the assistant director of the Federal Bureau of Prisons, which instituted a policy not to use stun belts on (i) pregnant female inmates, (ii) inmates with heart disease, (iii) inmates with multiple sclerosis, (iv) inmates with muscular dystrophy, and (v) inmates who are epileptic. Mar, 28 Cal. 4th at 1229, 52 P.3d at 113, 124 Cal. Rptr. 2d at 183. Based on these facts, the court warned “when the risk of accidental activation is considered, use of stun belt without adequate medical precautions is clearly unacceptable.” Mar, 28 Cal. 4th at 1229, 52 P.3d at 113, 124 Cal. Rptr. 2d at 183.1 share these concerns. Finally, today’s opinion fails to acknowledge the importance of adequate training for those officers of the court who control the device at trial. This is especially necessary in view of the stun belt’s troubling potential for accidental activation. I believe that the trial court should make an inquiry concerning the amount of training the officer in charge of the activation button has received before allowing the device to be used in the courtroom. In light of the concerns regarding health risks and accidental activations, I agree with those courts that hold that “if a stun belt is to be used to restrain a particular defendant, a court must subject that decision to careful scrutiny. This scrutiny should include addressing factual questions related to its operation, the exploration of alternative, less problematic methods of restraint, and a finding that the device is necessary in that particular case for a set of reasons that can be articulated on the record.” Durham, 287 F.3d at 1309. See also Mar, 28 Cal. 4th at 1230, 52 E3d at 113-14, 124 Cal. Rptr. 2d at 183-84 (holding that trial court can approve use of stun belt only after traditional restraint factors are met, the belt is the least restrictive device that will serve the court’s security interest and only upon determination that the use of the belt is safe and appropriate under the particular circumstances). Consistent with today’s application of the Boose factors to cases involving electronic stun belt restraining devices, I would also require that any trial judge who employs the use of electronic stun belt restraining devices in his courtroom make specific findings on the record with respect to the defendant’s medical history and the training given to the deputies before allowing such a method of restraint to be used. Given this position, I fail to see how the court can accuse me of using this dissent “to proselytize for a ban on the use of stun belts in Illinois.” 222 Ill. 2d at 356. Ill As the foregoing demonstrates, I disagree strongly with the court’s treatment of this issue of first impression. The opinion demonstrates that a majority of the court fails to appreciate the significant and profound impact that this relatively new means of restraint has on a defendant’s trial rights. I respectfully dissent. JUSTICES McMORROW and KILBRIDE join in this dissent.   2The court “reject[s] the dissent’s attempt” (222 Ill. 2d at 354) to distinguish Estelle. The court’s rejection is made without any real discussion of the salient points of the United States Supreme Court’s analysis as it fails to discuss the importance the invited-error doctrine had on the United State Supreme Court’s analysis in refusing to excuse the defendant’s procedural default.    3I would further note that in Estelle there was no objection made at all during the proceedings, which strengthened the Court’s conclusion that the defendant chose to wear the jail attire as part of some trial strategy. In this case, it is clear that an objection was made to the wearing of the stun belt by defense counsel, who indicated that he preferred that defendant not wear the belt. The record indicates that counsel’s request was denied by both a court officer and the trial judge, who stated that the device would remain on defendant. This type of exchange made on the record is enough in my view to establish that defendant was “compelled” to wear this restraint during this trial. Thus, I believe this record sufficiently establishes the element of “compulsion” that the United States Supreme Court found wanting in Estelle.    4It appears that electronic stun belts are not undetectable or invisible. In United States v. Durham, 287 F.3d 1297, 1305 (11th Cir. 2002), the court noted that the “belt protrudes some three inches from the wearer’s back.” In State v. Flieger, 91 Wash. App. 236, 242, 955 P.2d 872, 874 (1998), the electronic restraining device in use was so noticeable that it piqued jurors’ curiosity about what the device was.    5The court accuses me of speculating about the effect that this discrepancy had on the jury. I note that the court indulges in speculation itself when it states that the discrepancy did not affect the jury. This misses the point. One should not have to resort to speculation to appreciate that what occurred at trial raised the danger of prejudice, which in restraint cases, is what courts are supposed to be guarding against.    6The record reveals that when defendant’s counsel raised the issue of removing the belt, the first person to respond was the court officer, who stated “No” before the trial judge could even speak. The sheriffs position on electronic stun belts was discussed in People v. Martinez, 347 Ill. App. 3d 1001 (2004), and I take judicial notice of the fact of the following, taken from the appellate court’s decision in that case: “The [trial] court added that it would not ‘tell the Sheriff how to run his jail.’ The judge elaborated: ‘[Jail officials] tell me now that it is standard operating procedure, even if it’s a [sic] 80-year-old lady who is in custody with the cuffs off and going to trial on a Class 4 Felony, it’s [the stun belt] worn in court now. And I am not going to change the Sheriffs Department’s policy.’ ” Martinez, 347 Ill. App. 3d at 1003. I point out that the trial judge in Martinez was the same trial judge who presided over defendant’s trial in this case. I note that the court, in today’s opinion, refers to other cases arising from the Third District, and Will County in particular. Thus, it appears that the sheriff of Will County has established a general, blanket policy of restraining all felony prisoners with electronic stun belts without regard for particularized circumstances and clearly not on the case-by-case basis that this court required for imposition of restraints in Boose and Staley. The sheriffs actions in this regard appear to run afoul of the rule that it is the trial judge who traditionally exercises his or her discretion in maintaining order in the trial courtroom.   During the State’s presentation at oral argument, Justice Garman asked whether actions on the part of the defendant can “trigger” the belt. The assistant Attorney General answered that only the “deputy” holds the button, implying that there could not be any type of accidental activation. These recorded instances of accidental activation in other jurisdictions demonstrate that accidents do in fact occur.    8The court’s treatment of this issue indicates that but for counsel’s failure to include the matter in defendant’s posttrial motion, defendant’s challenge to the use of the stun belt would have been resolved differently. See 222 Ill. 2d at 359 (noting Boose, Staley, Martinez, and Deck all present a “different factual situation which allows for a per se finding of reversible error which is not applicable under the facts presented in this case”). In light of this, defendant may have a constitutional claim of ineffective assistance of trial counsel cognizable under our Post-Conviction Hearing Act.

=== CASE 2219287 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:08.594951+00 ===

666 N.W.2d 404 (2003)
Tracie Ann GRIESE, Petitioner, Respondent,
v.
Christopher R. KAMP, Appellant.
No. C8-02-2281.
Court of Appeals of Minnesota.
July 29, 2003.
*405 Marty G. Helle, Hoversten, Johnson, Beckmann & Hovey, L.L.P., MN, for respondent.
Brandon V. Lawhead, Lawhead Law Offices, Austin, MN, for appellant.
Considered and decided by SHUMAKER, Presiding Judge, ANDERSON, Judge, and HALBROOKS, Judge.
OPINION
GORDON W. SHUMAKER, Judge.
Appellant-father alleges that the district court abused its discretion when it declined to hold an evidentiary hearing before denying his motion to modify custody. He argues that the court erred when it refused to give sufficient weight to the initial affidavits of respondent-mother's parents, which favored appellant-father, but were later contradicted by subsequent affidavits from respondent-mother's parents. Because of the seriousness of the allegations and the contradictory nature of the affidavits by the same affiants, we reverse and remand for an evidentiary hearing.
FACTS
Appellant-father Christopher R. Kamp and respondent-mother Tracie Ann Griese are the parents of a daughter, L.A.G., who was born in 1995. Griese has sole physical custody of L.A.G., and for the past two years both have lived in the home of Griese's parents, Daryl and Betty Griese (collectively, the grandparents).
On November 21, 2002, Kamp filed a change-of-custody motion, which was accompanied by affidavits from Kamp, Daryl Griese, Betty Griese, and Tracie Ann Griese's ex-boyfriend, Kevin Johnson. In his motion, Kamp alleged that Griese's endangerment of the child and a change in circumstances warranted a custody modification. Kamp's affidavit stated that the child has expressed concerns for her safety, *406 recounting L.A.G.'s statements that Griese hit her when Griese was under the influence of drugs, took L.A.G. to parties where drugs were being used, and smoked marijuana in her vehicle with L.A.G. present. Johnson's affidavit stated that Griese excessively used drugs, she used drugs in L.A.G.'s presence, and she hit L.A.G. for no reason.
Daryl Griese's initial affidavit stated, among other concerns, that Griese "is currently using drugs frequently," "smokes pot and uses other drugs around [L.A.G.]," has an extensive drug problem that "she cannot resist * * * even for a short period of time," takes L.A.G. to parties where drugs are used, drives recklessly, has driven while under the influence of drugs and with L.A.G. in the car, does not carry auto insurance, and "puts the child in extremely dangerous situations." Daryl stated that Griese "has done no child care," has been "passed out upstairs" while L.A.G. was downstairs unsupervised, and that, when the grandparents are not present, "[L.A.G.] is neglected." He concluded his affidavit by stating that giving custody to Kamp is "the best way to insure that the child is safe."
The content of Betty Griese's initial affidavit was nearly identical to that of Daryl Griese, but Betty added that Griese's drug use had been escalating, L.A.G. will be harmed if she remains in Griese's custody, L.A.G. "is in extreme immediate danger of physical harm because of [Griese's] uncontrolled drug use," and Griese "is a flight risk with the child," suggesting that Griese will "take [L.A.G.] out of state and hide."
In response, Griese filed an opposing affidavit denying the allegations in the affidavits of Kamp, Johnson, and Griese's parents. She stated, among other things, that she has smoked marijuana in the past, but has not smoked marijuana "for some time now."
Two weeks after they submitted their initial affidavits, the grandparents filed additional affidavits that qualified and directly contradicted portions of their prior affidavits. These additional affidavits stated that the grandparents "can't prove that [Griese] is using drugs," though they have noted "some strange behavior, which may have been caused by drugs," and that Daryl "has smelled things that [he] think[s] smelled like marijuana." The grandparents also minimized their prior-stated fear of "physical harm" to L.A.G. as merely being their fear that Griese would prevent L.A.G. from seeing them. They stated that they "certainly suspect" that Griese has driven a car while under the influence of drugs, but they "have no evidence" that she has done so. The affidavits also stated that even though they suspect and have heard rumors that Griese's friends do drugs, they have never seen them do so. They said that their prior statements that Griese was "passed out" were inaccurate, restating that Griese was only "sleeping," though sometimes the sleeping was "at strange hours." The grandparents added that when they made their prior affidavits, they did not think that their statements "would be used to take [L.A.G.] away from [Griese] on a permanent basis."
Without holding an evidentiary hearing, the district court denied Kamp's motion for custody modification. The court explained that although the affidavits from Kamp and Johnson alone were insufficient to warrant an evidentiary hearing, those affidavitswhen coupled with the initial affidavits from the grandparentsdid establish the requisite prima facie case to require an evidentiary hearing. But the court went on to state that it could not take the initial affidavits as true because they were "directly contradicted, explained and/or compromised, by subsequent affidavits of the same individuals, i.e. [Griese's] *407 parents." Consequently, the district court found that Kamp failed to meet the requirements for an evidentiary hearing, and it denied Kamp's motion for an evidentiary hearing and his request for physical custody. This appeal follows.
ISSUE
Where the district court was presented with contradictory material affidavits from the same affiants, did it err by denying an evidentiary hearing?
ANALYSIS
Generally, an appellate court's review of a district court's decision to dismiss a custody-modification petition without an evidentiary hearing is limited to whether the district court abused its discretion. Geibe v. Geibe, 571 N.W.2d 774, 777 (Minn.App.1997). But when a district court's decision relies upon affidavits that are available in the same form to an appellate court, this court reviews the decision de novo. Ross v. Ross, 477 N.W.2d 753, 755-56 (Minn.App.1991). Where, as here, the appellate court is called upon to read and interpret the same affidavits available to the district court, and where there is no evidence beyond those documents, we hold that the appropriate standard of review is de novo.
A party seeking modification of child custody must submit an affidavit asserting facts to support the requested modification. Minn.Stat. § 518.185 (2002). To establish a prima facie case and to obtain an evidentiary hearing, a party moving for custody modification must establish four elements:
(1) a change in the circumstances of the child or custodian; (2) that a modification would serve the best interests of the child; (3) that the child's present environment endangers her physical or emotional health or emotional development; and (4) that the harm to the child likely to be caused by the change of environment is outweighed by the advantage of change.
Geibe, 571 N.W.2d at 778 (citation omitted); see Minn.Stat. § 518.18 (providing relevant factors when considering motions for modification of custody). The movant's affidavits must show the present endangerment of the child, and a showing of endangerment is a threshold issue. See Minn.Stat. § 518.18(d)(iv) (2002) (requiring analysis of the child's "present environment"); Niemi v. Schachtschneider, 435 N.W.2d 117, 119 (Minn.App.1989).
When evaluating these factors, a district court must accept the moving party's affidavits as true. Nice-Petersen v. Nice-Petersen, 310 N.W.2d 471, 472 (Minn.1981). If the movant's affidavits do not provide sufficient grounds for modification, the trial court should deny an evidentiary hearing. Roehrdanz v. Roehrdanz, 438 N.W.2d 687, 690 (Minn.App.1989), review denied (Minn. June 21, 1989). Conversely, where some factual dispute exists regarding whether the present environment endangers the child, the district court should schedule an evidentiary hearing. Harkema v. Harkema, 474 N.W.2d 10, 14 (Minn.App.1991).
A court must disregard any directly contrary affidavits and may only use an opposing party's contrary affidavits to "explain the circumstances surrounding the accusations." Geibe, 571 N.W.2d at 779 (citation omitted). Here, the district court acknowledged that Kamp's and Johnson's affidavits, when viewed with the grandparents' initial affidavits, established a prima facie case. The court stated, however, that the grandparents' second set of affidavits effectively nullified the statements in their initial affidavits. Specifically, it ruled that it could not "take as *408 true" any affidavits "that are directly contradicted, explained and/or compromised, by subsequent affidavits of the same individuals, i.e. [Griese's] parents." This ruling, however, is directly contrary to the rule that the court must accept as true the movant's affidavits, must disregard any affidavits directly contrary to the movant's affidavits, and may only use those contrary affidavits to "explain the circumstances surrounding the accusations." Id. The district court has done precisely the opposite by taking as true the grandparents' second set of contradictory affidavits and disregarding their prior affidavits.
Accordingly, the district court may not give weight to any directly contradictory evidence in the grandparents' second set of affidavits. Even those portions that appear to explain the circumstances surrounding their prior statements serve to confirm that the grandparents still suspect that Griese has engaged in the endangering behavior, but that they do not have clear evidence to prove it. However, for the purposes of a Nice-Petersen hearing, allegations need not be corroborated with additional independent evidence. Lilleboe v. Lilleboe, 453 N.W.2d 721, 722-23 (Minn.App.1990) (reversing when trial court denied evidentiary hearing because of lack of independent substantiation).
The grandparents' contradiction of their prior affidavits, at the very least, raises a question of fact requiring an evidentiary hearing. See Larson v. Larson, 400 N.W.2d 379, 381-82 (Minn.App.1987) (holding that contradictory, mitigating affidavits justify an evidentiary hearing). In the context of summary judgment in other civil cases, Minnesota courts have held that a party cannot eliminate the damage done in prior evidence by providing later, contradictory evidence. See, e.g., Oreck v. Harvey Homes, Inc., 602 N.W.2d 424, 429 (Minn.App.1999) (in summary-judgment proceeding, self-serving affidavit later contradicting earlier deposition testimony did not create material fact issue), review denied (Minn. Jan. 25, 2000). As in Nice-Petersen hearings, summary-judgment cases have an exception stating that later affidavits from the same individuals may only explain and clarify the prior statements, rather than simply contradicting them. Hoover v. Norwest Private Mortgage Banking, 632 N.W.2d 534, 541 n. 4 (Minn.2001). The courts in these cases have consistently given credence to elements of the first testimony and have stated that subsequent testimony cannot serve to fully eliminate the effects of the first.
Minnesota courts have held that evidentiary "hearings are strongly encouraged where allegations are made of present endangerment to a child's health or emotional well being." Ross, 477 N.W.2d at 756 (citing Harkema, 474 N.W.2d at 14; Lilleboe, 453 N.W.2d at 724). Considering the seriousness of the allegations alleged by Kamp and by the grandparents, an evidentiary hearing is even more appropriate. See Harkema, 474 N.W.2d at 14 (requiring evidentiary hearing when affidavits provide factual disputes regarding endangerment). An evidentiary hearing serves to resolve disputes with contradictory evidence. Larson, 400 N.W.2d at 381-82 (requiring evidentiary hearing after submission of contradictory, mitigating affidavits). There does not appear to be more contradictory evidence than that in the present case, where the grandparents initially provided very damaging affidavits and then directly contradicted those statements two weeks later.
Finally, we address respondent's motion to strike. In response to Griese's affidavits, Kamp filed an affidavit that he included in the appendix to his appellate brief. Because the district court did not consider *409 Kamp's responsive affidavit, we grant respondent's motion to strike it from the appellate record. See Minn. R. Civ.App. P. 110.01 (defining record on appeal).
DECISION
Because the conflicting affidavits demonstrate that an evidentiary hearing is needed to ascertain whether L.A.G. is in a dangerous situation, we hold that the district court erred by denying an evidentiary hearing, and we remand for further proceedings.
Reversed and remanded; motion granted.

=== CASE 9739311 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:12:02.085402+00 ===

JUSTICE HOFFMAN delivered the opinion of the court: The respondent, Wanda A., appeals from an order of the circuit court terminating her parental rights with her son, C.A. For the reasons that follow, we affirm. C.A. was born on August 25, 2003. On September 5, 2003, the State filed a petition for adjudication of wardship, alleging that C.A. was neglected pursuant to section 2 — 4(1) (b) of the Juvenile Court Act of 1987 (Act) (705 ILCS 405/2 — 4(l)(b) (West 2002)) because of the respondent’s mental disability. According to the petition, the respondent had previously been diagnosed with schizoaffective disorder and had resided in psychiatric rehabilitation facilities for approximately five years. Following an adjudicatory hearing on February 11, 2004, C.A. was found to be neglected based on an injurious environment. On May 19, 2004, a dispositional order was entered, finding that the respondent was unable to care for C.A., adjudicating the minor a ward of the court, and placing him in the guardianship of the Department of Children and Family Services (DCFS). The State filed a supplemental petition for the appointment of a guardian with the right to consent to adoption on March 15, 2005. On September 5, 2005, the respondent’s attorney filed a motion asking the court to hold a fitness to stand trial hearing. The circuit court subsequently denied the motion. A termination hearing was held on December 19, 2005, and February 21, 2006. At the hearing, Chrissy Reynolds, C.A.’s caseworker, testified that C.A. was brought to the attention of the DCFS because the respondent had a history of mental illness, the respondent tested positive for cocaine at the time of the birth, and the respondent stated that she did not want to care for C.A. The respondent was assessed for services, and it was determined that she was in need of a drug and alcohol evaluation and treatment plan, treatment for her mental illness, and a parenting assessment. Reynolds testified that the only service the respondent had complied with was the treatment plan for her mental illness, but not on a consistent basis. Dr. Tiffany Masson, a clinical psychologist, testified that the respondent was referred to her for an evaluation by the court. After examining the respondent and reviewing her medical records, Dr. Masson diagnosed her with schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorder. Dr. Masson opined that the respondent’s mental illness directly impacted her ability to discharge her parental responsibilities and that she could not care for the basic needs of her child. Dr. Masson also believed that the respondent’s mental illness would last throughout her lifetime. At the conclusion of the hearing, the circuit court found the respondent unfit based on her failure to maintain a reasonable degree of interest, failure to make reasonable progress toward the return of the child, and inability to discharge her parental responsibilities. The court further found that it was in C.A.’s best interest to terminate the respondent’s parental rights and appoint a guardian with the right to consent to adoption. This appeal followed. The respondent argues that the circuit court erred in denying her request for a fitness hearing. Under long-established principles of due process, an individual may not be criminally prosecuted if he or she is unfit to stand trial. Medina v. California, 505 U.S. 437, 446, 120 L. Ed. 2d 353, 364, 112 S. Ct. 2572, 2576 (1992); People v. Johnson, 206 Ill. 2d 348, 361, 794 N.E.2d 294 (2002). To ensure these due process rights, a circuit court is required to conduct a mental fitness hearing if there exists a bona fide doubt as to a criminal defendant’s fitness to understand the nature and purpose of the proceedings and to assist in his or her defense. People v. Birdsall, 172 Ill. 2d 464, 475, 670 N.E.2d 700 (1996); 725 ILCS 5/104 — 10 (West 2002). Should a criminal defendant be found unfit at the hearing, the proceedings may be suspended until he or she recovers. See 725 ILCS 5/104 — 16 (West 2002). The respondent maintains that, because of her history of mental illness, the circuit court was required to conduct a fitness hearing to determine whether she was able to understand and participate in her defense at the termination hearing. Because the circuit court failed to hold such a hearing, the respondent contends that she was denied her constitutional right to due process. We disagree. Under the fourteenth amendment of the United States Constitution, a person cannot be deprived of life, liberty, or property without due process of law. U.S. Const., amend. XIV( §1. A parent has a fundamental liberty interest in maintaining custody of his or her child. Santosky v. Kramer, 455 U.S. 745, 753, 71 L. Ed. 2d 599, 606, 102 S. Ct. 1388, 1394 (1982); In re Andrea F., 208 Ill. 2d 148, 165, 802 N.E.2d 782 (2003). Accordingly, the procedures employed in terminating parental rights must comply with the requirements of the due process clause. Santosky, 455 U.S. at 753, 71 L. Ed. 2d at 606, 102 S. Ct. at 1394; In re M.H., 196 Ill. 2d 356, 363, 751 N.E.2d 1134 (2001). In determining whether a parental rights termination proceeding satisfied the constitutional requirements of due process, the factors set forth in Mathews v. Eldridge, 424 U.S. 319, 47 L. Ed. 2d 18, 96 S. Ct. 893 (1976), must be considered. Lassiter v. Department of Social Services, 452 U.S. 18, 27, 68 L. Ed. 2d 640, 649, 101 S. Ct. 2153, 2159 (1981); In re Andrea F., 208 Ill. 2d at 165. These factors include: (1) the private interest affected by the proceeding; (2) the risk of an erroneous deprivation of that interest through the procedures used and the probable value, if any, of additional or alternative procedural safeguards; and (3) the government’s interest, including the function involved and the fiscal and administrative burdens that the additional or alternative procedures would require. Matthews, 424 U.S. at 335, 47 L. Ed. 2d at 33, 96 S. Ct. at 903. Two private interests are involved in a proceeding to terminate parental rights: the parent’s interest in raising his or her child and the child’s interest in a safe and stable home environment. In re D.T., 212 Ill. 2d 347, 363, 818 N.E.2d 1214 (2004). A parent has a fundamental desire and right to the companionship, care, custody, and management of his or her children. Lassiter, 452 U.S. at 27, 68 L. Ed. 2d at 649-50, 101 S. Ct. at 2159-60; In re M.H., 196 Ill. 2d at 365. When a parental rights termination proceeding is brought, the State seeks not only to infringe this right, but to end it. Santosky, 455 U.S. at 759, 71 L. Ed. 2d at 610, 102 S. Ct. at 1397. Therefore, a parent has a commanding interest in the outcome of a termination proceeding. Lassiter, 452 U.S. at 27, 68 L. Ed. 2d at 650, 101 S. Ct. at 2160. The child also has a private interest in his or her own well-being and a stable environment. People v. R.G., 131 Ill. 2d 328, 354, 546 N.E.2d 533 (1989). Additionally, a child has an interest in ending State custody. In re Bernice B., 352 Ill. App. 3d 167, 176, 815 N.E.2d 778 (2004). The State, likewise, has an important interest in a parental rights termination proceeding. Its interest is twofold: a parens patriae interest in the welfare of the child and a fiscal and administrative interest in reducing the cost and burden of such proceedings. Santosky, 455 U.S. at 766, 71 L. Ed. 2d at 615, 102 S. Ct. at 1401; In re M.H., 196 Ill. 2d at 367. Because a delay in the adjudication of a termination proceeding can cause grave harm to a child and the family (705 ILCS 405/2— 14(a) (West 2002)), parental termination cases must be resolved expeditiously. See In re S.G., 175 Ill. 2d 471, 492, 677 N.E.2d 920 (1997). The postponement of termination proceedings, for a fitness hearing or until the respondent could be restored to fitness, would further delay a child’s interest in finding a permanent home. In re Bernice B., 352 Ill. App. 3d at 178. Accordingly, such an indefinite postponement would frustrate the State’s parens patriae interest in promoting the welfare of the child. In re Bernice B., 352 Ill. App. 3d at 177-78. Determining whether a parent is mentally fit would also impose an increased fiscal cost and administrative burden on the State. The State would be required to expend legal resources to establish the respondent’s competency and, possibly, be required to pay for the treatment to restore her to fitness. In re Bernice B., 352 Ill. App. 3d at 178. The State would also be required to continue to pay for the child’s foster care during the delay caused by the fitness hearing. In re Bernice B., 352 Ill. App. 3d at 178. Finally, we must consider to what extent the absence of a fitness hearing increased the risk of an erroneous deprivation of the respondent’s rights and the probable value, if any, of additional or alternative procedural safeguards. The respondent argues that the failure to hold a fitness hearing increased the likelihood that her parental rights were erroneously terminated where she was unable to understand or participate in her defense. The respondent, however, has failed to explain how she could have better assisted her attorney had she been found competent to participate in the termination proceedings. She has not identified any additional evidence that would have been introduced or presented any argument explaining how the outcome of the termination hearing would have been different had the proceedings been stayed until she was restored to fitness. Additionally, a parent may be found unfit if the parent suffers from a mental impairment which renders him or her unable to discharge a parent’s normal responsibilities for a reasonable period of time. In re R.C., 195 Ill. 2d 291, 305, 745 N.E.2d 1233 (2001); 750 ILCS 50/1 (D)(p) (West 2002). Accordingly, a finding at a fitness hearing that the respondent was not mentally fit could have provided additional evidence weighing in favor of termination. In re Bernice B., 352 Ill. App. 3d at 177. The current procedures provided for under the Act properly safeguard a parent’s rights. Parents have the right to be present, to be heard, to present evidence, to cross-examine witnesses, to examine court files and records, and to be represented by counsel. 705 ILCS 405/1 — 5(1) (West 2002). In this case, the respondent was represented by counsel, who cross-examined witnesses and argued her case. Based upon the record before us, we conclude that the absence of a fitness hearing offered little or no risk that the respondent’s parental rights were erroneously terminated. After considering the Mathews factors, we find that the respondent was not denied due process by the circuit court’s failure to hold a fitness hearing. Having rejected the only basis for reversal raised by the respondent, we affirm the circuit court’s order terminating the respondent’s parental rights. Affirmed. SOUTH, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9739312 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:12:02.09005+00 ===

JUSTICE HALL, dissenting: I respectfully dissent. In applying the Mathews factors, I believe the due process clause of the federal constitution (U.S. Const., amend. XI\( §1) requires a trial court in a termination proceeding to hold a competency hearing for a parent where the parent’s attorney requests such a hearing or, in the absence of such a request, the behavior of the parent suggests to the court that a competency hearing should be held. See In re Alexander V., 223 Conn. 557, 566, 613 A.2d 780, 785 (1992). In either situation, the standard the trial court should be guided by is whether the record before the court contains specific factual allegations that, if true, would constitute substantial evidence of mental impairment. In re Alexander V., 223 Conn. at 566, 613 A.2d at 785, citing State v. Lloyd, 199 Conn. 359, 365, 507 A.2d 992, 995 (1986). In this case, the majority maintains that postponing a termination proceeding until a competency hearing is completed or until a parent’s competency is restored would delay a child’s interest in finding a permanent home and undermine the State’s parens patriae interest in protecting the child’s welfare. This argument is too broad to comport with due process and fundamental fairness because in certain cases a parent’s competency may be restored within a relatively short period of time. Holding a competency hearing would give the parties an opportunity to present evidence concerning the likelihood that the parent could be restored to competency within a reasonable time. In re Alexander V., 223 Conn. at 564, 613 A.2d at 784. The trial court would then be in a position to determine the most appropriate and beneficial course of action. The majority also contends that a competency hearing would impose an increased fiscal cost and administrative burden on the State. I do not believe that the administrative costs of holding a competency hearing are prohibitive when balanced against a parent’s fundamental right to the care, companionship, custody, and management of his or her child. The United States Supreme Court has determined that a parent’s interest in retaining custody of his or her child outweighs the State’s interest in avoiding the comparatively minimal costs of a fitness hearing. See Stanley v. Illinois, 405 U.S. 645, 657 n.9, 31 L. Ed. 2d 551, 562 n.9, 92 S. Ct. 1208, 1215 n.9 (1972). The majority finally contends that where a parent is represented by counsel, the absence of a fitness hearing offers little or no risk of an erroneous deprivation of parental rights. I disagree. A mentally incompetent parent who is unable to understand the nature of a termination proceeding or assist his or her attorney in presenting the case could be at a severe disadvantage. A mentally incompetent parent may be unable to supply an attorney with sufficient information to rebut evidence offered by the State, which, although superficially damaging, could be refuted by a competent parent or a witness whose availability would be made known by a competent parent. See In re Alexander V., 223 Conn. at 563, 613 A.2d at 784. In addition, a mentally incompetent parent’s ability to offer affirmative proof of the existence or prospect of an ongoing parent-child relationship might be significantly compromised. See In re Alexander V., 223 Conn. at 563, 613 A.2d at 784. A mentally incompetent parent might also be unable to assist his or her attorney in establishing tactical and substantive goals at a termination proceeding. See In re Alexander V. 223 Conn. at 563, 613 A.2d at 784. In sum, there is a substantial risk that a mentally incompetent parent, who is unable to understand the nature of a termination proceeding or assist his or her attorney in presenting the case, might suffer an erroneous deprivation of parental rights even where the parent is represented by counsel.

=== CASE 9739313 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:12:02.842478+00 ===

*706OPINION
GILBERT, Justice.
Appellant Marcus Keith Miller was charged by indictment in Hennepin County for first-degree murder, Minn.Stat. § 609.185(1) (2002), and second-degree murder, Minn.Stat. § 609.19, subd. 1(1) (2002), for the killing of Wendy Bozeman. A jury trial was held. The jury returned guilty verdicts on both charged counts. A sentencing hearing was held and appellant received the mandatory sentence for first-degree murder, life in prison. Appellant appeals the judgment of conviction on the following grounds: (1) the district court committed reversible error when it allowed the state to introduce DNA evidence developed through the use of PCR-STR process and random match probability statistics that were not shown to fall within this court’s DNA exception to the rule against admission of quantitative, statistical probability evidence; and (2) the district court committed reversible error when it admitted testimony by police that appellant kept a list of sexual partners that included references to prostitutes, and a plastic female head used by appellant as a sex toy. We affirm.
At 5:20 in the afternoon on May 31, 2001, a woman walking her dog in Theodore Wirth Park discovered a severed human arm. She reported the discovery to park employees who then called 911. The area of the park where the arm was found was cordoned off and searched. The search eventually led to the discovery of another arm, two legs and a head. Subsequently, these remains were identified as those of Wendy Bozeman. A garbage can within the park was inspected and found to contain a plastic garbage bag. That garbage bag contained three other garbage bags, Allied parking lot ticket stubs, a City Pages newspaper, a Burger King french fry container, cigarette butts, blood and human tissue.
Ronald Rucker, the father of Wendy Bozeman’s son, testified at trial to the following. His longtime relationship with Wendy ended and the two separated, but they remained in touch for the purpose of raising their 14-year-old son. In November of 2000, Bozeman had fallen on hard times and asked if their son could move in with Rucker. Rucker agreed, and hearing that Bozeman had no place to stay, allowed her to move into his home too. Thereafter, Bozeman lived with Rucker on and off between November and May. On May 30, 2001, Bozeman went to work at her job downtown. That evening, while their son was at a church activity, Rucker saw that Bozeman was in the bathroom and smelled the odor of cocaine coming from the bathroom. In the early morning hours of May 31, between 12:00 and 12:30 a.m., Bozeman said she “was going around the corner” and that she would be back. Rucker understood that to mean that she was going to a nearby drug house to get drugs. Bozeman left with only her keys and identification. She never returned.
The next day Rucker read in the newspaper that an African-American woman’s body had been found in Theodore Wirth Park. Rucker called the police and local hospitals and was directed to the coroner’s office. He called the coroner’s office and provided a description of Bozeman. He was asked to come down to identify her remains. Rucker positively identified the remains of Bozeman from a photo of the remains taken by the coroner.
A surveillance camera in Theodore Wirth Park provided evidence implicating appellant. Police sergeant Erika Christensen testified as to what the video *707showed, and the video was introduced into evidence. At 3:28 p.m., the video shows a Geo Tracker or Suzuki Sidekick come up to the parking lot, slow down and then go through again. The vehicle returns 5 to 8 minutes later and the driver parks it in the north end of the parking lot. A man exits the vehicle and walks to a trash can approximately 20 feet from the parking spot and appears to place a trash bag into the trash can. The man returns to the vehicle, stands for a moment in front of the vehicle, walks to the back of the vehicle and stands there for another brief moment, and then gets in the vehicle and leaves. From a review of the video the police were also able to determine that the vehicle in the video was a 1992-1996 model Geo Tracker.
Prior to the arrival of the vehicle, the only other time the video shows someone near the trash can is at 12:54 p.m. At that time a park employee, riding on a motorized cart, stops in the area of the trash can, gets out and looks inside the trash can and then gets back onto the vehicle and drives away. A man testified that he was the park employee on the video and that although he had no particular recollection of checking that garbage can, if there had been trash in the can, he would have removed it.
Paul Melchert testified that while driving through the park in the afternoon of May 31, he saw a vehicle parked on the side of the road in a no-parking area and a man standing by the curb. The back tailgate of the vehicle was open and there was a garbage bag to the man’s left. Melchert testified that his attention was drawn to the man because he believed the man was dumping trash in a city park. At the time, Melchert considered reporting the man to the park authorities for illegal dumping, but ultimately decided not to report the incident and left the park. Upon reading in Monday’s newspaper that human remains had been found in the park, Mel-chert contacted the police.
Melchert testified that the vehicle was a turquoise car with a hatchback that hinged on the left side and had a black roof and purple and white decaling. He described the man he had seen as “a light-skinned African male with longer hair kind of in — I call them Jeri curls.” He testified that the man was wearing a dark green jogging suit with a white patch on the front that came into a triangle. Melchert testified that he did not get a good enough look at the man to be able to identify him.
The investigating officers were able to track the Allied parking ticket stubs found in the trash can at the park back to a specific parking lot in downtown Minneapolis. The officers went to the lot and noticed a Geo Tracker matching the description of the one appearing in the surveillance video. The parking lot attendant told the officers that the driver of the Tracker worked at Augie’s, a bar next to the parking lot. The officers ran the Tracker’s license plate and discovered the vehicle was registered to appellant.
The officers returned to the parking lot later in the day and upon seeing that the Tracker was still in the lot, entered Au-gie’s pretending to be license inspectors with the Minneapolis Police Department. Appellant informed the officers that his shift -had ended at 8 p.m. on May 30 and he had not worked on May 31.
Appellant was placed under police surveillance. While under surveillance he drove to the Salvation Army and left a garbage bag at the front door. The police recovered 'the bag. The bag contained numerous empty beer and liquor bottles, women’s jewelry and paper backing from self-adhesive floor tiles. The officers followed appellant back to his home where they could see through the window that he was “scrubbing or cleaning something.”
*708Appellant did not testify at trial. The investigating officers provided the following testimony. Appellant, having heard that he was under investigation, on his own initiative, went to the Minneapolis police homicide office. There he met with the investigating officers, the same officers who had talked to him earlier at Augie’s when posing as liquor license inspectors. Appellant spoke with investigators for 3 hours. Appellant denied knowing Boze-man. Appellant explained that he was employed as a disk jockey at Augie’s in downtown Minneapolis and lived in an apartment that was part of a warehouse space. He was converting part of the warehouse space into a training facility for disk jockeys. Appellant told the officers that he had worked at Augie’s on May 30 until 8 p.m., and that after work he spent the evening hours drinking at several bars in Minneapolis. Appellant said that he returned to Augie’s at around 1:15 a.m. in order to give one of the club’s dancers a ride home. Appellant told the officers that he drove home fast because he was drunk and that he arrived at his home between 2:00 and 2:30 a.m.
Appellant claimed that he was home alone in his residence from 2:00 or 2:30 a.m. until he woke up the next day around noon. Appellant told the officers that he had a severe hangover from the previous night and spent quite some time throwing up. He felt like he needed to get out of the house, so he went to a nearby store where he purchased an orange. He then drove to Theodore Wirth Park to eat the orange in order to alleviate the effects of the hangover. He claimed he ate the orange and threw the remainder of the orange in the trash and then left. He also said that he was wearing a green Michigan State shirt and gray sweatpants that day.
During the course of the interview, one of the officers left the room and was informed that appellant’s fingerprints were found on one of the parking ticket stubs found in the trash can at the park. The officers then continued the interview, asking more direct questions about the murder of Wendy Bozeman. Appellant claimed that he picked up some garbage near the curb while at the park and threw it in the trash can. When confronted with the descriptions of the surveillance video and the statement by Melchert, appellant denied stopping in the area where the remains were discovered and stated that he merely slowed down because of the speed limit signs. Appellant explained that when he found the trash bag on the curb, he had cleaned out his vehicle. At the conclusion of the interview, appellant was arrested and taken to the Hennepin County Jail Intake.
Search warrants were then drawn up for appellant’s residence and another address that was listed on appellant’s driver’s license. The Minnesota Bureau of Criminal Apprehension (BCA) began the search of appellant’s residence at around 7 or 8 p.m. on June 7. When the officers entered they noticed a strong order of chlorine bleach, which seemed to be coming from the bathroom. In the doorway of the bathroom were a bucket and mop. An officer described the shower curtain as looking new. The bathroom walls were painted black. The officers also found a paint roller with black paint and several previously opened containers of black paint.
The officers seized a roll of black trash bags from the kitchen and these bags were found to be of the same general type as those found in the trash can at the park. In the sleeping area of the residence the police found a plastic female head with a mouth that opened and closed, described as a sex toy by the officer testifying at trial. The plastic female head sex toy was seized pursuant to a second search war*709rant, issued on June 8, 2001. This second warrant was issued after the officers had entered appellant’s residence pursuant to the first search warrant. This second search warrant sought permission to seize items that the officers had seen while in appellant’s residence when executing the first search warrant including “[s]exual toys or devices or any items of that nature used for sexual acts.” The warrant was supported by an affidavit from Sergeant Christensen. Residue on the doll subsequently tested positive for the presence of semen.
The investigating officers testified that the floor of appellant’s shower stall appeared to have been damaged by a sharp tool. In parts of the shower these markings had been melted and reshaped in what the officer hypothesized was an attempt to cover up evidence that the shower had been damaged. Appellant’s residence contained a number of hand tools, a cordless drill, soldering irons and a torch. In the office area the police found an article discussing the human skeleton. A list of appellant’s sexual partners was also found. Among the names on the list there were nine entries where the sexual partners were referred to as prostitutes.
At the entrance to the bathroom, under the floor tiles, the investigators found what appeared to be blood. DNA tests were conducted on the samples and were found to be a match with Wendy Bozeman’s DNA profile. Later, after the BCA team had left, the Minneapolis homicide officers assigned to the case returned to appellant’s residence. One of the officers noticed a group of blood spatters on the wall in the bathroom that the BCA investigative team had not noticed. The BCA team was called back to the residence and.collected the samples; these blood samples also were a DNA match with Wendy Boze-man. A BCA forensic scientist explained the testing procedure and the statistical significancé of the matches he found, testifying that “we did not expect to see this DNA profile occur more than once in the world’s population.”
Appellant’s Geo Tracker was seized for processing. The Tracker, green with white and purple pinstripes and a black soft top, matched the description provided by Melchert and the vehicle shown in the surveillance video. Several locations within the Tracker tested positive for the presence of blood, including areas of the back seat, the seat belt, the wheel-well cover, the driver’s door handle, the steering wheel, the carpeting and on the rear bumper area. Three samples from the Tracker were subjected to DNA testing, one from the seat belt, one from a side panel next to the passenger side back seat and a third from the steering wheel. The sample from the steering wheel matched the DNA of appellant. The other two samples matched the DNA of Bozeman.
The Hennepin County assistant chief medical examiner testified that an autopsy conducted on the human remains found in the park revealed a variety of injuries, including sharp force injuries and blunt force injuries, which consisted of bruises, scratches, lacerations or tears into the skin surface. The death was classified “as homicide in manner due to complex homicidal violence.” Evidence of hemorrhaging present in the victim’s airway and in her eye indicated that she had been choked or strangled. The condition of the remains was consistent with the victim having been killed within 24 hours of the time of the autopsy. The most likely cause of death was strangulation. The victim also had suffered hemorrhage to the brain caused by trauma to the head. Tests revealed that the victim was under the influence of cocaine at the time of death; The examin*710er also testified that dismemberment occurred after the victim was dead.
The torso .of an African-American woman was found near railroad tracks in north Minneapolis on June 21. The torso had decomposed to such an extent that it was not possible to conduct a DNA test to match it to Bozeman. An examination of the level of decomposition, including study of insects within the torso, was consistent with the torso having been at the site where it was found for 2 to 3 weeks before it was discovered, which would be consistent with the torso being dumped around the same time as the human remains found in Theodore Wirth Park.'
I.
Appellant presents two arguments that the admission of DNA evidence was error. The first claim is that the PCR-STR process used by the BCA has not been proved to produce results that are accepted as reliable and trustworthy within the scientific community. A Frye-Mack hearing was not held in this case. But at trial, defense counsel filed a motion in limine to exclude any testimony regarding the DNA evidence because it involved the use of the STR system. The defense argued that the then-recent court of appeals decision in State v. Traylor, 641 N.W.2d 335 (Minn.App.2002), rev’d, 656 N.W.2d 885 (Minn.2003), should be considered authority for excluding the DNA evidence, which involved the use of the STR process. The DNA evidenced was allowed.
James A. Liberty, a BCA Forensic Science Laboratory employee, testified at trial as to the results of the DNA tests, which indicated Bozeman’s blood was found on appellant’s bathroom wall, the floor at the threshold to his bathroom and within his Geo Tracker. Liberty testified that the frequency with which one would expect to see the DNA profile match that of Bozeman was “once in the world’s population.” Liberty also testified that a sample of blood from the steering wheel of the Geo Tracker, matched that of the appellant, and the chance of selecting someone at random from the population who would be a match for that profile was “one in one billion.” Liberty attributed the significant difference in the two statistical probabilities given to the fact that there was insufficient DNA present on the steering wheel to do testing with two kits, therefore only one kit was used. There was no effort by defense counsel to cross-examine on the frequency testimony nor was any rebuttal evidence offered on the point.
Evidentiary rulings are within the discretion of the district court. State v. Ashby, 567 N.W.2d 21, 25 (Minn.1997). We review evidentiary rulings for an abuse of discretion. Id.
Appellant’s trial occurred after the court of appeals ruling in State v. Traylor, but before this court’s reversal of that ruling. State v. Traylor, 656 N.W.2d 885 (Minn.2003). Appellant’s brief to this court was also written before our decision in Traylor and states, “Whatever result this Court reaches in Traylor will be dispositive of Miller’s challenge to the PCR-STR testing performed in this case.” We approved use of PCR-STR testing methodology in Traylor. 656 N.W.2d 885. Appellant concedes the Traylor decision resolved the issue so as to eliminate the PCR-STR claim. We agree.
Appellant next argues that the testimony of the BCA expert was not based on the “interim ceiling method” recommended by the National Research Council and approved by’this court in State v. Bloom, 516 N.W.2d 159 (Minn.1994). Appellant argues that in this case the state did not establish that the statistics to which Liberty testified fell within the exception to the *711prohibition on statistical evidence that we recognized in Bloom.
The state claims appellant’s argument is nonsensical for two reasons. First, the state contends the National Research Council (NRC) no longer recommends the “interim ceiling method.” The state goes on to assert that in 1996 the NRC concluded the “interim ceiling method” was no longer scientifically justifiable and that frequency statistics should instead be calculated using the “product rule method.” The state quotes the 1996 NRC report as stating, “ ‘In general, the calculation of a profile frequency should be made with the product rule’ both for VNTR1 and PCR based systems.”
The second argument the state offers to refute appellant’s claim is that the NRC did not recommend the “interim ceiling method” for use in conjunction with STR testing. The state claims that in 1996 the NRC explained that the “interim ceiling method” was designed and intended for use with the VNTR-based systems. Furthermore, that same year the NRC concluded that the “product rule method” was the appropriate method for use with VNTR-based testing as well as STR-based testing. The state concludes by arguing that because we approved STR testing in Traylor, it naturally follows the “product rule method” is the appropriate method.
Appellant, in his reply brief, states that he does not dispute the state’s characterization of the NRC’s position on the use of the ceiling principle in conjunction with PCR-based testing. Appellant argues that in Bloom this court expressed concern that population frequency statistics would be misunderstood by the jury as a quantification of the likelihood that a defendant is guilty. Appellant offers further support for this position by citing State v. Kromah, 657 N.W.2d 564 (Minn.2003), where we advised courts to be aware of “the potentially prejudicial nature of the statistical probability evidence and ensure that DNA identification evidence is not presented in a misleading or unfairly prejudicial way.” Id. at 567. Appellant argues that the district court did nothing to limit the prejudicial impact of the statistical evidence, thus, the admission of the evidence was reversible error.
In recognition of the fact, acknowledged by both parties to this action, that the NRG recognizes the “product rule method” as the appropriate method to use with STR testing, we conclude the district court did not abuse its discretion by admitting the statistics based on the “product rule method.” Here, the evidence was not presented in a misleading or unfairly prejudicial way. Furthermore, at trial, the defendant did not offer any rebuttal evidence on this point, attempt any cross-examination on this testing or request any jury instruction to limit the prejudicial effect of the evidence. As such, the district court was not required sua sponte to instruct the jury.
II.
Appellant presents three distinct arguments that the evidence of a list of sexual partners, including references to prostitutes, and a plastic female head sex toy were unlawfully seized in violation of the Fourth Amendment. First, appellant argues that the first search warrant was invalid as it relates to authorizing the seizure of the list of appellant’s sexual partners because the warrant lacked the necessary particularity. Second, he claims the affidavit supporting the first search warrant did not contain sufficient information for the issuing judge to find probable *712cause supporting a search for the “personal writings and notes.” Finally, appellant argues that the second warrant likewise did not provide a basis for a finding of probable cause for the plastic female head sex toy. Appellant’s motion to suppress the evidence was denied by the district court at the conclusion of a Rasmussen hearing held immediately preceding appellant’s trial.
“[W]hen reviewing a district court’s probable cause determination made in connection with the issuance of a search warrant [we] * * * afford the district court’s determination great deference.” State v. Rochefort, 631 N.W.2d 802, 804 (Minn.2001). We “review[ ] a district court’s decision to issue a warrant only to consider whether the issuing judge had a substantial basis for concluding that probable cause existed.” Id. “[DJoubtful or marginal cases should be largely determined by the deference to be accorded to warrants.” Id.
We begin our analysis by addressing appellant’s argument that the first search warrant was invalid as it relates to authorizing the seizure of the list of appellant’s sexual partners because the warrant lacked the necessary particularity as it relates to the seizure of “personal writings and, notes.”
The first search warrant authorized a search and seizure of the following:
A human torso; Photographic and video evidence; latent and visible blood evidence; latent and visible fiber evidence mailings to show occupancy; black, plastic garbage bags; parking lot tickets; Cigarette butts; personal writings and notes; address books; vehicle information; possible murder weapons which would cause a “chop-type” injury; residual blood/fiber evidence in sink traps or drains; womens clothing to include blue jeans, a dark jacket, light-colored tennis shoes; items belonging to the victim, ‘Wendy Bozeman”; mens clothing to include gray sweatpants, green sweatshirt (possibly MI State); any other evidence tending to show the crime of murder has occurred and that a specific person(s) committed the murder.
Appellant cites Andresen v. Maryland, 427 U.S. 463, 480, 96 S.Ct. 2737, 49 L.Ed.2d 627 (1976), to support the argument that this search was unconstitutionally broad as applied to the list of sexual partners. In Andresen, the Supreme Court stated the following:
General warrants of course, are prohibited by the Fourth Amendment. “(T)he problem (posed by the general warrant) is not that of intrusion per se, but of a general, exploratory rummaging in a person’s belongings ... (The Fourth Amendment addresses the problem) by requiring a ‘particular description’ of the things to be seized.” Coolidge v. New Hampshire, 403 U.S. 443, 467 [91 S.Ct. 2022, 29 L.Ed.2d 564] (1971). This requirement “ ‘makes general searches !.. impossible and prevents the seizure of one thing under a warrant describing another. As to what is to be taken, nothing is left to the discretion of the officer executing the warrant.’ ” Stanford v. Texas, 379 U.S. 476, 485 [85 S.Ct. 506, 13 L.Ed.2d 431] (1965) (quoting Marron v. United States, 275 U.S. 192, 197 [48 S.Ct. 74, 72 L.Ed. 231] (1927)).
Andresen, 427 U.S. at 480, 96 S.Ct. 2737.
The state cites as persuasive authority, United States v. Wayne, 903 F.2d 1188 (8th Cir.1990). The search warrant at issue in Wayne authorized seizure of “[quantities of cocaine or derivatives thereof, and United States currency, documents and records which may be associated with said contraband.” Id. at 1195. In Wayne, the defendant argued that “docu*713ments and records which may be associated with said contraband” lacked the requisite particularity under the Fourth Amendment. Id. The court held constitutionally permissible the subsequent seizure of “ledger books, the address books, the rolodex, the photographs, the marijuana handbook, the letter from a co-conspirator, and the telephone records.” Id. The court concluded that the provision allowed the searcher to identify the objects authorized to be seized and stated:
The standard to be used in this determination is one of practical accuracy rather than technical nicety. Where the precise identity of goods cannot be ascertained at the time the warrant is issued, naming only the generic class of items will suffice because less particularity can be reasonably expected than for goods (such as those stolen) whose exact identity is already known at the time of issuance.
Id. (quoting United States v. Johnson, 541 F.2d 1311, 1313-14 (8th Cir.1976)).
We have recognized that when determining whether a clause in a search warrant is sufficiently particular, the circumstances of the case must be considered, as well as the nature of the crime under investigation and whether a more precise description is possible under the circumstances. State v. Poole, 499 N.W.2d 31, 34 (Minn.1993) (‘We have recognized that there is a degree of flexibility to the particularity requirement.”); State v. Ruud, 259 N.W.2d 567, 573 (Minn.1977) (“A warrant can only be as specific as the nature of the materials sought will allow.”). In State v. Hannuksela, 452 N.W.2d 668, 674 (Minn.1990), we acknowledged that at the time the warrant was sought the officers “did not definitely know all of the circumstances surrounding [the victim’s] disappearance although they were then in possession of sufficient facts to establish probable cause that he was the victim of foul play and that appellant was involved.” In that case we held the district court did not err by admitting evidence that was seized pursuant to a warrant authorizing the search of the defendant’s residence and the seizure of “personal property belonging to [the victim].” Id. at 672, 674.
Granting the district court considerable deference, as is required when reviewing the issuance of a warrant, we conclude that under the totality of the circumstances the search warrant was sufficiently particular to authorize the seizure of the list of sexual partners. See Hannuksela, 452 N.W.2d at 674 (concluding “under all of the circumstances” the warrant met minimal constitutional standards). The warrant at issue here authorized seizure of “personal writings and notes [and] address books.” The list at issue here is personal writings and notes with some characteristics of an address book. It contained a list of former acquaintances, as would be expected to be contained within an address book, but in this case the personal information recorded about each person was not related to where they lived, but rather were notes related to their previous sexual encounter with appellant. Accordingly, in seizing the list the police did not need to effect a “general exploratory rummaging in [appellant’s] belongings,” Andresen, 427 U.S. at 480, 96 S.Ct. 2737, but were able to seize only those things fitting the particular description of “personal writings and notes [and] address books.” As such, the warrant was sufficiently particular as it relates to the list of sexual partners seized from appellant’s residence.
Appellant next claims that even if the warrant was sufficiently particular in describing the list of sexual partners, there was no probable cause to support the seizure of either the list or the plastic female *714head sex toy. Appellant claims that because the list of sexual partners made no mention of Bozeman, it lacked the necessary nexus to her disappearance, death and dismemberment to have been supported by probable cause.
A judge, based on the information provided regarding the nature and circumstances of a crime, may use common sense to draw reasonable inferences as to what evidence is likely to be found. In Illinois v. Gates, 462 U.S. 213, 231-32, 103 S.Ct. 2317, 76 L.Ed.2d 527, (1983), the United States Supreme Court stated the following:
Long before the law of probabilities was articulated as such, practical people formulated certain common-sense conclusions about human behavior; jurors as factfinders are permitted to do the same — and so are law enforcement officers. Finally, the evidence thus collected must be seen and weighed not in terms of library analysis by scholars, but as understood by those versed in the field of law enforcement. As these comments illustrate, probable cause is a fluid concept — turning on the assessment of probabilities in particular factual contexts — not readily, or even usefully, reduced to a neat set of legal rules.
Gates addressed the information needed to support a probable cause finding that would result in the issuance of a search warrant, not the probable cause relating to a particular piece of evidence within the suspect’s home. Id. at 231, 103 S.Ct. 2317. Nonetheless, the case is instructive in that it cautions against the formulation of a “neat set of legal rules” for issues relating to probable cause. Thus, in determining whether the warrant application provided probable cause for the seizure of the lists of sexual partners, the question is whether the evidence listed in the warrant application linking appellant to Bozeman was such that law enforcement could make the reasonable inference that appellant’s home contained “personal writings and notes [and] address books” that would provide evidence of Bozeman’s murder. We conclude that the inference was reasonable and there was sufficient information to support a probable cause finding.
Appellant argues that the affidavit supplied by Sergeant Christensen as part of the warrant application was too subjective, vague and conclusory to justify issuance of the second warrant for the seizure of the plastic female head sex toy, and cites State v. Souto, 578 N.W.2d 744, 749 (Minn.1998), as-support for this argument. In Souto we stated that assertions in a warrant affidavit are too vague and con-clusory to support probable cause if the issuing magistrate cannot independently evaluate the officer’s conclusions. Id. However, in Souto, the law enforcement affiant merely stated “he knew” that the defendant was involved in possession or distribution of drugs. Id. Here, the officer stated in the affidavit that she knew the plastic head was in the home, having seen it upon entering the house pursuant to the first warrant, evidence placed appellant at the place where the remains were found, and the remains included a severed head of a woman. The officer’s theory, expressed in the supporting affidavit, was that based on her training, and given the nature of this homicide, the plastic head was “symbolic” of the manner in which the victim was decapitated. Such a theory was supported by the facts of the case known at the time. As such, we conclude that the district court judge did not err in finding probable cause to support the seizure of the plastic female head sex toy.
III.
Appellant next asserts that even if the district court did not err by not suppress*715ing the list of sexual partners and the plastic head, the evidence was not admissible under Minn. R. Evid. 402 and 408. We review a district court’s evidentiary rulings for an abuse of discretion. Ashby, 567 N.W.2d at 25.
Appellant argues that the list of sexual partners was not relevant under Minn. R. Evid. 402, because the victim’s name was not on the list, the list contained only a small number of prostitutes, and the evidence that the victim was engaged in prostitution was also weak. We disagree.
The evidence of a list of sexual partners that contained references to prostitutes is relevant under Minn. R. Evid. 402. The list revealed that appellant on occasion had sex with prostitutes. Rucker testified that the night Bozeman disappeared she went to buy drugs and that on occasion Boze-man would engage in prostitution in order to support her drug habit. As such, the list is circumstantial evidence of a connection between the victim and appellant.
Appellant argues that even if the evidence is considered relevant, its probative value is outweighed by the prejudicial effect and, as such, should have been excluded under Minn. R. Evid. 403. In support of this contention, appellant cites State v. Harris, 521 N.W.2d 348, 351-52 (Minn.1994). The evidence that appellant kept a list of sexual partners is quite distinct from the situation in Harris, where evidence was introduced that the defendant masturbated to the newspaper photo of the victim while in his jail cell. Id. at 353. Here, the evidence is far less inflammatory and is highly relevant to the state’s case because it shows a potential link between appellant and the victim. Furthermore, the district court took steps to reduce the prejudicial effect of the list of sexual partners. The list of sexual partners was not introduced into evidence and no reference was made to the sexual acts on the list, nor was the list provided to the jury. Rather, it was made a court exhibit. The testifying officer was asked if a list of sexual partners was found, to which he responded in the affirmative. He was then asked how many references there were to prostitutes and he responded that there were nine such references. Again, in the state’s rebuttal to appellant’s pro se closing argument,2 wherein appellant mentioned the list of sexual partners, the state explained the list of partners was relevant only because it showed the appellant’s interest in having sex with prostitutes and the victim was known to have engaged in prostitution.
Appellant further claims that the plastic female head sex toy was not relevant and any relevance the plastic head had was outweighed by its prejudicial effect: Thus, the plastic head should have been excluded under Minn. R. Evid. 402 and 403.
The state counters by arguing that the plastic head was relevant because it was symbolic of Bozeman’s decapitation. The district court allowed the plastic head into evidence concluding, “[I]t has some probative value. There is argument that the victim in this case was dismembered, her head was found in a separate spot, the [plastic] head is. prominently displayed in the house.” Sergeant Christensen testified at trial and described the .appearance of the interior of appellant’s living quarters on the night the police entered it pursuant to the first warrant. The state asked whether anything grabbed the sergeant’s attention. After defense counsel’s objection was overruled she explained that in *716the middle of the sleeping area was a doll with a red wig and sunglasses. She went on to explain that it was sitting on two rolls of toilet paper. She described the doll as made of a soft, flesh-like material and explained that it was anatomically correct with a mouth that opened and closed. In the corner of the mouth was a sperm-like substance. The plastic head was then marked for identification and received into evidence. Liberty testified that the material found on the doll was semen. Although the state argued to the district court and upon appeal that the plastic head was symbolic of the victim’s decapitation, that argument was never made to the jury-
Although the state’s theory that the plastic head is symbolic of the decapitation does involve some conjecture, we cannot conclude the district court abused its discretion by finding the evidence to be sufficiently relevant under Minn. R. Evid. 402. Much the same rationale as applied to the list of sexual partners can also be applied to references to the plastic head. Although appellant argues that its introduction portrayed him as a depraved sexual deviant; the evidence does not appear to have the inflammatory nature of the evidence we held to have been admitted in error in Harris. While the district court’s conclusion that the plastic head was relevant because the victim was decapitated requires substantial inference, such rulings are best left to the discretion of the district court and are- reviewed for an abuse of discretion. As such, we conclude the district court did not abuse its discretion by allowing the limited references to and introduction of the plastic head sex toy, nor did it err by admitting evidence relating to the list of sexual' partners . referencing prostitutes.
IV.
In his pro se brief appellant argues that the assistance he received from counsel was unreasonable and he identifies a number of specific actions taken by counsel, either acts or omissions, that he alleges failed to meet the prevailing professional norms of a defense counsel.
“An appellant arguing that he or she received ineffective assistance of counsel must demonstrate that counsel’s representation fell below an objective standard of reasonableness, and that a reasonable probability exists that the outcome would have been different but for counsel’s errors.” State v. Lahue, 585 N.W.2d 785, 789 (Minn.1998). The appellant bears the burden of proof on an ineffective assistance of counsel claim. Id. There is a strong presumption “that counsel’s performance fell within a wide range of reasonable assistance.” Id. Counsel’s decisions regarding trial strategy are granted particular deference. Id. “Which witnesses to call at trial and what information to present to the jury are questions that lie within the proper discretion of the trial counsel.” Id. at 789-90 (quoting State v. Jones, 392 N.W.2d 224, 236 (Minn.1986)).
Appellant argues that his trial counsel failed to present a witness that would place appellant somewhere else during the time the victim was last seen alive, and an eyewitness who had seen the victim in the presence of an unknown person when the victim was last seen alive. Appellant alleges that his trial counsel knew about these witnesses, but did not believe that théy would make much difference, because DNA would be the main issue. Appellant further asserts that his trial counsel was ineffective because counsel failed to somehow act upon the fact that some unidentified fingerprints were found on items in the trash at Theodore Wirth Park, unidentified fibers were found on the recovered *717torso, and a light switch and a plastic pail in appellant’s residence contained DNA that remains unidentified. Appellant fails to articulate precisely how his counsel could have responded to this information, and merely asserts “counsel should have acted upon this with the training and experience they possessed instead of concentrating on one thing.” Appellant further argues that his trial counsel was ineffective by failing to properly cross-examine the witnesses against him. Appellant claims that Melchert, who testified that he saw a light-skinned African-American man, with a garbage bag standing next to a Geo Tracker near the area of the park where the trash containing blood and tissue was found, improperly described that the Geo Tracker’s tailgate opened on the right, whereas appellant claims that model Tracker opens from the left. Appellant alleges that by failing to point out this alleged mistake his trial counsel was deficient.
Appellant further claims that his trial counsel was ineffective during cross-examination of Sergeant Michael Carlson, the investigator who found blood spatter on the wall of the bathroom after the BCA investigative team had left. The BCA team was then called back and collected the blood samples, which were a match with DNA from Bozeman. Appellant complains that counsel failed to ask the “effective” questions during Carlson’s cross-examination. Appellant also alleges that the cross-examination of Rucker was so deficient as to merit a new trial. Specifically, appellant complains that his trial counsel failed to point out, through cross-examination, that Rucker was twice arrested for domestic assault against Bozeman and that she filed an order for protection wherein she stated that Rucker had said, “I’ll kill you.” Finally, appellant claims that in a pretrial, out-of-court conference, his counsel told him that he had represented Ruck-er in a previous case and there may be a conflict of interest, but doubted that the court would dismiss him from the case so late in the process.
Appellant’s claims focus almost entirely on trial tactics. In State v. Jones, 392 N.W.2d 224, 236 (Minn.1986), we stated, “trial tactics should not be reviewed by an appellate court, which, unlike the counsel, has the benefit of hindsight.” We went on to recognize that “[c]ounsel must, after all, have the flexibility to represent a client to the fullest extent possible.” Id. The claims raised by appellant in his pro se brief are of the type we have repeatedly declined to recognize as amounting to ineffective assistance of counsel. See Jones, 392 N.W.2d at 236 (Minn.1986).
Finally, appellant has failed to provide an argument that the various tactical decisions of his trial counsel with which he now takes issue with on appeal prejudiced his case. Thus, even if counsel’s performance was deficient, appellant has failed to carry his burden of demonstrating that the representation resulted in prejudice. See Lahue, 585 N.W.2d at 790.
Appellant’s final claim of ineffective assistance of his trial counsel is that one of his attorneys mentioned in an out-of-court conference that he had represented Rucker in a previous matter, and that it might be considered a conflict of interest, but the court would not dismiss counsel so late in the process. Appellant implies that this conflict of interest led to his counsel’s decision not to cross-examine Rucker on his tumultuous and sometimes violent history with Wendy Bozeman. However, the decision not to cross-examine Rucker on that issue can also be considered a tactical decision. We have held that “until a defendant shows that his counsel actively represented conflicting interests, he has not established the constitutional predicate *718for his claim of ineffective assistance.” Gustafson v. State, 477 N.W.2d 709, 713 (Minn.1991) (quoting Cuyler v. Sullivan, 446 U.S. 335, 349-50, 100 S.Ct. 1708, 64 L.Ed.2d 333 (1980)). Appellant has provided no evidence to support his claim that a conflict of interest existed. Appellant’s ineffective assistance of counsel claim is without merit.
Affirmed.
CONCURRENCE AND DISSENT
. Variable Number of Tandem Repeat.
. At the close of the trial, appellant, against the advice of counsel, chose to discharge his counsel in order to give his own pro se closing argument. After the completion of that closing argument, upon appellant’s request, counsel was reappointed.

=== CASE 9739314 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:12:02.848316+00 ===

PAGE, Justice
(concurring in part, dissenting in part).
I concur in the result and in most of the court’s reasoning. I cannot agree, however, with the court’s conclusion that the trial court did not abuse its discretion in admitting the plastic head sex toy into evidence. “ ‘Relevant evidence’ means evidence having any tendency to make the existence of any fact that is of consequence to the determination of the action more probable or less probable than it would be without the evidence.” Minn. R. Evid. 401. The plastic head sex toy was not relevant to the victim’s decapitation or to anything else. The fact that Miller possessed the sex toy does not tell us anything about whether he killed the victim. Moreover, because this evidence lacked any probative value, the danger of unfair prejudice was clear and present. See Minn. R. Evid. 403 (stating “evidence may be excluded if its probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice”).
The trial court’s abuse of discretion notwithstanding, I would hold, on the record presented, that the error in admitting this piece of evidence was harmless. See State v. Chomnarith, 654 N.W.2d 660, 665 (Minn.2003) (noting that, if no constitutional violation has been alleged, the test for measuring whether the trial court’s abuse of discretion was harmless is whether the error substantially influenced the jury’s decision).

=== CASE 2219298 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:08.86139+00 ===

265 Wis. 2d 607 (2003)
2003 WI App 117
666 N.W.2d 74
STATE of Wisconsin, Plaintiff-Respondent,
v.
Bryan HOOVER, Defendant-Appellant.[]
No. 02-1687-CR.
Court of Appeals of Wisconsin.
Submitted on briefs March 26, 2003.
Decided May 28, 2003.
*612 On behalf of the defendant-appellant, the cause was submitted on the briefs of Glenn L. Cushing, assistant state public defender, Madison.
On behalf of the plaintiff-respondent, the cause was submitted on the brief of Eileen W. Pray, assistant attorney general, and James E. Doyle, attorney general.
Before Nettesheim, P.J., Anderson and Snyder, JJ.
*613 ¶ 1. ANDERSON, J.
Bryan Hoover appeals a judgment of the trial court convicting him of first-degree intentional homicide, party to a crime, contrary to WIS. STAT. §§ 940.01(1) and 939.05, and conspiracy to hide a corpse contrary to WIS. STAT. §§ 940.11(2) and 939.31 (2001-02).[1] He also appeals the trial court order denying him postconviction relief. Hoover argues that his constitutional right to confront and cross-examine witnesses testifying against him was violated by the trial court's rulings and/or trial counsel's deficient performance or confusion over what questioning was permissible. He also argues that the trial court deprived him of his due process right to a fair trial and unconstitutionally relieved the State of its burden of proof by substantially modifying the pattern jury instruction on party to a crime liability. With both arguments, we disagree. Accordingly, we affirm.
Background
¶ 2. At trial, several witnesses testified against Hoover, including Lyda Antia Morris (Antia) and her husband Richard Morris (Morris). The following evidence was presented. Hoover, Antia and Morris were involved in the murder of Frederick Jones and the subsequent conspiracy to conceal Jones's corpse on November 30 and December 1, 1995. Antia lived with Morris and during that time Hoover was staying with them. On November 30, the three decided to beat up Jones because he had allegedly sold Morris bad cocaine. The three tried to contact Jones, who eventually came over to the apartment.
¶ 3. After Jones's arrival at the apartment, Hoover and Morris began to beat him up. At some *614 point, Morris put Jones in a bear hug and at some point, Hoover hit Jones in the head with a golf club. After Jones was dead, Morris removed six condoms, $200 and a .357 gun from his body. The three contacted a friend, Tywon Knight, because he had a car and they wanted his help in disposing of Jones's body. Morris and Hoover then wrapped the body in a blanket and, with the help of Knight, put the body into the trunk of Knight's car.
¶ 4. Antia, Hoover and Morris dropped Knight off at a relative's apartment, but kept Knight's car in order to drive Jones's body to Chicago. In Chicago, they purchased lighter fluid using the money they had stolen from Jones. It was approximately 2:00 a.m. when they drove to the rear of an abandoned school, parked the car and removed Jones's body from the trunk. Morris opened the blanket and squirted lighter fluid onto Jones's body and onto the blanket. Morris then lit the body on fire. Thereafter, the three drove to a nearby alley and watched Jones's body burn.
¶ 5. On December 1, 1995, pathologist Lary Simms, Deputy Medical Examiner in Cook County, Chicago at that time, examined Jones's body. Simms testified to two causes of death: First, he noted cranial cerebral injuries consisting of "sharp force wounds" on Jones's forehead, which fractured his skull and drove the bone of the skull into the brain causing damage to the brain. He stated that these injuries were "definitely consistent" with being caused by an iron golf club and that these injuries "in and of [themselves] would be sufficient" to cause death. Second, he stated that the hyoid bone had been fractured from manual strangulation, which would also have been sufficient to cause death.
*615 Discussion
[1-4]
¶ 6. Right of Confrontation. Hoover contends that the trial court's rulings and/or his defense counsel's deficient performance or confusion violated his constitutional right to confront and cross-examine witnesses testifying against him. A Wisconsin criminal defendant's right to confront witnesses is guaranteed by the Sixth and Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution[2] and article I, section 7 of the Wisconsin Constitution.[3] The confrontation rights under both constitutions are the same. State v. Burns, 112 Wis. 2d 131, 144, 332 N.W.2d 757 (1983). The right of confrontation includes the right to cross-examine adverse witnesses to expose potential bias. Delaware v. Van Arsdall, 475 U.S. 673, 678-79 (1986). Although a court may not prohibit all inquiry into the possibility of bias, reasonable limitation on "interrogation that is repetitive or only marginally relevant" is appropriate. Id. at 679. The fundamental inquiry in deciding whether the right of confrontation was violated is whether the defendant had the opportunity for effective cross-examination. See Delaware v. Fensterer, 474 U.S. 15, 19-20 (1985); State v. Pulizzano, 155 Wis. 2d 633, 645, 456 N.W.2d 325 (1990).
*616 [5, 6]
¶ 7. Generally, the decision whether to admit or exclude evidence is within the circuit court's discretion. State v. Williams, 2002 WI 58, ¶ 7, 253 Wis. 2d 99, 644 N.W.2d 919, reconsideration denied, 2002 WI 121, 257 Wis. 2d 123, 653 N.W.2d 894 (Wis. Oct. 24, 2002) (No. 00-3065-CR). However, this discretion may not be exercised until the court has accommodated the defendant's right of confrontation. See State v. George, 2002 WI 50, ¶ 16 n.17, 252 Wis. 2d 499, 643 N.W.2d 777. Whether the limitation of cross-examination violates the defendant's right of confrontation is a question of law that we review de novo. See Williams, 253 Wis. 2d 99, ¶ 7.
[7, 8]
¶ 8. When considering an ineffective assistance of counsel claim, we review the circuit court's findings of fact regarding counsel's conduct under a clearly erroneous standard. State v. Swinson, 2003 WI App 45, ¶ 57, 261 Wis. 2d 633, 660 N.W.2d 12. Whether those facts constitute deficient performance and prejudice are questions of law that we review independently. Id.
[9-13]
¶ 9. The test for ineffective assistance of counsel has two prongs: (1) a demonstration that counsel's performance was deficient, and (2) a demonstration that the deficient performance prejudiced the defendant. Id. at ¶ 58; Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668, 687 (1984). To prove deficient performance, a defendant must establish that his or her counsel "made errors so serious that counsel was not functioning as the `counsel' guaranteed the defendant by the Sixth Amendment." Id. The defendant must overcome a strong presumption that his or her counsel acted reasonably within professional norms. Swinson, 261 Wis. *617 2d 633, ¶ 58. To satisfy the prejudice prong, the defendant must show that counsel's errors were serious enough to render the resulting conviction unreliable. Id.; Strickland, 466 U.S. at 687. We need not address both components of the test if the defendant fails to make a sufficient showing on one of them. Id.
¶ 10. Hoover argues that his constitutional right to confront and cross-examine witnesses testifying against him was violated by the trial court's rulings, and/or trial counsel's deficient performance or confusion over what questioning was permissible. Specifically, Hoover contends a violation of his constitutional right to confront and cross-examine Maurice Anderson-El, who testified that Hoover told of his involvement in Jones's homicide while Anderson-El and Hoover were inmates in the Kenosha County Jail. We hold that Hoover's constitutional right to confront and cross-examine Anderson-El was not violated by the trial court's rulings, nor was it violated by trial counsel's deficient performance or confusion. Our review of the record reveals that the trial court accommodated Hoover's right of confrontation and Hoover has not shown that his counsel's performance was deficient. Additionally, Hoover has not persuaded us that a new trial is warranted in the interests of justice due to confusion on his counsel's part.
¶ 11. Before Hoover's trial, Anderson-El's plea hearing took place and the hearing transcript reveals that the State did not give Anderson-El a deal in exchange for his testimony. Additionally, there was no mention of his cooperation, his statement or his potential testimony. In his appellate brief, Hoover concedes "it is undisputed that Anderson-El was not directly offered his plea bargain in exchange for either his *618 information or his testimony, and that he came forward with his information on his own."
¶ 12. Prior to Anderson-El's testimony, the trial court held several discussions with defense counsel and the prosecutor outside the presence of the jury concerning the appropriate scope of cross-examination. Defense counsel argued that he should be able to question Anderson-El about what defense counsel characterized as "the break" Anderson-El received in sentencing as a result of his statement.
¶ 13. The trial court disagreed, expressing concern that questions regarding Anderson-El's sentence could confuse the jury into believing that the court had somehow rewarded Anderson-El for his potential testimony. Specifically, the court responded: "The break has to come from the prosecutor, not from the Court. The considerations the Court applies are not a quid pro quo." The court explicitly disallowed questions concerning the sentence imposed to avoid confusing the jury into believing that the court had participated in plea negotiations and gave Anderson-El a "break" in his sentence in exchange for his testimony.
¶ 14. However, the court did not prohibit questions concerning the terms of the plea agreement. Rather, the court suggested that questions concerning the plea agreement would be appropriate. The court authorized defense counsel to question Anderson-El about his motivation for testifying and whether Anderson-El thought he might get something out of the State in the way of a reduced sentence recommendation, even though it was not part of any specific deal. The court stated:
Court Judges do not participate in sentence negotiations. So to the extent that any of your questioning would imply that, that certainly would be inappropriate. *619 What [Anderson-El's] expectations from the State recommendations are I think you can go into. If he was expecting because of his cooperation to get a break from the State, that's fine. But I don't want it implied that because of his cooperation he was anticipating a break from the Court.
....
[T]here's a difference between a sentencing consideration made by a Court and in effect a contract made between the State and a defendant for the State being committed to a position. And if he thinks that because of the State's position he receives a benefit, that's fine. That I think you can go into. The State promised to make a recommendation of x number of years in part due to my cooperation, is fair game. But to imply that the Court participated in that.... (Emphasis added.)
Defense counsel then asked for and received further clarification:
[Defense Counsel] Am I going to be able to  if he says; I wasn't expecting a break, or I was expecting a break but I didn't get a break, am I able to then explain to the jury what kind of sentence he received?
[Court] No. Because the sentence is what the Court imposes. The recommendation is the break. And that's the distinction I drew yesterday and that's the distinction I make today.
[Defense Counsel] All right.
[Court] What the benefit of the bargain is, is from the District Attorney, not from the Court.
[Defense Counsel] All right.
¶ 15. In addition, immediately before Anderson-El's testimony, the court reiterated to defense counsel *620 that it was not preventing cross-examination regarding Anderson-El's perception of what benefit he might receive for his testimony:
[I]f you want to ask him ... do you think that if you testified today you may, although you're notthe State hasn't agreed to give you anything, you may get some benefit, you can ask him that.
¶ 16. With this clarification given, the State called Anderson-El, who testified that Hoover admitted to him his involvement in Jones's homicide while he and Hoover were inmates in the Kenosha County Jail. During Anderson-El's cross-examination testimony, the only question to which the State objected was whether Anderson-El thought the charges were "very serious."[4] The court sustained the objection without explanation. Defense counsel followed up this question by asking Anderson-El whether he was concerned about the charges, to which there was no objection.
¶ 17. The trial transcript reveals a number of added ways that Anderson-El's potential bias was put before the jury: (1) the jury was informed that Anderson-El had ten prior convictions; (2) Anderson-El testified that when he came forward with his statement, he was in the Kenosha County Jail facing charges; (3) at defense counsel's request, the court took judicial notice that the date of Anderson-El's initial appearance on his criminal charge coincided with the date he said that Hoover made admissions to him; (4) defense counsel cross-examined Anderson-El about jailhouse snitches and the fact that snitches generally hope to get something *621 for their testimony; and (5) defense counsel questioned Anderson-El about his personal motivation for coming forward:
[Defense Counsel] Although you didn't have an agreement with the District Attorney's office you hoped that this would help you in terms of your predicament, that you were in prison; is that correct?
[Anderson-El] Well 
[Defense Counsel] Yes or no, sir.
[Anderson-El] No, sir.
[Defense Counsel] That motivation didn't come across you at all?
[Anderson-El] As I stated earlier, I wasn't concerned by the cases.
[Defense Counsel] So you were purely motivated by good intentions. Is that what you're saying, Mr. Anderson-El?
[Anderson-El] Yes.
[Defense Counsel] You expected no deal, you expected nothing in return for this information?
[Anderson-El] Well it was already established that we had no deal. So, you know, I mean 
[Defense Counsel] And nothing in the future?
[Anderson-El] No.
¶ 18. The trial court did not erroneously exercise its discretion or deprive Hoover of his constitutional right of confrontation. In State v. McCall, 202 Wis. 2d 29, 34-35, 44-45, 549 N.W.2d 418 (1996), the supreme *622 court held that the circuit court did not misuse its discretion or deny the defendant his right of confrontation by prohibiting the defense from cross-examining a key State witness about the dismissal of three criminal charges that had been pending prior to the beginning of McCall's trial. The defense in McCall presented no evidence that there was any agreement between the witness and the State in regard to the witness's testimony or that the witness believed such an agreement existed. Id. at 40.
¶ 19. Accordingly, the supreme court held that the mere fact that the witness's pending criminal charges had been dismissed prior to the defendant's trial would not support a reasonable inference that the witness was testifying in accord with an agreement with the prosecution or even that he believed he may have been doing so. Id. at 38-40. The circuit court properly exercised its discretion by excluding speculative and irrelevant evidence that could confuse the issues and unfairly prejudice the jury. Id. at 44. The supreme court held that the evidence of the dismissal of pending charges against the witness was irrelevant, and therefore, its exclusion did not constitute a misuse of discretion; the exclusion of irrelevant evidence does not violate the constitutional right to confrontation. Id. at 42.
[14]
¶ 20. The rationale of McCall is controlling here. In the absence of any sentencing-for-testimony agreement, it would be irrelevant to question Anderson-El about his sentence. Defense counsel was able to and, in fact, did question Anderson-El about his charges and whether he expected to get a benefit from testifying. However, eliciting information about the actual sentence imposed was not relevant to any incentives the *623 prosecution may have given Anderson-El for testifying on behalf of the State. Moreover, testimony concerning the actual sentence imposed might confuse the jury into believing the court was a party to some unproven sentencing-for-testimony agreement. As in McCall, the record does not support such a speculative theory.
¶ 21. Again, the fundamental inquiry in deciding whether the right of confrontation was violated is whether the defendant had the opportunity for effective cross-examination. See Fensterer, 474 U.S. at 19-20; Pulizzano, 155 Wis. 2d at 645. Our examination of the record convinces this court that Hoover had the opportunity for effective cross-examination. The trial court aptly communicated its willingness to accommodate Hoover's right of confrontation. See George, 252 Wis. 2d 499, ¶ 16 n.17. We highlight examples of three such communications:
1. "What [Anderson-El's] expectations from the State recommendations are I think you can go into. If he was expecting because of his cooperation to get a break from the State, that's fine."
2. "And if he thinks that because of the State's position he receives a benefit, that's fine. That I think you can go into. The State promised to make a recommendation of x number of years in part due to my cooperation, is fair game."
3. "[I]f you want to ask him ... do you think that if you testified today you may, although you're notthe State hasn't agreed to give you anything, you may get some benefit, you can ask him that."
Having made known its intention to accomodate Hoover's right of confrontation, the court did not err in *624 exercising its discretion to prohibit questions concerning the sentence imposed to avoid confusing the jury into believing that the court had participated in plea negotiations or somehow gave Anderson-El a "break" in his sentence in exchange for his testimony. See Williams, 253 Wis. 2d 99, ¶ 7 ("[A] circuit court's decision to admit evidence is ordinarily a matter for the court's discretion, whether the admission of evidence violates a defendant's right to confrontation is a question of law subject to independent appellate review."). This limitation on cross-examination did not violate Hoover's right of confrontation. See id.
¶ 22. Moreover, during Anderson-El's cross-examination testimony, the only question to which the State objected was whether Anderson-El thought the charges were "very serious." And while the court sustained the objection without explanation, defense counsel was otherwise unhampered in his opportunity to delve into questions regarding Anderson-El's potential bias.
[15]
¶ 23. Thus, since we hold that the opportunity existed to confront Anderson-El, we move to whether Hoover has shown that his counsel was ineffective. He has not. Hoover has not established that his counsel "made errors so serious that counsel was not functioning as the `counsel' guaranteed the defendant by the Sixth Amendment." Swinson, 261 Wis. 2d 633, ¶ 58; Strickland, 466 U.S. at 687. He has not overcome the strong presumption that his counsel acted reasonably within professional norms. Id. The transcript establishes that defense counsel questioned Anderson-El about his personal motivation for coming forward:
[Defense Counsel] Although you didn't have an agreement with the District Attorney's office you hoped that *625 this would help you in terms of your predicament, that you were in prison; is that correct?
[Anderson-El] Well 
[Defense Counsel] Yes or no, sir.
[Anderson-El] No, sir.
[Defense Counsel] That motivation didn't come across you at all?
[Anderson-El] As I stated earlier, I wasn't concerned by the cases.
[Defense Counsel] So you were purely motivated by good intentions. Is that what you're saying, Mr. Anderson-El?
[Anderson-El] Yes.
[Defense Counsel] You expected no deal, you expected nothing in return for this information?
[Anderson-El] Well it was already established that we had no deal. So, you know, I mean 
[Defense Counsel] And nothing in the future?
[Anderson-El] No.
We deem defense counsel's performance to be reasonably within professional norms and thus, need not address the prejudice prong of the ineffective assistance of counsel test because Hoover has failed to demonstrate that counsel's performance was deficient. See Swinson, 261 Wis. 2d 633, ¶ 58; Strickland, 466 U.S. at 687.
[16]
¶ 24. Finally, Hoover makes a cursory argument that a new trial is warranted in the interests of justice due to his counsel's confusion over what could or could *626 not be pursued on cross-examination of Anderson-El. We disagree. Anderson-El's testimony was part of a nine-day jury trial. It was, for the most part, cumulative of other evidence presented, including evidence presented by the State's direct witnesses to the crime.
¶ 25. The final statements of Morris corroborated Anderson-El's testimony. Although Morris gave earlier contradictory statements, his final version and only signed statement agreed with Anderson-El's testimony. Morris gave statements to both the Kenosha police and the Chicago police that placed Hoover at the scene of the crime. Morris indicated that Hoover struck Jones with a golf club, that Hoover helped dispose of Jones's body by placing it in the trunk of a car, and that Hoover drove to Chicago, purchased lighter fluid and burned the body. Morris's trial testimony from his Illinois homicide conviction was read to the jury and it placed Hoover at the scene of the crime and stated that Hoover had hit Jones with a golf club.
¶ 26. Antia's testimony also placed Hoover at the scene of the crime. She stated that Hoover hit Jones with a golf club and that Hoover helped dispose of the body by burning it in Chicago.
¶ 27. The medical examiner testified that the sharp force wounds found on Jones's head were enough to cause death and were consistent with being inflicted by a golf club. Hoover's fingerprints were identified on the lighter fluid cans. Knight's statement, which was read to the jury, indicated that Hoover and Morris approached him on the night of the murder, showed him the body and threatened him in order to get help moving the body.
*627 ¶ 28. Thus, we are not moved to differ with the trial court's assessment that "the evidence that is on the record here is so overwhelming absent Anderson-El that the interest of justice does not require a new trial on this matter."
[17-21]
¶ 29. Due Process Right to a Fair Trial. Hoover's second claim is that the trial court unconstitutionally relieved the State of its burden of proof by substantially modifying the pattern jury instruction on party to a crime liability and thereby deprived him of his due process right to a fair trial. Whether a jury instruction violated a defendant's right to due process is a question of law subject to our de novo review. State v. Pettit, 171 Wis. 2d 627, 639, 492 N.W.2d 633 (Ct. App. 1992). In reviewing a claimed jury instruction error, we do not view the challenged words or phrases in isolation. Id. at 637. Rather, "in determining whether the instructions to the jury appropriately advised the jury of the applicable law, or whether any error in the instructions constitutes reversible error, [the supreme court] has recognized that the instructions must not be judged in isolation, but must be considered as a whole." State v. Ivy, 119 Wis. 2d 591, 603, 350 N.W.2d 622 (1984). Relief is not warranted, however, unless the court is "persuaded that the instructions, when viewed as a whole, misstated the law or misdirected the jury" in the manner asserted by the challenger to the instruction. Pettit, 171 Wis. 2d at 638; State v. Paulson, 106 Wis. 2d 96, 108, 315 N.W.2d 350 (1982). In evaluating instructions given to a jury, an error may be rendered harmless if other correct statements of law are contained in the instructions; however, "even if the error is not rendered harmless by other portions of the instructions, there is no reversible error unless it may reasonably be said *628 that, had the error not been made, the verdict might probably have been different." Paulson, 106 Wis. 2d at 108 (citation omitted).
[22-24]
¶ 30. A trial court has broad discretion in instructing a jury but must exercise that discretion in order to fully and fairly inform the jury of the applicable rules of law. State v. Coleman, 206 Wis. 2d 199, 212, 556 N.W.2d 701 (1996). Whether a crime charged was a natural and probable consequence of the crime with which a defendant allegedly assisted is a factual issue for the jury. Ivy, 119 Wis. 2d at 601. Whether a jury instruction is appropriate, under the given facts of a case, is a legal issue subject to independent review. See Pettit, 171 Wis. 2d at 639.
¶ 31. The specific section of the jury instruction that Hoover takes issue with states:
A person who intentionally aids and abets the commission of a crime is also guilty of any other crime which is the natural and probable consequence of the intended crime. A crime is the natural and probable consequence of another crime if in the light of ordinary experience it was the result to be expected, not an extraordinary or surprising result. The probability that one crime would result from another should be judged by the facts and circumstances known to the defendant at the time the events occurred.
¶ 32. Hoover argues that the trial court's use of this modified version of WIS JICRIMINAL 406 "violated [his] constitutional right to due process of law by failing to require a jury finding on essential elements of the theory of guilt embodied in WIS. STAT. § 939.05(2)(c), and by improperly relieving the state of [its] burden of proof as to those elements." Specifically Hoover asserts:
*629 The instruction did not even identify what the intended crime or crimes were and relieved [the] state of its burden to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that Hoover aided and abetted the intended crime and that the charged crime was a natural and probable consequence of the intended crime.
He claims that the jury could not determine if the homicide was a natural and probable consequence of some other crime if the jury did not know what that other crime was.
[25]
¶ 33. First, we agree with the trial court that in the future it would be advisable to "elect to give a brief summary of [the intended crimes] rather than completely excis[ing] them from 406." However, we also agree with the trial court that even if any error occurred, under all the circumstances of this case, there is no prejudice to Hoover for the manner in which the jury was instructed. The instruction for the charged crime was given properly as to the elements and the intended crime instruction was adequate to inform the jury.
¶ 34. Finally, we are persuaded by the rationale in United States v. Elizondo, 920 F.2d 1308, 1317 (7th Cir. 1990), where the Seventh Circuit held that any error in a conspiracy jury instruction is harmless if the government does not rely solely on that theory of criminal liability. The Elizondo court affirmed the conviction because alternative theories of direct and vicarious liability existed for affirming the substantive convictions despite the defective instruction. Id. Given this rationale, we consider it significant that like the prosecution in Elizondo, the prosecution here did not rely solely on the natural and probable consequence theory of liabilityit also relied on a first-degree intentional homicide theory and an aiding and abetting theory.
*630 ¶ 35. As a final point, Hoover does not succeed on his claim that his counsel was ineffective for failing to object to the proposed instruction. We note that the trial court found that defense counsel did properly raise and preserve any objection to WIS JICRIMINAL 406 and how it should be implemented. However, regardless of whether counsel properly objected or not, we hold that given our harmless error analysis, there is no reasonable probability that counsel's failure to object to the natural and probable consequences jury instruction affected the verdict.
¶ 36. Having thoroughly reviewed the extensive record before us and the relevant law, we hold that Hoover's constitutional right to confront and cross-examine Anderson-El was not violated by the trial court's rulings, nor was it violated by his defense counsel's deficient performance or confusion over what questioning was permissible. In addition, we hold that Hoover's due process right to a fair trial was not violated by the trial court's modification of the pattern jury instruction on party to a crime liability.
By the Court.Judgment and order affirmed.
NOTES
[]  Petition to review denied 8-13-03.
[1]  All references to the Wisconsin Statutes are to the 2001-02 version.
[2]  The Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution provides in part: "In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right ... to be confronted with the witnesses against him." The Sixth Amendment applies to the states by virtue of the Fourteenth Amendment. See Pointer v. Texas, 380 U.S. 400, 406 (1965).
[3]  Article I, section 7 provides in part: "In all criminal prosecutions the accused shall enjoy the right ... to meet the witnesses face to face."
[4]  At the postconviction motion hearing, the prosecutor explained that his objection was "based on the fact the defendant [was] not in a position to be able to characterize whether charges are serious or not."

=== CASE 9739316 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:12:05.355583+00 ===

OPINION
BAKER, Judge.
Appellant-defendant Jesus Arrieta brings this interlocutory appeal from the trial court's order refusing to appoint an interpreter at government expense. Ar-rieta argues that a non-English-speaking criminal defendant is entitled to the appointment of an interpreter at government expense whether or not the defendant has established indigencey. Finding that this is a matter best left to the legislature and that nothing in statutory or constitutional law requires a trial court to pay for an interpreter for a defendant who has not established financial need, we affirm the judgment of the trial court.
FACTS
On June 10, 2005, Arrieta was arrested for class A felony dealing in cocaine. At a *1287preliminary hearing held that same day, Arrieta indicated that he did not speak English. Bond was set at "$50,000 cash, surety," and on June 13, 2005, Arrieta posted bond. Appellant's App. p. 3. At a June 13 hearing, Arrieta indicated his intention to retain private counsel. On June 14, 2005, the State filed the charging information. At the initial hearing, also held on June 14, Arrieta's attorney and a court-funded translator were present.
On August 31, 2005, the trial court notified Arrieta that a certified translator would need to be present for the upcoming pretrial hearing and that it would be Ar-rieta's responsibility to pay for that translator. At the pretrial hearing on September 8, 2005, Arrieta objected to paying for the translator and no translator was present, so the trial court continued the hearing. The trial court advised Arrieta that because of the county's dire financial needs, the court automatically provides translators only for initial hearings because at that time, there has not yet been an opportunity to make an indigeney determination. For further proceedings, the trial court provides a translator only if the defendant has established financial need. Absent a showing of indigency, defendants are required to pay for their own translators.
On October 27, 2005, Arrieta filed a motion to provide translator services for all future proceedings in his case, informing the trial court that he speaks very little English and is unable to understand the proceedings or assist in his defense without an interpreter. The trial court held a hearing on Arrieta's motion on November 16, 2005, during which the court made the following statements:
[The Court will always respect your right and your client's right to have a translator. But the issue here is who's to pay for them. The Court does pro-
vide translators for individuals who are indigent and for individuals who have established that they do not have financial abilities to pay for a translator. But that's something that needs to be brought to the Court's attention....
ock
The Court will never deny an interpreter because I do agree and concur that it's up, that everybody has the right to an interpreter. The only question is who pays for it.
Hock ok
... The only issue at any stage beyond the initial hearing, because the Court does pay for interpreters at the initial hearings for all matters just to make sure because we don't have time to make the determination of financial abilities. But it's up to the defendant to show and establish that they have a financial need. Just as if we appoint a public defender basically there has to be a showing of need. -
Tr. p. 4-7. The trial court denied Arrie-ta's motion 'and certified the order for interlocutory appeal.
DISCUSSION AND DECISION
Whether trial courts are required to provide interpreters for non-English-speaking criminal defendants absent a showing of indigeney is an issue of law to which we apply a de novo standard of review. See Brown v. State, 677 N.E.2d 517, 518 (Ind.1997) (holding that issues of law are reviewed de novo).
It is not in dispute that a non-English-speaking criminal defendant has a right to have court proceedings translated for him. Martinez Chaves v. State, 534 N.E.2d 731, 736 (Ind.1989). An interpreter
enables a non-English speaking defendant to understand the trial, provides a *1288means of communication between the defendant and his attorney, and translates the defendant's testimony if he testifies. The interpreter is necessary to implement fundamental notions of due process such as the right to be present at trial, the right to confront one's aceus-ers, and the right to counsel.
Id. at 737 (citation omitted). Moreover, the State and the trial court agree that an indigent, non-English-speaking criminal defendant is entitled to the services of an interpreter at court expense. Appellee's Br. p. 5.
As to a criminal defendant who has not established financial need, we observe that non-indigent defendants are not entitled to court-appointed attorneys or expert witnesses. Lamonte v. State, 839 N.E.2d 172, 176 (Ind.Ct.App.2005). Thus, the mere fact that a right-such as the right to counsel-is fundamental does not necessarily mean that the exercise of that right must be subsidized by the government under all cireumstances. Rather, it is only when the defendant is without financial ability to exercise that right that it must be provided by the government at no cost to him. In concluding that there is no federal constitutional right to a court-appointed interpreter absent a showing of indigency, the Second Circuit commented as follows:
We are aware that trying a defendant in a language he does not understand has a Kafka-like quality, but [the defendant's] ability to remedy that situation dissipates substantially-perhaps completely-any feeling of unease.... [Wle doubt that [the defendant's] claimed absolute constitutional right to an interpreter is stronger than the absolute right to a court-appointed counsel; the latter is held only by the indigent. ...
United States v. Desist, 384 F.2d 889, 902 (2d Cir.1976). Similarly, we conclude that the Indiana Constitution does not require the court to provide an interpreter at government expense for a non-English-speaking criminal defendant who has not established indigency.
Although Arrieta directs our attention to a provision of the United States Code regulating the use of interpreters in federal courts, see 28 U.S.C. § 1827, there is no analogous Indiana statute requiring court-funded interpreters in State courts.1 Indeed, although the statute governing the appointment and use of interpreters in civil cases explicitly provides that if the trial court appoints an interpreter the court may determine the manner in which the interpreter will be paid-including the person responsible for the cost-there is no similar statute applicable to criminal proceedings. 2 Ind.Code § 84-45-1-4. Thus, it is apparent that our legislature has made a policy decision to require trial courts to provide interpreters at government expense only when the defendant is indigent. Any change in that policy is best made by the legislature, not by the courts.
*1289Finally, Arrieta argues that if a non-indigent defendant is forced to pay for his own translator, he may hire someone, such as a family member or friend, who is not skilled or who is emotionally involved to an extent that her ability to interpret effectively, accurately, and impartially is adversely affected. But, as here, a trial court may permit only certified interpreters to be used. If a defendant is unable to afford a certified interpreter, then the trial court would find the defendant to be indigent and would, consequently, provide a court-funded interpreter.
Here, Arrieta has not attempted to demonstrate indigency despite the trial court's invitation to do so. Indeed, the only evidence in the record on appeal, while not dispositive, suggests that Arrieta is not indigent-he posted bond and hired a privately-retained attorney. Arrieta has not attempted to establish that these expenditures have exhausted all of his available funds or that he is otherwise indigent. Under these circumstances, the trial court properly denied his request to provide him with a court-funded interpreter.
The judgment of the trial court is affirmed.
CRONE, J., concurs.
VAIDIK, J., dissents with opinion.
. Arrieta also directs our attention to the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), which requires courts to provide interpreters for people with certain disabilities such as hearing impairments. But we are not persuaded that a lack of proficiency in English is akin to a disability, and the ADA does not require courts to provide interpreters for non-English-speaking people who are not disabled. Consequently, we do not find the ADA to be helpful authority in this matter.
. In 1981, the General Asserably repealed Indiana Code section 35-1-8-2, which had provided that an interpreter could be retained by a criminal defendant or could be appointed by the court. Moreover, if the court appointed the interpreter, the court set the fee and determined the manner in which it would be paid, except that an acquitted defendant could not be required to pay any fee for the court-appointed interpreter's services.

=== CASE 9739317 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:12:05.359465+00 ===

VAIDIK, Judge,
dissenting.
I must respectfully dissent. "The right to a fair trial is a fundamental liberty secured by the Fourteenth Amendment." Estelle v. Williams, 425 U.S. 501, 508, 96 S.Ct. 1691, 48 LEd.2d 126 (1976). While the majority recognizes that in some cases "[an] interpreter is necessary to implement fundamental notions of due process such as the right to be present at trial, the right to confront one's accusers, and the right to counsel," op. at 1288 (quoting Martinez Chavez v. State, 534 N.E.2d 731, 736 (Ind. 1989)), it goes on to hold that a non-English speaking defendant is required to pay for this service unless he or she can make a showing of financial need. I disagree.
I would hold that if a non-English speaking defendant is comvicted and able to pay, the trial court has discretion to order the defendant to pay the cost of the interpreter. Indiana Code § 833-37-2-3 provides statutory guidelines for the imposition of costs in criminal actions, and this Court has stated: "It has long been the law of this state that one who is convicted of a eriminal offense may appropriately be assessed the costs of prosecution." Gooch v. State, 685 N.E.2d 152, 155 (Ind.Ct.App.1997). Addressing the issue before us, the Louisiana Supreme Court held that a "trial court erred when it denied defendant's motion for the appointment of a translator on the ground that defendant was not indigent," but, citing a state statute, it continued, "should the defendant be convicted, the costs for any necessary foreign language interpreter is assessable as a cost of the prosecution or proceeding against him." State v. Lopes, 805 So.2d 124, 128-29 (La.2001). To support this holding, the Court cited the statutes of three other states allowing for such an assessment of costs. Id. at 129 n. 9 (citing Ark.Code Ann. § 16-89-104 (2006); Ohio Rev.Code Ann. § 2885.09 (LexisNexis 2006); Utah Code Ann. § 78-24-4 (2006)). Ordering a defendant to pay the costs of an interpreter after a conviction, however, is a big leap from ordering a defendant, who is presumed innocent, to pay for an interpreter from the outset of a criminal proceeding.
The majority likens paying for an interpreter to paying for an attorney, noting that it is only when a defendant is without financial ability to pay that the government must provide an attorney. I cannot accept this analogy. Rather, I see an in*1290terpreter as one of what the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit once labeled the "physical accoutrements" of a trial. See United States v. Desist, 384 F.2d 889, 903 (2nd Cir.1967), cert. granted on other grounds. Requiring a non-English speaking defendant to pay for an interpreter, to me, would be tantamount to requiring any defendant to pay for a courtroom, a bailiff, even a judge. In that way, an interpreter is part of the "basic apparatus" for intelligible and fair proceedings. See id.3 And when the government chooses to make someone a criminal defendant, it should furnish this basic apparatus. A criminal defendant is involuntarily drawn into the judicial system and thereby made subject to its immense powers. To require that defendant to pay merely to be able to understand the words being spoken around him in this system infringes upon basic notions of fairness and due process.
I pause to stress the distinction I see between an attorney and an interpreter. Whereas an attorney is often needed to parse out the legal complexities of a case for an untrained defendant, an interpreter serves the more basic role of relaying to the defendant the content of the conversation around and about him. And whereas defendants without attorneys often represent themselves pro se (albeit with varying levels of success), defendants who cannot speak English and find themselves in an English-speaking courtroom are at a much more critical and fundamental disadvantage than an unrepresented defendant who can speak English,. Therefore, I reject the suggestion that a non-indigent should have to pay for an interpreter simply because he has to pay for an attorney.
The majority also rejects the argument that its opinion will lead eriminal defendants to enlist unqualified or incompetent interpreters. It reasons that, "as here, a trial court may permit only certified interpreters to be used." Op. at 1289. I respond that just because this trial court required Arrieta to secure a certified interpreter does not mean that the same will be required by every trial court in every case. No statute or court rule requires interpreters to be certified. The Indiana Supreme Court recently launched a Court Interpreter Certification program, largely to combat the many problems associated with unqualified interpreters. See Court Interpreter Certification Program, available ot http://www.in.gov/jadiciary/ interpreter (last accessed on Nov. 1, 2006). This program is laudable, but practical considerations, such as the plethora of languages spoken in this country, prevent it from ever being made mandatory. In sum, certification is not a prerequisite to serving as an interpreter in Indiana's trial courts. As such, there is a very real possibility that a criminal defendant could retain the services of an uncertified or otherwise unqualified interpreter. Of particular concern is the prospect of a person with an emotional or professional interest in the case, such as a family member, a friend, or a law enforcement officer, serving as an interpreter. The potential consequences of such an arrangement are obvious. In the alternative, a defendant could seek to avoid the cost of an interpreter by indicating to the trial court that he understands more than he actually does, thereby accepting the risks of proceeding without an interpreter. I fear that the majority's opinion will encourage non-English speaking criminal defendants to take one of these two dangerous routes.
*1291I acknowledge the added financial strain that court-provided interpreters could put on Indiana's cash-strapped counties. Nonetheless, some rights transcend fiscal considerations and are so important as to be considered fundamental. As the Indiana Supreme Court has recognized, "[an] interpreter is necessary to implement fundamental notions of due process." Martinez Chaves, 584 NE2d at 786. I would reverse the decision of the trial court and order it to appoint an interpreter to serve Arrieta in all future court-related proceedings in this cause. I would also hold that if Arrieta is eventually convicted, the trial court may, in its discretion, order Arrieta to pay the costs of his prosecution, including the cost of the interpreter.
. I acknowledge that the Desist Court held that an interpreter is not part of this "basic apparatus." I simply disagree.

=== CASE 2219305 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:09.743778+00 ===

856 N.E.2d 422 (2006)
222 Ill. 2d 276
305 Ill. Dec. 617
VINE STREET CLINIC et al., Appellants and Cross-Appellees,
v.
HEALTHLINK, INC., Appellee and Cross-Appellant.
No. 99790.
Supreme Court of Illinois.
September 21, 2006.
*425 Feldman, Wasser, Draper & Benson, Springfield (Howard W. Feldman, James J. Rammelkamp and Thomas J. Immel, of counsel), for appellants and cross-appellees.
Joseph A. Klenk, Nathaniel S. Shapo, Leah R. Bruno, of Sonnenschein Nath & Rosenthal, L.L.P., Stephen H. Pugh, Nabil G. Foster, of Pugh, Jones, Johnson & Quandt, P.C., Chicago, and Joseph E. Martineau, of Lewis Rice & Fingersh, L.C., St. Louis, Missouri, for appellees and cross-appellant.
Robert John Kane, Springfield, for amicus curiae Illinois State Medical Society.
Alan I. Greene and Laurel A. Haskell, of Michael Best & Friedrich, L.L.P., Chicago, for amicus curiae America's Health Insurance Plans.
Thomas J. Edstrom, Chicago, for amicus curiae American Federation of State, *426 County and Municipal Employees, AFL-CIO.
David L. Schenberg, of Husch & Eppenberger, L.L.C., St. Louis, Missouri, for amicus curiae Egyptian Area Schools Employee Benefit Trust.
Justice KARMEIER delivered the judgment of the court, with opinion:
On March 4, 2003, plaintiff Vine Street Clinic (Vine Street) filed a putative class action lawsuit in Sangamon County against defendant HealthLink, Inc. (HealthLink), seeking a declaration that the "percentage fee" provision of the parties' services contract violated section 22(A)(14) of the Medical Practice Act of 1987(Act) (225 ILCS 60/22(A)(14) (West 2002)). Vine Street also sought a refund of all administrative fees paid to HealthLink under the contract. On May 27, 2003, plaintiff Ursula Thatch, M.D., was granted leave to intervene in this action, and Vine Street and Thatch (plaintiffs) were allowed to amend their complaint. Plaintiffs' amended complaint sought a declaration that: (1) the percentage fee violated the Act; (2) HealthLink's new "flat fee" also violated the Act; and (3) HealthLink was barred from collecting any administrative fees under the Illinois Insurance Code (Insurance Code) (215 ILCS 5/1 et seq. (West 2002)). The amended complaint also sought injunctive relief and recovery of all administrative fees previously paid to HealthLink.
On June 26, 2003, HealthLink filed a verified counterclaim for declaratory relief, seeking a declaration that the flat fee does not violate the Act, and asking the court to enter judgment against plaintiff Thatch for any administrative fees that she owed. On July 30, 2003, the circuit court entered judgment on the pleadings, holding that although HealthLink's former percentage fee violated the Act, its current flat fee did not. The circuit court further held that previously paid monies were not recoverable because any alleged illegal contract was unenforceable. Finally, the court granted defendant's motion to dismiss plaintiffs' counts alleging: (1) the Insurance Code bars HealthLink from collecting administrative fees; and (2) unjust enrichment. Plaintiffs appealed and HealthLink cross-appealed.
The appellate court affirmed the circuit court's ruling with respect to the repayment of fees previously paid, but the majority held that both the flat fee and the previously charged percentage fee were prohibited by the Act. 353 Ill.App.3d 929, 289 Ill. Dec. 206, 819 N.E.2d 363. The appellate court did not address plaintiff's argument that HealthLink violated the Insurance Code. Justice Steigmann dissented, arguing that both the percentage and flat fee were permissible. Appeal lies in this court as a result of the appellate court thereafter granting an application for a certificate of importance pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 316 (155 Ill.2d R. 316). This court has granted leave to file an amicus curiae brief in support of HealthLink to: (1) America's Health Insurance Plans; and (2) the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, AFL-CIO, and Egyptian Area Schools Employee Benefit Trust. We have also granted the Illinois State Medical Society leave to file an amicus brief in support of plaintiffs. 155 Ill.2d R. 345.
Plaintiff Vine Street is a partnership consisting of physicians who render psychiatric services, and plaintiff Thatch is an Illinois physician specializing in obstetrics and gynecology. Defendant HealthLink is an Illinois corporation that enters into participating physician agreements with physicians, and different agreements with those offering other health-care services, thereby creating a network of health-care providers. HealthLink makes these provider *427 networks available to members of health plans that are offered by insurance carriers, self-funded employer groups, governmental entities and union trusts (collectively payors). Participating physicians agree to provide medical services to payor members at a discounted rate and to send their claims for reimbursement to HealthLink. HealthLink then processes the claims and sends them to the payor for benefit determination and payment. Vine Street was a provider in HealthLink's network from 1989 to 2001, and during that time paid HealthLink a 5% administrative fee that totaled at least $21,720.28. Thatch is a provider in HealthLink's network who, from 1993 until June 30, 2002, paid HealthLink a percentage-based fee totaling $25,079.06.
The Illinois Attorney General is charged with enforcing state law, including the Act, and one duty of the Attorney General is to provide written opinions on legal questions to certain government officers and agencies. 15 ILCS 205/4 (West 2002). In an opinion letter dated March 5, 2002, Attorney General James E. Ryan responded to an inquiry made by Charles A. Hartke, assistant majority leader of the House of Representatives, and concluded that section 3.7 of the HealthLink agreement, requiring each participating physician to pay HealthLink an administrative fee equal to 5% of the amount allowed in HealthLink's rate schedule for services provided to members by the physician, violated section 22(A)(14) of the Act and was therefore void under Illinois law. 2002 Ill. Att'y Gen. Op. No. 02-005, slip op. at 4. On May 30, 2002, HealthLink notified its providers that to comply with the Attorney General's opinion, it would now charge a fixed flat fee instead of the percentage-based fee. HealthLink calculated the flat fee based on two factors: (1) physician specialty; and (2) volume of claims submitted by the physician during the preceding calendar year. HealthLink calculated Thatch's new fixed flat fee at $600 per month. Thatch refused to pay the flat fee. On May 27, 2003, as noted, plaintiffs filed their amended complaint seeking, inter alia, a declaration that both the percentage-based fee and the flat fee violated the Act, and the recovery of all fees previously paid.
In this court, HealthLink contends that: (1) neither its flat fee nor its former percentage fee for administrative services violates section 22(A)(14) of the Act; and (2) its administrative fees violate no public policy. Plaintiffs contend herein that: (1) the lower courts erred by allowing HealthLink to retain the administrative fees paid by plaintiffs; (2) if the fees are not returned to plaintiffs, HealthLink should be divested of these fees and the funds applied to benefit the public; and (3) HealthLink was acting as an administrator under the Illinois Insurance Code (215 ILCS 5/1 et seq. (West 2002)).
As it is the linchpin issue raised herein, we first address cross-appellant HealthLink's assertion that the appellate court erred in finding that both its percentage and flat fees violated section 22(A)(14) of the Act. Because this issue concerns the construction of a statute, it is a question of law, and our standard of review is de novo. Bowman v. American River Transportation Co., 217 Ill. 2d 75, 80, 298 Ill. Dec. 56, 838 N.E.2d 949 (2005); Progressive Universal Insurance Co. of Illinois v. Liberty Mutual Fire Insurance Co., 215 Ill. 2d 121, 128, 293 Ill. Dec. 677, 828 N.E.2d 1175 (2005). The primary rule of statutory construction is to ascertain and give effect to the legislature's "true intent and meaning." Bowman, 217 Ill.2d at 83, 298 Ill. Dec. 56, 838 N.E.2d 949; Progressive Universal Insurance, 215 Ill.2d at 134, 293 Ill. Dec. 677, 828 N.E.2d 1175. "We determine legislative intent by *428 examining the language of the statute, which is `the most reliable indicator of the legislature's objectives in enacting a particular law.'" In re Detention of Lieberman, 201 Ill. 2d 300, 308, 267 Ill. Dec. 81, 776 N.E.2d 218 (2002), quoting Michigan Avenue National Bank v. County of Cook, 191 Ill. 2d 493, 504, 247 Ill. Dec. 473, 732 N.E.2d 528 (2000). "A court construing a statute should read it as a whole, give the statutory language its plain meaning, and import to the statute the fullest possible meaning to which it is susceptible." People v. Ferrell, 277 Ill.App.3d 74, 77, 213 Ill. Dec. 646, 659 N.E.2d 992 (1995). Further, when undertaking the interpretation of a statute, we must presume that when the legislature enacted a law, it did not intend to produce absurd, inconvenient or unjust results. Progressive Universal Insurance, 215 Ill.2d at 134, 293 Ill. Dec. 677, 828 N.E.2d 1175.
Here, the relevant language of the Medical Practice Act of 1987 provides:
"§ 22. Disciplinary action.
(A) The Department [of Professional Regulation] may revoke, suspend, place on probationary status, or take any other disciplinary action as the Department may deem proper with regard to the license or visiting professor permit of any person issued under this Act to practice medicine, or to treat human ailments without the use of drugs and without operative surgery upon any of the following grounds:
* * *
(14) Dividing with anyone other than physicians with whom the licensee practices in a partnership, Professional Association, limited liability company, or Medical or Professional Corporation any fee, commission, rebate or other form of compensation for any professional services not actually and personally rendered." 225 ILCS 60/22(A)(14) (West 2002).
Well-reasoned opinions of the Attorney General interpreting or construing an Illinois statute are persuasive authority and are entitled to considerable weight in resolving a question of first impression, although they do not have the force and effect of law. See Bonaguro v. County Officers Electoral Board, 158 Ill. 2d 391, 399, 199 Ill. Dec. 659, 634 N.E.2d 712 (1994); see also City of Springfield v. Allphin, 74 Ill. 2d 117, 130-31, 23 Ill. Dec. 516, 384 N.E.2d 310 (1978); Sparks & Wiewel Construction Co. v. Martin, 250 Ill.App.3d 955, 965, 189 Ill. Dec. 565, 620 N.E.2d 533 (1993). While our appellate court has reviewed the meaning of section 22(A)(14) in somewhat similar contexts to the one presented here, this court has never examined the parameters of section 22(A)(14)'s prohibition of percentage fee arrangements involving Illinois licensed physicians, or, more specifically, whether entering into participating physician agreements with a corporation such as HealthLink, which required as an administrative fee a percentage of the amount the physicians received for medical services performed, is violative of section 22(A)(14). We therefore find the reasoning set forth in the Attorney General's March 2002 opinion letter to be useful here in determining the propriety of the lower courts' holdings that the percentage fee set forth in section 3.7 of HealthLink's standard agreement with its participating physicians violated the fee sharing prohibition of section 22(A)(14) of the Act.
Prior to May 30, 2002, section 3.7 of HealthLink's participating physician agreement stated, in pertinent part: "In consideration of the services provided hereunder by HealthLink, each PHO Participating Provider shall pay HealthLink an administrative fee equal to five percent *429 (5%) of the amounts allowed to the PHO Participating Provider under the Rate Schedule for the provision of Medical Services to Members by the Participating Provider." As earlier stated, the Attorney General's opinion letter concluded that section 3.7 of HealthLink's participating provider agreement was in violation of section 22(A)(14) of the Act. The Attorney General's finding was essentially based upon several Illinois Appellate Court opinions which the Attorney General found had "construed subsection 22(A)(14) to prohibit payments by physicians for management or other services based upon a percentage of professional income." 2002 Ill. Att'y Gen. Op. No. 02-005, slip op. at 3.
In the earliest of these cases, E & B Marketing Enterprises, Inc. v. Ryan, 209 Ill.App.3d 626, 154 Ill. Dec. 339, 568 N.E.2d 339 (1991), a marketing firm agreed to promote the name and practice of a physician engaged in private practice, primarily to insurance carriers, in return for a consulting fee of 10% on all billings collected by the physician in connection with such referrals. The appellate court held that the agreement was a fee splitting contract, in violation of section 16(14) of the Medical Practice Act (Ill.Rev.Stat.1985, ch. 111, par. 4433(14)), and was therefore void as against public policy. E & B Marketing, 209 Ill.App.3d at 628-30, 154 Ill. Dec. 339, 568 N.E.2d 339. The fact that the contracting physician collected the fees from insurance companies, rather than from individual patients, had no effect upon the illegality of the underlying fee splitting contract. E & B Marketing, 209 Ill. App.3d at 629-30, 154 Ill. Dec. 339, 568 N.E.2d 339.
Although not noted by the Attorney General, E & B Marketing was clearly based on section 16(14) of the Medical Practice Act, which is not identical to section 22(A)(14) of the Medical Practice Act of 1987. Rather, section 16(14) stated that anyone licensed or certified under the Medical Practice Act was subject to disciplinary action for: "Directly or indirectly giving to or receiving from any physician, person, firm or corporation any fee, commission, rebate or other form of compensation for any professional services not actually and personally rendered." Ill.Rev. Stat.1985, ch. 111, par. 4433(14). Section 16(14) further stated that nothing therein prohibited those licensed under the Act from practicing medicine in a partnership, corporation or as an association and "pooling, sharing, dividing or apportioning the fees and monies received." Ill.Rev.Stat. 1985, ch. 111, par. 4433(14). The Medical Practice Act was repealed effective December 31, 1997. See E & B Marketing, 209 Ill.App.3d at 629 n. 1, 154 Ill. Dec. 339, 568 N.E.2d 339.
Thus, it was based on this earlier statutory language that the court in E & B Marketing found: "The Act, in its plain terms, prohibits the receipt of any fee or commission, direct or indirect, for professional services not actually rendered. E & B's receipt of money `indirectly' through insurance companies was in direct violation of the Act." E & B Marketing, 209 Ill. App.3d at 629-30, 154 Ill. Dec. 339, 568 N.E.2d 339. We must therefore ask whether the differences between the language of the now-repealed section 16(14) and the language of section 22(A)(14) affect the Attorney General's finding that HealthLink's percentage-based fee violates the current Act. A comparison of the two sections reveals that, of the portion at issue here, only the language in the first phrase of the first sentence has been changed. Section 16(14) begins: "Directly or indirectly giving to or receiving from any physician, person, firm or corporation any fee * * *," whereas section 22(A)(14) begins: "Dividing with anyone other than physicians with whom the licensee practices *430 in a partnership, Professional Association, limited liability company, or Medical or Professional Corporation any fee * * *."
Examining the plain language of these two sections, we find that they both prohibit traditional "fee splitting," i.e., "a dividing of a professional fee for a specialist's medical services with the recommending physician," (Webster's Third New International Dictionary 835 (1986)), as well as prohibiting the sharing of such a fee with any other "person, firm or corporation" (Ill.Rev.Stat.1985, ch. 111, par. 4433(14)). The phrases at issue appear to differ only in that the legislature moved to the first sentence of section 22(A)(14) the language setting forth, in more inclusive terms, the exemption from the fee sharing prohibition for those physicians practicing in a "partnership, Professional Association, limited liability company, or Medical or Professional Corporation." 225 ILCS 60/22(A)(14) (West 2002). Therefore, we conclude that the Attorney General's analysis of the issue before us was not affected by the slightly different language of now-repealed section 16(14).
Support for this conclusion comes from comparing the remaining cases examined by the Attorney General. In Lieberman & Kraff, M.D., S.C. v. Desnick, 244 Ill. App. 3d 341, 185 Ill. Dec. 245, 614 N.E.2d 379 (1993), which also construed the language of section 16(14), the appellate court invalidated a contract for the sale of a medical practice which provided compensation to the seller over a 20-year period, holding that the contract was an illegal fee-sharing agreement, regardless of the fact that the purpose of the contract was benign. In similar fashion to E & B Marketing, the court in Lieberman & Kraff, 244 Ill.App.3d at 345, 185 Ill. Dec. 245, 614 N.E.2d 379, found that "nothing in the language of the statute indicates an intent to restrict the reach of the statute solely to conduct traditionally known as fee splitting," i.e., that which occurs "when a physician refers a patient to another physician and then collects a portion of that patient's fee." Rather, the issue is whether the parties' agreement violates the statute as written. Lieberman & Kraff, 244 Ill. App.3d at 345, 185 Ill. Dec. 245, 614 N.E.2d 379.
"When read as a whole, the plain language of section 16 of the Medical Practice Act prohibits the sharing, pooling, dividing, or apportioning of professional fees by physicians unless the fee agreement falls within one of the enumerated exceptions. The statute specifically permits physicians who practice within the framework of a partnership, corporation or association to share fees. (Ill.Rev. Stat.1985, ch. 111, par. 4433(14).) * * * However, the reach of the statute is not limited to `fee splitting.' The Medical Practice Act also prohibits all other fee-sharing arrangements not specifically authorized." Lieberman & Kraff, 244 Ill.App.3d at 345, 185 Ill. Dec. 245, 614 N.E.2d 379.
Nine months later, the appellate court decided Practice Management Ltd. v. Schwartz, 256 Ill.App.3d 949, 952, 195 Ill. Dec. 192, 628 N.E.2d 656 (1993), a case which reviewed a percentage-fee agreement for management services and the referral of patients between, inter alios, plaintiff, a business which employed unlicensed optometrists, and defendants, two licensed ophthalmologists, under "the pertinent section of the Illinois Medical Practice Act of 1987(Act) (225 ILCS 60/22(A)(14) (West 1992))." We first observe that the court in Schwartz actually erred in basing its decision on section 22(A)(14) of the Medical Practice Act of 1987, where, as the Lieberman & Kraff *431 court noted, "under the Regulatory Agency Sunset Act, the repeal [of the Medical Practice Act] does not become effective until December 31, 1997. Thus, the statute * * * remains in effect. See Ill.Rev. Stat.1991, ch. 127, par. 1904.9." Lieberman & Kraff, 244 Ill.App.3d at 344 n. 1, 185 Ill. Dec. 245, 614 N.E.2d 379. However, as we have previously found, the differences in the language of section 16(14) and section 22(A)(14) do not, for our purposes, change the analysis of whether a prohibited fee arrangement occurred. The Schwartz court held that the fee agreement was improper, even though some legitimate management services were performed by the unlicensed optometry business, because the agreement allowed the business to be compensated through a percentage of the net profits generated by the licensed physicians, and the Act prohibits not only fee splitting, but all other fee-sharing arrangements not specifically authorized therein. Schwartz, 256 Ill.App.3d at 953-55, 195 Ill. Dec. 192, 628 N.E.2d 656, citing Lieberman & Kraff, 244 Ill.App.3d at 345, 185 Ill. Dec. 245, 614 N.E.2d 379.
Finally, in TLC The Laser Center, Inc. v. Midwest Eye Institute II, Ltd., 306 Ill. App. 3d 411, 239 Ill. Dec. 487, 714 N.E.2d 45 (1999), the appellate court held that a service contract violated section 22(A)(14) because it provided, in part, for an annual fee to be paid by the defendant medical practice to the plaintiff, an unlicensed corporation, in addition to specific reimbursements. Although the fee was not calculated on a straight percentage, the court found a "direct relation" between the revenues generated by the practice and the fee the physicians were required to pay to plaintiffs. TLC, 306 Ill.App.3d at 428, 239 Ill. Dec. 487, 714 N.E.2d 45. With respect to this fee arrangement, the TLC court observed:
"Section 22 of the Medical Practice Act does not only prohibit sharing of fees for patient referrals; Illinois courts have struck down contracts for the sale of a medical practice (see Lieberman & Kraff v. Desnick, 244 Ill.App.3d 341[, 185 Ill. Dec. 245], 614 N.E.2d 379 (1993)) and contracts which involved `performance of some legitimate management services' (see Practice Management Ltd. v. Schwartz, 256 Ill.App.3d 949, 954[, 195 Ill. Dec. 192], 628 N.E.2d 656 (1993)) on the basis that the contracts ran afoul of the statute. The `* * * Medical Practice Act also prohibits all other fee-sharing arrangements not specifically authorized.' Lieberman & Kraff, 244 Ill. App.3d at 345[, 185 Ill. Dec. 245], 614 N.E.2d at 382. The policy reasons behind the prohibition are the danger that such an arrangement might motivate a nonprofessional to recommend a particular professional out of self-interest, rather than the professional's competence. In addition, the judgment of the professional might be compromised, because the awareness that he would have to split fees might make him reluctant to provide proper (but unprofitable) services to a patient, or, conversely, to provide unneeded (but profitable) treatment. Practice Management, 256 Ill. App.3d at 953[, 195 Ill. Dec. 192], 628 N.E.2d at 658, quoting E & B Marketing Enterprises, Inc. v. Ryan, 209 Ill. App. 3d 626, 630[, 154 Ill. Dec. 339], 568 N.E.2d 339, 342 (1991)." TLC, 306 Ill. App.3d at 427-28, 239 Ill. Dec. 487, 714 N.E.2d 45.
It is evident from this quotation that the reasoning used by the TLC court to find a violation of section 22(A)(14) of the Act was the same reasoning applied in prior appellate court decisions which were, or should have been, made under the previous, but equivalent, section 16(14) of the Medical Practice Act. Thus, the Attorney *432 General reasonably relied on this unchanging line of Illinois cases to conclude that HealthLink's participating physician agreement, which included a percentage fee for its services, was violative of section 22(A)(14) of the Act and therefore void under Illinois law. While we believe the Attorney General's opinion letter is entitled to considerable weight, it is not binding on the courts (Bonaguro v. County Officers Electoral Board, 158 Ill.2d at 399, 199 Ill. Dec. 659, 634 N.E.2d 712), and thus should be considered in light of the arguments raised by the parties herein.
HealthLink claims that we should follow Practice Management Associates, Inc. v. Orman, 614 So. 2d 1135 (Fla.App.1993), a Florida case construing section 22(A)(14)[1] and holding that it did not preclude physicians from agreeing to pay a percentage of their profits to an unlicensed entity in exchange for marketing and management services provided by that entity. As the Attorney General's opinion points out, several of the decisions from our appellate court specifically disagreed with Orman, finding that while the Florida court interpreted our Act to prohibit only traditional fee splitting, the language of our statute is broad and nothing therein evinces an intent by our legislature to limit the prohibition to unaffiliated physicians. See Schwartz, 256 Ill.App.3d at 952-54, 195 Ill. Dec. 192, 628 N.E.2d 656; Lieberman & Kraff, 244 Ill.App.3d at 347, 185 Ill. Dec. 245, 614 N.E.2d 379. We too cannot agree with the Florida court that the intent of section 22(A)(14) "is to prohibit fee splitting for patient referrals in the traditional sense and that the [nonprofessional corporation's percentage-fee based] contract does not fall within the conduct proscribed." Orman, 614 So.2d at 1138.
Next, we examine an alternative argument made by plaintiffs which not only is without merit, but which also unnecessarily confuses those attempting to construe section 22(A)(14) of the Act. Plaintiffs contend that the meaning of "professional services" in section 22(A)(14) is not limited only to medical services, as this interpretation ignores the term "anyone" in the phrase "[d]ividing with anyone." Indeed, plaintiffs' reply brief states that the legislature intended section 22(A)(14) to prohibit the division of fees between licensees and "any other individual or entity that may render professional services." (Emphasis in original.) We disagree.
Under the interpretation of section 22(A)(14) which we have now adopted, the conduct which the legislature seeks to prohibit is the agreement by a licensee to share a percentage of the fees he or she earned for "professional services * * * actually and personally rendered," with "anyone," "other than physicians with whom the licensee practices." 225 ILCS 60/22(A)(14) (West 2002). This interpretation contemplates that words and phrases should not be construed in isolation, as plaintiffs' argument necessitates, but must be interpreted in light of "other relevant provisions of the statute." Alternate Fuels, Inc. v. Director of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, 215 Ill. 2d 219, 238, 294 Ill. Dec. 32, 830 N.E.2d 444 (2004), citing Michigan Avenue National Bank, 191 Ill.2d at 504, 247 Ill. Dec. 473, 732 N.E.2d 528.
Here, our examination of the entirety of section 22 and another section of the Act supports our holding that only the sharing of a percentage of the licensee's fees for medical "professional services not actually *433 and personally performed" by the licensee was meant to be prohibited. First, the final sentence of section 22(A)(14) itself reads:
"Nothing contained in this subsection shall abrogate the right of 2 or more persons, holding valid and current licenses under this Act, to each receive adequate compensation for concurrently rendering professional services to a patient and divide a fee; provided, the patient has full knowledge of the division, and, provided, that the division is made in proportion to the services performed and responsibility assumed by each." (Emphasis added.) 225 ILCS 60/22(A)(14) (West 2002).
Next, section 22(A)(25) states that another ground for disciplinary action occurs when a licensee commits: "Gross and wilful and continued overcharging for professional services, including filing false statements for collection of fees for which services are not rendered * * *." (Emphasis added.) 225 ILCS 60/22(A)(25) (West 2002). Finally, section 26 of the Act, entitled "Advertising," states: "Any person licensed under this Act may advertise the availability of professional services in the public media or on the premises where such professional services are rendered." (Emphases added.) 225 ILCS 60/26(1) (West 2000).
These "other relevant provisions of the statute" corroborate our determination that the plain meaning of "professional services" in section 22(A)(14) of the Act encompasses only medical services. See Alternate Fuels, 215 Ill.2d at 238, 294 Ill. Dec. 32, 830 N.E.2d 444; see also Andrews v. Kowa Printing Corp., 217 Ill. 2d 101, 106, 298 Ill. Dec. 1, 838 N.E.2d 894 (2005) (courts should consider a statute in its entirety, keeping in mind the subject it addresses and the legislature's apparent objective in enacting it). Thus, "[b]y definition, it is impossible for a nonphysician to render `professional services' to a patient." 353 Ill.App.3d at 935, 289 Ill. Dec. 206, 819 N.E.2d 363. We therefore reject plaintiffs' claim that section 22(A)(14) was meant to prohibit the division of fees between licensees and any other individual or entity that may render professional services under the Act, as "professional services" cannot be performed by anyone other than those licensed to practice medicine.
As earlier noted, examining the language of the statute is the best indicator of the legislature's intent in enacting a particular law. In re Detention of Lieberman, 201 Ill.2d at 308, 267 Ill. Dec. 81, 776 N.E.2d 218. In section 22(A) of the Act, the legislature sets forth a number of grounds upon which the Department of Professional Regulation may take disciplinary action with regard to the license of, inter alios, "any person issued under this Act to practice medicine." 225 ILCS 60/22(A) (West 2002). One of these grounds for disciplinary action, delineated in section 22(A)(14), involves: "Dividing with anyone other than physicians with whom the licensee practices in a partnership, * * * any fee, commission, rebate or other form of compensation for any professional services not actually and personally rendered." (Emphases added.) 225 ILCS 60/22(A)(14) (West 2002).
Based on the foregoing, we conclude that plaintiffs main argument is correct; i.e., that section 22(A)(14) of the Act prohibits: (1) "traditional" fee splitting for patient referrals between licensees, except those in a partnership or corporate-type relationship and licensees concurrently rendering professional services to a patient; and (2) fee-sharing agreements whereby a licensee "divides with anyone," for any service rendered to the licensee, a percentage of the monies earned by the licensee for medical services he or she has *434 performed. 225 ILCS 60/22(A)(14) (West 2002). Thus, where HealthLink's agreement with plaintiffs required them to pay HealthLink an administrative fee, equal to 5% of the amounts allowed in HealthLink's rate schedule for medical services provided to members by plaintiffs, the agreement was in violation of section 22(A)(14). "Nonphysicians can receive a fee for services rendered, apart from referral, but cannot receive a percentage of the physician's profit, or its equivalent." 353 Ill. App. 3d at 935, 289 Ill. Dec. 206, 819 N.E.2d 363. We therefore hold that the lower courts herein, as well as the Attorney General, properly found that HealthLink's percentage-fee based contract with plaintiffs was void as against Illinois law.
Next, we examine HealthLink's contention that the appellate court erred in holding that the Act also prohibits HealthLink's fixed flat fee, which was established in response to the Attorney General's opinion. The appellate court reasoned, in part, as follows:
"HealthLink argues the flat fee currently paid by physicians is for administrative services, such as administrating and implementing HealthLink's policies, procedures, and programs, and not for patient referrals.
* * * [However,] [t]he fact that HealthLink does not technically refer a member-patient to a specific provider does not negate the fact that HealthLink exercises substantial control over its member-patients." 353 Ill.App.3d at 935, 289 Ill. Dec. 206, 819 N.E.2d 363.
We agree with HealthLink that the flat fee now in place is for administrative services and not for patient referrals. Therefore, the appellate court's similar conclusion, that HealthLink does not make patient referrals to specific providers, appears at odds with its additional finding that there is no "significant difference" between making a network of thousands of physicians available to payors for use by member-patients, as HealthLink does, and making an agreement with certain physicians to send them specific patients. 353 Ill. App. 3d at 935, 289 Ill. Dec. 206, 819 N.E.2d 363. It is the member-patient who makes the choice of physician, not HealthLink, and this fact constitutes the difference between a prohibited referral for a percentage of the physician's fee and the provision of a service to both HealthLink's participating physicians and its payors. See Schwartz, 256 Ill.App.3d at 954, 195 Ill. Dec. 192, 628 N.E.2d 656 (although plaintiffs provided legitimate management services, the method of payment for these services was improper, as were the patient referrals, where plaintiffs referred patients of the optometrists the company employed to specific ophthalmologists for medical services which only a licensed physician could provide).
In the instant case, this court has concluded that HealthLink's percentage fee was violative of section 22(A)(14) because the agreement required participating physicians to pay HealthLink a portion of the fee they received from each patient for medical services they performed. As the Attorney General stated in the addendum to his opinion letter, "it has not been suggested that the object of the agreement is violative of public policy, or that the services that HealthLink provides are improper in any way. The only aspect of the agreement found invalid * * * was the basis upon which the fees for the administrative services performed under the agreement are calculated." 2002 Ill. Att'y Gen. Op. No. 02-005, Addendum, slip op. at 2. Accordingly, HealthLink amended its participating physician agreements to allow a flat fee for administrative services to be paid monthly on a basis independent of the physician's fees.
*435 HealthLink's flat fee is not based or linked to revenue, gross receipts or billings collected. Instead, it is based on the volume of claims that HealthLink processed for a physician during the prior year and the physician's specialty. For example, a participating physician who submitted a large number of claims for relatively inexpensive procedures and who made a modest income might pay a higher administrative fee to HealthLink than a physician in the same specialty who submitted fewer claims, but for more expensive procedures, and who earned a higher income. Because a higher volume of claims or a more complicated specialty translates into a higher volume of work for HealthLink, the flat-fee arrangement now charged to participating physicians fairly compensates HealthLink without being a prohibited division of the physician's remuneration.
Thus, the appellate court erred in comparing HealthLink's flat fee, based on claims volume, with the fee charged by the nonprofessional entity in TLC, which was based on revenue volume. 353 Ill.App.3d at 937, 289 Ill. Dec. 206, 819 N.E.2d 363; see TLC, 306 Ill.App.3d at 428, 239 Ill. Dec. 487, 714 N.E.2d 45 (although the contract did not structure the annual fee in literal terms of a percentage of the practice's revenue per se, the fee clearly increased as the revenues increased). Here, in contrast, because HealthLink's flat fee is based on the volume and complexity of the administrative services provided, the fee will not automatically increase as the revenue of the participating physician increases. We therefore find that where HealthLink's monthly flat fee does not constitute prohibited fee sharing, it is not violative of section 22(A)(14).
As to plaintiffs' claim that the flat fee is against public policy, we first note that the general purpose of the Medical Practice Act of 1987 is to protect the public health and welfare from those not qualified to practice medicine. Ikpoh v. Department of Professional Regulation, 338 Ill.App.3d 918, 926, 273 Ill. Dec. 542, 789 N.E.2d 442 (2003), citing Carter-Shields v. Alton Health Institute, 201 Ill. 2d 441, 458, 268 Ill. Dec. 25, 777 N.E.2d 948 (2002). Further, we have established that the goal of section 22(A)(14) is to prevent persons licensed under the Act from sharing a percentage of their fees with anyone except those licensees specifically set forth. The underlying purpose of this prohibition, as earlier noted, is to eliminate the danger of a nonprofessional recommending a particular physician out of self-interest, rather than the physician's competence, and to maintain the professional independence of physicians. See TLC, 306 Ill.App.3d at 427, 239 Ill. Dec. 487, 714 N.E.2d 45.
As to the former danger to the public, HealthLink's flat fee is charged to each participating physician for administrative services rendered, not for referrals and, thus, no "recommendation" component exists. As for the latter danger, in Schwartz, the appellate court held "fee-splitting arrangements" violated public policy by creating a danger that: "`a doctor, knowing that he had to split his fees with one who did not render medical services, might be hesitant to provide proper services to a patient. Conversely, unneeded treatment might be rendered just because of the need to split fees.'" Schwartz, 256 Ill.App.3d at 953, 195 Ill. Dec. 192, 628 N.E.2d 656, quoting E & B Marketing, 209 Ill.App.3d at 630, 154 Ill. Dec. 339, 568 N.E.2d 339. Here, however, HealthLink's flat-fee agreement places no such improper influence on the professional choices made by its participating physicians, because it does not require a sharing of professional fees which would relate patient *436 care to an increase or decrease in revenue.
"`An agreement is against public policy if it is injurious to the interests of the public, contravenes some established interest of society, violates some public statute, is against good morals, tends to interfere with the public welfare or safety, or is at war with the interests of society or is in conflict with the morals of the time.'" E & B Marketing, 209 Ill.App.3d at 630, 154 Ill. Dec. 339, 568 N.E.2d 339, quoting Marvin N. Benn & Associates, Ltd. v. Nelsen Steel & Wire, Inc., 107 Ill.App.3d 442, 446, 63 Ill. Dec. 251, 437 N.E.2d 900 (1982).
Given our conclusion that HealthLink's flat-fee agreement does not contravene any public policy underlying section 22(A)(14), we opine that the agreement also meets the E & B Marketing test set forth above.
Finally, we note that plaintiffs' definition of "professional services," which we earlier rejected, makes no more sense in a flat-fee context. Because HealthLink's provision of administrative services to plaintiffs does not encompass medical "professional services" within the meaning of the Act, no violation of section 22(A)(14) can occur. This reading of section 22(A)(14) gives the statutory language its plain and ordinary meaning without reading into it exceptions, limitations or conditions which conflict with the express legislative intent. See Alternate Fuels, 215 Ill.2d at 238, 294 Ill. Dec. 32, 830 N.E.2d 444. Accordingly, we hold that the flat fee HealthLink now charges its participating physicians for administrative services which HealthLink performs for them is not violative of section 22(A)(14) of the Act, nor is it against public policy.
Next, we address plaintiffs' contention that the lower courts erred in allowing HealthLink to retain the percentage and flat fees it previously collected from plaintiffs. We agree with the lower courts herein that plaintiffs are not entitled to recover any fees previously paid, be they percentage-based or flat fees. 353 Ill.App.3d at 937, 289 Ill. Dec. 206, 819 N.E.2d 363. The lower courts' decision not to reimburse plaintiffs for the fees paid pursuant to their HealthLink contracts reflects the maxim that "the law will not aid either party to an illegal act, but will leave them without remedy as against each other," with the caveat that they are of equal knowledge, wilfulness and wrongful intent, or in pari delicto. Rees v. Schmits, 164 Ill.App. 250, 258 (1911); see also King v. First Capital Financial Services Corp., 215 Ill. 2d 1, 33-34, 293 Ill. Dec. 657, 828 N.E.2d 1155 (2005) (the doctrine of in pari delicto embodies the principle that a plaintiff who has participated in wrongdoing may not recover damages resulting from the wrongdoing). Plaintiffs argue that the lower courts failed to recognize that two of the exceptions to the availability of the in pari delicto defense are present in this case where: (1) there is no parity in the culpability of the parties; and (2) there exists a necessity to support the public interest or policy. See Evans v. Funk, 151 Ill. 650, 657-58, 38 N.E. 230 (1894). We find that neither exception exists under the facts of this case.
As to the first exception, plaintiffs claim they are only seeking to be restored to the status quo, and that they are not in pari delicto with HealthLink, because they were coerced into signing the contracts in order to have access to patients. Yet we see nothing of record to suggest that the agreements were anything other than arm's-length transactions between HealthLink and plaintiffs. Thus, we concur with the appellate court's finding that: "This is not a case * * * where anyone `held a gun' to plaintiffs' heads. Plaintiffs could have *437 sought relief from the courts, the Attorney General, or the Department of Professional Regulation at any time." 353 Ill.App.3d at 937, 289 Ill. Dec. 206, 819 N.E.2d 363. Further, it is the plaintiffs, as licensees under the Act, who have violated section 22(A)(14), not HealthLink. 353 Ill.App.3d at 938, 289 Ill. Dec. 206, 819 N.E.2d 363, citing TLC, 306 Ill.App.3d at 428-29, 239 Ill. Dec. 487, 714 N.E.2d 45 ("the physician is the wrongdoer" under the Act).
We are similarly unimpressed with plaintiffs' related argument that the voluntary payment doctrine should not apply because the fees were paid to HealthLink under circumstances amounting to compulsion. Plaintiffs have not alleged that the money paid to HealthLink was a result of fraud, misrepresentation or mistake of fact. Instead, plaintiffs argue the agreements were illegal and against public policy. However, money voluntarily paid under a claim of right to the payment, and with knowledge of the facts by the person making the payment, cannot be recovered by the payor solely because the claim was illegal. Kanter & Eisenberg v. Madison Associates, 116 Ill. 2d 506, 512, 108 Ill. Dec. 476, 508 N.E.2d 1053 (1987); see also Harris v. Johnson, 218 Ill.App.3d 588, 594, 161 Ill. Dec. 680, 578 N.E.2d 1326 (1991) (if a party has advanced money under an agreement that is against public policy, that party cannot obtain redress); Evans v. Funk, 38 Ill.App. 441, 444 (1890) ("No rule of law is better settled than that money voluntarily paid in consideration of the payee doing, or agreeing to do, something opposed to public policy, can not be recovered back").
Therefore, we find ourselves in agreement with the appellate court's reasoning (353 Ill.App.3d at 937, 289 Ill. Dec. 206, 819 N.E.2d 363), which relied on the following passage from Practice Management v. Schwartz:
"Where a contract is illegal or against public policy, the contract should not be enforced, because to allow such relief would undermine the policy considerations in prohibiting fee splitting. (O'Hara v. Ahlgren, Blumenfeld & Kempster (1989), 127 Ill. 2d 333[, 130 Ill. Dec. 401], 537 N.E.2d 730; Schnackenberg v. Towle (1954), 4 Ill. 2d 561, 123 N.E.2d 817). In order to discourage professionals and nonprofessionals from attempting illegal fee splitting, the court will leave the parties where they have placed themselves. Leoris v. Dicks (1986), 150 Ill.App.3d 350[, 103 Ill. Dec. 584], 501 N.E.2d 901." Schwartz, 256 Ill.App.3d at 955, 195 Ill. Dec. 192, 628 N.E.2d 656.
In the instant case, where we have found the percentage-based fee agreement between plaintiffs and HealthLink to have violated the broad prohibition against sharing fees set forth in section 22(A)(14), the proper course is for the parties to be left "where they have placed themselves." 353 Ill.App.3d at 937, 289 Ill. Dec. 206, 819 N.E.2d 363.
We also reject plaintiffs' contention that HealthLink is prohibited from retaining fees paid under the agreements because the necessity to support public policy prevents defendants from using in pari delicto as a defense. It is true that in Evans, 151 Ill. at 657, 38 N.E. 230, this court stated that "this general rule has its exceptions, arising out of necessity or from unyielding principles of public policy, or from the different conditions of the parties." However, the exception to the use of the in pari delicto defense in Evans stemmed "from the strongest necessity of upholding the principles of public policy, in maintaining the purity and honor of the courts of justice free from all scandal or suspicion of improper conduct on the part *438 of the judges." Evans, 151 Ill. at 658, 38 N.E. 230.
Traditionally, and in keeping with the principle of freedom of contract, this court has been reluctant to declare a private contract as void as contrary to public policy. H & M Commercial Driver Leasing, Inc. v. Fox Valley Containers, Inc., 209 Ill. 2d 52, 57, 282 Ill. Dec. 160, 805 N.E.2d 1177 (2004).
"In considering whether any contract is against public policy it should be remembered that it is to the interests of the public that persons should not be unnecessarily restricted in their freedom to make their own contracts. Agreements are not held to be void, as being contrary to public policy, unless they be clearly contrary to what the constitution, the statutes or the decisions of the courts have declared to be the public policy or unless they be manifestly injurious to the public welfare." Schumann-Heink v. Folsom, 328 Ill. 321, 330, 159 N.E. 250 (1927).
See also H & M Commercial Driver, 209 Ill.2d at 57, 282 Ill. Dec. 160, 805 N.E.2d 1177. Thus, we believe that Evans is an example of the extreme circumstances needed to forego the general rule of in pari delito, i.e., where the public welfare must be protected from manifest injury. The same vehement need to support public policy by forcing HealthLink to refund the illegal percentage-based fees paid by plaintiffs is absent here.
Regarding HealthLink's flat fees, as Justice Steigmann stated in his partial dissent below: "[T]he goal of the Act is to regulate the licenses of physicians, not to prevent them from entering into legitimate contracts or relieve them of the corollary duty to pay for services * * * rendered pursuant to such contracts." 353 Ill. App. 3d at 941, 289 Ill. Dec. 206, 819 N.E.2d 363 (Steigmann, J., specially concurring in part and dissenting in part). Thus, where we have found that HealthLink's flat fee is neither illegal nor against public policy, the parties' agreements requiring payment by plaintiffs of a fixed monthly amount for administrative services must be upheld.
Moreover, we need not address plaintiffs alternative request that, if this court declines to return the fees to plaintiffs, "the Court [should] draw upon its equitable powers to require [HealthLink] to fully account for and then apply the illegal fees toward a public fund or charity." This request stems from plaintiffs' belief that allowing HealthLink to keep its collected fees has a more deleterious effect on public policy and the prohibition against physician fee sharing than does returning those monies to plaintiffs. However, as we have found that HealthLink's percentage fees can be retained by virtue of the in pari delicto defense, and that its flat fees do not violate either the Act or public policy, no further consideration is necessary. Additionally, we note that, even had we the desire to examine this contention, it is not properly brought here where plaintiffs have failed to: (1) raise it at any time in the lower courts (People ex rel. Waller v. 1989 Ford F350 Truck, 162 Ill. 2d 78, 90-91, 204 Ill. Dec. 759, 642 N.E.2d 460 (1994)) (issues not raised in either the trial court or the appellate court are considered waived and may not be raised for the first time on appeal to this court)); or (2) cite any authority for this novel remedy (People v. Ward, 215 Ill. 2d 317, 332, 294 Ill. Dec. 144, 830 N.E.2d 556 (2005)) (a point raised in a brief but not supported by citation to relevant authority fails to satisfy the requirements of Supreme Court Rule 341(e)(7), and is thus forfeited)).
Plaintiffs additionally claim that HealthLink is an "Administrator" as that term is defined in sections 511.101 and *439 370g(g) of the Insurance Code (215 ILCS 5/511.101, 370g(g) (West 2002)), and that under these definitions HealthLink violated the Code by collecting unauthorized fees from health-care providers. As earlier noted, although plaintiffs raised this issue on direct appeal, it was not considered by the appellate court. We choose to briefly address the issue in the interest of judicial economy (People v. Wilson, 143 Ill. 2d 236, 249, 157 Ill. Dec. 473, 572 N.E.2d 937 (1991)), as we may dispose of it without examining the merits of plaintiffs' argument. Plaintiffs are without standing to seek the return of administrative fees under the Code because such a private right of action is not available. See Weis v. State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Co., 333 Ill.App.3d 402, 406, 267 Ill. Dec. 172, 776 N.E.2d 309 (2002) (the enforcement of the insurance rules was clearly delegated to the Department of Insurance and, as such, a plaintiff cannot plead or pursue a private action based on an insurer's violation of these rules); 215 ILCS 5/401 through 407 (West 2004); see also Village of McCook v. Illinois Bell Telephone Co., 335 Ill.App.3d 32, 36, 269 Ill. Dec. 150, 780 N.E.2d 335 (2002). Accordingly, where this count of plaintiffs' complaint does not allege a valid cause of action, we affirm its dismissal by the circuit court.
Thus, based upon the foregoing, we agree with the appellate court's holdings that HealthLink's percentage based fee violates section 22(A)(14) of the Act, and that plaintiffs cannot recover any monies paid pursuant to their participating provider agreements with HealthLink. However, we disagree with the appellate court's finding that the fixed flat fee charged to plaintiffs by HealthLink violates section 22(A)(14) of the Act or this state's public policy. Additionally, we find plaintiffs' claim that HealthLink should be required to divest itself of any fees paid by plaintiffs was forfeited, and that plaintiffs' claim that those fees should be returned to them based on a violation of the Illinois Insurance Code was properly dismissed.
The appellate court's judgment is affirmed in part and reversed in part, and the circuit court's judgment is affirmed.
Appellate court judgment affirmed in part and reversed in part; circuit court judgment affirmed.
Chief Justice THOMAS and Justices FREEMAN, FITZGERALD, and KILBRIDE concurred in the judgment and opinion.
Justices GARMAN and BURKE took no part in the consideration or decision of this case.
NOTES
[1]  We again note that it was section 16(14), and not section 22(A)(14), which was in effect in 1993, when Orman was decided.

=== CASE 9739318 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:12:09.85105+00 ===

OPINION
RILEY, Judge.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
Appellants-Plaintiffs, Sandra and Mark Brinkman (collectively, the Brinkmans), appeal the trial court's grant of summary judgment in favor of Appellees-Defen-dants, Anne P. Bueter, M.D. (Dr. Bueter), James F. Dupler, M.D. (Dr. Dupler), and Women's Health Partnership (WHP) (collectively, the Physicians).
We affirm in part, reverse in part, and remand.
ISSUES
The Brinkmans raise three issues on appeal, which we restate as:
(1) Whether the two-year statute of limitations for actions brought under the Medical Malpractice Act violates the Indiana constitution where the Brinkmans neither knew, nor could have known in the exercise of reasonable diligence, that they possessed a claim for medical malpractice; and
(2) Whether the trial court erred in concluding that no genuine issue of material fact existed as to the question of Dr. Dupler's standard of care in treating Sandra Brinkman.
On cross-appeal, the Physicians raise the following issue:
Whether the statute of limitations under the Medical Malpractice Act bars the Brinkmans' claim that Dr. Buster negligently counseled them to not have any more children.
FACTS AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY 1
In May of 1994, Sandra Brinkman (Sandra) learned she was pregnant and sought prenatal, obstetrical, and postnatal care from the Physicians. Dr. Bueter determined that Sandra was due to deliver on or about February 2, 1995. While Sandra's primary obstetrician was Dr. Bueter, other physicians within WHP saw Sandra throughout her pregnancy. During a prenatal appointment on January 19, 1995, Dr. Dupler evaluated Sandra and noted that her blood pressure was elevated, her weight had increased, and her urine was positive for two-plus protein. As a result of his evaluation, Dr. Dupler requested Sandra return for another office visit in three days. Dr. Dupler did not record on Sandra's chart any suspicion he may have had that she was suffering from preec-lampsia.2
*1234On Sunday, January 22, 1995, Sandra was admitted to St. Vincent Hospital in Carmel, Indiana with complaints of a severe headache that had persisted for a few days. Sandra additionally complained of gastric pain and vomiting. Upon admission, Dr. Dupler evaluated Sandra, again noting that her blood pressure was high and that her urine contained trace protein, but also charting that he found no signs or symptoms of preeclampsia. Due to her continuing and severe headache, Dr. Du-pler ordered a neurological exam of Sandra, which was performed by neurologist, Wesley Wong, M.D. (Dr. Wong). Dr. Wong's evaluation revealed no neurological explanation for Sandra's headache or other symptoms.
On January 25, 1995, while still hospitalized, Sandra went into labor. In the early morning hours of January 26, Sandra delivered a baby girl. Following delivery, Sandra experienced some relief of her previous symptoms, but her blood pressure remained elevated. Due to her elevated blood pressure, Dr. Wong recommended that Sandra remain in the hospital until it was stabilized; nonetheless, Dr. Dupler released Sandra on the afternoon of January 27, 1995, with instructions to call WHP if her headache returned.
On January 28 and 29, 1995, Sandra's husband, Mark Brinkman (Mark), called WHP and reported that Sandra had a severe headache. On January 30, 1995, Sandra called WHP complaining of a severe headache, as well as vomiting. However, because Sandra was now post-delivery and did not require obstetrical care, WHP referred her to a family physician, Steven Lang, M.D. (Dr. Lang), to treat her headache and vomiting. During an office visit on the same date, Dr. Lang treated Sandra's pain and nausea with medication, and sent her home. Later that afternoon, while resting in bed, Sandra had a grand mal seizure, witnessed by Mark. Shortly thereafter, she was taken by an ambulance to the emergency room at St. Vincent Hospital in Carmel, Indiana where she experienced another grand mal seizure. She was then transferred to St. Vincent Hospital in Indianapolis, and admitted with a diagnosis of toxic ecl‘aurnpsia.3 She remained in the hospital under treatment for eclampsia until February 4, 1995.
On March 10, 1995, Sandra, along with Mark, visited Dr. Bueter for a post-partum check-up. At this appointment, Dr. Bueter advised the Brinkmans to not have any more children because Sandra's diagnosis with eclampsia put her in a high-risk category for future complications during pregnancy. . Further, the Brinkmans contend that Dr. Bueter stated she would terminate her physician-patient relationship with Sandra if Sandra did not choose a sterilization procedure to prevent another pregnancy. On the other hand, Dr. Bueter alleges she remembers little about the details of her discussion with the Brink mans that day, but that it is her practice to discuss sterilization with any patient who *1235has had two or more children.4
As a result of Dr. Bueter's advice, the Brinkmans decided to not have any more children; however, for financial reasons, the Brinkmans opted not to undergo the sterilization procedure. The Brinkmans did not contact Dr. Bueter or WHP again until January of 2000, when Sandra suspected she might be pregnant despite efforts to prevent pregnancy. As Dr. Bueter was no longer with WHP, WHP advised Sandra to seek a physician elsewhere. Consequently, Sandra contacted Dr. Lang, who confirmed her pregnancy and referred her to Dawn Zimmer, M.D. (Dr. Zimmer), an obstetrician providing high-risk obstetrical care.
On January 31, 2000, the Brinkmans met with Dr. Zimmer, and were informed that a review of Sandra's previous medical records showed she had symptoms of preeclampsia prior to the birth of her daughter in 1995. Further, Dr. Zimmer informed the Brinkmans that if Sandra had received proper care for preeclampsia, she would not have progressed into toxic eclampsia. In addition, Dr. Zimmer explained to the Brinkmans that (1) the risk of preeclampsia does not increase in subsequent pregnancies with the same father, (2) preeclampsia does not always recur in subsequent pregnancies, and (8) if preec-lampsia recurs, it can be treated and toxic eclampsia can be prevented. Therefore, because preeclampsia can be managed, Dr. Zimmer neither agreed with Dr. Buster's advice that Sandra should not have any more children, nor that she should be sterilized to prevent subsequent pregnancies.
On December 7, 2000, as a result of the information gained through Dr. Zimmer, the Brinkmans filed a Proposed Complaint against the Physicians with the Indiana Department of Insurance. On February 28, 2001, the Physicians filed a Motion for Preliminary Determination of Law, arguing that the statute of limitations barred the Brinkmans' claim.5 After briefing and arguments, the trial court denied the Physician's motion. Consequently, the Physicians filed an interlocutory appeal with this court, resulting in our decision of Bueter v. Brinkman, T6 N.E.2d 910 (Ind.Ct.App.2002), where we concluded that the trial court's denial of the Physician's Motion for a Preliminary Determination of Law did not constitute a final disposition. Accordingly, we held that the statute of limitations defense could be raised again by the Physicians in subsequent proceedings.
Following our decision in 2002, the parties proceeded through the Medical Review Panel process,6 and on July 16, 2004, the panel issued the following decision, in pertinent part:
The panel is of the unanimous opinion that the evidence does not support the conclusion that [Dr. Dupler] failed to meet the applicable standard of care. With regard to [Dr. Bueter], the panel is of the unanimous opinion that there is a material issue of fact, not requiring expert opinion, bearing on liability for consideration by the court or jury. The panel also is of the unanimous opinion that the evidence supports the conclusion that [Women's Health Partnership] failed to comply with the appropriate standard of care, and that its conduct was a factor in the resultant damages.
(Appellant's App. p. 18).
On October 4, 2004, the Brinkmans filed a Complaint for Damages, alleging the fol*1236lowing negligent acts and omissions by the Physicians: (a) the Physicians failed to identify and treat the prenatal signs of preeclampsia exhibited by Sandra; (b) the Physicians failed to identify and treat the continuing signs of eclampsia exhibited by Sandra after delivery, and negligently discharged her from the hospital on January 27, 1995; (c) the Physicians failed to diagnose and treat the signs of eclampsia reported by Sandra after her discharge from the hospital; and (d) the Physicians failed to appropriately counsel the Brinkmans about the potential risks and complications relating to future pregnancies.
On October 25, 2004, the Physicians filed a Motion for Summary Judgment, wherein they argued a second time that the Brinkmans' claim was barred by the statute of limitations. On September 20, 2005, the trial court entered. the following Order, in pertinent part: 7
IT IS, THEREFORE, ORDERED that there is no just reason for delay in the entry of final judgment and Defendants, [Dr. Bueter, Dr. Dupler, and WHP 1, are hereby granted summary judgment on all issues in this matter, except as to Allegation [(d)] as it relates to [Dr. Bueter] and [WHP]. As to Allegation [(d)], the Motion for Summary Judgment is denied.
(Appellant's App. p. 9). Thus, only one of the Brinkmans' claims survived summary judgment-whether Dr. Bueter and WHP negligently counseled the Brinkmans as to the risk of eclampsia in future pregnancies.
The Brinkmans now appeal. Additional facts will be provided as necessary.
DISCUSSION AND DECISION
APPEAL
The Brinkmans argue that the trial court erred in granting summary judgment in favor of the Physicians on three of the four issues. Specifically, the Brink mans contend that all of their claims should have survived summary judgment because the two-year statute of limitations for medical malpractice actions in Indiana is unconstitutional as applied to the facts in their case. Additionally, the Brinkmans assert that despite the Medical Review Panel's determination that the evidence is insufficient to show Dr. Dupler's actions fell below the applicable standard of care, other expert medical evidence shows that Dr. Dupler did in fact breach the applicable standard of care in treating Sandra, and such substandard care was a substantial factor in Sandra's injuries and damages.
I. Standard of Review
Summary judgment provides a procedural means to halt litigation when there are no factual disputes and to allow the case to be determined as a matter of law. Rogers v. Mendel, 758 N.E.2d 946, 948 (Ind.Ct.App.2001), trans. demied. Summary judgment is appropriate only when there are no genuine issues of material fact and the moving party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law. Ind. Trial Rule 56(C). A negligence action is rarely properly disposed of by summary judgment, particularly when the critical ques-
*1237tion for resolution is whether the defendant exercised the requisite degree of care under the circumstances. Bunch v. Tiwari, 711 N.E.2d 844, 847 (Ind.Ct.App.1999). This issue is generally a question for the trier of fact, and not answerable as a matter of law. Id.
In reviewing a trial court's ruling on summary judgment, this court stands in the shoes of the trial court, applying the same standards in deciding whether to affirm or reverse summary judgment. AutoXchange.com, Inc. v. Dreyer and Reinbold,. Inc., 816 N.E.2d 40, 47 (Ind.Ct.App.2004). Thus, on appeal, our duty is to determine whether there is a genuine issue of material fact and whether the trial court has correctly applied the law. Id. A genuine issue of material fact exists where facts concerning an issue that would dispose of the litigation are in dispute or where the undisputed material facts are capable of supporting conflicting inferences on such an issue. American Family Mut. Ins. Co. v. Hall, 764 N.E.2d 780, 783 (Ind.Ct.App.2002), reh'g denied, trans. denied. The party appealing the grant of summary judgment has the burden of persuading this court that the trial court's ruling was improper. Palmer v. Gorecki, 844 N.E.2d 149, 1538 (Ind.Ct.App.2006), reh'g denied. However, we must carefully assess the trial court's decision to ensure the nonmov-ant was not improperly denied his or her day in court. Bunch, 711 N.E.2d at 848.
If the moving party asserts the statute of limitations as an affirmative defense and establishes that the action was commenced outside of the statutory period, the nonmoving party then has the burden of showing an issue of fact material to a theory that avoids the affirmative defense. Rogers, T58 N.E.2d at 948-49. In our review, we consider all of the designated evidence in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party. Hall, 764 N.E.2d at 788. . _.
IL Application of Occurrence-Based Statute of Limitations
The Brinkmans first argue that Indiana's occurrence-based two-year statute of limitations for medical malpractice actions is unconstitutional as applied to the facts of their case.8 Although the alleged malpractice occurred in 1995, the Brink mans contend they did not have enough knowledge to file their lawsuit against the Physicians until Sandra unexpectedly became pregnant in 2000 and sought high-risk obstetrical care from Dr. Zimmer.
Indiana's statutory scheme governing medical malpractice actions contains a statute of limitations, providing:
A claim, whether in contract or tort, may not be brought against a health care provider based upon professional services or health care that was provided or that should have been provided unless the claim is filed within two (2) years after the date of the alleged act, omission, or neglect.
1C. § 34-18-7-1(b). Our supreme court has stated that because this statutory time limit begins to run upon the occurrence of the alleged malpractice, without regard to the date of actual or constructive discovery of injury or malpractice by a person sus*1238taining harm, literal application of the statute can be found unconstitutional in certain situations. Booth v. Wiley, 839 N.E.2d 1168, 1170-71 (Ind.2005). Specifically, our supreme court has held that under the Indiana Constitution, Article 1, Sections 12 and 28, the two-year occurrence-grounded statute of limitations may not constitutionally be applied to preclude the filing of a claim before a plaintiff either knows of the malpractice and resulting injury or discovers facts that, in the exercise of reasonable diligence, should lead to the discovery of the malpractice and the resulting injury. Id. at 1171. Further, in Booth, our supreme court clarified the methodology guiding the application of the medical malpractice statute of limitations as follows:
Initially, a court must determine the date the alleged malpractice occurred and determine the discovery date-the date when the claimant discovered the alleged malpractice and resulting injury, or possessed enough information that would have led a reasonably diligent person to make such discovery. If the discovery date is more than two years beyond the date the malpractice occurred, the claimant has two years after discovery within which to initiate a malpractice action. But if the discovery date is within two years following the occurrence of the alleged malpractice, the statutory limitation period applies and the action must be initiated before the period expires, unless it is not reasonably possible for the claimant to present the claim in the time remaining
[[Image here]]
Id. at 1172.
Therefore, it is now precedent that "persons 'unable to discover the malpractice and their resulting injury within the two-year statutory period may file their claims within two years of the date when they discover the malpractice and the resulting injury or facts that, in the exercise of reasonable diligence, should lead to the discovery of the malpractice and the resulting injury'" Id. at 1171 (quoting Van Dusen v. Stotts, T12 N.E.2d 491, 497 (Ind.1999)). Furthermore, our supreme court explained in Van Dusen that generally, "[a] plaintiff's lay suspicion that there may have been malpractice is not sufficient to trigger the two-year period," however, "[alt the same time, a plaintiff need not know with certainty that malpractice caused his injury, to trigger the running of the statutory time period." Id. (quoting Van Dusen, 712 N.E.2d at 499).
Additionally, to clarify the standard of proof necessary to establish a plaintiff's date of discovery, our supreme court has provided that when it is undisputed that a physician has expressly informed a plaintiff that he has a specific injury caused by a specific act at a specific time, if not a probability therefore, then the question may be one of law. Id. Under such circumstances, a plaintiff is deemed to have sufficient facts to require him to promptly seek any additional medical or legal advice needed to resolve any uncertainty or confusion he or she may have regarding the injury and its cause, and thus should not be excused for failing to timely file a claim. Therefore, the date on which a potential plaintiff receives information that there is a reasonable probability that a specific injury was caused by a specific act at a specific time is the date upon which the two-year statute of limitations begins to run. Id.
In the present case, the Brinkmans assert they did not discover there was a reasonable probability that Dr. Bueter, Dr. Dupler, and WHP caused a specific injury to Sandra in their provision of obstetrical and post-delivery care in 1995 until meeting with Dr. Zimmer on January 31, 2000.
*1239Conversely, although it is undisputed that the Brinkmans did not have actual knowledge of the malpractice until January of 2000, the Physicians argue that Sandra received sufficient information to discover that an act of malpractice occurred when she was accurately diagnosed with eclamp-sia on January 30, 1995; in other words, according to the Physicians' argument, being diagnosed with eclampsia is sufficient to signal that a diagnosis of preeclampsia was missed. As a result, the Physicians contend that January 30, 1995 is the "discovery date" that began the running of the statute of limitations.
In our determination of the discovery date, we construe all facts in favor of the Brinkmans as nonmovants. See Palmer, 844 N.E.2d at 154. First, as directed by Booth, we determine the date, or dates in this case, the alleged malpractice occurred. Here, as previously noted, the Brinkmans urge that four separate instances of malpractice occurred: (a) the Physicians' failure to diagnose and treat preeclampsia; (b) the Physicians' failure to diagnose and treat eclampsia during Sandra's hospitalization from January 22 to January 26, 1995 and their negligence in discharging her on January 27, 1995; (c) WHP's negligent follow-up care upon telephone calls by the Brinkmans to the Physicians' practice over the weekend of January 28, 1995; and (d) Dr. Bueter's negligent counseling given to the Brinkmans during their final office visit at WHP on March 10, 1995. Thus, the "occurrence" date(s) for the alleged acts of malpractice are confined to January and March of 1995. Consequently, strict adherence to the occurrence-based method of the statute of limitations would put the Brinkmans' claim, filed in December of 2000, nearly four years beyond the expiration of the two-year time period.
However, if the determination relies strictly on the date the Brinkmans were made directly aware of their possible malpractice claim-January 31, 2000-their filing of the claim in December of 2000 falls well within the statutory time period. Nevertheless, as Booth noted, the discovery date does not solely depend upon when a claimant discovers the malpractice, but also depends upon when a claimant has enough information that through reasonable diligence, discovery of the alleged malpractice can be made. See Palmer, 844 N.E.2d at 154.
From our evaluation of the record, we conclude that the Brinkmans' ability to discover information supporting a malpractice claim prior to meeting with Dr. Zim-mer in January of 2000 is impracticable. In particular, our review of Sandra's deposition indicates she and Mark trusted the Physicians' care through her episode of eclampsia, and were unaware that the condition was a result of untreated preeclamp-sia. Furthermore, both Sandra's and Mark's depositions indicate they placed a significant amount of confidence in Dr. Bueter's recommendation that Sandra have no additional children. Moreover, we find contradiction within the Physicians' assertion that the Brinkmans were made aware of the failure to diagnose preee-lampsia when Sandra was diagnosed with eclampsia because such an assertion is inconsistent with Dr. Bueter's testimony from her deposition wherein she states that the discharge notes upon Sandra's release from the hospital on February 4, 2005 never reference preeclampsia. Thus, there is no evidence in the record to support a conclusion that Dr. Bueter discussed preeclampsia with the Brinkmans during Sandra's hospitalization.
Additionally, we fail to find any evidence that Dr. Bueter discussed preeclampsia with the Brinkmans during Sandra's post-delivery and post-hospitalization office visits. Also, following these office visits, we *1240note that Sandra did not experience any symptoms that would have put her on notice that a malpractice had occurred. See Martin v. Richey, 711 N.E2d 1273 (Ind.1999); see also Van Dusen, 712 N.E.2d 491; Battema v. Booth, 858 N.E.2d 1014 (Ind.Ct.App., 2006). Therefore, as the Brinkmans point out, the Physicians' argument essentially requires the Brink mans, as laypersons, to automatically know that eclampsia is preceded by preeclamp-sia. Consequently, viewed in the light most favorable to the Brinkmans, we conclude that the occurrence-based statute of limitations is unconstitutional as applied to the facts in this case because the Brink-mans did not have enough information to discover the malpractice until January 2000. See Booth, 889 N.E.2d at 1171.
Nonetheless, the Physicians argue that even if the Brinkmans did not have enough knowledge prior to January of 2000 to file their claim, the claim is still time-barred because an "omission cannot as a matter of law extend beyond the time the physician last rendered a diagnosis." (Appellees Brief p. 11) (quoting Havens v. Ritchey, 582 N.E.2d 792, 795 (Ind.1991)). In Havens, the defendant, a physician, performed surgery on the plaintiff in November of 1984, and never saw the plaintiff, patient, again. Havens, 582 NE2d at 793. The plaintiff was made aware of a potential malpractice upon seeing another physician in October of 1985. Id. Determining that the plaintiff's claim, filed in October of 1987, was outside the statute of limitations, our supreme court held:
[A] physician cannot be under a continuing duty to review all files daily to ensure that he did not misdiagnose a condition of a patient he may not have seen for several months or even years. This duty would be completely overwhelming to health care providers, and cut against the purposes of the Medical Malpractice Act. We hold that when the sole claim of medical malpractice is a failure to diagnose, the omission cannot as a matter of law extend beyond the time the physician last rendered a diagnosis.
Palmer, 844 N.E.2d at 156 (quoting Havens, 582 N.E.2d at 795).
In the instant case, three of the four claims brought by the Brinkmans involve a failure to diagnose either preeclampsia or eclampsia. Also, the record discloses that Sandra was last given a diagnosis by the Physicians on January 30, 1995, yet did not file her malpractice claim until December 2000. Looking at these facts in isolation, Havens would seemingly apply to bar the Brinkmans' three claims as to the Physi-clans' failures to diagnose preeclampsia and eclampsia. However, we cannot ignore primary differences between the facts in Havens and the facts here. Unlike the patient in Havens who never saw the physician again following the injury, Sandra visited Dr. Bueter more than onee following her hospitalization for eclampsia. During these office visits with Sandra, there is no evidence Dr. Bueter conferred her knowledge of the typical progression of preeclampsia to eclampsia to Sandra or her husband.
Additionally, we do not believe the facts before us imposed any continuing duty on Dr. Bueter or any of the Physicians to review Sandra's file. Rather, the Physi-clans were aware of their failure to diagnose preeclampsia at the time Sandra was admitted for eclampsia, and had the opportunity to review her records during the hospitalization and afterward during subsequent office visits. Finally, the record makes it clear that the Brinkmans filed their claim less than eleven months after meeting with Dr. Zimmer, whereas the patient in Havens waited two years after the time of discovery to file a claim. *1241Therefore, we find Havens inapplicable under this set of facts and adhere to our earlier conclusion that the occurrence-based statute of limitations is unconstitutional as applied to the Brinkmans.
III. Dr. Dupler
The Brinkmans also argue that the trial court improperly granted summary judgment as to all claims pertaining to Dr. Dupler. Specifically, the Brink-mans allege that summary judgment was inappropriate as to Dr. Dupler because a genuine issue of material fact exists as to whether he breached the applicable standard of care in treating Sandra.
In the Brinkmans' case, a unanimous medical review panel determined the evidence did not support the conclusion that Dr. Dupler failed to meet the applicable standard of care in treating Sandra. When a medical review panel renders an opinion in favor of the physician, the plaintiff must then come forward with expert medical testimony to rebut the panel's opinion in order to survive summary judgment. Bunch, 711 N.E.2d at 850. Accordingly, the Brinkmans designated as evidence in their opposition to the Physicians' motion for summary judgment the affidavit of Kathryn Cashner, M.D. (Dr. Cashner), an obstetrician / gynecologist, who stated, in pertinent part:
5. It is my opinion that during his care of [Sandra], [Dr. Dupler] fell below the appropriate standard of care for a obstetrician in Indiana practicing obstetrics and gynecology in 1995.
6. [Dr. Dupler] saw [Sandral on January 19, 1995 for a prenatal office visit. At that time, [Sandra] had a 3.8 pound weight gain, blood pressure of 138/90 and urine positive for 2+ protein, all possible signs of early pre[ Jeclampsia.
7. On Sunday, January 22, 1995, Sandra presented to St. Vincent Hospital with complaints of headache for the past three days. She was seen by [Dr. Du-pler] who admitted her for evaluation of her headache. Despite elevated blood pressure, slight edema of hands and ankles, slight proteinuria, headache, epi-gastric pain, and visual changes, Dr. Du-pler concluded "no pre-eclamptic signs or symptoms."
8. It is my opinion that Dr. Dupler fell below the standard of care during his care and treatment of [Sandral, including but not limited to the following: his failure to recognize the pre[-leclamptic signs and symptoms exhibited by [San-dral at the time of her admission on January 22, 1995; his failure to order daily weights for [Sandra] during her hospitalization; his failure to appropriately evaluate [Sandra's] condition on January 27, [1995,] which [led] to his decision to discharge her from the hospital despite documented high blood pressures and the recommendation by the neurologist, Dr. Wong, to continue her hospitalization until her blood pressure was normal; and his failure to communicate with his partners and office staff that "strict instructions to call should her headache redevelop or neurological signs or symptoms appear" were given to [Sandral.
9. It is my opinion that Dr. Dupler's breach of the standard of care for an obstetrician/gynecologist in 1995 in Indianapolis, Indiana, as set forth herein, was a substantial factor in [Sandra's] resulting injury and damages, including the progression of her condition to ec-lampsia and grand mal seizures.
(Appellant's App. pp. 80-81).
Thus, following the medical review panel's decision, the burden of proof shifted to the Brinkmans to respond by designating evidentiary matter to demonstrate that a genuine issue of fact existed regarding the *1242standard of care issue. See id. We conclude that the Brinkmans satisfied this burden of proof by submitting the affidavit of Dr. Cashner, which provides sufficient evidence to refute the medical review panel's opinion and create a genuine issue of material fact. See id. Accordingly, we conclude that the trial court erred in granting summary judgment in favor of Dr. Dupler on all claims applicable to him.
CROSS-APPEAL
I. Negligent Counseling by Dr. Bueter
On eross-appeal, the Physicians contend that the trial court erred in denying summary judgment as to the claim that Dr. Bueter negligently counseled the Brink-mans at Sandra's post-partum appointment on March 10, 1995. Specifically, the Physicians argue the claim is time-barred, and that the logic of the argument is flawed in that the Brinkmans assert Dr. Bueter's counseling was both intentional and negligent.
Due to our conclusion that the occurrence-based statute of limitations is unconstitutional here because the Brinkmans lacked the knowledge or ability to discover the alleged malpractice until January 2000, we disagree with the Physicians' proposition that the negligent counseling claim against Dr. Bueter is time-barred. Just as the Brinkmans did not have enough knowledge prior to January 2000 to discover the Physicians' failure to diagnose preeclamp-sia, they also could not have had sufficient information before that time to know that Dr. Buster ill-advised them on the dangers of future pregnancies. Nee Booth, 889 N.E.2d at 1171. Also, while we agree with the Physicians that conduct cannot be both negligent and willful, we must view the facts in the light most favorable to the Brinkmans. See Hall, 764 N.E.2d at 788. In doing so, we note that both the medical review panel and the trial court concluded that the negligent counseling claim against Dr. Bueter should stand. Also, considering we fail to find any independent evidence put forth by the Physicians that would persuade us to part from the previous decision of the medical review panel and the trial court, we decline to reverse summary judgment on this claim.
CONCLUSION
Based on the foregoing, we conclude: (1) the statute of limitations under the Medical Malpractice Act is unconstitutional as applied to the Brinkmans' case; (2) the trial court improperly entered summary judgment in favor of Dr. Dupler on all claims applicable to his care of Sandra; and (8) the trial court properly denied summary judgment as to the negligent counseling claim against Dr. Bueter.
Affirmed in part, reversed in part, and remanded.
DARDEN, J., concurs.
VAIDIK, J., dissents with separate opinion.
. In our recitation of the facts and procedural history, we rely in part on our earlier opinion, Bueter v. Brinkman, 716 N.E.2d 910, 911-12 (Ind. Ct.App.2002).
. Preeclampsia is the development of elevated blood pressure and protein in the urine (pro-teinuria) after the 20th week of pregnancy. http://www.nlm.nih. gov/medlineplus/ency/ article/000898.htm. The condition is addition*1234ally signified by documented weight gain, swelling in the upper body, and systemic problems such as headache, blurred vision and abdominal pain. Id.; http://www.nichd. gov/health/topics/Preeclampsia_and._ Eclampsia.cfm. The only way to cure preec-lampsia is to deliver the baby. http://www. nIm.nih.gov/medlineplus/ency/article/000898. htm. However, if delivery would be very premature, the disease may be managed by bed rest, close monitoring, and delivery as soon as the fetus has a good chance of surviving outside the womb. Id. Preeclampsia is also referred to as "toxemia" or "pregnancy-induced hypertension." Id.
. Eclampsia is a more severe form of preec-lampsia that can cause seizures and coma in the mother. http://www.nichd.gov/health/ topics
. The record indicates that prior to the birth of her daughter in January of 1995, Sandra had one other child.
. See 1C. § 34-18-11-1.
. See 1.C. § 34-18-8-4.
. We note that although Trial Rule 56(C) does not require the trial court to specifically state the legal basis for granting summary judgment, a trial court's findings and conclusions can facilitate appellate review and offer valuable insight into the trial court's rationale for its decision. AutoXchange. com, Inc. v. Dreyer and Reinbold, Inc., 816 N.E.2d 40, 48 (Ind.Ct.App.2004). In the instant case, contrary to our preference that trial courts set forth their reasons for granting summary judgment, the trial court did not issue any findings of fact or conclusions of law. See id.
. We note that while Appellants argue that T.C. § 34-18-7-1 is generally unconstitutional as applied to the facts of their case, they fail to inform this court as to which specific section or sections of the Indiana constitution have been violated. In light of precedent on this issue, we infer that Appellants contend that under the facts of their case, the medical malpractice statute of limitations violates Indiana's Privileges and Immunities Clause, Article 1, § 23, and the Open Courts Law Clause, Article 1, § 12. See Palmer, 844 N.E.2d at 154; see also Booth v. Wiley, 839 N.E.2d 1168, 1171 (Ind.2005).

=== CASE 9739319 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:12:09.858523+00 ===

VAIDIK, Judge,
dissenting.
I respectfully dissent from the majority's conclusion that the trial court erred in granting summary judgment in favor of the Physicians on three of the four issues raised in the Brinkmans' complaint. Specifically, I do not believe that Indiana's occurrence-based two-year statute of limitations for medical malpractice actions is unconstitutional as applied to the Brink-mans. Rather, I believe that the Brink mans possessed enough information that would have led a reasonably diligent person to discover the alleged malpractice and resulting injury within two years following the occurrence of the alleged malpractice. Therefore, I would affirm the trial court's grant of summary judgment in favor of the *1243Physicians on these issues. I also respectfully dissent from the majority's conclusion that the trial court properly denied summary judgment on the fourth issue raised in the Brinkmans' complaint. Specifically, I believe that the Brinkmans have not established that the Physicians concealed material information that somehow prevented them from inquiring into or investigating Sandra's condition, thus preventing them from discovering a potential cause of action. Therefore, I would reverse the trial court's denial of summary judgment on this issue.
In their complaint, the Brinkmans alleged that the Physicians committed malpractice by failing to diagnose and treat Sandra's pre-eclampsia and eclampsia. These events all occurred in January 1995. However, the Brinkmans did not file their complaint against the Physicians until December 2000. The Brinkmans argue that they did not discover there was a reasonable probability that the Physicians caused a specific injury to Sandra in their provision of care in 1995 until meeting with another doctor in January 2000, who advised the Brinkmans that Sandra's medical records showed that she had symptoms of pre-eclampsia prior to giving birth in 1995 and that if she had received proper care for pre-eclampsia, it would not have progressed into toxic eclampsia. The Physi-clans respond that the Brinkmans possessed sufficient information to discover that an act of malpractice occurred when Sandra was accurately diagnosed with ec-lampsia on January 30, 1995. As such, the Physicians assert that January 30, 1995, is the date that the statute of limitations began to run.
It is undisputed that "a plaintiff need not know with certainty that malpractice caused his injury, to trigger the running of the statutory time period." Booth v. Wiley, 889 N.E.2d 1168, 1171 (Ind.2005) (quotation omitted). Our Supreme Court has provided the following guidance for determining when the statutory time period begins to run:
Initially, a court must determine the date the alleged malpractice occurred and determine the discovery date-the date when the claimant discovered the alleged malpractice and resulting injury, or possessed enough information that would have' led a reasonably diligent person to make such discovery. If the discovery date is more than two years beyond the date the malpractice occurred, the claimant has two years after discovery within which to initiate a malpractice action. But if the discovery date is within two years following the occurrence of the alleged malpractice, the statutory limitation period' applies and the action must be initiated before the period expires, unless it is not reasonably possible for the claimant to present the claim in the time remaining after discovery and before the end of the statutory period.
Id. at 1172 (emphasis added).
The majority concludes that the Brink mans' ability to discover information supporting a malpractice claim prior to meeting with the doctor in 2000 is "impracticable." Slip op. at 14. I disagree. On January 22, 1995, Sandra, eight months pregnant, was hospitalized with complaints of a severe headache that had persisted for a few days, gastric pain, and vomiting. Her blood pressure was high and her urine contained trace protein. Sandra, still hospitalized, gave birth on January 26, 1995. On January 27, 1995, Sandra was released from the hospital with high blood pressure despite a neurologist's advice that she remain in the hospital until her blood pressure stabilized. After being released from the hospital, Sandra again experienced a se*1244vere headache and contacted the Physicians. Because Sandra was no longer an obstetrical patient, Sandra was referred to a family physician, and that doctor treated her for pain and nausea on January 30, 1995, and sent her home. Later that afternoon, Sandra experienced a grand mal seizure and was taken by ambulance to the hospital, where she experienced another seizure. She was admitted to the hospital with a diagnosis of toxic eclampsia. Sandra remained in the hospital under treatment for eclampsia until February 4, 1995.
I believe that the discovery date-the date when the claimant discovered the alleged malpractice and resulting injury or possessed enough information that would have led a reasonably diligent person to make such discovery-is January 30, 1995, the date Sandra was accurately diagnosed with eclampsia. The Brinkmans possessed enough information on that date to let them know that Sandra had a severe complication that had been negligently left untreated until she experienced two grand mal seizures and finally received a proper diagnosis of eclampsia. This case is wholly unlike the Supreme Court's cases in Martin v. Richey, 711 N.E.2d 1273 (Ind.1999), and Van Dusen v. Stotts, 712 N.E.2d 491 (Ind.1999), where the plaintiffs suffered from latent diseases and did not have any symptoms that would have put them on notice that malpractice might have occurred.9 See Battema v. Booth, 853 N.E.2d 1014, 1019 (Ind.Ct.App.2006), trans. pending. Despite Sandra's symptoms and efforts to let the Physicians know that something was wrong with her, Sandra was released from the hospital only then to suffer two grand mal seizures. Based on these facts, I conclude that the Brinkmans possessed enough information within two years after Sandra's diagnosis of eclampsia on January 30, 1995, to lead a reasonably diligent person to conclude that malpractice had occurred. Therefore, I would affirm the trial court on the issues related to the Physicians' failure to diagnose and treat Sandra's pre-eclampsia and eclampsia.
In their complaint, G to appropriately counsel them about the potential risks and complications relating to future pregnancies at Sandra's post-partum appointment on March 10, 1995, with Dr. Bueter.10 Specifically, the Brinkmans argue that the Physicians engaged in active, fraudulent concealment at this appointment, thereby tolling the statute of limitations. At Sandra's post-partum appointment, Dr. Bueter discussed Sandra's eclampsia with the Brinkmans. Dr. Bueter also told the Brinkmans that while she was hospitalized before giving birth, the Physicians had been checking her for signs and symptoms of pre-eclampsia but she did not appear to have any. Nevertheless, the Brinkmans assert that Dr. Bueter then told them things, such as not to have any more children, "to ensure that [they] would never learn about the malpractice." Appellants' Br. p. 28. However, this assertion ignores the fact that Sandra, who had symptoms of a severe complication, was sent home from the hospital and experienced two grand *1245mal seizures, at which point she was accurately diagnosed with eclampsia. To successfully invoke the doctrine of fraudulent concealment, the Brinkmans must establish that Dr. Bueter's concealment of material information somehow prevented them from inquiring into or investigating Sandra's condition, thus preventing them from discovering a potential cause of action. See Garneau v. Bush, 838 N.E.2d 1134, 1148 (Ind.Ct.App.2005), trans. denied. Here, because it is undisputed that Sandra was accurately diagnosed with eclampsia, the record lacks such uncontroverted evidence. Accordingly, I believe that the doctrine of fraudulent concealment does not operate to toll the statute of limitations. Accordingly, the statute of limitation on any claim arising from the postpartum appointment on March 10, 1995, began to run on that date, which is also the date that the physician-patient relationship ended. And because the Brinkmans filed their complaint in December 2000, like the claims above, such a claim is time-barred. Therefore, I would reverse the trial court on this issue and enter summary judgment in favor of Dr. Bueter and WHP.
. In their brief, the Brinkmans rely on Booth v. Wiley. However, that case is distinguishable from the present case because Booth had cataracts and glaucoma before the LASIK surgery and factual questions existed as to whether the doctor attributed Booth's symptoms to causes unrelated to the LASIK surgery. See Booth, 839 N.E.2d at 1175. These facts are not present here.
. In its summary judgment order, the trial court denied summary judgment on this issue as it related to Dr. Bueter and WHP. The trial court presumably granted summary judgment on this issue in favor of Dr. Dupler because he was not present at Sandra's March 10, 1995, post-partum appointment.

=== CASE 9739320 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:12:10.625853+00 ===

PRESIDING JUSTICE WOLFSON delivered the opinion of the court: At some point during the halftime of University of Illinois football games, Chief Illiniwek performs a certain dance. The plaintiffs filed a lawsuit against the University, contending the performance violates the Illinois Civil Rights Act of 2003. 740 ILCS 23/5 (West 2004). They ask for a declaratory judgment, damages, and an injunction ordering a stop to the performance and barring any University use of Chief Illiniwek (the Chief), whom the plaintiffs refer to as a “sports mascot,” while the defendants describe him as a “symbol.” Defendants filed a motion to dismiss, contending the Illinois legislature specifically approved the University’s continued use of the Chief when it passed a 1996 amendment to the University of Illinois Act (now see 110 ILCS 305/0.01 et seq. (West 2004)) declaring Chief Illiniwek an “honored symbol” of the University. Plaintiffs contend the Illinois Civil Rights Act cannot be reconciled with the 1996 statute and, they say, the Civil Rights Act controls. The trial court found no conflict between the two statutes. It dismissed plaintiffs’ complaint. It did not address the question of whether discrimination occurred. We affirm the trial court. FACTS The first Chief Illiniwek performance took place during halftime of an Illinois-Pennsylvania football game in 1926. B. Crowley, Resolving the Chief Illiniwek Debate: Navigating the Gray Area Between Courts of Law and the Court of Public Opinion, 2 DePaul J. Sports L. & Contemp. Probs. 28, 31 (2004). Chief Illiniwek performs a type of “fancy dancing,” which employs a double step, intricate footwork, and spinning movements. 2 DePaul J. Sports L. & Contemp. Probs. at 32. It is a considerably faster style of dance than traditional Indian dances. 2 DePaul J. Sports L. & Contemp. Probs. at 32. The dance is part of a performance known as the “Three In One,” consisting of three songs. 2 DePaul J. Sports L. & Contemp. Probs. at 32. “The first is called ‘Pride of the Illini’ and is performed while the Marching Illini band marches toward the north end zone in an T formation. This song carries a traditional marching beat. Chief Illiniwek then weaves his way through the band and emerges at midfield as the band spreads out into an T-L-L-I-N-I’ formation and performs his dance to the tune of the second song, ‘March of the Illini’, which carries a tom-tom beat. At the conclusion of the dance, the Chief stands at midfield with his arms folded across his chest as the fans sing ‘Hail to the Orange’, the university alma mater. At the conclusion of ‘Hail to the Orange’, Chief Illiniwek exits the field with the band as ‘March of the Illini’ is being played.” 2 DePaul J. Sports L. & Contemp. Probs. at 32 n.18. Plaintiffs’ “Amended Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief as to the Sports Mascot Chief Illiniwek” was brought under the Illinois Civil Rights Act. Pursuant to the Act, a unit of state, county, or local government in Illinois may not: “(1) exclude a person from participation in, deny a person the benefits of, or subject a person to discrimination under any program or activity on the grounds of that person’s race, color, or national origin; or (2) utilize criteria or methods of administration that have the effect of subjecting individuals to discrimination because of their race, color, or national origin. (b) Any party aggrieved by conduct that violates subsection (a) may bring a civil lawsuit, in a federal district court or State circuit court, against the offending unit of government. Any State claim brought in federal district court shall be a supplemental claim to a federal claim.” 740 ILCS 23/5(a), (b) (West 2004). Seven years earlier, the General Assembly enacted section If of the University of Illinois Act, which provides: “Consistent with a long-standing, proud tradition, the General Assembly hereby declares that Chief Illiniwek is, and may remain, the honored symbol of a great university, the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.” 110 ILCS 305/lf (West 1996). The plaintiffs allege the members of the Illinois Native American Bar Association (INABA) “suffer personally and professionally from the racist policy of the University in allowing the use of Chief Illiniwek as a sports mascot.” They allege plaintiffs Stephen Naranjo, a Santa Pueblo, New Mexican, Indian enrolled at the University of Illinois at Chicago, and Roger Fontana, a Cherokee descendant and a resident of Champaign, Illinois, feel “humiliated, embarrassed and discriminated against when [their] heritage is reduced to a half-time sporting event entertainment by Chief Illiniwek performances” and feel “that the image of Chief Illiniwek is inaccurate and demeans their culture and race.” Bess Van Asselt, a student at the University, “has been harassed and humiliated by persons that support the perpetuation of Chief Illiniwek as a sports mascot,” causing her to feel isolated and alienated within her dorm to the degree that she withdrew from her residential contract and moved. John Low, a member of the Potawatomi Tribe and a student at the University of Michigan, decided to study at Michigan rather than Illinois “as a result of the hostile atmosphere against Native Americans at the University of Illinois arising out of the Chief Illiniwek controversy.” Tom Cafcas, a student at the University whose family traces back to the Iroquois, “considers the Anglo-American construction of Chief Illiniwek to be a reminder of how exploitation and distortion of Native American culture and religion is woven into institutions like the University of Illinois without concern for the damage done to Native American students.” Among other things, plaintiffs allege: “Chief Illiniwek’s half-time performances at University of Illinois football and basketball games are false, misleading and demeaning characterizations of Native Americans and their culture. The Chiefs performances at sporting events is [sic] insulting, demeaning, humiliating and discriminates against Native Americans and Native American students at the University of Illinois. The Plaintiffs, Native American students, and those that associate with them, are effectively barred from attending University of Illinois sporting events where Chief Illiniwek performs because to attend would be humiliating and demeaning. :¡! * * The Defendants knowingly have exploited Native Americans by profiting from the perpetuation of false, misleading and demeaning images of Native Americans in the form of Chief Illiniwek. * * * The Defendants’ use of Chief Illiniwek as a mascot at sporting events is a catalyst for students and others to imitate Chief Illiniwek on and off campus. >:< * * The Defendants’ use of Chief Illiniwek as a mascot creates a hostile, demeaning and discriminatory environment for Native Americans on campus. * * * When students and others imitate Chief Illiniwek on campus and elsewhere, it is humiliating, demeaning and discriminates against Native American students that attend the University of Illinois, because it subjects them to disparate treatment and deprives them of an education that is free from humiliation and harassment.” Plaintiffs seek the following relief: (1) a judicial declaration that the Chief Illiniwek “mascot” is demeaning and discriminatory to Native Americans and violates the Illinois Civil Rights Act; (2) temporary and permanent injunctive relief enjoining the University from continuing to use Chief Illiniwek as a “sports mascot” and from allowing “entertainment” performances by the Chief at University events; and (3) damages and attorney fees and costs. The defendants’ motion to dismiss plaintiffs’ amended complaint for failure to state a claim contends: (1) the Illinois Civil Rights Act should not be construed to prohibit the University’s use of Chief Illiniwek because it would improperly invalidate section If of the University of Illinois Act; (2) plaintiffs’ allegations are insufficient to state a claim for discrimination under the Civil Rights Act; and (3) the Civil Rights Act authorizes civil suits only against the “offending unit of government,” not against individuals. The trial court granted the defendants’ motion to dismiss, finding there was no conflict between the statutes and that the legislature specifically authorized the University’s use of the Chief as its symbol or mascot. The court declined to consider defendants’ additional arguments for dismissal, but noted plaintiffs may not sue individual trustees under the Illinois Civil Rights Act. 740 ILCS 23/5(b) (West 2004). DECISION A motion to dismiss challenges the legal sufficiency of a complaint by alleging defects on its face. 735 ILCS 5/2—615 (West 2000). In reviewing the sufficiency of a complaint, we accept as true all well-pleaded facts and all reasonable inferences that may be drawn from those facts and construe the allegations in the light most favorable to the plaintiff. City of Chicago v. Beretta U.S.A. Corp., 213 Ill. 2d 351, 364, 821 N.E.2d 1099 (2004). Our review is de novo. Beretta, 213 Ill. 2d at 364. Plaintiffs contend the two statutes at issue are irreconcilably conflicting and ask this court to decide which statute controls. They say the Illinois Civil Rights Act relates to discrimination and civil rights, while the University of Illinois Act is silent on those subjects. Because the statutes are not governed by the same spirit or policy and do not relate to the same subject, plaintiffs contend the two provisions cannot be harmonized. Furthermore, when the legislature passed the Illinois Civil Rights Act in 2003, it is presumed to have been aware of section If of the University of Illinois Act, passed in 1996. Yet, the legislature did not include an exception in the Civil Rights Act allowing the University to “discriminate against Plaintiffs through the use of an ‘Indian’ mascot, Chief Illiniwek.” As the later and more specific statute, the Civil Rights Act should control, plaintiffs say. The plaintiffs rely on the Illinois Supreme Court’s decision in State v. Mikusch, 138 Ill. 2d 242, 562 N.E.2d 168 (1990). In Mikusch, several Secretary of State investigators were forced to retire at age 60 under section 2 — 115 of the Illinois Vehicle Code. The Vehicle Code had been amended on June 20, 1979, to mandate retirement for any investigator after reaching the age of 60. Mikusch, 138 Ill. 2d at 245-46; Ill. Rev. Stat. 1981, ch. 951/2, par. 2—115. The investigators filed suit under the Illinois Human Rights Act, enacted on November 8, 1979, which prohibits discrimination in employment because of age. Ill. Rev. Stat. 1981, ch. 68, par. 1—101 et seq. At that time, “age” was defined as “the chronological age of a person who is 40 but not yet 70 years old.” Ill. Rev. Stat. 1981, ch. 68, par. 1—103(A). The court set out general rules of statutory construction we apply in this case: “The fundamental rule of statutory construction, of course, is to give effect to the intent of the legislature. [Citation.] In seeking to ascertain legislative intent, courts consider the statutes in their entirety, noting the subject they address and the legislature’s apparent objective in enacting them. [Citation.] It is presumed that the legislature, in enacting various statutes, acts rationally and with full knowledge of all previous enactments. [Citation.] It is further presumed that the legislature will not enact a law which completely contradicts a prior statute without an express repeal of it and that statutes which relate to the same subject are to be governed by one spirit and a single policy. [Citations.]” Mikusch, 138 Ill. 2d at 247-48. The court rejected the Secretary’s argument that section 2 — 115 could be harmonized with the Human Rights Act by reading section 2 — 115 as an exception to the Human Rights Act. The expression of certain exceptions in a statute will be construed as an exclusion of all others. Mikusch, 138 Ill. 2d at 250. The detailed list of exceptions in the Human Rights Act did not include one allowing the mandatory retirement of Secretary of State investigators. Mikusch, 138 Ill. 2d at 250. The two statutes were “directly in conflict.” Mikusch, 138 Ill. 2d at 249. Furthermore, because the Human Rights Act was enacted after the amendment to section 2—115, the court assumed the legislature was aware of its previous enactment. Mikusch, 138 Ill. 2d at 250. The court considered the legislature’s failure to provide for the mandatory retirement of Secretary of State investigators as indicating its intent not to make mandatory retirement for investigators an exception to the Act. Mikusch, 138 Ill. 2d at 250. After determining the two statutes were irreconcilable, the court concluded the Human Rights Act was controlling because it was enacted after section 2 — 115. “When two statutes appear to be in conflict, the one which was enacted later should prevail, as a later expression of intent.” Mikusch, 138 Ill. 2d at 254. The Human Rights Act also was the more specific statute on the issue of age discrimination. In the case of two conflicting statutes, the more specific legislation should control over the more general one. Mikusch, 138 Ill. 2d at 254. The court did not rely on a repeal by implication. Plaintiffs’ position is not entirely clear to us. We cannot tell whether they are contending the Civil Rights Act repealed by implication the 1996 statute when they say the two statutes are “irreconcilable.” Repeal by implication is applied when two enactments of the same legislative body are irreconcilable. Lily Lake Road Defenders v. County of McHenry, 156 Ill. 2d 1, 8, 619 N.E.2d 137 (1993). A statute that is repealed by implication is legally eliminated. Lily Lake, 156 Ill. 2d at 8. Repeals by implication are not favored. Lily Lake, 156 Ill. 2d at 9. In any case, our examination of the legislative purpose behind the amended Illinois Civil Rights Act compels us to conclude there is no conflict between the two statutes. In construing statutes alleged to be irreconcilable, legislative intent is the paramount consideration. Moore v. Green, 219 Ill. 2d 470, 479, 848 N.E.2d 1015 (2006). “ ‘Traditional rules of statutory construction are merely aids in determining legislative intent, and these rules must yield to such intent.’ ” Moore, 219 Ill. 2d at 479, quoting Paszkowski v. Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago, 213 Ill. 2d 1, 7, 820 N.E.2d 401 (2004). An examination of the legislative debates helps us understand what the General Assembly was “particularly concerned with” when it passed the Act. People v. Maya, 105 Ill. 2d 281, 285, 473 N.E.2d 1287 (1985). The Civil Rights Act was introduced in the House of Representatives as House Bill 2330. The statements of a bill’s sponsor matter when determining legislative intent. Emerald Casino, Inc. v. Illinois Gaming Board, 346 Ill. App. 3d 18, 36, 803 N.E.2d 914 (2003). The sponsor of House Bill 2330 said: “Fritchey: The Bill provides a venue for individuals to bring a cause of action alleging disparate impact of a government policy via the State Courts which they presently do not have. * * Again, it’s just by way of history, there was a Supreme Court case which limited the ability of individuals to bring actions pursuant to Title VI under the Federal Act and we are simply trying to reinstate the ability of individuals to sue under the State Act. It’s not intended to expand or limit whatever rights somebody would’ve had.” (Emphasis added.) 93d Ill. Gen. Assem., House Proceedings, April 3, 2003, at 146-48 (statements of Representative Fritchey). Statements by the sponsor of the bill in the Senate further explain the intent: “Senator Harmon: *** [The bill] does not break any new legal ground nor create any new rights. Rather, it creates a State right of action that has existed at the federal level for over thirty years. *** There is no new exposure for the State, simply a new venue— State court rather than federal court.” (Emphasis added.) 93d Ill. Gen. Assem., Senate Proceedings, May 21, 2003, at 9-10 (statements of Senator Harmon). It is clear from the legislators’ comments and from the language in subsection (b) of the statute that the Act was not intended to create new rights. It merely created a new venue in which plaintiffs could pursue in the State courts discrimination actions that had been available to them in the federal courts. There is no indication in the Civil Rights Act that the legislature intended to “overrule” or otherwise diminish its declaration in the University of Illinois Act that “Chief Illiniwek is, and may remain, the honored symbol of a great university, the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.” 110 ILCS 305/lf (West 1996). Courts presume the legislature envisions a consistent body of law when it enacts new legislation. Lily Lake, 156 Ill. 2d at 9. We presume the legislature is aware of all previous enactments when it enacts new legislation. Mikusch, 138 Ill. 2d at 247-48. Given the direct language and glowing exaltation of Chief Illiniwek in the 1996 statute, we believe that had the legislature intended to repeal the provision or supercede it, it would have done so expressly. There is no “irreconcilable conflict” or contradiction between the statutes. Nor is there a need to harmonize the two provisions since the statutes are not related. The plaintiffs concede the two statutes “do not pertain to the same subject and legislative mission,” and section If “is silent on the subjects of discrimination and civil rights.” In order for two statutes to be in irreconcilable conflict, they must relate to the same subject. Mikusch, 138 Ill. 2d at 248. They do not in this case. In Mikusch, there was clear authority holding the Human Rights Act prohibited mandatory retirement based on age. The section of the Vehicle Code mandating retirement for investigators after age 60 directly conflicted with the Act, which prohibited mandatory retirement before age 70. The plaintiffs in this case assume the University’s use of Chief Illiniwek constitutes “discrimination,” as defined in the Illinois Civil Rights Act of 2003. They provide no authority for their conclusion. The plaintiffs contend the legislature’s failure to include an exception or exemption for the University’s use of Chief Illiniwek in the Civil Rights Act supports their contention that the Civil Rights Act rendered the 1996 statute inoperative. We believe the more reasonable interpretation is that the legislature did not find it necessary to exempt the University’s actions because it did not consider them to be a form of “discrimination” under the Civil Rights Act. We do not make any further inquiry into the plaintiffs’ questionable assertion that their allegations amount to a valid claim of discrimination under the Act. At any rate, plaintiffs have not shown the Act had any effect on the legislature’s clear statement of affection for Chief Illiniwek in the 1996 statute. Accordingly, we affirm the trial court’s dismissal of plaintiffs’ complaint. Affirmed.

=== CASE 9739327 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:12:17.56264+00 ===

BAKER, Judge,
concurring in result.
I agree with the result reached here because, as the majority aptly observes, Beaty was able to place before the jury some evidence of Hohler's prior misconduct at Lowe's that did not involve Beaty. Hence, Beaty was sufficiently able to explore Hohler's bias notwithstanding the exclusion of other evidence regarding Hoh-let's specific acts of misconduct.
However, I write separately to set forth my views regarding the trial court's limitation on the cross-examination of Hohler with respect to other thefts and wrongdoing by Hohler that did not involve Beaty. I fully embrace the spirit of Indiana Evidence Rule 608(b), which prohibits the inquiry into specific instances of misconduct unless there is a conviction of a crime as provided in Rule 609. To be sure, the rule produces a logical and practical result under most circumstances.
However, in this case, Beaty consistently maintained that he was "the dupe" of Hohler, while the State's position was that Beaty was the primary beneficiary of a joint plan between himself and Hohler to obtain building materials at large discounts or for free. Appellant's Br. p. 12. By limiting Beaty's cross-examination of Hohler in accordance with Indiana Evidence Rule 608, the trial court excluded evidence establishing that Hohler had an added incentive to curry the State's favor in order to avoid prosecution for other criminal acts precisely because of the plea agreement offered by the State. And, as noted by the majority, several of these acts had not been reduced to a conviction. As a result, Beaty was effectively prevented from delving into additional reasons why Hohler would be biased against Beaty in favor of the State. Hohler certainly had reasons to remain in the State's good graces in order to avoid prosecution for his other acts of misconduct during his employment at Lowe's. When the State dismissed the two counts of theft against Hohler, Beaty was denied the opportunity to fully expose Hohler's biases and motives and the chance to explore the reasons surrounding Hohler's motivation to testify as he did.
In circumstances such as these, where the State has offered a deal to a witness that results in the avoidance of prosecution, the State essentially retains the unfettered discretion to decide the extent to which the jury should learn about a witness's character. In my view, such a restriction on the ability to cross-examine does not comport with the goals of Evidence Rule 608. That said, I am of the belief that yet another exception to the rule preventing the admission of specific acts of misconduct in the absence of a conviction should follow when cireum-stances such as these arise.
In any event, because Beaty was able to present some evidence of Hohler's misconduct, as well as evidence pertaining to Hohler's plea agreement thereby establishing Hohler's possible bias, I concur in the result reached by the majority in affirming Beaty's convictions.

=== CASE 2219335 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:11.19637+00 ===

856 N.E.2d 649 (2006)
367 Ill. App. 3d 790
305 Ill. Dec. 844
FIREMAN'S FUND INSURANCE COMPANY, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
Serge J. PIERRE-LOUIS and Suburban Bank and Trust, as Trustee Under Trust No. 0904, Defendants-Appellees.
No. 1-05-3272.
Appellate Court of Illinois, First District, Second Division.
September 29, 2006.
*650 Hinshaw & Culbertson LLP, Chicago (Joshua G. Vincent, of counsel), for Appellant.
Alan R. Dolinko, Robert L. Margolis, Robinson Curley & Clayton, P.C., Chicago, for Appellee.
Justice SOUTH delivered the opinion of the court:
This appeal arises from two orders of the circuit court of Cook County entered on March 17, 2005, and September 9, 2005, declaring that plaintiff, Fireman's Fund Insurance Company, owed a duty to defend defendant, Serge J. Pierre-Louis, in an underlying case, as well as a duty to reimburse him for attorney fees and costs incurred in defending that case.
Plaintiff, Fireman's Fund, is a corporation duly licensed in the State of Illinois to write insurance policies. It issued a general liability policy to 155 North Harbor Drive Condominium Association, which was in effect from December 1, 2002, through December 1, 2003. That commercial general liability insurance coverage states in relevant part:
"1. Insuring Agreement.
(a) We will pay those sums that the insured becomes legally obligated to pay as damages because of `bodily injury' or `property damage' to which this insurance applies. We will have the right and duty to defend the insured against any `suit' seeking those damages. However, we will have not [sic] duty to defend the insured against any `suit' seeking damages for `bodily injury' or `property damage' to which this insurance does not apply. We may at our discretion, investigate any `occurrence' and settle any claim or `suit' that may result."
Additionally, Section II of the policy defines an insured to include the following:
"Each other unit owner of the described condominium, but only with respect to liability arising out of ownership, maintenance or repair of that portion of the premises which is not owned solely by the unit owner." (Emphasis added.)
Defendant Serge Pierre-Louise owns a condominium in Harbor Point at 155 North Harbor Drive in Chicago, Illinois. On July 21, 2003, members of the maintenance staff responded to a report of a leak in his unit. Further investigation revealed that his kitchen faucet supply line was causing the leak. The staff observed water under his kitchen sink, on his kitchen and hardwood floors in the dining room and hallway, and the living room, bedroom and closet carpets. The Harbor Point Condominium Association, the company which manages the building, sent a letter to defendant advising him of this condition and informed him that 22 other owners in the building had reported water damage to their units as a result of the leak in his unit. Defendant was further advised that "all maintenance, repairs and replacements in a unit are the responsibility of the unit owner, as well as any damages caused to any common element or other units," and that he should notify his insurance company and contact the owners of the affected units in order to resolve the matter.
On October 17, 2003, Suburban Bank and Trust (Suburban), the titleholder of one of the damaged units adjacent to defendant's, filed a two-count complaint in the circuit court of Cook County against defendant. Count I alleged negligence in that defendant "failed to make required repairs; failed to conform to Code of the City of Chicago; and failed to comply with the requirements of the Declaration and By-Laws of the Harbor Point Condominium Association." Count II of the complaint *651 alleged gross negligence in that defendant had received "written notice of a dangerous and defective condition indicating a high likelihood that the inferior `plastic lines used for water supply' in the kitchen of the unit were of such a defective nature that they were susceptible to explosion at any time since they were inferior to the pressure demand on the system," and that "[his] total disregard of the warnings given, and received by him, constitutes gross negligence and endangerment of the property of the plaintiff." Count II further alleged that the damages could have been avoided by the replacement of an appliance costing less than $3.
On January 21, 2004, defendant tendered the defense of the Suburban lawsuit to plaintiff. Plaintiff declined to defend the Suburban lawsuit on the grounds that defendant's alleged liability arose out of that portion of his premises which was owned, occupied and used solely and used exclusively by him, i.e., the kitchen water supply line.
On April 21, 2004, plaintiff filed a complaint for declaratory judgment, seeking a finding and declaration that defendant was not entitled to insurance coverage under the policy, and that plaintiff was under no obligation to defend or indemnify him with respect to the Suburban lawsuit. Defendant ultimately settled the Suburban lawsuit for $2,000.
Subsequently, plaintiff filed a motion for summary judgment, and defendant filed a cross-motion for summary judgment.
On March 17, 2005, the trial court denied plaintiff's motion for summary judgment and granted defendant's cross-motion for summary judgment, declaring it had a duty to defend in the Suburban lawsuit. Defendant was also ordered to file a fee petition and affidavit supporting reimbursement for fees and costs he incurred in defending the Suburban lawsuit.
On September 9, 2005, the trial court entered a final judgment and order, stating that (1) plaintiff had a duty to defend defendant in the Suburban lawsuit; (2) pursuant to the parties' agreement with respect to the fee petition, defendant was awarded $25,000 representing the fees and costs he incurred in defending the Suburban lawsuit; and (3) defendant's request for reimbursement of the settlement amounts paid to settle the Suburban lawsuit was denied. Defendant has not filed a cross appeal on that portion of the order which denied his request for reimbursement of the $2,000 settlement amount.
The issue raised by plaintiff on this appeal is whether the Suburban lawsuit alleges damages which arose out of defendant's ownership, maintenance, or repair of a portion of his condominium unit (a) not owned solely by him and (b) not reserved for his exclusive use or occupancy.
Because this is an appeal from an order granting summary judgment, we review the case de novo. Outboard Marine Corp. v. Liberty Mutual Insurance Co., 154 Ill. 2d 90, 102, 180 Ill. Dec. 691, 607 N.E.2d 1204 (1992). Summary judgment is appropriate when there are no genuine issues of material fact and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Purtill v. Hess, 111 Ill. 2d 229, 240, 95 Ill. Dec. 305, 489 N.E.2d 867 (1986). Summary judgment is a drastic measure and should only be granted if the movant's right to judgment is clear and free from doubt. Purtill, 111 Ill.2d at 240, 95 Ill. Dec. 305, 489 N.E.2d 867. Where a reasonable person could draw divergent inferences from undisputed facts, summary judgment should be denied. Pyne v. Witmer, 129 Ill. 2d 351, 358, 135 Ill. Dec. 557, 543 N.E.2d 1304 (1989). To determine whether the insurer has a duty to defend the insured, the court must look to the *652 allegations in the underlying complaint and compare these allegations to the relevant provisions of the insurance policy. Outboard Marine Corp., 154 Ill.2d at 108, 180 Ill. Dec. 691, 607 N.E.2d 1204. If the facts in the underlying complaint fall within, or potentially within, the policy's coverage, the insurer's duty to defend arises. Outboard Marine Corp. 154 Ill.2d at 108, 180 Ill. Dec. 691, 607 N.E.2d 1204. Refusal to defend is unjustifiable unless it is clear from the face of the underlying complaint that the facts alleged do not fall potentially within the policy's coverage. Outboard Marine Corp., 154 Ill.2d at 108, 180 Ill. Dec. 691, 607 N.E.2d 1204.
The Suburban complaint alleges that defendant was the "titleholder of record of unit 3110 Harbor Drive" and maintained "his premises in a careless and negligent fashion." Plaintiff argues that such language indicates that Suburban was suing defendant solely because he was the individual owner of the unit which was reserved for his exclusive use and occupancy, thereby disqualifying him as an additional insured under the insurance agreement. According to plaintiff, the factual allegations in the Suburban complaint that defendant was "required" to make "repairs" to the leak on "his premises," indicated that the damages to the other units arose out of a portion of the premises owned solely by him and reserved for his exclusive use and occupancy as opposed to some aspect of the common elements whose maintenance and repair would have been the responsibility of the condominium association. Defendant's response is that the "water supply line" referred to in the Suburban complaint is part of the building's pipe system, i.e., a common element.
In existence at the time of the incident was a document entitled "Declarations of Condominium Ownership and of Easements, Restrictions, Covenants and Bylaws for the 155 Harbor Drive Condominium Association." Article II of that declaration reads in pertinent part:
"3.01 Description. Except as otherwise provided in this Declaration, the Common Elements shall consist of all portions of the Property except the Units. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the Common Elements shall include the portions of the Building occupied by the stairways, entrances and exits, elevators, mail boxes, swimming pool, recreation rooms, and other amenity areas, lobbies, corridors, storage areas, managements offices, the Parking Area, all structural parts of the Building, pipes, ducts, flues, chutes, conduits, wires and other utility installations to the outlets, and such component parts of walls, floors, and ceiling as are not located within the Units and structural parts of the Building, including structural columns located within the Units * * *." (Emphasis added.)
The Suburban complaint alleges that the water leak in defendant's unit emanated from "inferior plastic lines used for water supply in the kitchen of the unit." The insurance policy covers all of the unit owners with respect to those portions of the premises which are not reserved for their exclusive use. Undoubtedly, water pipes or water supply lines fall under the rubric of common elements since these conduits supply all of the units throughout the building. In other words, there are portions within the individual units which are part of the common elements, which includes water pipes. The water pipes, which supply the entire building, are not used exclusively by any one unit but constitute part of the common elements. Plaintiff is not suggesting that individual water supply lines or pipes are constructed for each unit, nor would such an argument be rational. The pipes or water lines run *653 throughout the building and supply each of the units. Therefore, inasmuch as the allegations in the Suburban complaint allege damages arising out of that portion of defendant's premises which is part of the common elements of the building, we find the trial court did not err in finding that plaintiff had a duty to defend on the underlying action.
Accordingly, the judgment of the circuit court is affirmed.
Affirmed.
HOFFMAN and HALL, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 2219336 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:11.230628+00 ===

856 N.E.2d 706 (2006)
In the Matter of Phillip A. RENZ.
No. 02S00-0608-DI-315.
Supreme Court of Indiana.
November 15, 2006.
ORDER IMPOSING DISCIPLINE UPON AGREED FACTS
Pursuant to Ind.Admission and Discipline Rule 23, Section 17(a), the respondent has submitted to this Court his affidavit consenting to discipline in which he acknowledges the truth of the material facts set forth in the Indiana Supreme Court Disciplinary Commission's Verified Complaint for Disciplinary Action, filed August 30, 2006. The admitted facts are summarized as follows:
Facts: On April 1, 2003, respondent filed a petition for dissolution of marriage for D.B. The court partially divided the property and issued a decree of dissolution on November 26, 2003. The remaining property issues and child support were not resolved until July 25, 2005. Respondent represented D.B. throughout all of the proceedings. Between September 2003 and April 2005 respondent was involved in a sexual relationship with D.B.
Violations: Respondent violated Ind. Professional Conduct Rule 1.7(b)(2) (2004), which prohibits a lawyer from representing a client where the representation may be materially limited by the lawyer's own interests unless the client consents after consultation; and, Prof.Cond.R. 1.8(j) (2005), which prohibits a lawyer from engaging in a sexual relationship with a client unless a consensual sexual relationship existed when the client-lawyer relationship commenced.
For the misconduct found herein, this Court now suspends respondent from the practice of law for a period of thirty (30) days, effective immediately, with all of said suspension stayed upon respondent's successful completion of one (1) year of probation. As terms of his probation respondent is required to abide by the terms of his Monitoring Agreement entered into with the Judges and Lawyers Assistance Program for the next year, as described in his Memorandum on Sanctions filed with this Court on September 21, 2006. In addition, respondent shall commit no violation of law or the Ind. Professional Conduct Rules, and is required to promptly report any violation in writing to the Disciplinary Commission, not later than four (4) days after the violation occurs. Because the mitigators in this case are out of the ordinary, including respondent's self reporting and treatment program, we impose a suspended disciplinary sanction where otherwise executed suspension time would be appropriate. Costs of this proceeding are assessed against the respondent.
The Clerk of this Court is directed to forward notice of this order to the respondent and his attorney; to the Indiana Supreme Court Disciplinary Commission, and to all other entities as provided in Admis.Disc.R. 23(3)(d).
All Justices concur.

=== CASE 2219341 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:11.389341+00 ===

856 N.E.2d 1124 (2006)
306 Ill. Dec. 29
Wendy WEISMAN, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
SCHILLER, DUCANTO AND FLECK, LTD., Defendant-Appellee.
No. 1-04-2950.
Appellate Court of Illinois, First District, Fourth Division.
September 21, 2006.
*1129 Philip J. Nathanson, Chicago (Philip A. Nathanson, of counsel) and Goldberg & Goldberg, Chicago (Barth H. Goldberg, of counsel), for Appellant.
Johnson & Bell, Ltd., Chicago (Joseph R. Marconi and David M. Macksey, of counsel) and Shefsky & Froelich, Ltd., Chicago (J. Timothy Eaton, of counsel), for Appellee.
Presiding Justice QUINN delivered the opinion of the court:
Plaintiff Wendy Weisman sued defendant Schiller, Ducanto, & Fleck, Ltd. (SDF), for negligent representation of her interests during divorce proceedings against her former husband, Larry Weisman (Larry), where SDF allegedly failed to conduct adequate discovery on the value of the marital estate and to present expert witnesses. Following a jury trial, a verdict was entered for SDF, and plaintiff appealed. On appeal, plaintiff contends that the verdict was against the manifest weight of the evidence and alleges that the trial court made several errors.
BACKGROUND
The record shows that plaintiff and Larry married in February 1979. Thereafter, in the summer of 1980, Larry formed the law firm Goldberg, Weisman & Fohrman with Michael Goldberg and Donald Fohrman, which later became Goldberg, Weisman & Cairo (GWC) following Fohrman's departure.
In October 1986, Larry filed for divorce but quickly dismissed that action. He then refiled for divorce in April 1992, at which time plaintiff retained the services of SDF. Upon request, SDF received financial documents from Larry dating back to 1987, including annuity contracts, investment statements, and bank statements. Arnold Stein, an attorney at SDF, then deposed Larry on August 25, 1992, and questioned him about his disclosed financial documents. However, in the fall of 1993, Larry again dismissed the divorce action after plaintiff received treatment for her drug use at the Betty Ford Clinic.
In January 1994, plaintiff filed for divorce, and after a failed attempt at reconciliation, she told SDF to proceed with the marital dissolution action. Larry then filed a petition for order of protection on April 26, 1994, which the circuit court granted in an emergency order, and on April 27, 1994, he also filed for divorce.
On May 5, 1994, SDF filed a notice to produce and a notice of deposition on Larry. A limited discovery deposition of Larry was conducted on May 12, 1994, which primarily concerned the order of protection, child support, and attorney fees. Larry, however, failed to fully comply with SDF's production request for financial documents. As a result, SDF filed a motion to compel on June 13, 1994. Larry never responded to that motion and no hearing was ever held on it.
On June 27, 1994, however, Larry sent SDF financial records that which he claimed were for settlement purposes only. The documents included a handwritten financial statement of assets stating his net worth was $4,485,347, various promissory notes, and a notice of his participation in a *1130 profit-sharing plan at GWC for the 1993 year. Despite viewing the financial statement as incomplete, SDF sent Larry a settlement proposal on August 2, 1994. SDF estimated Larry's net worth to be $6.5 million based on his financial disclosures and the buy-sell agreement he had with GWC, which asserted that he would receive $1.2 million upon his departure. SDF requested $3.3 million in value of the marital estate, but Larry rejected the proposal.
In September 1994, Larry filed a motion to close discovery, and SDF filed a response that set forth in detail the documents it received from Larry and the documents it still sought. SDF noted in its response that Larry never fully complied with its production requests. The trial court granted Larry's motion and ordered all discovery to be closed on January 5, 1995, and set the trial for February 27, 1995.
Three weeks after the trial court granted Larry's motion to close discovery, SDF sent Larry another request for discovery and disclosure of expert witnesses. In response, Larry sent SDF another handwritten financial statement, dated November 18, 1994, which again noted it was for settlement purposes only. The statement showed he had a net worth of $4,312,567 but no value was listed for his interest in his law firm, GWC.
SDF asked the trial court for expert witness fees to hire an expert to value Larry's law practice. Larry provided $5,000 for a retainer for an expert and SDF hired Willamette Management Associates (Willamette).
In November 1994, Willamette sent SDF a list of documents it needed to formulate an opinion as to GWC's value. SDF forwarded that list to Larry in December 1994, and asked him for still outstanding discovery and expert witness disclosures. On December 20, 1994, Larry's attorney sent SDF a letter which disclosed expert witness Robert Robertson of Coopers & Lybrand, Ltd., who had been retained to value Larry's interest in GWC. The letter did not include a valuation of GWC even though Robertson had previously valued each partner's interest in GWC during the 1991 partnership dissolution case brought by former partner Fohrman.[1] SDF was aware of that previous valuation, but Willamette had not yet valued Larry's interest in GWC.
On December 28, 1994, plaintiff sent Stein a letter which informed him that she was dismissing SDF as counsel. In that letter, plaintiff informed Stein that he "had been great" but that she felt a change was necessary. She then retained the services of Kaufman, Litwin, & Feinstine (KLF) as counsel.
Prior to its January 13, 1995, withdrawal, SDF filed a motion to extend discovery and to continue the trial on January 5, 1995. In that motion, SDF rejected Larry's contention that his interest in GWC was of no value and asserted that Willamette had not yet valued Larry's interest. Further, SDF noted that Larry had not produced all requested financial documents. *1131 The trial court denied SDF's motion.
SDF also wrote to KLF on January 4, 1995, and January 11, 1995, asking them to retrieve plaintiff's file, which KLF did on January 18, 1995. Those files included the parties' tax returns from 1989 to 1993 as well as GWC's tax returns for those years.
Meanwhile, KLF also filed a motion to extend the discovery cutoff date and to continue the trial date, which the trial court denied. However, the trial court entered an order by agreement that Larry would appear for a deposition by January 31, 1995.
On January 20, 1995, Larry's attorney responded to KLF's notice of the deposition and the attached request for documents spanning six years by informing KLF that all relevant documents had already been produced. Subsequently, on January 26, 1995, Larry appeared for a deposition and presented updated versions of the documents he had previously provided SDF. During the deposition, Larry testified as to his assets, which included $2.62 million in a money market account with Mesirow Financial, $80,000 deposited with Fidelity, $30,000 in a personal checking account at Midcity Bank, two other accounts valued under $2,000, and an individual retirement account (IRA) worth about $36,000. Larry valued the couple's home at $580,000 and stated that it was fully paid for. He also testified that he earned $1.265 million in 1994 and provided details as to other business deals and loans, including financial dealings with GWC.
KLF was aware of Larry's interest in GWC. KLF was also aware that Fohrman received $1.2 million following his lawsuit upon his departure from the firm. The record contains a letter between partners of KLF, which suggests that the firm believed that the $1.2 million in the buy-sell agreement represented the value of Larry's interest in the firm for purposes of marital property division and distribution.
On February 25, 1995, at the advice of KLF, plaintiff settled her marital dissolution case with Larry out of court. Plaintiff received approximately $3,103,747 in the settlement, which consisted of $2,070,000 in assets and $1,033,747 in non-modifiable maintenance to be paid in varied sums over 10 years. At the prove-up hearing, Larry stated that all of his assets were set forth in the settlement agreement and acknowledged that he had made over $1 million each of the previous three years.
Thereafter, SDF filed a fee petition for its services, and the trial court ordered plaintiff to pay SDF $26,216.15 for the dissolution proceedings and $28,659 for the order of protection proceedings.
Plaintiff then filed a legal malpractice lawsuit against defendant. The trial court, however, dismissed that action under the doctrine of res judicata because plaintiff had raised the issue of legal malpractice in response to plaintiff's fee petition action. This court reversed that ruling on appeal (Weisman v. Schiller, Ducanto, & Fleck, 314 Ill.App.3d 577, 248 Ill. Dec. 143, 733 N.E.2d 818 (2000)) and remanded the case for trial.
During the subsequent jury trial, plaintiff testified first and acknowledged that she took quaaludes during her marriage because they helped her cope with her sense of loneliness. She stated that she knew she had to quit using drugs in order to "concentrate on her kids." Plaintiff received care at the Betty Ford Clinic and worked with a therapist thereafter.
Plaintiff's testimony further related that she worked as a paralegal at GWC prior to having her and Larry's two children. Plaintiff detailed her care of their household following the birth of the children, including driving the children to school and *1132 personal appointments and buying their clothes. She concluded her direct testimony by presenting and describing several family pictures.
On cross-examination, although the trial court disallowed defense counsel from reading from the 1994 protective order entered against plaintiff, it permitted questioning as to plaintiff's drug use despite her counsel's objection. During a side bar, the trial court informed counsel that it was permitting such questioning because plaintiff placed her credibility in question on direct examination by presenting a scenario of "a mother who had idyllic relationships with her children."
Stephen Katz, a partner at SDF, also testified in plaintiff's case-in-chief. He acknowledged that a full financial deposition of Larry was not conducted during SDF's representation and also confirmed that the expert disclosures in plaintiff's underlying case were not filed 60 days before the February 27, 1995, trial date, which put SDF at risk for being barred from offering expert testimony.
On cross-examination, Katz stated that he believed that a full financial deposition of Larry was conducted by successor counsel. He further stated that attorneys often agree to do discovery after the discovery cutoff date, and that he felt that the judge did not provide enough time to conclude discovery prior to the February 27, 1995, trial date.
Plaintiff then called Stein as an adverse witness pursuant to section 2-1102 of the Illinois Code of Civil Procedure (735 ILCS 5/2-1102 (West 2004)). Stein testified as to his knowledge of the law applicable to divorce proceedings and SDF's representation of plaintiff.
In addition, plaintiff presented the testimony of successor counsel Glen Kaufman, a partner at KLF, and Joseph Mirabella, an experienced divorce lawyer. Kaufman asserted that SDF's representation forced KLF to recommend that plaintiff settle her divorce case for the stated amount. Mirabella in turn testified that he believed that SDF deviated from the proper standard of care in its representation of plaintiff. However, on cross-examination, Mirabella admitted that he had not reviewed the entire record of the underlying case.
Finally, plaintiff called Michael Goldman to testify as an expert on firm valuation. Goldman intended to testify as to his report on GWC's valuation, which he found to be $7,902,000 as of December 31, 1994. Prior to trial, however, the trial court granted SDF's motion in limine to bar much of that testimony and limited his testimony as to his analysis of the 1991 Coopers & Lybrand valuation report. The trial court reached that ruling after finding that Goldman's report incorporated enterprise goodwill, which was not recognized at the time of SDF's representation. The trial court stated in pertinent part:
"But it seems to me that before I allow that to be done in this case, there ought to be some law at the Supreme Court level, and there ought to be law at the Supreme Court level at about the time that the Schiller, DuCanto & Fleck firm was being held to know this law and to apply this law and to advocate for Wendy Weisman the concept of enterprise goodwill.
So for that in mind, I will bar Mr. Goldman from testifying to enterprise goodwill, and I'll grant the motion in limine regarding that."
The trial court upheld that ruling at trial after conducting a voir dire of Goldman. In addition, the trial court barred Goldman from testifying as to a new valuation he derived following the voir dire since that valuation was not disclosed prior to trial. The court stated, "I will allow him to testify *1133 as originally planned, whatever you planned to testify on direct limited to this Coopers & Lybrand report, let you cross-examine."
Subsequently, Goldman testified that in analyzing the 1991 Coopers & Lybrand report, he took the numbers therein, carried them forward to December 31, 1994, and found the value of the firm to equal $4,155,000. Goldman determined that Larry's 48% share of the firm was worth roughly $2 million.
SDF then presented its case-in-chief. SDF first called Larry, plaintiff's ex-husband, who testified as to his marriage with plaintiff. During his testimony, he alleged that plaintiff contributed little to the marriage, which he attributed to her drug use.
SDF also presented the testimony of Timothy Cummins, who testified as to a report he prepared while he was a managing director in the "Valuation and Litigation Advisory Services Group" of Stout Risius Ross, Inc. The report concerned Larry's 48% interest in GWC, which Cummins determined to amount to $1.2 million pursuant to the buy-sell agreement between the partners.
SDF then sought to present the video evidence deposition of James Feldman, a partner at Jenner and Block, who reviewed Larry's financial information on behalf of defendant. Prior to the jury viewing the video, however, plaintiff made several objections as she argued that Feldman presented opinions during his evidence deposition that he had not disclosed during his discovery deposition or in his Rule 213 interrogatory answers (Official Reports Advance Sheet No. 8 (April 17, 2002), R. 213, eff. July 1, 2002). Following the court's rulings on those objections, SDF played the video for the jury.
During his evidence deposition, Feldman noted that pursuant to the supreme court's ruling in In re Marriage of Zells, 143 Ill. 2d 251, 256, 157 Ill. Dec. 480, 572 N.E.2d 944 (1991), which was the law at the time of the underlying divorce, it was "not appropriate for a number of reasons to value professional goodwill, that is, to try to place a number on what someone's earning potential is." He stated that he had handled divorce cases involving attorneys but had never hired an expert to value an attorney's goodwill. Feldman opined that SDF did not breach its standard of care in not hiring an expert to value GWC's goodwill or plaintiff's need for indefinite or reviewable maintenance. He based his opinion on the facts that Illinois law did not require the hiring of such an expert and that several necessary factors for determining maintenance had already been established during the order of protection hearing, including plaintiff's drug use.
Finally, SDF re-called Stein to testify. During that testimony, Stein stated, over plaintiff's objections, that he had participated in previous cases that dealt with the valuation of a law firm's goodwill. He specifically referenced a trial court's ruling in a case in which he represented a partner in the law firm McDermott, Will, and Emery that disallowed the valuation of goodwill. However, the following day, the trial court informed the parties that it had reconsidered Stein's testimony regarding another trial court's treatment of goodwill valuation, and subsequently ordered the jury to disregard it.
Stein also testified about plaintiff's drug use and the order of protection entered against her. However, the trial court sustained plaintiff's objection to a question as to the expiration of the order of protection. Further, the court instructed the jury to disregard the contempt finding that had been entered against plaintiff.
The court also allowed defense counsel to question Stein as to SDF's theory that *1134 one reason it could not prepare for trial and sought delays was to allow plaintiff time to clean up her drug addiction. In doing so, the trial court denied plaintiff's motion for mistrial as it determined that Stein had a right to explain his decision-making.
Finally, the trial court permitted Stein to testify as to what he and SDF would have done if they had continued to be retained as plaintiff's counsel. That testimony supported an affidavit he had earlier filed.
At the close of testimony, the trial court agreed to give defendant's Illinois Pattern Jury Instruction, Civil, No. 12.04 (1995) hereinafter IPI Civil (1995), which discussed the sole proximate cause of a third party's act, and IPI Civil (1995) No. 15.01, which defined proximate cause. However, it denied plaintiff's nonpattern instruction 9A in which she sought to instruct the jury as to SDF's liability based on the viability of her case following its representation.
The parties then presented closing arguments, during which defense counsel stated:
"We decided not to value the firm. We decided not to get an expert. They decided the same thing. I guess Mr. Stein must have convinced them yesterday when  remember when we talked about it would be malpractice to use that valuation?"
Plaintiff's objection to that statement was overruled.
Plaintiff also objected to defense counsel's argument that the supreme court had held that contingent fee contracts and goodwill were not subject to valuation. The trial court again overruled her objection.
However, the trial court sustained plaintiff's objection to defense counsel's assertion that Kaufman admitted the underlying divorce case was a "slam-dunk prove-up." The trial court also sustained plaintiff's objection to defense counsel's assertion that "[plaintiff] has been after her husband now for ten years. She's after her lawyers relating to her business with her husband. She has gone after her husband 12 times for documents."
Following closing arguments, the jury deliberated and returned a verdict for defendant. Subsequently, the trial court denied plaintiff's motion for a new trial, and she appealed.
ANALYSIS
I. Sufficiency of the Evidence
On appeal, we first address plaintiff's contention that the trial court erred in not granting her motion for a new trial where she alleges that the jury's verdict was against the manifest weight of the evidence. A verdict is against the manifest weight of the evidence where the opposite conclusion is clearly evident from the evidence or where the jury's findings are unreasonable or arbitrary and not based on the evidence. Maple v. Gustafson, 151 Ill. 2d 445, 454, 177 Ill. Dec. 438, 603 N.E.2d 508 (1992). We will not disturb the trial court's ruling on a motion for new trial absent an abuse of discretion. Maple, 151 Ill.2d at 455, 177 Ill. Dec. 438, 603 N.E.2d 508. In determining whether an abuse of discretion occurred, we consider whether the evidence supported the jury's verdict and whether defendant was denied a fair trial. Maple, 151 Ill.2d at 455, 177 Ill. Dec. 438, 603 N.E.2d 508. We also note that in ruling on a motion for new trial, the trial court had the benefit of observing the witnesses and the circumstances determining their credibility. Maple, 151 Ill.2d at 456, 177 Ill. Dec. 438, 603 N.E.2d 508.
*1135 In this case, plaintiff alleged that SDF committed legal malpractice by failing to conduct proper discovery and to obtain expert witnesses to value the marital estate. To establish a complaint of legal malpractice, plaintiff had to prove the existence of an attorney-client relationship establishing a duty on the part of the attorney, a negligent act or omission constituting a breach of that duty, a proximate causal relationship between the breach and the damages sustained, and actual damages. Governmental Interinsurance Exchange v. Judge, 221 Ill. 2d 195, 199, 302 Ill. Dec. 746, 850 N.E.2d 183 (2006); Lopez v. Clifford Law Offices, P.C., 362 Ill.App.3d 969, 974-75, 299 Ill. Dec. 53, 841 N.E.2d 465 (2005). "`Even if negligence on the part of the attorney is established, no action will lie against the attorney unless that negligence proximately caused damage to the client.'" Judge, 221 Ill.2d at 199-200, 302 Ill. Dec. 746, 850 N.E.2d 183, quoting Northern Illinois Emergency Physicians v. Landau, Omahana, & Kopka, Ltd., 216 Ill. 2d 294, 306-07, 297 Ill. Dec. 319, 837 N.E.2d 99 (2005). The existence of actual damages is essential to a viable cause of action for legal malpractice. Tri-G, Inc. v. Burke, Bosselman, & Weaver, 222 Ill. 2d 218, 225-26, 305 Ill. Dec. 584, 856 N.E.2d 389 (2006), citing Northern Illinois Emergency Physicians, 216 Ill.2d at 306-07, 297 Ill. Dec. 319, 837 N.E.2d 99.
"Where the alleged legal malpractice involves litigation, no actionable claim exists unless the attorney's negligence resulted in the loss of an underlying cause of action. If the underlying action never reached trial because of the attorney's negligence, the plaintiff is required to prove that but for the attorney's negligence, the plaintiff would have been successful in that underlying action. A legal malpractice plaintiff must therefore litigate a `case within a case.'" Tri-G, Inc., 222 Ill.2d at 226-227, 305 Ill. Dec. 584, 856 N.E.2d 389.
The "case within a case" on which plaintiff's malpractice claim is predicated was plaintiff's marital dissolution case involving Larry. To prove her legal malpractice claim, plaintiff had to establish that she would have received a larger share of the marital estate as a result of the divorce proceedings but for SDF's malpractice. Judge, 221 Ill.2d at 200, 302 Ill. Dec. 746, 850 N.E.2d 183.
Here, the record clearly establishes that an attorney-client relationship existed between plaintiff and SDF, and that SDF had a duty to represent plaintiff. The record, however, also shows that plaintiff failed to establish that she suffered damages due to SDF's representation. Plaintiff failed to present any concrete evidence that demonstrated that she would have received more than the $2,070,000 in assets and the $1,033,747 in non-modifiable maintenance to which she agreed had she not settled the case out of court. At trial, plaintiff testified and put forth the testimony of her successor attorney Kaufman, her expert Mirabella, whose testimony revealed that he had not reviewed much of the record, and Goldman, who valued Larry's share of the firm. SDF countered with the testimony of Larry, Cummins, and Stein. On appeal, plaintiff essentially argues that her witnesses were more credible than those of defendant.
Based on the evidence presented by plaintiff and SDF, we cannot say that the jury's verdict was against the manifest weight of the evidence. Consequently, we decline to disturb the circuit court's denial of plaintiff's motion for a new trial.
II. Trial Court Errors
A. Evidentiary Rulings
We next address plaintiff's numerous allegations that the trial court erred *1136 by admitting and excluding certain evidence. The admission of evidence during a trial is within the discretion of the trial court and will not be disturbed absent an abuse of discretion. Brax v. Kennedy, 363 Ill.App.3d 343, 355, 298 Ill. Dec. 994, 841 N.E.2d 137 (2005). An abuse of discretion occurs where no reasonable person would agree with the disposition of the trial court. Brax, 363 Ill.App.3d at 355, 298 Ill. Dec. 994, 841 N.E.2d 137.
1. Testimony Concerning Plaintiff's Drug Use
Plaintiff first contends that the trial court erred when it denied her pretrial motion in limine to bar evidence of her use of quaaludes. In particular, she alleges that she suffered prejudice when Larry testified that he saw plaintiff take drugs in front of their children more than 100 times.
Plaintiff argues that marital property is to be divided without regard to marital misconduct (750 ILCS 5/503(d) (West 2004)), as is maintenance (750 ILCS 5/504(a) (West 2004)), and thus argues that such evidence of her drug use was irrelevant. She further argues that even if such evidence was proper as the trial court determined for the limited issues of dissipation and to show that she was a candidate for permanent maintenance in the underlying case, SDF failed to stay within those parameters.
Plaintiff's claim of legal malpractice hinged on her ability to show that but for SDF's alleged errors she would have received more than the combined $3,103,747 for which she settled. As such, the evidence of her drug use was relevant in assessing the effect such use had on her contributions as a homemaker and to the family unit (750 ILCS 5/503(d)(1) (West 2004)). Furthermore, Larry's testimony that plaintiff used drugs in front of their children was admissible rebuttal evidence in light of plaintiff's testimony that she was a good mother. See Barth v. Massa, 201 Ill.App.3d 19, 33, 146 Ill. Dec. 565, 558 N.E.2d 528 (1990) ("Rebuttal evidence is used to answer, explain, repel, contradict or disprove evidence introduced by the [the other party]. [Citations.] The admission of rebuttal evidence is left to the discretion of the trial court, and its decision will not be disturbed on review unless an abuse of discretion is shown").
Moreover, the record shows that the trial court sustained plaintiff's objections whenever SDF attempted to present evidence of her drug use for reasons outside the trial court's parameters. In addition, the trial court informed the jury prior to its deliberations that it was to consider the evidence only for the consideration of each spouse's contributions to the marital assets and whether it affected plaintiff's eligibility for permanent or reviewable maintenance, and the jury is presumed to have followed that instruction (McDonnell v. McPartlin, 192 Ill. 2d 505, 535, 249 Ill. Dec. 636, 736 N.E.2d 1074 (2000)).
Accordingly, we find no error with the trial court's admission of evidence of plaintiff's drug use.
2. Michael Goldman's Testimony
Plaintiff also contends that the trial court erred in limiting the testimony of her expert Goldman. Prior to trial, Goldman prepared a valuation report of GWC in which he found the firm's value to equal approximately $7.9 million based on the average of three different analyses. However, the trial court ruled that Goldman could not testify as to that report since he incorporated enterprise goodwill in his valuation. As a result, it restricted his testimony to the 1991 Coopers & Lybrand report.
*1137 On appeal, plaintiff relies heavily on language from our supreme court's holding in In re Marriage of Schneider, 214 Ill. 2d 152, 167-68, 291 Ill. Dec. 601, 824 N.E.2d 177 (2005):
"The goodwill in a professional practice is generally personal in nature, while the goodwill in a corporation might include both personal and enterprise goodwill. [In re Marriage of Talty, 166 Ill. 2d 232, 239, 209 Ill. Dec. 790, 652 N.E.2d 330 (1995)]. As we recognized in Talty, the duplication of the factors set forth in section 503(d) of the Act is limited to personal goodwill and does not extend to enterprise goodwill. Talty, 166 Ill.2d at 239-40 [209 Ill. Dec. 790, 652 N.E.2d 330]."
In making its ruling in the instant case, the trial court reviewed case law concerning the valuation of goodwill, including the supreme court's decision in Schneider. The trial court then noted that the governing law at the time of the underlying divorce proceedings was the supreme court's holding in In re Marriage of Zells, 143 Ill.2d at 256, 157 Ill. Dec. 480, 572 N.E.2d 944, which determined that since goodwill was reflected in maintenance and support awards, additional consideration of it as a divisible asset was "duplicative and improper." That ruling, however, addressed only personal goodwill, not enterprise goodwill.
As discussed in Schneider, the concept of enterprise goodwill was first recognized in Talty, which was filed on June 22, 1995. In this case, plaintiff discharged SDF on December 28, 1994. KLF and plaintiff settled the dissolution action on February 25, 1995. For plaintiff to prevail, she had to show that SDF's negligent act or omission proximately caused damage to her. As the concept of enterprise goodwill was not recognized until Talty in June of 1995, SDF was not negligent in failing to value Larry's enterprise goodwill in his law firm when SDF represented plaintiff in 1994. An inability to foretell the future cannot provide a basis to find an attorney liable for malpractice. Based on this same reasoning, the trial court deemed it improper to consider enterprise goodwill and, thus, barred Goldman from testifying as to much of his report which relied heavily on enterprise goodwill in valuing GWC.
Plaintiff counters in this court that the $7.9 million figure proposed by Goldman did not include goodwill value, and thus, the trial court's ruling was erroneous. For support, she cites Goldman's report, which states, "we have estimated the Fair Market Value of 100% of Goldberg, Weisman, & Cairo as of December 31, 1994 to be $7,902,000 before adjusting for different components of Goodwill."
Plaintiff misreads Goldman's report. The next line of the report reads, "As shown in the Capitalization of Excess Earnings section, approximately 94% of the value of the Firm lies in Goodwill." The report then indicates that the value of the firm is $7,159,000 when personal goodwill is subtracted from the overall value. Goldman's report further states that 94% of the $7.9 million valuation consisted of goodwill and 90% of that goodwill was enterprise goodwill. Since enterprise goodwill was not a recognizable element of distribution at the time of the underlying divorce (see In re Marriage of Head, 273 Ill.App.3d 404, 409, 210 Ill. Dec. 270, 652 N.E.2d 1246 (1995)), it was inappropriate to consider it in determining the value of GWC for purposes of this legal malpractice action.[2]
*1138 For these reasons, we find that the trial court properly limited Goldman's testimony.
3. Arnold Stein's Testimony
Plaintiff also alleges that the trial court erred in its rulings on Stein's testimony. Specifically, she challenges three points of his testimony.
a. Testimony Regarding Unrelated Divorce Case
Plaintiff first contends that the trial court erred where Stein testified as to a trial court's ruling on the valuation of goodwill in an unrelated divorce case he had handled. Plaintiff argues that not only was the testimony irrelevant and hearsay, but that Stein testified falsely because records show that the noted case occurred after plaintiff's case, and thus, he violated the trial court's pretrial order barring testimony to events that occurred after February 25, 1995.
We, however, find no error. The record shows that although the trial court initially overruled plaintiff's objections to that testimony, the trial court instructed the jury to disregard that portion of Stein's testimony the following day, thereby curing any defect. See Kass v. Resurrection Medical Center, 316 Ill.App.3d 1108, 1114, 250 Ill. Dec. 194, 738 N.E.2d 158 (2000) ("we note that sustaining an objection and ordering an improper comment stricken generally is a prompt cure for any prejudicial impact that may have been caused"). Further, unlike the cases plaintiff relies upon in her brief, the record fails to show that Stein's testimony was an attempt to defraud the court or that it was material to the case.
Nonetheless, even if the brief injection of that testimony was erroneous, it was harmless given plaintiff's failure to establish damages resulting from SDF's representation.
b. Testimony of Plaintiff's Alleged Comparative Fault
Plaintiff also contends that the trial court erred by denying her motion in limine to bar Stein from testifying that plaintiff did not cooperate during trial preparations. She argues that it was an inappropriate opinion as to comparative fault that was not disclosed during discovery pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 213 (Official Reports Advance Sheet No. 8 (April 17, 2002), R. 213, eff. July 1, 2002), and thus, its admission at trial resulted in prejudice, particularly when Stein mentioned a contempt order against her in the underlying action.
The record, however, shows that the trial court did not allow the evidence of plaintiff's conduct to show comparative fault. Rather, the trial court permitted it for the limited purpose of allowing SDF to explain its legal theory for filing a motion to extend the trial date. Plaintiff fails to cite any cases that assert SDF could not have presented evidence explaining its reasoning for decisions made in the handling of plaintiff's marital dissolution.
In addition, the trial court explicitly stated that evidence of plaintiff's conduct did not constitute evidence of comparative fault, and it did not provide the jury with an instruction that comparative fault could be considered. The trial court also informed the jury to disregard Stein's testimony regarding a contempt order against plaintiff in the marital dissolution action. Thus, we find no error in the trial court's ruling.
*1139 c. Testimony as to Stein's Intentions
Plaintiff further contends that the trial court erred by denying her motion in limine to bar Stein's intentions as to what SDF would have done if plaintiff had not dismissed the firm as counsel. She argues that such evidence, which SDF introduced through an affidavit signed by Stein and Stein's testimony at trial, was speculative and violated Supreme Court Rule 213 (Official Reports Advance Sheet No. 8 (April 17, 2002), R. 213, eff. July 1, 2002) because it contained previously undisclosed opinions. We disagree.
We first note that plaintiff contends that Stein's affidavit and testimony were speculative. In making that argument, she erroneously relies on Soto v. Gaytan, 313 Ill.App.3d 137, 245 Ill. Dec. 769, 728 N.E.2d 1126 (2000). In Soto, 313 Ill.App.3d at 148, 245 Ill. Dec. 769, 728 N.E.2d 1126, the appellate court held that the trial court improperly allowed the opinion testimony of a treating physician as to the permanency of the plaintiff's injuries where a substantial time had passed between the physician's last examination of plaintiff and the date of trial. In the instant case, however, Stein's affidavit and testimony did not provide an opinion. Rather, as SDF contends, the evidence provided factual considerations of plaintiff's case based on the existing law at the time of the marital dissolution. As such, we determine that the evidence was not speculative.
In so ruling, we also find that Stein's testimony as to SDF's plan for handling plaintiff's case was similar to that of an occurrence witness. See Hernandez v. Paschen Contractors, Inc., 335 Ill. App. 3d 936, 945-946, 269 Ill. Dec. 893, 781 N.E.2d 1083 (2002) (trial court did not err in allowing witness to testify as to factual observations where witness was disclosed as a factual witness but not deposed prior to trial and court instructed him not to provide any opinion during his testimony). As such, unlike Clayton v. County of Cook, 346 Ill.App.3d 367, 281 Ill. Dec. 854, 805 N.E.2d 222 (2004), upon which plaintiff also relies, Stein did not provide opinion testimony for which SDF had to disclose the bases therefor in its answers to plaintiff's interrogatories. Consequently, SDF did not violate Supreme Court Rule 213 where the record shows that it did disclose that Stein would testify as to SDF's representation of plaintiff in its October 20, 2003, answer to plaintiff's interrogatories. See Official Reports Advance Sheet No. 8 (April 17, 2002), R. 213(f)(1), eff. July 1, 2002.
Moreover, we agree with the trial court that Stein had a right to testify as to what SDF planned to do if plaintiff had not discharged the firm since plaintiff repeatedly alleged in her complaint and in court that SDF's representation rendered her claim no longer viable. Nonetheless, we again note that even if any error had occurred, it was harmless where defendant failed to establish that damages resulted from SDF's representation.
4. James Feldman's Opinion Testimony
We next address plaintiff's contention that the trial court should have excluded portions of Feldman's testimony, because they contained opinions that were not disclosed during his discovery deposition or in his answers to Supreme Court Rule 213 interrogatories. Plaintiff, however, makes little effort to develop this argument. Rather, she merely makes numerous citations to a portion of the record that spans well over 100 pages and then concludes that, pursuant to Clayton, 346 Ill. App.3d at 367, 281 Ill. Dec. 854, 805 N.E.2d 222, the trial court should have sustained her objections.
*1140 We find that plaintiff's cursory argument does not meet the standard of Supreme Court Rule 341(e)(7) (188 Ill.2d R. 341(e)(7)), which requires plaintiff to put forth reasons for her argument. We need not sift through the record to find support for plaintiff's contention. See Mikrut v. First Bank of Oak Park, 359 Ill. App. 3d 37, 52, 295 Ill. Dec. 225, 832 N.E.2d 376 (2005). Thus, we conclude that the lack of development of this issue results in its waiver. Tri-G, Inc. v. Burke, Bosselman, & Weaver, 353 Ill.App.3d 197, 220, 288 Ill. Dec. 580, 817 N.E.2d 1230 (2004), aff'd in part & rev'd in part, 222 Ill. 2d 218, 305 Ill. Dec. 584, 856 N.E.2d 389 (2006) (reversing the award of punitive damages and entering a remittitur on the compensatory damage award).
Nonetheless, given the other evidence in this case, any error in the admission of such evidence would have been harmless.
5. Evidence of Settlement
Plaintiff's final contention as to the admission of evidence concerns evidence of KLF settling her marital dissolution case. She argues that such evidence should have been excluded because her case was no longer viable when KLF took over for SDF.
We initially note that, in making her argument, plaintiff again attacks Feldman's testimony. We have already dismissed that argument above, and do so here.
Plaintiff relies on Mitchell v. Schain, Fursel & Burney, Ltd., 332 Ill. App. 3d 618, 266 Ill. Dec. 122, 773 N.E.2d 1192 (2002), to support her argument that her case was no longer viable. In Mitchell, this court affirmed the trial court's summary judgment for the plaintiff's original counsel in a legal malpractice action. That ruling stemmed from this court's determination that the plaintiff's underlying cause of action was still viable when plaintiff terminated his original counsel's representation. This court noted that although the original counsel may have provided subpar representation, the statute of limitations on the plaintiff's claim had two years before expiration prior to the plaintiff hiring successor counsel. Thus, this court determined that the original counsel was not the proximate cause of damages plaintiff suffered when her underlying cause of action expired.
Plaintiff argues that unlike the plaintiff's case in Mitchell, her case was no longer viable after she dismissed SDF. We disagree.
Plaintiff dismissed SDF on December 28, 1994. KLF and plaintiff then settled the marital dissolution case on February 25, 1995. The record shows that the statute of limitations had not expired prior to KLF's representation and that nothing prohibited plaintiff from pursuing further litigation. KLF possessed detailed information of Larry's financial worth to proceed with the divorce action. Although, as plaintiff notes, Larry had disclosed financial documents for settlement purposes only, the documents informed KLF that he had substantial assets worth over $4 million. In addition, KLF deposed Larry as to his financial holdings after SDF's dismissal and KLF knew of GWC's buy-sell agreement, which set the valuation of Larry's share in GWC at $1.2 million. Viewing that evidence, combined with plaintiff's testimony, we conclude that KLF had sufficient evidence to proceed in the marital dissolution action against Larry if plaintiff had wanted to do so. As such, the underlying cause of action was still viable upon SDF's dismissal.
In reaching that conclusion, we note that a settlement by successor counsel does not necessarily bar a malpractice action against prior counsel. McCarthy v. *1141 Pedersen & Houpt, 250 Ill.App.3d 166, 172, 190 Ill. Dec. 228, 621 N.E.2d 97 (1993). An attorney malpractice action should be allowed where the plaintiff can show that she settled for a lesser amount than she could reasonably expect absent the malpractice. Webb v. Damisch, 362 Ill.App.3d 1032, 1042, 299 Ill. Dec. 401, 842 N.E.2d 140 (2005).
Having concluded that this case was still viable after SDF's dismissal, and considering the holdings in McCarthy and Webb, we find that the trial court did not err by permitting evidence of KLF's settlement. This evidence countered plaintiff's contention that SDF's representation was the proximate cause of her not receiving a greater share of the marital estate. Further, the jury would have needed to consider the amount of the settlement in order to determine whether plaintiff settled for a lesser amount than she reasonably could have expected absent SDF's alleged malpractice.
III. Trial Court's Jury Instructions
We next address plaintiff's contention that the trial court erred in ruling on jury instructions where it provided defendant's long form of IPI Civil (1995) No. 12.04 but refused to give plaintiff's nonpattern instruction on the issue of viability. The decision as to which jury instructions to use falls within the discretion of the trial court, which a reviewing court will not disturb absent an abuse of that discretion. Stift v. Lizzadro, 362 Ill. App. 3d 1019, 1025-1026, 298 Ill. Dec. 983, 841 N.E.2d 126 (2005). Generally, the standard for determining the adequacy of jury instructions is whether they were sufficiently clear so as not to mislead the jury, while simultaneously stating the law fairly and correctly. Baier v. Bostitch, 243 Ill. App. 3d 195, 207, 183 Ill. Dec. 455, 611 N.E.2d 1103 (1993). A new trial will only be granted where the instructions were faulty and misled the jury so as to result in prejudice to appellant. Bostitch, 243 Ill. App.3d at 207, 183 Ill. Dec. 455, 611 N.E.2d 1103.
A. Issue of Foreseeability
Plaintiff first contends that the trial court erred by giving defendant's long form instruction on sole proximate cause, IPI Civil (1995) No. 12.04. That instruction stated:
"More than one person may be to blame for causing an injury. If you decide that the defendant was negligent and that their negligence was a proximate cause of injury to the plaintiff, it is not a defense that some third person who is not a party to the suit may also have been to blame.
However, if you decide that the sole proximate cause of injury to the plaintiff was the conduct of some person other than the defendant, then your verdict should be for the defendant." IPI Civil (1995) No. 12.04.
On appeal, plaintiff relies on Dugan v. Sears, Roebuck & Co., 113 Ill. App. 3d 740, 73 Ill. Dec. 320, 454 N.E.2d 64 (1983), to argue that the instruction as given was erroneous because it did not include the concept of foreseeability. In Dugan, this court held that a jury verdict for the defendant on a strict liability claim was not against the manifest weight of the evidence where it found that the intervention of a third party was the sole proximate cause of the injury. In so ruling, this court determined that the jury could have reasonably determined that the third party's behavior was not so foreseeable that the defendant could have taken action to prevent the superceding cause. Dugan, 113 Ill.App.3d at 744, 73 Ill. Dec. 320, 454 N.E.2d 64.
*1142 We find, however, that Dugan provides little support for plaintiff's argument in this case. Although Dugan examined the concept of foreseeability in determining whether a third party's superceding actions constituted proximate cause, it did not do so within the context of jury instructions. As such, we reject plaintiff's invitation to extend the holding in Dugan so as to require reversal in this case where the trial court provided the jury with IPI Civil (1995) No. 12.04 without incorporating the concept of foreseeability.
Moreover, IPI Civil (1995) No. 15.01, which the trial court also gave the jury, provided:
"When I use the expression `proximate cause,' I mean any cause which, in natural or probable sequence, produced the injury complained of. It need not be the only cause, nor the last or nearest cause. It is sufficient if it concurs with some other cause acting at the same time, which in combination with it, causes the injury." IPI Civil (1995) No. 15.01.
Where that instruction spoke of a cause that is "in natural or probable sequence," it incorporated the concept of foreseeability. Pursuant to IPI Civil (1995) No. 15.01, the jury could have found that SDF's actions or inactions were a proximate cause of any damages plaintiff sustained. The fact that the jury found for SDF does not mean that the instructions were erroneous.
As such, we find that the trial court provided the jury with instructions that fairly and accurately stated the law and, thus, find no reversible error.
B. Instruction on Issue of Viability
Plaintiff's second jury instruction contention is that the trial court erred in refusing to give her nonpattern instruction on the issue of viability. In her brief, she contends that the instruction was "designed to instruct the jury along the lines of the case of [Mitchell] where the issue was whether the settlement reached by the second law firm broke the chain causation as to the alleged negligence of the first law firm." In her reply brief, plaintiff further asserts that this court's recent ruling in Lopez v. Clifford Law Offices, P.C., 362 Ill.App.3d 969, 299 Ill. Dec. 53, 841 N.E.2d 465 (2005), which affirmed the use of the viability standard, increases the significance of her argument.
We first note that we agree with plaintiff that the viability standard that this court applied in Mitchell and Clifford remains applicable in assessing an original attorney's liability in a legal malpractice case. However, those rulings provide no support for plaintiff's argument that the trial court erred in not giving the jury a nonpattern instruction on viability.
A trial court is required to use pattern instructions when applicable in a civil case after considering the facts and prevailing law. Schultz v. Northeast Illinois Regional Commuter R.R. Corp., 201 Ill. 2d 260, 273, 266 Ill. Dec. 892, 775 N.E.2d 964 (2002). However, if a pattern instruction does not accurately state the law, the court may instruct the jury pursuant to a non-IPI instruction. Schultz, 201 Ill.2d at 273, 266 Ill. Dec. 892, 775 N.E.2d 964.
Here, plaintiff's nonpattern instruction provided:
"There are circumstances in which the first attorney, Defendant Schiller, Ducanto and Fleck, could be held to be a proximate cause of plaintiff's damages even though a successor counsel took over the case after the first attorney's discharge. Those circumstances in where [sic] the defendant's acts or omissions leave doubt about the subsequent viability of plaintiff's claim after the representation of the first attorney, *1143 defendant Schiller, Ducanto and Fleck, Limited, ended. It is for the jury to determine whether the defendant[']s acts or omissions left doubt about the subsequent viability of plaintiff's claims in the Weisman 1994 Lake County divorce case at the time of defendant's discharge."
We find that this instruction in large part repeated the pattern instructions as to proximate cause, which were given, but with the intermixing of facts from this case. Thus, the nonpattern instruction was unnecessary.
Further, the "left doubt" standard utilized in plaintiff's proffered instruction was erroneous. In Mitchell, 332 Ill.App.3d at 621, 266 Ill. Dec. 122, 773 N.E.2d 1192, this court explained:
"We recognize that there may be circumstances where the first attorney could be held to be a proximate cause of plaintiff's damages where his acts or omissions leave doubt about the subsequent viability of plaintiff's claim after his representation ends, such as when a statute of limitations expires one day after an attorney ceases representation and a new attorney could not reasonably recognize that problem in the time allowed."
This court then affirmed the circuit court's entry of summary judgment for the defendant law firm utilizing the "leave doubt" standard. See Purtill v. Hess, 111 Ill. 2d 229, 240, 95 Ill. Dec. 305, 489 N.E.2d 867 (1986) (summary judgment should be allowed "when the right of the moving party is clear and free from doubt"). The instant case, however, did not involve a summary judgment, and thus, the "leave doubt" standard did not apply. As such, we find that the proffered nonpattern instruction was erroneous.
For these reasons, we find no error in the trial court's ruling.
IV. Defense Counsel's Closing Argument
Finally, plaintiff argues that defense counsel's closing argument denied her a fair trial. Specifically, plaintiff references her objections to four of defense counsel's comments during closing argument as grounds for a new trial.
In making closing arguments, attorneys are generally given broad latitude. Lewis v. Cotton Belt Route-St. Louis Southwestern Ry. Co., 217 Ill. App. 3d 94, 111, 159 Ill. Dec. 995, 576 N.E.2d 918 (1991). The trial court has discretion in the scope of a closing argument and its judgment as to the propriety of comments therein will not be reversed unless they were of such character that they prevented the opposing party from receiving a fair trial. Lewis, 217 Ill. App.3d at 111, 159 Ill. Dec. 995, 576 N.E.2d 918. A reviewing court gives great deference to the trial court due to its superior position to assess the accuracy and effect of counsel's statements. Lauman v. Vandalia Bus Lines, Inc., 288 Ill.App.3d 1063, 1071, 224 Ill. Dec. 434, 681 N.E.2d 1055 (1997).
Plaintiff first argues that defense counsel's statement as to plaintiff's decision to present an expert witness on the valuation of Larry's firm was erroneous because it allegedly constituted improper commentary on Stein's credibility where defense counsel alleged that plaintiff's decision was because "Mr. Stein must have convinced them yesterday." Plaintiff further argues that the statement constituted an opinion not disclosed pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 213, and that it misstated the evidence. As defendant argues, however, defense counsel's statement was not made to bolster Stein's credibility but, rather, served as conjecture as to plaintiff's trial decisions. Further, no violation *1144 of Rule 213 occurred as the comment clearly was not an improper assertion of undisclosed opinion testimony. Finally, although the record shows that plaintiff had Goldman testify as an expert at trial, her counsel did not even comment on his testimony in her closing argument. Thus, we find that no prejudice resulted from defense counsel's comment regarding plaintiff's use of an expert.
Plaintiff also argues that defense counsel misstated the law when he stated that, pursuant to the supreme court's ruling in In re Marriage of Zells, contingent fees and goodwill are not marital assets subject to distribution and division. However, the holding in In re Marriage of Zells, which was the law at the time of the underlying case, was just as defense counsel stated, and thus, we find no error.
Plaintiff further argues that defense counsel misstated the testimony of Kaufman by claiming that he acknowledged that the underlying case was a "slam-dunk prove-up." We find, however, that any error resulting from that remark was cured when the trial court sustained plaintiff's objection and counsel admitted his error in open court. Kass, 316 Ill. App.3d at 1114, 250 Ill. Dec. 194, 738 N.E.2d 158.
Plaintiff's final argument regarding closing argument was that defense counsel "made up facts that were not in evidence" where he argued, "[Plaintiff] has been after her husband now for ten years. She's after her lawyers relating to her business with her husband. She has gone after her husband 12 times for documents." The record, however, shows defense counsel's statement did not "make up facts" where nearly 10 years had passed since the original settlement, plaintiff had sued her former counsel, and through SDF and KLF, plaintiff had requested documents from Larry multiple times during the years of litigation. Moreover, the trial court sustained plaintiff's objection, thereby curing any defect.
For these reasons, we find that defense counsel's closing argument did not deprive plaintiff of a fair trial.
CONCLUSION
Accordingly, we affirm the judgment of the circuit court of Cook County.
Affirmed.
GREIMAN and MURPHY, JJ., concur.
NOTES
[1]  Fohrman had sued the firm upon his departure, and the trial court held that he was only entitled to the $1,200,000 provided by the firm's buy-sell agreement. This court affirmed that ruling on appeal. Fohrman v. Goldberg, No. 1-93-1546, 272 Ill.App.3d 1101, 227 Ill. Dec. 904, 688 N.E.2d 385 (1995) (unpublished order under Supreme Court Rule 23). However, Robertson's analysis, which is found in the record, concluded that as of January 15, 1991, the fair market value of Fohrman's alleged 32.4886% interest in GWC was $350,000. At the time, Larry also had a 32.4886% interest, which increased after Fohrman's departure.
[2]  We further note that Larry is a lawyer and both Schneider and Talty recognized that "the goodwill in a professional practice is generally personal in nature" as opposed to enterprise goodwill. See Schneider, 214 Ill.2d at 167, 291 Ill. Dec. 601, 824 N.E.2d 177; Talty, 166 Ill.2d at 239, 209 Ill. Dec. 790, 652 N.E.2d 330. In spite of this, Goldman opined that Larry's interest in GWC constituted enterprise goodwill rather than personal goodwill.

=== CASE 2219342 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:11.430777+00 ===

856 N.E.2d 100 (2006)
Esselona Jane LARSON, Appellant-Plaintiff,
v.
PORTAGE TOWNSHIP SCHOOL CORPORATION, Appellee-Defendant.
No. 64A03-0603-CV-98.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
November 3, 2006.
*101 Jay Lauer, South Bend, IN, Attorney for Appellant.
Thomas E. Wheeler, II, Locke Reynolds LLP Indianapolis, IN, Attorney for Appellee.
OPINION
CRONE, Judge.
Case Summary
Esselona Jane Larson appeals from the trial court's order granting summary judgment in favor of Portage Township School Corporation ("the School Corporation") and denying her motion for summary judgment. We affirm.
Issue
Larson raises one issue, which we restate as follows: Whether the trial court erred in granting the School Corporation's motion for summary judgment and denying her motion for summary judgment.
Facts and Procedural History
The relevant facts are not in dispute. In 2004, Larson was employed by the *102 School Corporation as principal of Meyers Elementary School in Portage. On December 17, 2004, Michael Berta, the superintendent of the School Corporation, sent Larson a letter informing her that the school board was considering a decision not to renew her contract as principal, and advising her of her right to a private conference with the superintendent and an additional private conference with the school board as long as she submitted her requests within the required time period. On December 28, 2004, Larson met with Berta to discuss the renewal of her contract as principal. Larson then requested a private conference with the school board for the same purpose. The conference was held on January 12 and 19, 2005. The members of the school board, Larson, Berta, the School Corporation's attorney, and Larson's attorney were present at the conference. Larson objected to Berta's presence at the conference, but the school board allowed him to remain. After Larson presented reasons justifying the renewal of her contract, Berta presented reasons not to renew her contract. Larson was then permitted to respond to Berta's presentation. At a public meeting held on January 24, 2005, the school board unanimously voted not to renew Larson's contract as principal.
On August 16, 2005, Larson filed a complaint against the School Corporation, claiming that Berta's presence at her conference with the school board held on January 12 and 19 violated her statutory right to a private conference with the school board pursuant to Indiana Code Section 20-6.1-4-17.3(b) (now XX-XX-X-X(b)).[1] On September 14, 2005, the School Corporation filed a motion for judgment on the pleadings. On October 14, 2005, Larson filed a motion for summary judgment and a motion to strike certain portions of the School Corporation's answer. On November 15, 2005, the School Corporation filed a response to Larson's motion for summary judgment and a motion requesting that its motion for judgment on the pleadings be converted to a motion for summary judgment. The School Corporation did not contest Larson's motion to strike. On November 21, 2005, the trial court heard oral argument and took the matter under advisement. On January 18, 2006, the trial court granted summary judgment in favor of the School Corporation and denied Larson's motion for summary judgment. Larson appeals.
Discussion and Decision
Larson asserts that the presence and participation of Berta at her private conference with the school board constituted a material violation of Indiana Code Section 20-6.1-4-17.3(b), warranting reversal of the trial court's order granting the School Corporation's motion for summary judgment and denying her motion.
When reviewing a grant or denial of summary judgment our well-settled standard of review is the same as it is for the trial court: whether there is a genuine issue of material fact, and whether the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Summary judgment should be granted only if the evidence sanctioned by Indiana Trial Rule 56(C) shows that there is no genuine issue of material fact and the moving party deserves judgment as a matter of law. All evidence must be construed in favor of the opposing party, and all doubts as to the existence of a material issue must be resolved against the moving party.
*103 Monroe Guar. Ins. Co. v. Magwerks Corp., 829 N.E.2d 968, 973 (Ind.2005) (citations omitted). The fact that the parties made cross-motions for summary judgment does not alter our standard of review. Hartford Acc. & Indem. Co. v. Dana Corp., 690 N.E.2d 285, 291 (Ind.Ct.App.1997), trans. denied.
Before addressing Larson's contention, we note that each year a principal's contract is to expire, the governing body of the school corporation or an employee must provide written notice of renewal or refusal to renew the individual's contract for the ensuing year. Ind.Code § 20-6.1-4-17.2 (now XX-XX-X-X). Indiana Code Section 20-6.1-4-17.3(b), which is part of the Teacher Tenure Act, governs the notice and conference requirements when the governing body is contemplating a decision not to renew a principal's contract. Indiana Code Section 20-6.1-4-17.3(b) provides,
If the individual files a request with the school corporation for an additional private conference within five (5) days after the initial private conference with the superintendent of the school corporation, the individual is entitled to an additional private conference with the governing body of the school corporation before being given written notice of refusal to renew the contract.
(Emphases added.)
Specifically, Larson contends that the trial court misinterpreted the term "private conference," as it is used in Indiana Code Section 20-6.1-4-17.3(b), to mean "non-public conference," as opposed to a one-on-one meeting between herself and the school board. The term "private conference" is not defined in the Teacher Tenure Act. "Governing body" is defined as "any township trustee and the township board of a school township, any board of school commissioners, any metropolitan board of education, any board of trustees or any other board or commission charged by law with the responsibility of administering the affairs of a school corporation." Ind.Code § 20-6.1-1-3 (now XX-XX-X-X). "Superintendent" is defined as the chief administrative officer of a school corporation. Ind.Code § 20-6.1-1-7 (now XX-XX-X-XX).
"When reviewing a trial court's determination of the construction of a statute, we are not bound by the trial court's interpretation, but rather must make an independent legal determination as to the meaning of the statute and its application to the facts of the case before us." Caston Sch. Corp. v. Phillips, 689 N.E.2d 1294, 1297 (Ind.Ct.App.1998).
The first step in interpreting any Indiana statute is to determine whether the legislature has spoken clearly and unambiguously on the point in question. If a statute is unambiguous, we must give the statute its clear and plain meaning. A statute is unambiguous if it is not susceptible to more than one interpretation. However, if a statute is susceptible to multiple interpretations, we must try to ascertain the legislature's intent and interpret the statute so as to effectuate that intent. We presume the legislature intended logical application of the language used in the statute, so as to avoid unjust or absurd results.
Nieto v. Kezy, 846 N.E.2d 327, 335 (Ind.Ct. App.2006) (citations and quotation marks omitted). The purpose of the Teacher Tenure Act is to safeguard and promote the wellbeing of Indiana's educational system. Joseph v. Lake Ridge School Corp., 580 N.E.2d 316, 320 (Ind.Ct.App.1991), trans. denied. Thus, we construe its provisions liberally so that the efficiency of the school system and the protection of the public right take precedence over individual teacher's rights. Id.
*104 Larson asserts that the plain language of Indiana Code Section 20-6.1-4-17.3(b) unambiguously "limits" the private conference between the principal and the governing body. Appellant's Br. at 4-5. In support, she contends that because the superintendent is not a member of the governing body, the legislature would have added "and the superintendent" if it intended for the superintendent to be present at the private conference. Id. at 10. We disagree. While it is true that Berta is not a member of the governing body, the exclusion of "and the superintendent" does not lead inexorably to the sole conclusion that the legislature intended that the superintendent be excluded from the private conference. The legislature did not include "and the attorneys representing the principal and the school corporation," yet Larson does not dispute the propriety of their presence at the conference. We think a reasonable inference is that the legislature intended to permit the attendance of the school corporation's attorney, the principal's attorney, and if the school board so chooses, the superintendent, as they are reasonably necessary to facilitate the conference.
To support her argument that the language of Indiana Code Section 20-6.1-4-17.3(b) does not permit the presence of the superintendent at the principal's conference with the governing body, Larson also urges us to compare this statute with Indiana Code Section 20-6.1-4-14(c) (now XX-XX-X-XX), which governs contract rights of non-permanent teachers.[2] She argues that 20-6.1-4-14(c) provides a more detailed description of non-permanent teacher's conference rights than 20-6.1-4-17.3(b) provides for principal's conference rights, and therefore, an interpretation of private conference that allows the presence of the superintendent is an effort "to imply powers or rights not expressed in 20-6.1-4-17.3(b)." Id. at 11. However, though 20-6.1-4-14(c) may be more detailed, there is no language in it that either explicitly requires or prohibits the superintendent's attendance at a non-permanent teacher's conference with the governing body. Likewise, there is no language in 20-6.1-4-17.3(b) that either requires or prohibits the superintendent's attendance at a principal's conference with the governing body. We also note that 20-6.1-4-14(c) specifically authorizes a teacher to have a representative at any conference while 20-6.1-4-17.3(b) does not provide such authorization to a principal, yet Larson does not argue that the absence of such authorization in 20-6.1-4-17.3(b) implies that she cannot have an attorney present at her private conference. We are *105 unpersuaded that 20-6.1-4-14(c) implies that we must construe 20-6.1-4-17.3(b) to preclude the attendance of the superintendent at the principal's conference with the governing body. Furthermore, 20-6.1-4-17.3(b) does not contain any language that dictates the manner in which the private conference should be conducted. Therefore, the format the governing body used here, allowing both Larson and Berta to present their positions and providing Larson with an opportunity for rebuttal, is not prohibited by 20-6.1-4-17.3(b).
Having rejected Larson's argument that 20-6.1-4-17.3(b) unambiguously limits the private conference to the principal and the school board, we focus now on the purpose of the Teacher Tenure Act to guide us in interpreting the meaning of private conference as it is used in 20-6.1-4-17.3(b). The attendance of the superintendent at the principal's private conference with the governing body affords the governing body convenient access to information relevant to its decision whether to renew the principal's contract. Here, Larson presented her position to the governing body, Berta presented his position, and Larson was able to respond to Berta's statements. The governing body's ability to efficiently and intelligently fulfill its duties was thereby enhanced. By allowing Larson to hear and respond to the superintendent, her ability to advance her position was advanced as well. We conclude that interpreting private conference as a non-public conference in the context of 20-6.1-4-17.3(b) is consistent with the purpose of the Teacher Tenure Act and our obligation to construe it to promote the state's educational interests.
The parties also dispute the interaction between Indiana Code Section 20-6.1-4-17.3(b) and Indiana Code Section 20-4-8-20 (now XX-XX-XX-XX).[3] Indiana Code Section 20-4-8-20 requires the superintendent to "attend all meetings of the board except when his re-appointment is under consideration, to carry out the orders of the board, and to make all other decisions and perform all other duties that may be prescribed by law or which may fall within his power and logical jurisdiction." Larson asserts that the provision for a private conference in Indiana Code Section 20-6.1-4-17.3(b) should control because it is more specific and more recent. The School Corporation urges that the interpretation of private conference as a nonpublic conference serves to harmonize the two statutes. We agree with the School Corporation. "So long as two statutes can be read in harmony with one another, we presume that the Legislature intended for them both to have effect." Burd Mgmt., LLC v. State, 831 N.E.2d 104, 108 (Ind.2005); see also Poehlman v. Feferman, 717 N.E.2d 578, 582 (Ind.1999) ("[W]e recognize a strong presumption that when the legislature enacted a particular piece of legislation, it was aware of existing statutes relating to the same subject."). By interpreting private conference as one that is not open to the public, the principal's privacy is protected, and the superintendent may comply with his obligation to attend all board meetings. Thus, 20-6.1-4-17.3(b) reasonably may be construed to bring it in harmony with XX-X-X-XX.
Based on the foregoing, we conclude that pursuant to Indiana Code Section 20-6.1-4-17.3(b), Larson is entitled to a conference with the governing body that is not open to the public. Berta's presence at and participation in Larson's non-public conference with the governing body did *106 not violate Indiana Code Section 20-6.1-4-17.3(b). Accordingly, we affirm the trial court's grant of the School Corporation's motion for summary judgment and the denial of Larson's motion for summary judgment.
Affirmed.
BAKER, J., and VAIDIK, J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  In 2005, Title 20 was recodified. For clarity, we refer to the same citations used by the parties in their briefs and the trial court in its summary judgment order.
[2]  Indiana Code Section 20-6.1-4-14(c) provides in relevant part,
A conference shall be held with the governing body, or at its direction with the superintendent or the superintendent's designee, not more than ten (10) days following the day the governing body receives the request. If the first conference is not with the governing body, a second conference shall be held with the governing body not more than twenty (20) days following the day the governing body receives the request for a second conference, or before the end of the school year, whichever is earlier. The governing body may, in addition to a conference, require that the superintendent, or the superintendent's designee and the teacher summarize in writing the position of each party with respect to the continuation of the contract. At any conference, the governing body, the superintendent, or the superintendent's designee shall provide full and complete information supporting the reasons given for noncontinuance, and the teacher shall provide any information demonstrating that noncontinuance of the contract is improper. The conference with the governing body shall be in executive session unless the teacher requests a public conference. The teacher may have a representative at any conference.
[3]  This statute is part of the School Powers Act, of which the Teacher Tenure Act is a part, and has been recodified at Indiana Code Section 20-18-2-1 et. seq.

=== CASE 2219350 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:11.822625+00 ===

856 N.E.2d 445 (2006)
222 Ill. 2d 482
305 Ill. Dec. 640
Hon. George BRIDGES et al., Appellees,
v.
The STATE BOARD OF ELECTIONS et al., Appellants.
No. 102489.
Supreme Court of Illinois.
September 26, 2006.
*446 Lisa Madigan, Attorney General, Chicago (Gary Feinerman, Solicitor General, of counsel), for appellants.
Patrick A. Salvi, of Salvi Schostok & Pritchard, P.C., Waukegan, Richard A. Cowen, of Stahl Cowen Crowley, L.L.C., Chicago, Frederick P. Velde and Tim Bertschy, of Heyl, Royster, Voelker & Allen, Springfield, for appellees.
Justice FITZGERALD delivered the judgment of the court, with opinion:
On April 14, 2006, the Sangamon County circuit court declared Public Act 94-727, which amended the Circuit Courts Act (705 ILCS 35/1 et seq. (West 2004)), unconstitutional. The State Board of Elections and its members (SBE) filed a direct appeal. See 134 Ill.2d R. 302(a)(1). For the reasons that follow, we reverse the judgment of the circuit court.
BACKGROUND
The Nineteenth Judicial Circuit currently covers Lake County and McHenry County. See 705 ILCS 35/1 (West 2002). There are 16 judgeships in that circuit: *447 seven at-large judgeships elected by voters in both counties (see 705 ILCS 35/2, 2h(f) (West 2002)), six resident judgeships elected by voters in Lake County, and three resident judgeships elected by voters in McHenry County (see 705 ILCS 35/2f-1(c) (West 2004)).
The Ninety-Third General Assembly sought to change the composition of the Nineteenth circuit. Senate Bill 75 split the Nineteenth circuit into the new Nineteenth circuit, covering Lake County, and the new Twenty-Second circuit, covering McHenry County. The bill also added five subcircuit judgeships in the new Nineteenth circuit and one at-large judgeship in the new Twenty-Second circuit. Thus, Senate Bill 75 left the new Nineteenth and Twenty-Second circuits with a total of 22 judges, 6 more than the current Nineteenth circuit.
The House offered an amendment to this bill. Like Senate Bill 75, the House amendment split the Nineteenth circuit into the new Nineteenth and Twenty-Second circuits, and it created subcircuits in both. The House, however, deleted the portion of Senate Bill 75 adding the six judgeships, and instead directed 11 of the 16 judgeships in the current Nineteenth circuit to the new Nineteenth circuit and the remaining five judgeships to the new Twenty-Second circuit. As amended, Senate Bill 75 passed the House and the Senate, Governor Blagojevich signed it, and it became Public Act 93-541 on August 18, 2003.
While Senate Bill 75 was pending, the Administrative Office of the Illinois Courts (AOIC) submitted fiscal and judicial notes regarding the House amendment. The notes read, in part: "Currently, the 19th Circuit has seven at-large judges. A total of 12 at-large circuit judges would be elected in the new 19th and 22nd Circuits, a net increase in five judges." The AOIC's notes were based upon its reading of section 2 of the Circuit Courts Act, which ties the number of at-large judgeships in a circuit to the population of the circuit: circuits other than Cook County with a population of more than 475,000 have eight at-large judgeships; circuits other than Cook County with a population of more than 270,000 have four at-large judgeships. 705 ILCS 35/2 (West 2004). The new Nineteenth circuit fell into the first category, and the new Twenty-Second circuit fell into the second category. Because Public Act 93-541 allocated five of the current Nineteenth circuit's seven at-large judgeships to the new Nineteenth circuit, the AOIC advised that that circuit was entitled to three additional at-large judgeships. Because the Act allocated the other two at-large judgeships to the new Twenty-Second circuit, the AOIC advised that that circuit was entitled to two additional at-large judgeships.
On June 13, 2005, the SBE announced these five additional at-large judgeships would appear on the March 2006 primary election ballot. The new Nineteenth circuit judgeships were designated "Additional Judgeships A, B and C," and the new Twenty-Second circuit judgeships were designated as "Additional Judgeships A and B." On December 5, 2005, the SBE then posted a notice entitled "JUDICIAL OFFICES THAT WILL APPEAR ON THE MARCH 21, 2006 PRIMARY ELECTION BALLOT" on its website. The notice listed various vacancies, including the additional judgeships in the new Nineteenth and Twenty-Second circuits, but stated:
"The Board has received information from the Speaker of the Illinois House and the President of the Illinois Senate that a bill will be called in January which would eliminate the full circuit additional judgeships in the newly created *448 19th and 22nd circuits. The Board will accept nomination papers during the period of December 12-19, 2005 for these judgeships if candidates choose to file, but please note that if such legislation is enacted by January 19, 2006, the Board will not certify the judgeships for the March 21, 2006 primary election ballot. Please note that if the legislation is enacted subsequent to the SBE certification date, the Board will amend the certification to remove those judgeships."
The General Assembly considered Senate Bill 1681, which addressed those additional judgeships, during the 2005 fall veto session. This bill failed to receive the supermajority required for it to become effective immediately, so the House Speaker moved the bill to another reading and later reconsideration. Because this bill was not enacted by January 19, 2006, the SBE certified the additional judgeships to appear on the March 2006 primary election ballot. Weeks later, Senate Bill 1681 passed the House and the Senate. Governor Blagojevich signed it, and it became Public Act 94-727 on February 14, 2006, more than a month before the primary election.
Public Act 94-727 provided that the number of at-large judgeships in the new Nineteenth and Twenty-Second circuits shall be the number set forth in Public Act 93-541  five in the new Nineteenth circuit and two in the new Twenty-Second circuit-plus the judgeships which the SBE had certified as Additional Judgeship A in the Nineteenth circuit and Additional Judgeship A in the Twenty-Second circuit. See Public Act 94-727, eff. February 14, 2006 (adding 705 ILCS 35/2f-1(b-5)). Public Act 94-727 also amended section 2 of the Circuit Courts Act: "[Section 2] shall not apply to the determination of the number of circuit judgeships in the 19th and 22nd judicial circuits." Public Act 94-727, eff. February 14, 2006 (amending 705 ILCS 35/2).
The next day, February 15, 2006, the candidates for the new judgeships[1] filed a complaint against the SBE, its members, the Lake County clerk, and the McHenry County clerk in the Sangamon County circuit court. The plaintiffs sought a declaratory judgment that Public Act 94-727 was unconstitutional, an injunction preventing the SBE from decertifying the five additional judgeships, and an order commanding the county clerks to count the primary election votes for these judgeships. On February 17, 2006, the trial court entered an order prohibiting the SBE from decertifying candidates for the five additional judgeships. The SBE filed a motion to dismiss the plaintiffs' complaint, and the plaintiffs filed a motion for summary judgment.
After a hearing on these motions, the trial court asked the parties to submit draft orders. On April 14, 2006, the trial court signed the order submitted by the plaintiffs, denying the SBE's motion, and granting the plaintiffs' motion. This order stated that Public Act 93-541, coupled with section 2 of the Circuit Courts Act, created five new at-large judgeships  three for the new Nineteenth circuit and two for the new Twenty-Second circuit. The order then summarily concluded, without any legal analysis, that Public Act 94-727 violated *449 article VI, sections 12(a), 12(c), and 12(e), of the Illinois Constitution (Ill. Const.1970, art. VI, §§ 12(a), (c), (e)); article II, section 1, of the Illinois Constitution (Ill. Const.1970, art. II, § 1); article IV, section 13, of the Illinois Constitution (Ill. Const.1970, art. IV, § 13); and article I, section 2, of the Illinois Constitution (Ill. Const.1970, art. I, § 2). The order finally stated that because Public Act 94-727 was not enacted until after the SBE had certified the candidates for the March 2006 primary election, the SBE was estopped from removing their names or the offices they seek from the November 2006 general election ballot.
The SBE appealed the trial court's order directly to this court. We allowed the plaintiffs' motion for an expedited briefing and hearing schedule.
ANALYSIS
All statutes carry a strong presumption of constitutionality. People v. Botruff, 212 Ill. 2d 166, 178, 288 Ill. Dec. 105, 817 N.E.2d 463 (2004), citing People v. Maness, 191 Ill. 2d 478, 483, 247 Ill. Dec. 490, 732 N.E.2d 545 (2000). To overcome this presumption, a party challenging a statute must clearly establish that it violates the constitution. People ex rel. Sherman v. Cryns, 203 Ill. 2d 264, 290, 271 Ill. Dec. 881, 786 N.E.2d 139 (2003). This court will affirm a statute's constitutionality if the statute is reasonably capable of such an interpretation. See People v. Einoder, 209 Ill. 2d 443, 450, 283 Ill. Dec. 551, 808 N.E.2d 517 (2004). Our review proceeds de novo. Arvia v. Madigan, 209 Ill. 2d 520, 536, 283 Ill. Dec. 895, 809 N.E.2d 88 (2004).
Though the constitutionality of Public Act 94-727 is before us, the SBE initially addresses Public Act 93-541. The SBE contends that Public Act 93-541 did not create five additional judgeships for the new Nineteenth and Twenty-Second circuits, and Public Act 94-727 necessarily passes constitutional muster because it merely clarified the legislature's intent.
The plaintiffs respond that Public Act 93-541 did create five additional judgeships, albeit indirectly. According to the plaintiffs, Public Act 93-541 did not place a ceiling on the number of at-large judges in the new Nineteenth and Twenty-Second circuits, but section 2 of the Circuit Courts Act did provide a floor. Section 2 established the minimum number of at-large judgeships for each circuit, based on population. The plaintiffs argue that when Public Act 93-541 allocated the seven at-large judgeships in the current Nineteenth circuit to the new Nineteenth and Twenty-Second circuits, it also dropped the new circuits below the number of at-large judgeships mandated by section 2. The new circuits were, consequently, entitled to more judgeships.
We need not decide this disagreement, because even if Public Act 93-541 created additional judgeships, Public Act 94-727 clearly eliminated them, and clearly resolved any confusion about the effect of section 2 on the new circuits. Public Act 94-727 provided that the number of at-large judgeships in the new Nineteenth and Twenty-Second circuits shall be the number assigned to those circuits by Public Act 93-541  five and two, respectively  plus one additional at-large judgeship in each circuit. Public Act 94-727, eff. February 14, 2006 (adding 705 ILCS 35/2f-1(b-5)). The Act also amended section 2 to provide that it "shall not apply to the determination of the number of circuit judgeships in the 19th and 22nd judicial circuits." Public Act 94-727, eff. February 14, 2006 (amending 705 ILCS 35/2).
The General Assembly apparently felt that the SBE had misinterpreted Public Act 93-541, and Public Act 94-727 clarified *450 the legislature's intent. Our inquiry turns to whether the legislature could correct the SBE without violating the Illinois Constitution.
The plaintiffs argue that Public Act 94-727 violates the separation of powers clause of the Illinois Constitution. See Ill. Const.1970, art. II, § 1; see also Walker v. State Board of Elections, 65 Ill. 2d 543, 562, 3 Ill. Dec. 703, 359 N.E.2d 113 (1976) (holding that the SBE is part of the executive branch). Public Act 94-727, the plaintiffs claim, is "an attack" on the SBE. The Election Code provides that "the State Board of Elections shall determine whether the General Assembly has created new judgeships which are to be filled at the next general election" (10 ILCS 5/25-3(b)(4) (West 2004)), and the plaintiffs assert that the SBE made this determination twice when it certified the plaintiffs as candidates for the additional judgeships. According to the plaintiffs, the legislature cannot certify or decertify candidates, and cannot determine who is on or off the ballot.
The plaintiffs fail to grasp that, while the SBE has the authority to determine whether a statute created new judgeships, the General Assembly has the authority to create such a statute in the first instance. Article VI, section 7(b), of the Illinois Constitution provides: "Each Judicial Circuit shall have one Circuit Court with such number of Circuit Judges as provided by law." Ill. Const.1970, art. VI, § 7(b). The General Assembly has plenary power to determine the number of circuit judges; creating additional judgeships is "an act exclusively within the province of the legislature pursuant to our constitution." McDunn v. Williams, 156 Ill. 2d 288, 306-07, 189 Ill. Dec. 417, 620 N.E.2d 385 (1993). Any infringement on this power not only violates the clear language of article VI, section 7, but also threatens the separation of powers. McDunn, 156 Ill.2d at 307, 189 Ill. Dec. 417, 620 N.E.2d 385; see generally People v. Walker, 119 Ill. 2d 465, 473, 116 Ill. Dec. 675, 519 N.E.2d 890 (1988). And because only the legislature may appropriate revenues for state expenditures, there are no funds available to pay for judgeships that the legislature did not create. McDunn, 156 Ill.2d at 308, 189 Ill. Dec. 417, 620 N.E.2d 385, citing Ill. Const.1970, art. VIII, § 2(b).
The plaintiffs concede that the General Assembly has the constitutional authority to determine the number of judges in each circuit, but insists the General Assembly established this number with finality in section 2. Apparently, the plaintiffs do not believe that plenary power to determine the number of judges includes the power to reconsider because they contend that the General Assembly may not eliminate judgeships created by prior legislation. The plaintiffs rely on article VI, section 12(a), of the Illinois Constitution:
"Supreme, Appellate and Circuit Judges shall be nominated at primary elections or by petition. Judges shall be elected at general or judicial elections as the General Assembly shall provide by law. A person eligible for the office of Judge may cause his name to appear on the ballot as a candidate for Judge at the primary and at the general or judicial elections by submitting petitions. The General Assembly shall prescribe by law the requirements for petitions." Ill. Const.1970, art. VI, § 12(a).
As the SBE correctly observes, a candidate's right to seek ballot access for a particular judgeship assumes that the judgeship exists. Here, the General Assembly eliminated three of the additional judgeships certified by the SBE, and section 12(a) provides no right to appear on the ballot to fill nonexistent judgeships. Further, article VI, section 12(e), of the *451 Constitution provides that the legislature may reduce the number of judges, provided it does not prejudice the right of any judge to seek retention. See Ill. Const. 1970, art. VI, § 12(e) ("A reduction shall become effective when a vacancy occurs in the affected unit"); see also Hirschfield v. Barrett, 40 Ill. 2d 224, 239 N.E.2d 831 (1968). Public Act 94-727 eliminated three judgeships, none of which, of course, were occupied. The legislature could act without affecting any judge's right to seek retention. Sections 7(b) and 12(e) of article VI, by their express terms, permit this legislative action.
The plaintiffs assert that this result would establish a dangerous precedent because the legislature then could effectively control who holds office. According to the plaintiffs, if the legislature has the power to abolish judgeships that have been twice certified by the SBE, then it has seized the power to choose candidates, and therefore judges. The plaintiffs again ignore the fact that it is the General Assembly, not the SBE, which decides to create judgeships. The SBE announced five additional judgeships in the new Nineteenth and Twenty-Second circuits, and the legislature eliminated them, prior to any 2006 election.
The plaintiffs argue that Public Act 94-727 violates both the special legislation clause (Ill. Const.1970, art. IV, § 13) and the equal protection clause (Ill. Const.1970, art. I, § 2) of our state constitution. The plaintiffs essentially contend that Public Act 94-727 either treats citizens in other circuits with similar populations better than citizens in the new Nineteenth and Twenty-Second circuits or treats citizens in the new Nineteenth and Twenty-Second circuits worse than citizens in other circuits with similar populations. The new Nineteenth circuit, state the plaintiffs, is in the same population classification as the Twelfth and the Eighteenth circuits. Under section 2 of the Act, all such circuits are entitled to eight at-large judges. The Twelfth and Eighteenth circuits each have eight at-large judges; pursuant to Public Act 94-727, the new Nineteenth circuit would have only five at-large judges. The Twenty-Second circuit is in the same population classification as the Third and the Seventeenth circuits. Under section 2, all such circuits are entitled to four at-large judges; pursuant to Public Act 94-727, the new Twenty-Second circuit has only two. According to the plaintiffs, Lake County and McHenry County rank number one and three respectively in new filings per judge for 2004; these are the third and fourth fastest growing counties in the state. The new circuits need more judges.[2]
The General Assembly has plenary power to determine the number of judges in each circuit. It exercised this power more than 50 years ago when it enacted the precursor to section 2 and put in place a default population rule. See Ill.Rev.Stat. 1951, ch. 37, par. 72.2. Since 1975, the parameters of the default rule have remained the same, despite obvious growth in certain circuits. Compare Ill.Rev.Stat. 1975, ch. 37, par. 72.2 with 705 ILCS 35/2 (West 2004). The legislature has freely departed from the default rule with impunity, adding judgeships in subsequent acts as the need for them arose and the resources *452 to fund them appeared. See, e.g., 705 ILCS 35/2c, 2d, 2g, 2h, 2i, 2j (West 2004). Likewise, section 2 and its default rule was amended by Public Act 94-727. The legislature chose to determine the number of circuit judges in a manner besides population; this was the legislature's prerogative, and it was not limited by either the special legislation clause or the equal protection clause. See Hirschfield, 40 Ill.2d at 233, 239 N.E.2d 831 (holding that the special legislation clause may not be used to upset legislation enacted in compliance with the Judicial Article of the state constitution). The plaintiffs' argument fails.
The plaintiffs finally argue that Public Act 94-727 violates the due process clause of our state constitution. See Ill. Const.1970, art. I, § 2. According to the plaintiffs, the legislature unconstitutionally changed the rules in the middle of the game. That is, the plaintiffs relied on the SBE's certification of the additional judgeships to their detriment, incurring obligations, conducting their campaigns, and somehow obtaining a vested interest in additional judgeships that the legislature never intended to create.
The plaintiffs had no such vested interest, merely "unilateral expectations" in the face of strong indications that the additional judgeships would be subject to further legislative action. See Big Sky Excavating, Inc. v. Illinois Bell Telephone Co., 217 Ill. 2d 221, 242, 298 Ill. Dec. 739, 840 N.E.2d 1174 (2005). The due process clause does not protect such expectations. Again, the plaintiffs' argument fails. We note that our conclusion here is limited to the facts of this case. We express no opinion whether our conclusion would have been different if the legislature had failed to act before the March 2006 primary election.
Because we conclude that the trial court erred in declaring Public Act 94-727 unconstitutional, we need not address the SBE's severability argument.
CONCLUSION
For the reasons that we have stated, the judgment of the circuit court is reversed. The mandate shall issue forthwith.
Reversed; mandate issued forthwith.
Chief Justice THOMAS and Justices FREEMAN, KILBRIDE, GARMAN, KARMEIER, and BURKE concurred in the judgment and opinion.
NOTES
[1]  The candidates, and plaintiffs, are Nineteenth Circuit Associate Judge George Bridges, Nineteenth Circuit Associate Judge Valerie Ceckowski, Nineteenth Circuit McHenry County Resident Judge Michael Chmiel, Nineteenth Circuit Associate Judge Wallace Dunn, Nineteenth Circuit Associate Judge Gordon Graham, Nineteenth Circuit Associate Judge John Phillips, Nineteenth Circuit Associate Judge Theodore Potkonjak, and Stephen Haugh.
[2]  The plaintiffs acknowledge that Public Act 94-727 added an at-large judgeship in the new Nineteenth circuit and an at-large judgeship in the Twenty-Second circuit. Thus, the plaintiffs contend that the actual number of judgeships in dispute is three. The plaintiffs do not mention that before Public Act 94-727 became law, Public Act 93-1102 also added a subcircuit judgeship in the Twenty-Second circuit. See Pub. Act 93-1102, eff. April 7, 2005 (amending 705 ILCS 35/2f-5(a)).

=== CASE 2219351 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:11.863614+00 ===

856 N.E.2d 560 (2006)
368 Ill. App. 3d 310
305 Ill. Dec. 755
Theo HILL, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
PS ILLINOIS TRUST, Defendant-Appellant.
No. 1-05-4000.
Appellate Court of Illinois, First District, Second Division.
September 26, 2006.
*562 Christopher Langone, Mark Lavery and Jason G. Shanfield, The Langone Law Firm, Chicago, for Appellant.
Richard T. Greenberg, Donald C. Pasulka and Angelo M. Russo, McGuire Woods LLP, Chicago, for Appellee.
Presiding Justice WOLFSON delivered the opinion of the court:
The storage facility sold off plaintiff's property because his rent payments were overdue. That sale gives rise to the plaintiff's constitutional and statutory claims we address in this appeal.
Plaintiff Theo Hill filed a class action lawsuit against defendant PS Illinois Trust (PS), alleging the Illinois Self-Storage Facility Act (Storage Act) (770 ILCS 95/1 et seq. (West 2004)) violated the due process clause of the Illinois Constitution (Ill. Const.1970, art. I, § 2). Plaintiff also alleged on his own behalf that PS's actions in conducting a lien sale under the Storage Act were "unfair and deceptive" under the Illinois Consumer Fraud and Deceptive Business Practices Act (CFA) (815 ILCS 505/2 (West 2004)).
PS moved to dismiss plaintiff's case pursuant to section 2-615 of the Illinois Code of Civil Procedure (Code) (735 ILCS 5/2-615 (West 2004)). The trial court granted PS's motion.
On appeal, plaintiff contends the trial court erred when it determined he failed to allege the requisite state action necessary to support a claim under the Illinois due process clause, and that he failed to state a claim under the CFA. We affirm in part and reverse and remand in part.
FACTS
The pleadings reveal the facts relevant to this appeal. On August 5, 2003, defendant entered into a contract with PS for the rental of a storage locker in order to store his personal property. Plaintiff made his monthly payments for August and September. On October 17, 2003, plaintiff called PS's storage facility to inform it that he would be late with October's rent payment, but would make the payment later in the week. Plaintiff was told his account was past due, but was not told his property would be auctioned off if payment was not made.
Plaintiff was unable to make the October and November rental payments. On December 5, 2003, plaintiff called PS to check the balance on his account and arrange payment. Plaintiff was told his belongings were auctioned off on November 25, 2003. Plaintiff's personal property was worth in excess of $25,000. According to plaintiff, he never received notice that PS would be auctioning off his property in order to enforce a lien created under section 3 of the Storage Act. 770 ILCS 95/3 (West 2004).
On January 26, 2005, plaintiff called PS to demand the return of any balance remaining from the lien sale, as required by section 4(j) of the Storage Act. 770 ILCS 95/4(j) (West 2004). A representative of PS told plaintiff "I have no idea what you *563 are talking about." On February 9, 2005, plaintiff faxed PS a letter demanding the return of any balance remaining. PS never responded to the letter.
Plaintiff filed a two-count complaint against PS in the circuit court of Cook County. In Count I, plaintiff sought, on behalf of himself and a putative class of PS customers, a declaratory judgment that the Storage Act was unconstitutional "on its face and as applied" because it failed to provide adequate notice. In Count II, plaintiff alleged on his own behalf that PS, in violation of the CFA, engaged in unfair and deceptive conduct when it sold his property.
PS moved to dismiss the complaint pursuant to section 2-615 of the Code. PS contended: (1) plaintiff failed to allege the requisite state action necessary to support a claim under the due process clause of the Illinois State Constitution; and (2) plaintiff failed to allege any facts that would constitute an unfair act in violation of the CFA. The trial court dismissed Count I and gave plaintiff time to amend his claim under the CFA. Plaintiff then filed a motion to amend his complaint. The trial court denied plaintiff's motion to amend and dismissed the case with prejudice. Plaintiff appealed the dismissal of the CFA and declaratory judgment claims, but did not appeal from the trial court's refusal to allow him to amend his complaint, nor did he appeal dismissal of his conversion claim.
DECISION
A section 2-615 motion to dismiss challenges only the legal sufficiency of the complaint. 735 ILCS 5/2-615 (West 2004); Jarvis v. South Oak Dodge, Inc., 201 Ill. 2d 81, 85, 265 Ill. Dec. 877, 773 N.E.2d 641 (2002). The central inquiry is whether the allegations of the complaint, when considered in the light most favorable to the plaintiff, are sufficient to state a cause of action relief may be granted on. Jarvis, 201 Ill.2d at 86, 265 Ill. Dec. 877, 773 N.E.2d 641; Connick v. Suzuki Motor Co., 174 Ill. 2d 482, 490, 221 Ill. Dec. 389, 675 N.E.2d 584 (1996). We review de novo the dismissal of a complaint under section 2-615 of the Code. Jarvis, 201 Ill.2d at 86, 265 Ill. Dec. 877, 773 N.E.2d 641.
I. Due Process
Plaintiff contends the trial court erred when it determined he failed to allege the requisite state action necessary to support a claim under the Illinois due process clause.
Initially, we note plaintiff has not indicated he complied with Supreme Court Rule 19 (134 Ill.2d R. 19), which requires a litigant challenging the constitutionality of a statute, ordinance, or administrative regulation to serve notice of the challenge upon the Attorney General or other affected agency or officer. While we recognize the failure of a litigant to strictly comply with the rule may result in forfeiture, our Supreme Court has concluded that "a party's failure to comply with Rule 19 does not deprive the court of jurisdiction to consider the constitutional issue." Village of Lake Villa v. Stokovich, 211 Ill. 2d 106, 119, 284 Ill. Dec. 360, 810 N.E.2d 13 (2004); Serafin v. Seith, 284 Ill.App.3d 577, 219 Ill. Dec. 794, 672 N.E.2d 302 (1996) ("[m]oreover, even if the issue were not waived, we believe that [plaintiff's] constitutional arguments are without merit.") We will decide the issue, although its ripeness for consideration is dubious.
To assert a violation of the Illinois due process clause, a plaintiff must allege a state action deprived him of a protected right, privilege, or immunity. In re Adoption of L.T.M., 214 Ill. 2d 60, 73, 291 Ill. Dec. 645, 824 N.E.2d 221 (2005); USA I Lehndorff Vermoegensverwaltung GmbH & Cie v. Cousins Club, Inc., 64 *564 Ill.2d 11, 15-16, 348 N.E.2d 831 (1976). The Illinois due process clause stands "as a prohibition against governmental action, not action by private individuals." Methodist Medical Center of Illinois v. Taylor, 140 Ill.App.3d 713, 717, 95 Ill. Dec. 130, 489 N.E.2d 351 (1986).
Plaintiff contends state action was properly alleged in this case because the State of Illinois "authorized" PS, under section 4 of the Act, to violate his constitutional rights by selling his property without due process. See 770 ILCS 95/4 (West 2004). Plaintiff contends there are three distinct tests for determining whether there is state action. See Edmonson v. Leesville Concrete Co., Inc., 500 U.S. 614, 621-22, 111 S. Ct. 2077, 2083, 114 L. Ed. 2d 660, 674 (1991). Plaintiff contends the third test, the "state authorization model," applies in this case because the Storage Act specifically authorized PS to conduct the lien sale.
In response, PS contends plaintiff's failure to attribute state action to PS's decision to sell his goods is fatal to his due process claim. Defendant contends section 4 of the Act permitted, but did not compel, PS to sell plaintiff's belongings. See 770 ILCS 95/3 (West 2004). PS contends merely permitting a private actor to make such a choice cannot support a finding of state action.
When appropriate, the Illinois Supreme Court has interpreted our state due process clause to provide greater protections than its federal counterpart. Lewis E. v. Spagnolo, 186 Ill. 2d 198, 227, 238 Ill. Dec. 1, 710 N.E.2d 798 (1999) "Nonetheless, federal precedent interpreting the federal due process clause is useful as a guide in interpreting the Illinois provision." Spagnolo, 186 Ill.2d at 227, 238 Ill. Dec. 1, 710 N.E.2d 798.
To support his contention, plaintiff relies on three United States Supreme Court decisions: Edmonson, 500 U.S. 614, 111 S. Ct. 2077, 114 L. Ed. 2d 660; Shelley v. Kraemer, 334 U.S. 1, 68 S. Ct. 836, 92 L. Ed. 1161 (1948); and Reitman v. Mulkey, 387 U.S. 369, 87 S. Ct. 1627, 18 L. Ed. 2d 830 (1967).
In Edmonson, the Court noted that "in determining whether a particular action or course of conduct is governmental in character, it is relevant to examine the following: the extent to which the actor relies on governmental assistance and benefits; whether the actor is performing a traditional governmental function; and whether the injury caused is aggravated in a unique way by the incidents of governmental authority." (Citations Omitted.) Edmonson, 500 U.S. at 621-22, 111 S. Ct. at 2083, 114 L.Ed.2d at 674. However, the Court also noted that "[a]lthough private use of state-sanctioned private remedies or procedures does not rise, by itself, to the level of state action, our cases have found state action when private parties make extensive use of state procedures with `overt, significant assistance of state officials.'" (Citations omitted.) Edmonson, 500 U.S. at 622, 111 S.Ct. at 2083, 114 L. Ed. 2d at 674.
In Shelley, the Court concluded restrictive racial covenant agreements, standing alone, could not be regarded as a violation of any rights guaranteed by the Fourteenth Amendment. "So long as the purposes of those agreements are effectuated by voluntary adherence to their terms, it would appear clear that there has been no action by the State." Shelley, 334 U.S. at 13, 68 S. Ct. at 842, 92 L.Ed. at 1180. When the restrictive terms and purposes of the agreements were judicially enforced in state courts, however, sufficient state action was present to bring them under the purview of the Fourteenth Amendment. Shelley, 334 U.S. at 13-15, 68 S.Ct. at 842, 92 L. Ed. at 1180.
*565 Finally, in Reitman, the U.S. Supreme Court held a California statute not only repealed an existing law forbidding private racial discriminations, but "was intended to authorize, and does authorize, racial discrimination in the housing market." The California Supreme Court held the statute would significantly encourage and involve the State in private discrimination. After analyzing the decision, the Court found it had not been presented with any persuasive considerations indicating the California judgment should be overturned. Reitman, 387 U.S. at 381, 87 S. Ct. at 1634, 18 L.Ed.2d at 838.
By contrast, in Flagg Brothers, Inc. v. Brooks, 436 U.S. 149, 151, 98 S. Ct. 1729, 1731, 56 L. Ed. 2d 185, 190 (1978), a case similar to the instant action, the Court considered whether a warehouseman's proposed sale of goods entrusted to him for storage in order to collect overdue storage fees, as permitted by a New York statute, was an action properly attributable to the State of New York. Plaintiff initiated a class action in federal district court under section 1983 of the United States Code (42 U.S.C. § 1983), seeking damages, an injunction against the threatened sale of her belongings, and a declaration that such a sale pursuant to the New York statute would violate the Due Process and Equal Protection Clauses of the Fourteenth Amendment. In order to establish a section 1983 claim, plaintiff was required to show: (1) she was deprived of a right "secured by the Constitution and the laws of the United States;" and (2) Flagg Brothers deprived her of this right acting "under color of any statute of the State of New York." 436 U.S. at 155, 98 S.Ct. at 1733, 56 L. Ed. 2d at 192.
The Court held the New York statute had done nothing more than "authorize (and indeed limit)without participation by any public officialwhat Flagg Brothers would tend to do, even in the absence of such authorization, i.e., dispose of respondents' property in order to free up its valuable storage space." The proposed sale pursuant to the lien was not a significant departure from traditional private arrangements. Flagg Brothers, 436 U.S. at 163, 98 S. Ct. at 1737, 56 L.Ed.2d at 197. The "total absence of overt official involvement" distinguished the case from earlier decisions imposing procedural restrictions on creditors' remedies. Flagg Brothers, 436 U.S. at 157, 98 S. Ct. at 1734, 56 L.Ed.2d at 194.
Notwithstanding, the plaintiffs contended Flagg Brothers' proposed action under the statute was properly attributable to the State because "the State has authorized and encouraged it" by enacting the statute. Flagg Brothers, 436 U.S. at 164, 98 S. Ct. at 1737, 56 L.Ed.2d at 198. Rejecting the plaintiffs' contention, the Court held its cases reflect that a State is responsible for the act of a private party only "`when the State, by its law, has compelled the act.'" Flagg Brothers, 436 U.S. at 164, 98 S. Ct. at 1737, 56 L.Ed.2d at 198, quoting Adickes v. S.H. Kress & Co., 398 U.S. 144, 170, 90 S. Ct. 1598, 1615, 26 L. Ed. 2d 142, 161-62 (1970). The Court noted it had "never held that a State's mere acquiescence in a private action converts that action into that of the State." Flagg Brothers, 436 U.S. at 164, 98 S. Ct. at 1737, 56 L.Ed.2d at 198. Flagg Brothers' actions pursuant to the statute, without something more, were not sufficient to justify characterizing Flagg Brothers as a state actor. The Court did not directly or indirectly limit its decision to section 1983 cases.
Plaintiff contends Flagg Brothers is inapplicable here because the plaintiff in that case sought to hold individuals personally liable under section 1983 of the United States Code, rather than simply seeking to *566 declare the New York statute unconstitutional. Plaintiff contends the issue of whether a defendant is a state actor is not relevant in an action seeking only to declare a state statute unconstitutional.
Contrary to plaintiff's contention, however, the United States Supreme Court has noted: "In cases under § 1983, `under color' of law has consistently been treated as the same thing as the `state action' required under the Fourteenth Amendment." Lugar v. Edmondson Oil Co., 457 U.S. 922, 928, 102 S. Ct. 2744, 2749, 73 L. Ed. 2d 482, 489 (1982), quoting United States v. Price, 383 U.S. 787, 794, n. 7, 86 S. Ct. 1152, 1157, 16 L. Ed. 2d 267, 272 (1966).
For example, in American Manufacturers Mutual Insurance Co. v. Sullivan, 526 U.S. 40, 50, 119 S. Ct. 977, 985, 143 L. Ed. 2d 130, 143 (1999), the plaintiffs, hoping to avoid the traditional application of the Court's section 1983 state-action cases, characterized their claim as a "facial" or "direct" challenge to the procedures contained in the statute. The plaintiffs contended the Court need not concern itself with the "identity of the defendant" or the "act or decision by a private actor or entity who is relying on the challenged law." Sullivan, 526 U.S. at 50, 119 S. Ct. at 985, 143 L.Ed.2d at 143. The Court held the argument ignored its repeated insistence that state action requires:
"both an alleged constitutional deprivation `caused by the exercise of some right or privilege created by the State or by a rule of conduct imposed by the State or by a person for whom the State is responsible,' and that `the party charged with the deprivation must be a person who may fairly be said to be a state actor.'" (Emphasis in original.) Sullivan, 526 U.S. at 50, 119 S. Ct. at 985, 143 L.Ed.2d at 143, quoting Lugar, 457 U.S. at 937, 102 S. Ct. at 2753, 73 L.Ed.2d at 495.
The Court noted that in cases involving extensive state regulation of private activity, "we have consistently held that `[t]he mere fact that a business is subject to state regulation does not by itself convert its action into that of the State for purposes of the Fourteenth Amendment.'" Sullivan, 526 U.S. at 52, 119 S. Ct. at 986, 143 L.Ed.2d at 144-45, quoting Jackson v. Metropolitan Edison Co., 419 U.S. 345, 350, 95 S. Ct. 449, 453-54, 42 L. Ed. 2d 477, 484 (1974). A private actor will not be held to constitutional standards unless "`there is a sufficiently close nexus between the State and the challenged action of the regulated entity so that the action of the latter may be fairly treated as that of the State itself.'" Sullivan, 526 U.S. at 52, 119 S. Ct. at 986, 143 L.Ed.2d at 144-45, quoting Jackson, 419 U.S. at 350, 95 S. Ct. at 453-54, 42 L.Ed.2d at 484.
Whether such a "close nexus" exists depends on whether the State exercised coercive power or provided such significant encouragement, either overt or covert, that the choice must be deemed to be that of the State. Sullivan, 526 U.S. at 52, 119 S. Ct. at 986, 143 L.Ed.2d at 144-45; Jackson, 419 U.S. at 350, 95 S. Ct. at 453-54, 42 L.Ed.2d at 484. "Action taken by private entities with the mere approval or acquiescence of the State is not state action." Sullivan, 526 U.S. at 52, 119 S. Ct. at 986, 143 L.Ed.2d at 144-45.
The dividing line we seek to apply in this case was clearly drawn by the U.S. Supreme Court in Tulsa Professional Collection Services, Inc. v. Pope, 485 U.S. 478, 108 S. Ct. 1340, 99 L. Ed. 2d 565 (1988). There, the question was whether a provision of Oklahoma's probate laws requiring contract claims against an estate be presented *567 within a specified time period violated the Due Process Clause.
The issue was whether state action wrongfully deprived a creditor of its property rights. Citing Flagg Brothers, the Court observed: "Private use of state-sanctioned private remedies or procedures does not rise to the level of state action." Tulsa Professional Collection Services, Inc., 485 U.S. at 485, 108 S. Ct. at 1345, 99 L.Ed.2d at 575. "But," the Court continued, "when private parties make use of state procedures with the overt, significant assistance of state officials, state action may be found." Tulsa Professional Collection Services, Inc., 485 U.S. at 486, 108 S. Ct. at 1345, 99 L.Ed.2d at 576.
The Court found significant state action because the probate court was "intimately involved throughout, and without that involvement the time bar is never activated." Tulsa Professional Collection Services, Inc., 485 U.S. at 487, 108 S. Ct. at 1346, 99 L.Ed.2d at 576. In the case before us, there was no significant state action by a court or by any other state official.
Similarly, the Illinois Supreme Court considered whether the Illinois distress for rent provisions (Ill.Rev.Stat.1973, ch. 80, pars.16-34) were unconstitutional in Cousins Club, Inc., 64 Ill. 2d 11, 348 N.E.2d 831. Under the distress for rent provisions, the actual distraint was accomplished by the acts of the lessor; no State action was involved in the procedure. The court noted:
"There are numerous holdings that when a creditor exercises his self-help remedy to repossess personal property as authorized under section 9-503 of the Uniform Commercial Code (Ill.Rev.Stat. 1973, ch. 26, par. 9-503) or under similar statutes, there is no State action involved so far as the question of due process is concerned." Cousins Club, Inc., 64 Ill.2d at 15, 348 N.E.2d 831.
The question was not simply whether state action was involved, but rather whether the role of the State was "sufficiently significant, constitutionally speaking, so that one may invoke the protection afforded by the due process clause." Cousins Club, Inc., 64 Ill.2d at 18, 348 N.E.2d 831. The court held the State was not "significantly involved, where, as here, the lessor takes possession of his tenant's property pursuant to a statute that simply codifies the lessor's common law right to do this and that does not have the State carry out the lessor's rights." Cousins Club, Inc., 64 Ill.2d at 16, 348 N.E.2d 831.
In an attempt to circumvent the holdings in Flagg Brothers, Sullivan, and Cousins Club, Inc., plaintiff contends the United States Supreme Court "unequivocally" held in Lugar that: "While private misuse of a state statute does not describe conduct that can be attributed to the State, the procedural scheme created by the statute obviously is the product of state action." (Emphasis Added.) Lugar, 457 U.S. at 941, 102 S. Ct. at 2756, 73 L.Ed.2d at 498. Plaintiff, however, ignores the Lugar Court's determination that a state statute "is subject to constitutional restraint and properly may be addressed in a § 1983 action, if the second element of the state-action requirement is met as well." (Emphasis added.) Lugar, 457 U.S. at 941, 102 S. Ct. at 2756, 73 L.Ed.2d at 498. The second element is whether, under the facts of the case, a private party may be appropriately characterized as a state actor. Lugar, 457 U.S. at 939, 102 S. Ct. at 2754-55, 73 L.Ed.2d at 496-97.
In this case, there is no question plaintiff's deprivation of property resulted from the exercise of a right or privilege having its source in state authority, i.e., the lien sale conducted pursuant to section 4 of the Storage Act. See 770 ILCS 95/4 (West 2004). Therefore, the question becomes *568 whether PS may be appropriately characterized as a "state actor." See Sullivan, 526 U.S. at 50, 119 S. Ct. at 985, 143 L.Ed.2d at 143; Lugar, 457 U.S. at 939, 102 S. Ct. at 2754-55, 73 L.Ed.2d at 496-97.
Similar to the statutes in Flagg Brothers and Sullivan, the Storage Act authorized, but did not require or compel, PS to sell plaintiff's personal property stored at the facility in order to satisfy a lien for past due rent. Besides establishing the right to a lien and providing a self-help remedy by enacting the Storage Act, the State was not significantly involved in the seizure and sale of plaintiff's property. See Cousins Club, Inc., 64 Ill.2d at 16, 348 N.E.2d 831.
While we recognize the State's decision to provide storage facility owners the option of conducting a lien sale can be seen as encouragement to do just that, "this kind of subtle encouragement is no more significant than that which inheres in the State's creation or modification of any legal remedy." See Sullivan, 526 U.S. at 53, 119 S. Ct. at 986, 143 L.Ed.2d at 146. Because the State did not compel, assist in, or significantly encourage the seizure and sale of plaintiff's property, we find PS's actions did not amount to "state action." See Sullivan, 526 U.S. at 53, 119 S. Ct. at 986, 143 L.Ed.2d at 146; Flagg Brothers, 436 U.S. at 164, 98 S. Ct. at 1737, 56 L.Ed.2d at 198.
We therefore conclude the trial court did not err in dismissing Count I of plaintiff's complaint.
II. Consumer Fraud
Plaintiff contends the trial court erred in dismissing Count II of his complaint because he adequately stated a cause of action under the unfair conduct prong of the Illinois Consumer Fraud Act.
The CFA is "a regulatory and remedial statute intended to protect consumers, borrowers, and business people against fraud, unfair methods of competition, and other unfair and deceptive business practices." Robinson v. Toyota Motor Credit Corp., 201 Ill. 2d 403, 419, 266 Ill. Dec. 879, 775 N.E.2d 951 (2002). A complaint raising a claim under the CFA "must state with particularity and specificity the deceptive manner of defendant's acts or practices, and the failure to make such averments requires the dismissal of the complaint." Robinson, 201 Ill.2d at 419, 266 Ill. Dec. 879, 775 N.E.2d 951; Connick v. Suzuki Motor Co., 174 Ill. 2d 482, 502, 221 Ill. Dec. 389, 675 N.E.2d 584 (1996).
Unfair or deceptive acts or practices are described in the CFA as:
"including but not limited to the use or employment of any deception, fraud, false pretense, false promise, misrepresentation or the concealment, suppression or omission of any material fact, with intent that others rely upon the concealment, suppression or omission of such material fact." 815 ILCS 505/2 (West 2004).
A plaintiff may allege that conduct is unfair under the CFA without alleging that the conduct is deceptive. Saunders v. Michigan Avenue National Bank, 278 Ill. App. 3d 307, 313, 214 Ill. Dec. 1036, 662 N.E.2d 602 (1996). In determining whether conduct is unfair, the CFA mandates consideration "be given to the interpretations of the Federal Trade Commission and the federal courts relating to Section 5(a) of the Federal Trade Commission Act." 815 ILCS 505/2 (West 2004). In Federal Trade Comm'n v. Sperry, 405 U.S. 233, 244 n. 5, 92 S. Ct. 898, 905, 31 L. Ed. 2d 170, 178 (1972), the United States Supreme Court set out the requirements for establishing unfair conduct: (1) whether the *569 practice offends public policy; (2) whether it is immoral, unethical, oppressive, or unscrupulous; and (3) whether it causes consumers substantial injury. See also Saunders, 278 Ill.App.3d at 313, 214 Ill. Dec. 1036, 662 N.E.2d 602 ("the defendant's conduct must violate public policy, be so oppressive as to leave the consumer with little alternative but to submit, and injure the consumer.")
In dismissing Count II of the complaint, the trial court found: "Plaintiff fails to allege that [PS] did not comply with the provisions of the Self Storage Facilities Act; therefore, Plaintiff fails to allege facts that constitute a violation of the act on any basis, let alone unfairness."
Plaintiff's complaint, however, alleged PS violated the CFA's prohibition against unfair practices by failing to provide plaintiff with any form of statutorily-required notice that his property was being sold. Plaintiff specifically alleged that he "never received notice, either by telephone, in-person delivery or certified mail, that [PS] would be seeking to enforce the lien created in its favor," as "required both by the Act itself-see 770 ILCS 95/4(A)(C)and by the express terms of the rental agreement Plaintiff signed." Plaintiff also alleged PS engaged in unfair conduct by: failing to inform him of the outcome of the lien sale, or even acknowledge that it was statutorily required to return any surplus from such sale to plaintiff on demand; selling his personal property without allowing him the opportunity to exercise his statutory right to redeem the property; and failing to return to him any funds recouped from the sale of goods over and above the lien amount after defendant made a demand for the surplus.
Furthermore, plaintiff alleged PS's conduct offended Illinois public policy, as embodied in the Storage Act; was unethical and oppressive because it was contrary to well-established industry practices and afforded him no reasonable opportunity to avoid the lien sale; and significantly harmed him because he lost nearly all of his possessions, including items of inestimable personal and sentimental value.
After reviewing the allegations contained in Count II of the complaint, taking them as true, we find they were sufficient to state a cause of action under the CFA for unfair conduct.
We therefore conclude the trial court erred in dismissing Count II of plaintiff's complaint.
CONCLUSION
We affirm the trial court's dismissal of Count I of plaintiff's complaint. We reverse the trial court's dismissal of Count II of plaintiff's complaint and remand for further proceedings.
Affirmed in part; reversed and remanded in part.
HOFFMAN, and SOUTH, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9739328 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:12:25.54641+00 ===

OPINION
HARTEN, Judge.
Appellants were tried separately on stipulated facts and convicted separately under Minn.Stat. § 617.247 (1999) of possession of pictorial representations of minors. In this consolidated appeal, both challenge the constitutionality of that statute.
FACTS
Appellant Kristopher Fingal was charged with possessing child pornography in violation of Minn.Stat. § 617.247 (2000). He moved to dismiss the charges on the ground that Minn.Stat. § 617.247 is unconstitutional. The district court, relying on Ashcroft v. Free Speech Coalition, 535 U.S. 234, 122 S.Ct. 1389, 152 L.Ed.2d 403 (2002) (definition of pornographic work appearing in Minn.Stat. § 617.246, subd. l(f)(2)(iii) (2000), and referenced in Minn.Stat. § 617.247, unconstitutionally void for over-breadth), concluded that, although Minn. Stat. § 617.246, subd. l(f)(2)(iii), was unconstitutional, it was severable, and ordered respondent State of Minnesota to file notice of its intent to proceed against Fingal under the surviving provisions of the statute. The state complied and *423amended its complaint to charge Fingal with possessing child pornography as defined in Minn.Stat. § 617.246, subd. 1(f)(1) (2000), and/or Minn.Stat. § 617.246, subd. 1(f)(2)®, (ii) (2000). Fingal unsuccessfully moved to dismiss the complaint. He was convicted on stipulated facts, among them an admission that the depictions in his possession were of “real, identifiable children.” 1
Appellant Dennis Franke was charged under the same statutory provisions. He also was convicted on stipulated facts including an admission that the images were of real, identifiable children.2 Both appellants filed appeals, which this court consolidated. The Minnesota Civil Liberties Union filed an amicus curiae brief on behalf of appellants.3
ISSUES
1. Are the definitions of “pornographic work” set forth in Minn.Stat. § 617.246, subd. 1(f)(1), (2)(i), (2)(ii) (2000), unconstitutional for vagueness and overbreadth?
2. Do appellants have standing to challenge on due process grounds the constitutionality of the definitions of “pornographic work” set forth in Minn.Stat. § 617.246, subd. 1(f)(1), (2)(i), (2)(ii) (2000)?
3. Are the definitions of pornographic work set forth in Minn.Stat. § 617.246, subd. 1(f)(1), (2)(i), (2)(ii) (2000), unconstitutional for violations of due process?
ANALYSIS
1. Vagueness and Overbreadth
Evaluating the constitutionality of a statute is a question of law. Hamilton v. Comm’r of Pub. Safety, 600 N.W.2d 720, 722 (Minn.1999). Thus, we are not bound by the district court’s conclusions. In re Blilie, 494 N.W.2d 877, 881 (Minn.1993). Minnesota statutes are presumed constitutional, and the court’s power to declare them unconstitutional should be exercised with extreme caution and only when absolutely necessary. In re Haggerty, 448 N.W.2d 363, 364 (Minn.1989).
Appellants contend that the statute is unconstitutionally vague and over-broad because it prohibits depictions of sexual performance activities not involving real children. As a threshold matter, we note that, because appellants stipulated to possessing materials depicting sexual performances by real, identifiable children, their challenge to the statute as overbroad in allegedly prohibiting depictions of other sexual performances must be made under the facial overbreadth doctrine. The doctrine is an exception to the general rule that a person to whom a statute may constitutionally be applied has no standing to challenge that statute on the ground that it might conceivably be applied unconstitutionally to others in situations not before the court. State v. Mireles, 619 N.W.2d 558, 561 (Minn.App.2000), review denied *424(Minn. 15 Feb. 2001). The doctrine is invoked when “the statute’s very existence may cause others not before the court to refrain from constitutionally protected speech or expression.” Id. (quotation omitted).
[B]eeause the doctrine has the potential to void an entire statute, * * * [it] should be applied * * * only if the degree of overbreadth is substantial. A determination of substantial overbreadth requires a finding of realistic danger that the statute itself will significantly compromise recognized First Amendment protections of parties not before the Court.
Id. (citations and quotation omitted). Because appellants themselves were convicted of possessing materials legitimately prohibited by the statute, their challenge to its constitutionality for overbreadth will succeed only if that overbreadth is substantial.
Appellants argue first that Minn. Stat. § 617.246, subd. 1(f)(1) (2000), is overbroad. It provides that “pornographic work” means:
an original or reproduction of a picture, film, photograph, negative, slide, videotape, videodisc, or drawing of a sexual performance involving a minor ⅜ * *.
For this argument, they rely on Ashcroft v. Free Speech Coalition, 535 U.S. 284, 122 S.Ct. 1389, 152 L.Ed.2d 403 (2002). The Ashcroft holding, in summary, is as follows:
[18 U.S.C. § ] 2256(8)(B) prohibits “any visual depiction, including any photograph, film, video, picture, or computer or computer-generated image or picture” that “is, or appears to be, of a minor engaging in sexually explicit conduct.” * * *
⅜ ⅜ ⅜ ⅜
* * * [T]he statute * * * leaves unprotected a substantial amount of speech not tied to the Government’s interest in distinguishing images produced using real children from virtual ones.
In sum, * * * [the statute] abridges the freedom to engage in a substantial amount of lawful speech. For this reason, it is overbroad and unconstitutional.
Id. at 241-42, 256, 122 S.Ct. at 1397, 1405. The operative phrase for the Ashcroft court was “appears to be.” But unlike the federal statute, the Minnesota statute does not pertain to visual images that “appear to be” of sexual activity involving a minor; it pertains only to depictions actually representing “a sexual performance involving a minor.” “Minor” is defined at Minn.Stat. § 617.246, subd. 1(b), as “any person under the age of 18.” If the sexual performance depicted does not, in fact, involve a person under the age of 18, possession of the depiction is not prohibited. Thus, appellants’ challenge to Minn.Stat. § 617.246, subd. 1(f)(1), fails.
Appellants then challenge Minn.Stat. § 617.246, subd. 1(f)(2), defining pornographic work as:
any visual depiction, including any photograph, film, video, picture, drawing, negative, slide, or computer-generated image or picture, whether made or produced by electronic, mechanical, or other means that:
(i) uses a minor to depict actual or simulated sexual conduct; [or]
(ii) has been created, adapted, or modified to appear that an identifiable minor is engaging in sexual conduct
Again, appellants rely on the Ashcroft distinction between actual child pornography, involving real children, and virtual child pornography, involving virtual children, and argue that the Minnesota statute fails to make that distinction. But appellants *425misread the statute: both provisions pertain only to real children. ' Minn.Stat. § 617.246, subd. l(f)(2)(i), defines pornographic work to include any visual depiction that “uses a minor to depict actual or simulated sexual conduct.” While the depiction may be computer-generated and the sexual conduct may be simulated, the minor may be neither computer-generated nor simulated but must be, as defined by Minn.Stat. § 617.246, subd. 1(b), a “person under the age of 18.”
Minn.Stat. § 617.246, subd. l(f)(2)(ii), defines pornographic work to include any visual depiction “created, adapted, or modified to appear that an identifiable minor is engaging in sexual conduct.” The visual depiction must be of an identifiable minor, not a virtual child. Thus, the Minnesota statutory provisions comply with the Ashcroft requirement that a statute prohibit only materials involving sexual performances by real children.
A determination that the statute is facially overbroad requires a “finding of realistic danger that the statute itself will significantly compromise recognized First Amendment protections of parties not before the Court.” Mireles, 619 N.W.2d at 561 (quotation omitted). We cannot make such a determination and, accordingly, we conclude that the statute is not unconstitutionally overbroad.4
2. Due Process: Standing
We review de novo the legal issue of standing. Nash v. Wollan, 656 N.W.2d 585, 588 (Minn.App.2003) (citing Frost-Benco Elec. Ass’n v. Minn. Pub. Utils. Comm’n, 358 N.W.2d 639, 642 ,(Minn.1984)), review denied (Minn. 29 Apr. 2003). Appellants raise three due process challenges to the constitutionality of Minn. St'at. § 617.246, subd. 1(f). - First, appellants claim it lacks an “innocent downloading” defense, but neither appellant meets the “innocent downloader” standard. See 18 U.S.C. § 2252(c) (2000) (innocent down-loaders must take prompt steps to destroy visual depictions or-report the matter to law enforcement agency). Second, appellants claim that, it lacks an exception for those possessing a small number of works, but appellants stipulated to - possessing large numbers of works. Finally, appellants argue that the statute violates due process because it lacks a scienter requirement as to the age of the persons depicted, but neither appellant has claimed not knowing that the persons depicted were minors.
Those to whom a-statute may constitutionally be applied lack standing to challenge that statute on the ground that it might conceivably be applied unconstitutionally to others in situations not before the court. Mireles, 619 N.W.2d at 561. Thus, appellants lack standing to raise their due process challenges. Nevertheless, we review those challenges in the interests of justice. See Minn. R. CivApp. P.. 103.04 (permitting appellate review of any matter as the interests of justice may require).
3. Due Process Challenges
a. “Innocent Downloading” Defense and Scienter Requirement
Appellants contend that Minn. Stat. § 617.247 (2000) is unconstitutional *426because it would reach, an individual who inadvertently or accidentally downloaded “what he or- she thought was a legitimate site” but discovered that it contained child pornography. Appellants misread the statute. It provides that only those “knowing or with reasoh to know [a work’s] content and character” can be found guilty of possession of a pornographic work. Minn.Stat. § 617.247, subd. 4. The relevant definition of “pornographic work” at Minn.Stat. § 617.246, subd. 1(f), refers to depictions of sexual activity involving minors. Therefore, those who neither knew nor had reason to know that a site contained child pornography or depicted real children would not be at risk under the statute.
b. “Small Number” Defense
Appellants cite 18 U.S.C. § 2252A(d) (2000), which provides an affirmative defense for a defendant who pos- ' sesses fewer than three images and promptly either takes reasonable steps to destroy them or reports the matter to a law enforcement agency and provides access to the images. Appellants argue that, because no Minnesota statute provides this affirmative defense, the Minnesota statutes violate due process. But appellants offer no support for the view that state statutes violate due process if they fail to provide the affirmative defenses provided in federal statutes, and they cite no statute or caselaw constitutionally requiring the existence of such an affirmative defense.
Appellants’ due process challenges fail.
DECISION
MinmStat. § 617.246, subd. 1(f)(1), (2)(i), (2)(ii) (2000), are not substantially over-broad because they refer only to depictions of minors, or persons under the age of 18, and not of virtual or imaginary children. The statute does not violate due process because it excludes innocent viewing and accidental downloading.
Affirmed.
. Fingal stipulated to possession and control of a computer and hard drive that contained "11 videos and at least 37 non-video images that depicted children engaged in sexual conduct.”
. Franke stipulated to possession of six three-ring binders containing approximately 800 to 1,000 images per binder of unclothed juvenile males, many of whom are prepubescent, depicted in sexually explicit poses or engaged in sexual conduct, or both.
.The state points out that parts of the amicus curiae brief address issues not raised by appellants. We agree that these issues are not properly before the court. Amici curiae may not raise statutory constitutionality issues not raised by the parties. City of Minneapolis v. Church Universal and Triumphant, 339 N.W.2d 880, 890 n. 3 (Minn.1983).
. We note also that the statute meets none' of the four criteria the Supreme Court has identified as justifying facial overbreadth challenges: (1) statute seeks to regulate only spoken words; (2) statute purports to regulate the time, place, and manner of expressive and communicative conduct; (3) statute limiting right of association might burden innocent associations; and (4) statute requires official approval for protected conduct that is granted at the discretion of local officials. Mireles, 619 N.W.2d at 561-62 (quoting Broadrick v. Oklahoma, 413 U.S. 601, 611-13) 93 S.Ct. 2908, 2916, 37 L.Ed.2d 830 (1973)).