=== CASE 9738591 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:57:37.325622+00 ===

DUNN, Justice (on reassignment).
This is an appeal by defendant of his conviction for third offense DWI, a felony. Defendant contends that his two prior DWI guilty pleas were not entered intelligently and voluntarily and that the convictions based thereupon were unconstitutional and inadmissible as evidence at trial on the third offense charge. We affirm.
On April 12, 1979, the defendant was found guilty of driving while under the influence of alcoholic beverages and was sentenced under the third offense penalty provision of SDCL 32-23-4. At the trial, certified copies of a 1975 and a 1977 judgment, based upon pleas of guilty to driving while under the influence of an alcoholic beverage, were admitted into evidence. The defendant stipulated that he was the person identified in both judgments, but he objected to their introduction. He now claims that he entered the prior pleas on advice of counsel and that he was not informed by the court of the exact nature of the charges against him, his right against self-incrimination, and his right to confront the witnesses against him. He recalls being informed of his right to a jury trial, but contends that neither plea was voluntarily and intelligently made. There is no transcript of either proceeding, and the court records and the judgments of conviction do *857not indicate whether he was advised of his constitutional rights before intelligently and voluntarily entering pleas of guilty as mandated in Boykin v. Alabama, 395 U.S. 238, 89 S.Ct. 1709, 23 L.Ed.2d 274 (1969). Boykin was given application in South Dakota by Nachtigall v. Erickson, 85 S.D. 122, 128, 178 N.W.2d 198, 201 (1970), with this language:
Nevertheless, it is now settled as. a principle of the constitutional law that a plea of guilty cannot stand unless the record in some manner indicates a free and intelligent waiver of the three constitutional rights mentioned in Boykin — self-incrimination, confrontation and jury trial — and an understanding of the nature and the consequences of the plea. South Dakota judges can no longer assume that an accused represented by counsel has been informed of such matters and the judge must actively participate by “canvassing the matter with the accused.”
Boykin and Nachtigall require that a waiver of these constitutional rights cannot be presumed from a silent record. In Nachti-gall, the trial court conducted an evidentia-ry hearing to determine the voluntary nature of the plea. We held that procedure to be in accord with the practice suggested in Halliday v. United States, 394 U.S. 831, 89 S.Ct. 1498, 23 L.Ed.2d 16 (1969), in post-conviction proceedings. This was followed by Merrill v. State, 87 S.D. 285, 206 N.W.2d 828 (1973), wherein we adopted the body of authority that Boykin does not require the arraignment record to show an express enumeration by the court, nor an express waiver by the defendant, of the constitutional rights mentioned in Boykin as a condition precedent to a voluntary and intelligent guilty plea. In Crew v. Nelson, 88 S.D. 162, 216 N.W.2d 565 (1974), we held that the Boykin standards apply to misdemeanor as well as felony cases and that in the absence of a stenographic record collateral evidence from the trial judge can be considered in determining whether the accused was aware of his constitutional rights and understood those rights at the time of the plea. See also, Lodermeier v. State, 273 N.W.2d 163 (S.D.1978); State v. Holmes, 270 N.W.2d 51 (S.D.1978).
The trial court supplemented the record regarding the previous guilty pleas with the testimony of Judge Keller, the magistrate who accepted both prior pleas, and with transcripts of proceedings in magistrate court in December of 1978, with Judge Keller presiding. The transcripts were prepared by Katherine Bakke, who took the proceedings at the' request of defendant to show what rights were explained en masse to people pleading guilty to. DWI. This was permissible in light of Crew v. Nelson, 88 S.D. 162, 216 N.W.2d 565 (1974), and Merrill v. State, 87 S.D. 285, 206 N.W.2d 828 (1973). Upon considering Judge Keller’s deposition and the transcripts prepared by Miss Bakke, the trial court determined that the defendant had been advised of his Boykin rights when he entered his guilty pleas to DWI in 1975 and 1977 and upheld the third offense DWI charge.
A fair summary of the deposition of Judge Keller indicates that during the period in question he had advised defendants either en masse or individually that they were entitled to a jury trial; that they were entitled to confront the witnesses against them and cross-examine them; that they were entitled to bring in witnesses in their own behalf; that the state had to prove them guilty of the offenses charged; and that they need not testify or incriminate themselves in any way. Judge Keller also advised them that as a consequence of a plea of guilty they would waive all of these enumerated rights. He did not recall “spelling out the sentences” for each defendant.
The transcripts prepared by Miss Bakke constitute the only real record of the en masse proceedings in magistrate court and the attention given to individual defendants, and therefore certain portions of the transcripts are set out verbatim. The first transcript covers the general statements made to all defendants by the judge:
Each person appearing in court is charged with a violation of the law. You are entitled to know and understand the charge against you. If you do not under*858stand the charge, inform me and I will explain further. You are presumed innocent until proven guilty.
1. You are entitled to a speedy and public trial * You are entitled to a trial by jury.
* If you request this, request it today. Do not wait for the preliminary hearing; as it takes at least 24 hours to get the facts together to have a case. It causes delays and unhappiness. When the States Attorney reads your name, please stand. The charge against you will be stated. At the preliminary hearing, you may waive your rights and enter a plea. A preliminary hearing is not a trial. Between now and the time of the trial, the purpose is for the state to call witnesses and to bring in witnesses to testify in your behalf. When the preliminary hearing is all over, it must be proved that an offense has been committed and probable cause that you did it. If they are not able to prove this, you will be dismissed. You will stand trial either to a court or a jury. If you waive your rights to a preliminary hearing, you should enter a plea of guilty or not guilty. You are entitled to a court or jury trial. You are not to incriminate yourself. You are entitled to a speedy and public trial. You may have witnesses sworn an oath and cross examined. You may compel witnesses to testify in your behalf. If your guilty plea admits you committed the offense, you charge and subject yourself to the penalties.
2. You are not required to testify against yourself or produce any evidence.
3. You may have witnesses in court sworn an oath and they may be cross examined.
4. You may use subpoena power to compel witnesses to testify in your behalf.
5. You may represent yourself, or have a lawyer represent you. If you are not able to afford a lawyer, one will be appointed for you at the expense of the state.
The second transcript covers the individual attention given to a defendant who is pleading guilty to DWI: *
Miss _!_, you entered a plea of guilty to a charge of driving while under the influence of alcoholic beverages. Miss_, if you plead guilty, you’re trying to admit something. Do you admit that at the time you were driving, you were under the influence of alcoholic beverages. True?
Yes.
Do you enter a plea of guilty?
Yes.
If you enter a plea of guilty, you give up the right to have witnesses in court. You may represent yourself, or you may have the assistance of Mr. Arneson. You give up the right to compel witnesses to come into testify in your behalf, and you give up the right to have these witnesses sworn an oath and cross examined. Do you understand this?
Yes.
Do you know what the maximum penalty could be?
No.
I could fine you as much as $1,000 or I could send you to the County Jail for as long as one year.
Was there a blood test taken?
No.
Was there a preliminary hearing in this case?
Yes.
Were you present?
Yes.
Was the arresting officer present?
Yes.
Did he testify as to whether he had you recite the alphabet?
Yes.
What is your recollection of the night you were arrested?
He made me do a lot of different things. Like what?
I had to touch my finger to my nose. Did you do this successfully?
I guess not.
What else did the officer have you do?
*859Stand on one leg for 30 seconds.
Did you do this successfully?
Well, he thought I didn’t.
What time were you arrested?
At about 11:30.
Where were you prior to this time?
At a friends house.
Had you been drinking?
Yes.
How much did you drink?
We had a case of beer.
How many people were there?
Five of us.
Was it all gone before you left?
Yes.
I will accept your plea of guilty.
These proceedings were taken by Miss Bakke prior to the taking of Judge Keller’s deposition, and they were apparently taken without Judge Keller’s knowledge. The transcripts reflect a record of a typical day in magistrate court. The transcripts were introduced into evidence by the defendant and accepted by the court over objections by the state, and the trial court was justified in considering these transcripts along with other evidence.
There is ample evidence in the supplemental record to substantiate the trial court’s finding that all of the rights in Boykin —self-incrimination, confrontation, jury trial and an understanding of the nature and the consequences of the plea-— were explained to the defendant on the occasions of his pleas in 1975 and 1977 and that he understood those rights. We will not disturb that finding.
We are also impressed with the nature of the sentences meted out to defendant in 1975 and 1977. These were not the routine “30 days and $100 sentences with jail sentence suspended upon payment of fine.” In both instances, the sentence, standing alone, has every indication of a negotiated plea or plea bargain in which the defendant and his attorney actively participated. Why else was a heavy jail sentence given and then suspended on condition that defendant try and rehabilitate himself? Why else would the trial court set out the installment method of paying the fine if it was not at the request of the defendant?
In plain language, this defendant not only knew of the possible consequences of his plea, he apparently knew exactly what the consequences and the penalty would be as a result of his plea. He now comes in some four or five years later, claiming that he was not advised of his rights and hoping that the state cannot prove otherwise.
The judgment of the trial court is affirmed.
WOLLMAN, C. J., and MORGAN, J., concur.
HENDERSON and FOSHEIM, JJ., dissent.
The transcript of a typical day in magistrate court included other arraignments besides the one set out verbatim in this opinion. Some of the arraignments were incomplete as they did not include rights that had been previously explained to a defendant in a “two-part” arraignment being used in some cases. The one set out above was a complete statement of rights to a defendant after she pleaded guilty to DWI and was appearing for sentence.

=== CASE 9738592 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:57:37.331319+00 ===

FOSHEIM, Justice
(dissenting).
I am satisfied from the evidence that the trial court elicited a factual basis for the two prior pleas as required by Spirit Track v. State, 272 N.W.2d 803 (S.D.1978), and State v. Doherty, 261 N.W.2d 677 (S.D. 1978). At this point, however, I part company with the majority. A review of the record establishes that both prior pleas were not entered voluntarily and intelligently as required and were therefore inadmissible in support of the third-offense charge. Accordingly, I dissent.
Judge Keller testified that in 1975 he individually questioned each defendant with regard to understanding the Boykin rights. Because of the increased caseload, however, this procedure had been abandoned when the 1977 conviction was obtained. The judge said he then merely watched all the defendants while their rights were explained and if a defendant appeared not to understand what was being said, he would pursue the matter further with that individual before a plea was entered.
In Crew v. Nelson, 88 S.D. 162, 216 N.W.2d 565 (1974), we applied the Boykin standards to misdemeanor guilty pleas and sanctioned the en masse advisement of constitutional rights to groups assembled for arraignment in misdemeanor cases. This was in recognition of the need for efficiency *860in high-volume courts. Accordingly, once those constitutional rights have been explained, whether individually or as a group, the court must, with both misdemeanor and felonies, examine each defendant individually to satisfy itself that the accused understands the nature of the charge and the consequences of a guilty plea and that there is a free and intelligent waiver of the three constitutional rights mentioned in Boykin.
Judge Keller specifically testified that his procedure at the time the 1977 conviction was obtained did not involve any individual canvassing of pleading defendants with respect to their understanding of the Boykin rights. The majority attempts to overcome this with transcripts of “a typical day in magistrate court” prepared from notes taken (at defendant’s request) by a speedwriter in Judge Keller’s court in December of 1978 and January of 1979. Such unofficial notes, however, do not refute the testimony of Judge Keller with regard to what he did by way of advising the accused of his constitutional rights in 1975 and 1977. What he did in 1978 or 1979 proves nothing. Nevertheless, since these transcripts form the basis for the majority opinion, they demand examination. The majority quotes a colloquy between the judge and one pleading defendant in 1978 and concludes therefrom that defendant Driver’s prior pleas must have been characterized by similar dialogue. This conclusion is absolutely untenable in light of the entire record. The 1978 transcript reveals that on the day the specimén plea was accepted, only two of three pleading defendants were canvassed by the court; there is no evidence of any colloquy with the first. More disturbing is the 1979 transcript, which reveals that none of the three defendants entering guilty pleas on that occasion were questioned by the judge with regard to their understanding of the Boykin rights and the consequences of their pleas. The majority completely ignores this fact, notwithstanding our statement in Nachtigall that: “[I]t is now settled as a principle of the constitutional law that a plea of guilty cannot stand unless the record in some manner indicates a free and intelligent waiver of the three constitutional rights mentioned in Boykin [.] ” 85 S.D. at 128, 178 N.W.2d at 201. While, as the majority opinion states, the trial court may quite properly consider collateral evidence where the record is silent, Boykin and Nachtigall require that such evidence affirmatively show that the pleas in question were entered voluntarily and intelligently. In the present case, there is an absolute lack of evidence of any kind that would demonstrate the validity of defendant’s pri- or pleas.
The majority, in similar fashion, also dispenses with defendant’s claim that he was not informed of the penal consequences of his pleas. It is clear from the record, however, that Judge Keller’s general procedure at the time of both prior pleas did not involve any discussion of either the mandatory minimum or the possible maximum sentence that could be imposed. A guilty plea is not knowing and voluntary in the constitutional sense unless the defendant has a reasonable apprehension of the range of possible sentences. Von Moltke v. Gillies, 332 U.S. 708, 68 S.Ct. 316, 92 L.Ed. 309 (1948); Lewellyn v. Wainwright, 593 F.2d 15 (5th Cir. 1979).
In Nachtigall, supra, we quoted with approval (as did the Supreme Court in Boy-kin) from Commonwealth v. Rundle, 428 Pa. 102, 105, 237 A.2d 196, 197 (1968):
A majority of criminal convictions are obtained after a plea of guilty. If these convictions are to be insulated from attack, the trial court is best advised to conduct an on the record examination of the defendant which should include, inter alia, an attempt to satisfy itself that the defendant understands the nature of the charges, his right to a jury trial, the acts sufficient to constitute the offenses for which he is charged and the permissible range of sentences, [emphasis supplied]
85 S.D. at 127, 178 N.W.2d at 200. Thereafter, in Crowe v. State, 86 S.D. 264, 268, 194 N.W.2d 234, 236 (1972), we noted that the defendant had not been advised by the court of the minimum and maximum penalties for the crime of first-degree rape, and said:
*861In effect, Boykin held that Rule 11 of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure is applicable to the states as a matter of federal constitutional due process and that the record must show that the defendant had an understanding of the nature and consequences of his plea before a guilty plea can be sustained.
Crowe, however, was not decided under the Boykin rule because in Nachtigall we held that Boykin should be given prospective application only (to guilty pleas entered after June 2, 1969). We noted specifically that the plea in question in Crowe was entered in 1966, and we therein decided the issue under pre-Boykin rules. In Crowe, the Court concluded that “[notwithstanding the inexplicable failure of the trial court to advise petitioner of the minimum and maximum penalties for the charge against him and of his right against self-incrimination, we do not believe the petitioner has carried his burden of proof [under the totality of the circumstances rule applicable to pre-Boykin cases] of showing that his guilty plea was involuntary . . .” 86 S.D. at 271, 194 N.W.2d at 237 (emphasis supplied). Thus, Crowe clearly indicates that if the Boykin-Nachtigall rule were applied, our conclusion with respect to the validity of the plea in that case would have been the opposite.
In the present ease, Judge Keller, referring to his procedure in 1975 and 1977, testified: “I don’t spell out the penalties.” Rather, he simply informed pleading defendants that they would be subject to the penalties provided by law for the particular offense without stating the minimum or the maximum penalties. This procedure cannot be said to have satisfied constitutional requirements.* Moreover, of the six guilty pleas covered by the so-called 1978 and 1979 “transcripts”, four reveal no advisement of available penalties.
The majority further concludes that defendant must have known of the penal consequences of his pleas because the convictions were obviously the products of plea-bargains. This implies that his attorney must have advised him of his rights and the penalties involved and that any deficiency on the part of the court was thereby corrected. Such a presumption flies in the face of Nachtigall which expressly holds that: “South Dakota judges can’ no longer assume that an accused represented by counsel has been informed of such matters and the judge must actively participate by ‘canvassing the matter with the accused.’ ” 85 S.D. at 128, 178 N.W.2d at 201.
Boykin and Nachtigall require that the evidence affirmatively show that defendant’s 1975 and 1977 convictions (not subsequent specimen pleas) were obtained in compliance with the Constitution. The record in this case, including the collateral evidence considered by the court, contains nothing to indicate that defendant’s prior pleas were entered voluntarily and intelligently as required by law. In both instances, there is no evidence that defendant was advised of the minimum and maximum penalties for the offense. In addition, the 1977 plea was not preceded by any individual canvassing of the defendant by the court, except as to a factual basis for the plea. These deficiencies are not corrected by pre*862sumption nor by the fact that defendant was represented by counsel. Similarly, the conclusion of the trial judge that defendant understood and voluntarily waived his constitutional rights is inadequate. State v. Nachtigall, supra. The convictions based upon defendant’s prior guilty pleas are thus void and inadmissible either to support guilt or enhance punishment. Burgett v. Texas, 389 U.S. 109, 88 S.Ct. 258, 19 L.Ed.2d 319 (1967); United States v. Pricepaul, 540 F.2d 417 (9th Cir. 1976); United States v. Megura, 394 F.Supp. 246 (D.Conn.1976).
The majority opinion in effect modifies and weakens what we explicitly said in Nachtigall in applying Boykin in South Dakota. The full thrust of Boykin, however, is necessarily binding on us as a state, with or without Nachtigall. In my opinion, the majority attempts- to depart from settled principles of constitutional law.
I am authorized to state that Justice HENDERSON joins in this dissent.
A defendant need be advised of and understand only the direct penal ramifications of his plea as opposed to any collateral consequences. See, e. g., Moore v. Hinton, 513 F.2d 781 (5th Cir. 1975), holding that failure to inform a DWI defendant that a collateral consequence of his plea would be suspension of his driver’s license by the Department of Public Safety did not render his plea invalid where the defendant was apprised of and understood the fine and jail sentence to be imposed. See also: Armstrong v. Egeler, 563 F.2d 796 (6th Cir. 1977); United States v. Parrino, 212 F.2d 919 (2nd Cir. 1954), cert. denied, 348 U.S. 840, 75 S.Ct. 46, 99 L.Ed. 663 (1954).
SDCL 23A-7-4 follows Rule 11(c) of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure and specifically provides:
Before accepting a plea of guilty or nolo contendere a court must address the defendant personally in open court, subject to the exception stated in § 23A-7-5, and inform him of, and determine that he understands, the following:
(1) The nature of the charge to which the plea is offered, the mandatory minimum penalty provided by law, if any, and the maximum possible penalty provided by law[.]

=== CASE 9738597 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:57:45.133634+00 ===

L. B. Bebeau, J.
Pursuant to a sentence agreement, defendant on February 14, 1977, pled guilty to two charges of armed robbery, MCL 750.529; MSA 28.797, and two charges of possession of a firearm during the commission of a felony, MCL 750.227b; MSA 28.424(2). The two armed robberies to which defendant pled guilty were separate and distinct crimes, involving different victims, times, and geographical locations, although both occurred on the same day. Defendant subsequently received concurrent prison terms of two years on the first felony-firearm conviction and five years on the second, in addition to terms of one year and one *34day on each armed-robbery conviction, the latter to run concurrently with each other but consecutive to the felony-firearm sentences.
The sole issue presented by defendant on appeal which requires discussion is his contention that the mandatory five-year sentence imposed by the lower court for his second felony-firearm conviction was invalid and should have been two years instead. Simply stated, the question is whether defendant’s pleas of guilty to two separate felony-firearm offenses, rendered at a single plea-taking session, satisfied the requirement of MCL 750.227b(l); MSA 28.424(2X1) that "[u]pon a second conviction under this section, the person shall be imprisoned for 5 years”.
The problem presented is no longer one of first impression. In People v Barrett, 93 Mich App 808; 287 NW2d 348 (1979), this Court analyzed a similar fact situation. There, as here, the defendant argued that the felony-firearm statute should be interpreted analogously to Michigan’s habitual offender act, MCL 769.10 et seq.; MSA 28.1082 et seq., so that no enhanced punishment would be proper under MCL 750.227b(l); MSA 28.424(2X1) unless the subsequent felony-firearm offense was committed after the defendant had been convicted of a previous felony-firearm charge. In rejecting this argument the Barrett Court observed (p 815):
"While both statutes are similar in that each is imbued with a general deterrent force common to all criminal statutes, they are strikingly different in language and purpose. The habitual offender act specifically excepts from its coverage the first-time offender whereas the felony-firearm statute applies to all offenders. The habitual offender statute was intended to afford a first offender an opportunity to reform. Thus, a time gap between convictions becomes important. By contrast, the felony-firearm statute is directed at pun*35ishing the use of firearms during unlawful acts and, as such, is not concerned with the time at which convictions are received.”
We agree with the result reached in Barrett. The language of the felony-firearm statute is unambiguous and is distinguishable on its face from that of the habitual criminal act. Had the Legislature intended to do so, it coudl easily have incorporated into the felony-firearm statute the clear language already existing in the habitual offender act, and thus dictated the result argued for by defendant. Its failure to do so must be regarded as intentional and meaningful.
Defendant’s allegation that the felony-firearm statute provides inadequate notice is without merit.
Affirmed.
Cynar, P.J., concurred.

=== CASE 2216727 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:17.16655+00 ===

250 Cal.App.2d 651 (1967)
THE PEOPLE, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
JOHN HENRY BREKKE, Defendant and Appellant. [250 Cal.App.2d 652]
Crim. No. 4086.
California Court of Appeals. Third Dist.
May 3, 1967.
Benjamin F. Davis, under appointment by the Court of Appeal, for Defendant and Appellant.
Thomas C. Lynch, Attorney General, Raymond M. Momboisse and Ronald W. Tochterman, Deputy Attorneys General, for Plaintiff and Respondent.
VAN DYKE, J.  [fn. *]
An indictment was filed charging appellant with the murder of Julius Micheletti. Appellant entered pleas of not guilty and not guilty by reason of insanity. A jury found appellant guilty of murder in the second degree and determined that he was sane at the time the offense was committed. Appellant now appeals from the judgment entered.
On appeal two principal contentions of appellant are that the court erred in allowing the prosecution to call two psychiatrists to testify to appellant's state of mind at both the guilt and sanity phases of trial when appellant's constitutional rights had not been fully protected as required by the Dorado and Escobedo cases. A third contention is that it was error to allow a third psychiatrist (court-appointed) to testify on sanity.
There is no substantial conflict in the facts elicited at the trial.
Appellant, 16 years of age, was brought to the Sacramento County Juvenile Center at approximately 11:20 a.m. on August 19, 1964. He was taken to Unit F in the center after a short talk with the intake officer, who explained to appellant that the following day there would be a detention hearing, at which time the judge would determine whether appellant would be retained or released.
Later in the day, while in the bathroom of the gymnasium, appellant approached Joseph Masse, another boy confined to Unit F, and asked if Masse knew of any way that he, appellant, could get out. Then shortly after 8 p.m. while in the television room, another boy, Anthony Davis, also confined in the unit, heard appellant state that he wanted to break out; that he was going to wait until 12 o'clock, ring his buzzer, overpower the man who answered, remove his keys, and leave by the back door.
At approximately 8:20 p.m. one of the two counselors in *653 Unit F left the unit on an errand. Micheletti, the second counselor, was seated at the counselor's desk, which is located near the door. A ping pong table located in the center of the recreation room was between the counselor's desk and the pool table. Although there are two pool cue sticks in the unit, only one cue stick is allowed out when the boys are playing.
At approximately 8:30 p.m. Anthony Davis and Noel Kyles were playing ping pong. David Nicol was watching the ping pong game, and Joseph Masse was watching television but turned around when he heard a loud noise. All four boys witnessed essentially most of appellant's acts and testified to the following:
Appellant approached the desk where Micheletti was sitting and reading a book. He was carrying the pool cue. Holding the cue stick at the small end like a baseball bat, appellant started swinging with "all of his might," striking Micheletti first on the left side of his head, then on the right side, and again on the left side. Micheletti fell to the floor.
Appellant, handing the cue stick to Nicol (who let it drop to the floor), turned and said, "Anybody want to go with me?" or something like, "O.K., let's go," to no one in particular; appellant then went rapidly to the sliding patio door and tried to open it. This door led into a patio enclosed by a 12 to 15-foot high wall.
There was confusion: the 25 to 30 boys in the area got up, someone ordered everybody into the television room, and a boy referred to as "Sugar Man" pushed the button for the control room and called out that they had better get down there, that there was somebody dying. Finding the patio door locked, appellant turned away and said to those around him, "Nobody saw anything" or "Nobody saw nothing." He then sat down.
Max Rose, Superintendent of the Juvenile Center, was near the control counter at 8:30 p.m. when the emergency alarm sounded; he and others ran to Unit F when upon switching on the Unit F control they heard a high level of noise. When Mr. Rose and Thomas McKerras, the other counselor in Unit F who was returning to the unit, arrived, they saw Micheletti on the floor behind the counter in a large pool of blood, and the cue stick on the floor in front of the control desk.
The boys were sent to their rooms. Ten to fifteen minutes later appellant was removed from his bedroom in Unit F and placed in an isolated room near the front where he could be closely observed. Within 30 minutes appellant appeared to be *654 asleep, and around 2:30 a.m. Rose had difficulty in awakening appellant to talk to the officers who were investigating the case.
Micheletti died as a result of the blows he had received.
Appellant's defense consisted solely of testimony introduced to show his state of mind--to show that he was not capable of forming an intent to commit the offense charged. Appellant himself did not testify. His father testified to an injury to appellant's head at the age of five; that up until the time appellant was 11 to 13 years old he believed his false statements to be true; that appellant was a chronic bed wetter until he was 15 years of age; that he had a severe nervous reaction to polio shots in 1956 or 1957; and that in 1963 or 1964 he had fainted at school.
It was brought out that appellant was admitted to the Juvenile Center after an automobile accident; that after the accident he at first told the officers that he tried to end his life by deliberately crashing the car he was driving; later he claimed that the wheels had locked. The probation officer who so testified also testified on cross-examination that when he talked to appellant he noted nothing unusual to show any mental disorder.
Appellant then called as an expert witness Dr. George O'Brien, a psychiatrist who saw defendant on August 25 and September 7, 1964, at the request of appellant's counsel. It was his opinion that appellant was so severely psychotic and out of touch with reality that he was incapable of forming an intent to kill; that appellant lacked the mental capacity to carry out any cool or deliberate preconceived design to kill as a result of a deliberate decision to kill. Dr. O'Brien considered appellant as suffering from schizophrenia. As a basis for this opinion Dr. O'Brien considered appellant's background; what appellant had told him regarding the incident, i.e., he had killed a man and wished that he could forget it or that it had ever happened; that while he was striking the counselor he could think only of his girl friend, whom he wanted to join, and the senselessness of the act itself.
Throughout cross-examination Dr. O'Brien stood firm in his opinion that appellant was not competent to form an intent to deliberately kill a person.
In rebuttal the prosecution called two psychiatrists who had seen appellant, Doctors Ken Johnson and John Wright. Doctor Johnson, at the request of the probation office, saw appellant the day following the incident. Dr. Wright, a staff *655 psychiatrist, saw appellant while he was at Vacaville pending his trial.
Prior to their testimony appellant's counsel objected on constitutional grounds, under Escobedo-Dorado rules.
On voir dire Dr. Johnson testified that he was contacted by Mr. Thornton of the probation office to evaluate appellant's mental state, to determine whether appellant was mentally ill, and if he were dangerous and if so whether he ought to be removed to a security setup. That was his sole purpose in interviewing appellant--not for the purpose of eliciting statements regarding the crime.
The court ruled that Dr. Johnson could testify as to his opinion of appellant's capacity to form the requisite intent, but on direct examination the doctor was not to testify to any incriminating statements made by appellant during the examination. The court did not place any restrictions on cross-examination.
On direct examination Dr. Johnson testified that he saw appellant for an hour or less on the day following the incident, the 20th of August, to make a determination of appellant's mental state and not for the purpose of eliciting incriminating statements. However, it is apparent he discussed with appellant the facts of his assault on Micheletti. As a result of this interview he arrived at the opinion that appellant possessed the ability to premeditate and to form an intent to kill.
Even on cross-examination Dr. Johnson, adhering to the court's ruling, did not relate any statement regarding the incident that appellant may have made to him during the examination.
Appellant's objection to having Dr. Wright, a Vacaville Facility staff psychiatrist, testify was based in part on the fact that appellant was taken to Vacaville on a hold basis without his attorney's consent or being so informed, and that he was not given the opportunity to be present to object to appellant's submission to interviews, observations or treatments. Out of the presence of the jury, it was established that appellant had at no time admitted or made any statements to Dr. Wright regarding any deliberate intent to kill which would go to premeditation. The record does not contain the court's ruling, but Dr. Wright did testify.
Dr. Wright testified that appellant was "housed" at Vacaville from October 8, 1964, to June 24, 1965, pending his trial. *656 During this period Dr. Wright saw appellant daily in the unit; and as a routine duty, in conformity with American Hospital Association Standards, Dr. Wright, on March 8, 1965, did a psychiatric evaluation on appellant which lasted approximately 15 minutes. It was Dr. Wright's opinion that appellant in August 1964 did have the ability to premeditate and deliberate and form the intent to kill.
On the cross-examination of Dr. Wright it was brought out that appellant was quite distraught when he arrived; that he tried cutting his arm with a paper clip once; that for six months or less appellant was on tranquilizers; despite appellant's emotional disturbance, however, Dr. Wright testified that appellant was not mentally ill; he appeared to be oriented, had no trouble in communicating or understanding. He said the fact that appellant was on tranquilizers would not affect his psychiatric evaluation of him; moreover, the various drugs administered to appellant would not tend to suppress any overt psychotic behavior.
At no time did Dr. Wright testify or relate any incriminating statements that appellant may have made to him, though he had asked appellant as to details of the attack on Micheletti.
After the jury found appellant guilty of murder in the second degree, the parties stipulated that the evidence introduced during the guilt phase of the trial was to be incorporated in the insanity phase of the trial, and the jury was so instructed. Appellant's counsel, however, renewed his objection to the testimony of both Doctors Johnson and Wright.
Dr. O'Brien, appellant's expert witness, recalled, testified that it was his opinion that appellant was psychotic, a schizophrenic, and was unable to distinguish between right and wrong at the time of the assault, in effect, that he was legally insane.
Both Doctors Johnson and Wright were of the opinion that appellant knew of the nature and quality of his act at the time of the offense and that he could at that time differentiate between right and wrong. Neither doctor was of the opinion that appellant was psychotic.
Also assigned as error on appeal is the testimony of the prosecution's next witness, Dr. Walter Rapaport, one of the two court-appointed psychiatrists.
At the outset of the insanity phase, the prosecution made a motion that appellant submit to an examination by Dr. Rapaport. Appellant's counsel objected, stating that he was refusing *657 to allow appellant to submit to such an examination by Dr. Rapaport. The court deferred ruling on the motion. There is nothing in the record to indicate the court denied the prosecution's motion but appellant did not submit to an examination immediately prior to the sanity phase.
Prior to Dr. Rapaport's testimony, defense counsel again objected to any testimony given by Dr. Rapaport regarding any opinion he may have arrived at as a result of a brief talk he had with appellant, and from the records made available to him. This objection was based on the ground that Dr. Rapaport's opinion would be based on only that brief time he saw appellant, and the doctor's testimony would be prejudicial for it would bring out the fact that defense counsel was advising appellant not to submit to any psychiatric examination. The court overruled appellant's objection and allowed Dr. Rapaport to testify.
Dr. Rapaport testified that after the court, on June 25, 1965, had appointed him to examine appellant, he had received a letter from Mr. Wells, appellant's counsel, advising him that he was not going to permit him to examine appellant. The doctor called Mr. Wells and they reached an understanding that Dr. Rapaport could see appellant, but only in the presence of Mr. Wells.
Dr. Rapaport arrived in Sacramento on June 27th. Mr. Wells introduced appellant to the doctor. Leaving appellant, Mr. Wells took Dr. Rapaport to his office where he explained his position, let Dr. Rapaport read the various reports in Wells' file on appellant, including the report of Dr. Johnson, and discussed appellant's background, and the details of the offense. They then returned to appellant and the doctor asked appellant his name, age, birthdate and birthplace, questions which appellant answered. Mr. Wells then interrupted and told appellant he was not to answer any further questions.
From his conversation with Mr. Wells, the reports in Mr. Wells' office and his brief interview with appellant, Dr. Rapaport was of the opinion that appellant was not mentally ill at the time of the offense, nor was he suffering from a condition that would preclude him from knowing what he was doing, or the quality of what he was doing. He diagnosed appellant as being impulsive and hyperemotional, but not psychotic.
[1] Now on appeal appellant contends it was prejudicial error to allow Doctors Johnson and Wright to testify at *658 both phases of trial and Dr. Rapaport to testify at the sanity phase of trial.
Appellant argues, as to Dr. Johnson's testimony, that at the time he was examined by Dr. Johnson he was not represented by counsel nor had he been advised of his constitutional right to remain silent, as required in People v. Dorado, 62 Cal.2d 338 [42 Cal.Rptr. 169, 398 P.2d 361], and Escobedo v. Illinois, 378 U.S. 478 [12 L.Ed.2d 977, 84 S.Ct. 1758], inasmuch as Dr. Johnson's opinion was based on statements made by appellant regarding the offense where there had not been compliance with these constitutional requisites. That it was, in substantial part, so based is not denied.
We hold these objections untenable for the following reasons. In Escobedo the Supreme Court of the United States stated as follows (p. 490): "We hold, therefore, that where, as here, the investigation is no longer a general inquiry into an unsolved crime but has begun to focus on a particular suspect, the suspect has been taken into police custody, the police carry out a process of interrogations that lends itself to eliciting incriminating statements, the suspect has requested and been denied an opportunity to consult with his lawyer, and the police have not effectively warned him of his absolute constitutional right to remain silent, the accused has been denied 'the Assistance of Counsel' in violation of the Sixth Amendment to the Constitution as 'made obligatory upon the States by the Fourteenth Amendment,' ... and that no statement elicited by the police during the interrogation may be used against him at a criminal trial." In Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436 [16 L.Ed.2d 694, 86 S.Ct. 1602, 10 A.L.R.3d 974], the Supreme Court said (at p. 706 [16 L.Ed.2d]): 'Our holding ... briefly stated, ... is this: the prosecution may not use statements, whether exculpatory or inculpatory, stemming from custodial interrogation of the defendant unless it demonstrates the use of procedural safeguards effective to secure the privilege against self-incrimination. By custodial interrogation, we mean questioning initiated by law enforcement officers after a person has been taken into custody or otherwise deprived of his freedom of action in any significant way.  [fn. 4]" [Footnote 4: "This is what we meant in Escobedo when we spoke of an investigation which had focused on an accused."] Throughout both Escobedo and Miranda the court was at pains to point out that the thrust of those cases was to discourage improper police action in violation of constitutionally declared rights. To implement this *659 policy, the court forbade use at trial of incriminating statements or confessions so obtained. Thus in Escobedo the court said (pp. 488-489): "We have learned the lesson of history, ancient and modern, that a system of criminal law enforcement which comes to depend on the 'confession' will, in the long run, be less reliable and more subject to abuses than a system which depends on extrinsic evidence independently secured through skillful investigation." And (p. 490), "This Court also has recognized that 'history amply shows that confessions have often been extorted to save law enforcement officials the trouble and effort of obtaining valid and independent evidence. ...' " Further (p. 490), "We have also learned the companion lesson of history that no system of criminal justice can, or should, survive if it comes to depend for its continued effectiveness on the citizens' abdication through unawareness of their constitutional rights. ... If the exercise of constitutional rights will thwart the effectiveness of a system of law enforcement, then there is something very wrong with that system." In Miranda the courts noted (at p. 704) that "This case [Escobedo] has been the subject of judicial interpretation and spirited legal debate since it was decided two years ago." Said the court (p. 706): "It was necessary in Escobedo, as here, to insure that what was proclaimed in the Constitution had not become but a 'form of words,' [Citations], in the hands of government officials." Said the court further (at pp. 707-708), in explanation and justification of the rules declared in Escobedo and Miranda: "An understanding of the nature and setting of this in-custody interrogation is essential to our decisions today. The difficulty in depicting what transpires at such interrogations stems from the fact that in this country they have largely taken place incommunicado. From extensive factual studies undertaken in the early 1930's, including the famous Wickersham Report to Congress by a Presidential Commission, it is clear that police violence and the 'third degree' flourished at that time. In a series of cases decided by this Court long after these studies, the police resorted to physical brutality--beating, hanging, whipping--and to sustained and protracted questioning incommunicado in order to extort confessions. The 1961 Commission on Civil Rights found much evidence to indicate that 'some policemen still resort to physical force to obtain confessions,' .... The use of physical brutality and violence is not, unfortunately, relegated to the past or to any part of the country. Only recently in Kings County, New *660 York, the police brutally beat, kicked and placed lighted cigarette butts on the back of a potential witness under interrogation for the purpose of securing a statement incriminating a third party. [Citation.]
"The examples given above are undoubtedly the exception now, but they are sufficiently widespread to be the object of concern. Unless a proper limitation upon custodial interrogation is achieved--such as these decisions will advance--there can be no assurance that practices of this nature will be eradicated in the foreseeable future."
Much more was said to indicate that the goal of the court was to insure so far as it could that improper questioning of suspects "initiated by law enforcement officers" would be discouraged and, hopefully, abandoned.
In the instant case little police investigation was necessary and little appears to have been done. The fact that appellant had committed a felonious assault on Micheletti which would probably result, as it soon did, in his death, was apparent with indisputable certainty. Within hours sheriff's deputies and a deputy district attorney had investigated the obvious, had interviewed appellant, and it further appears from the record that in the main if not entirely police investigation ceased before Dr. Johnson conducted his interview. While it appears that these officers and the deputy district attorney did not comply with Escobedo-Dorado rules, neither did they testify as to any incriminating statements appellant may have made to them. Extensive voir dire proceedings were conducted by the trial court in the absence of the jury concerning the admissibility of the testimony of the psychiatrist, Dr. Johnson. Dr. Johnson was employed by the California Adult Authority as a psychiatrist. After the sheriff's deputies and the deputy district attorney had concluded their interviews with appellant, the authorities at the Juvenile Center who still had custody and responsibility for the safekeeping of appellant requested Dr. Johnson to make a psychiatric examination of appellant to determine his mental state with regard to custody. On voir dire Dr. Johnson testified that he was contacted by Mr. Thornton, the county probation officer, and asked to see appellant and to determine what degree of disturbance was involved in the case, that is, was appellant mentally ill and, if he be considered dangerous, should he be removed to a security setup. His purpose was not to elicit incriminating statements.
From the facts elicited before the court on voir dire, it *661 appears without conflict that the interview of appellant by Dr. Johnson was not initiated by the law enforcement authorities but entirely by the staff of the Juvenile Center for the legitimate purpose and the single purpose of determining what custodial safeguards would be required both for the protection of appellant and for the protection of his custodians. There was ample reason for their having been concerned about these matters. There was his statement to the officers who first apprehended him that he had crashed his car into a tree in order to commit suicide. There were the facts of his unprovoked and senseless assault upon Micheletti. From a custodial point of view there was good reason why the Juvenile Center staff wanted to find out just what sort of custodial provisions and safeguards were required. And so, impliedly, the trial court found after extensive voir dire. We hold that Escobedo-Dorado rules have no application on the issue of admissibility of Dr. Johnson's testimony. His interview with appellant was not "initiated by law enforcement officers," nor, from the record, did they know anything about it.
What we have said also disposes of the contention that there was error in receiving the testimony of Dr. Wright, the psychiatrist at the Vacaville Facility, who during the course of appellant's stay at the facility observed him, and on one occasion, following hospital routines, examined him psychiatrically. Law enforcement authorities had nothing to do with the acts of Dr. Wright.
[2] The same considerations and others to be noted also dispose of the contention that there was error in receiving the testimony of Dr. Rapaport. He was the psychiatrist appointed by the court under the statute which provides for such court appointments when the defense of diminished capacity or insanity is interposed. Such appointees are appointed for the benefit of both parties and of the jury and of court. By virtue of their appointment by the court they must be deemed to be neutral and unbiased. It is true that a defendant is not compelled to submit to an examination by them and in this case such refusal was made known to both appointees by counsel for appellant. But Dr. Rapaport, accepting the ban on interviews with appellant, based his testimony upon the report of Dr. Johnson, which was made available to him, and on other data which he was given. Objections to his testimony other than constitutional, were based upon the matter of the extent of his investigation and the sufficiency of the basis for *662 his opinion, in short, as going not to admissibility but to the weight of his testimony. They were properly overruled. (See, Hope v. Arrowhead & Puritas Waters, Inc., 174 Cal.App.2d 222, 230 [344 P.2d 428]; People v. Lewis, 186 Cal.App.2d 585, 601 [9 Cal.Rptr. 263].)
The final contention of appellant is that the evidence was insufficient to establish murder, but we need not discuss that. The record amply supports the verdict.
The judgment appealed from is affirmed.
Pierce, P. J., and Friedman, J., concurred.
NOTES
[fn. *]  *. Retired Presiding Justice of the Court of Appeal sitting under assignment by the Chairman of the Judicial Council.
[fn. 4]  4

=== CASE 2216734 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:17.263337+00 ===

250 Cal.App.2d 367 (1967)
THE PEOPLE, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
EDDIE TAYLOR, Defendant and Appellant.
Crim. No. 11888.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. Two.
Apr. 24, 1967.
Eddie Taylor, in pro. per., and Lawrence H. Nagler, under appointment by the Court of Appeal, for Defendant and Appellant.
Thomas C. Lynch, Attorney General, and Elizabeth Miller, Deputy Attorney General, for Plaintiff and Respondent.
ROTH, P. J.
On August 14, 1965, at approximately 3 p.m., two officers of the Los Angeles Police Department were *369 driving north on Central Avenue in Watts. They observed appellant standing inside the Lucky Ace Liquor store holding several bottles of liquor. The front window of the store was broken.
The officers parked in front of the store. The door to the store was locked. Appellant was ordered out. He refused. One of the officers entered through the broken window and brought him out. It was necessary to forcibly restrain appellant and to handcuff him while he was patted down for weapons. He was taken to the 77th Street police station. When led into the interrogation room, appellant kicked one of the officers. The officer testified appellant was "very combative" and that he punched appellant in the mouth with his fist. Appellant tried to kick the officer and another officer punched him in the stomach. Appellant "quieted down."
Appellant was taken to Central Receiving Hospital, then to the County Hospital and booked in the prison ward. He was given X-rays and received stitches for a cut on his lip. He remained in the hospital for six days, until August 20, 1965 and was arraigned on the burglary charge on Tuesday, August 24, 1965.
On September 10, 1965, appellant was charged by information with burglary. Arraigned on the same date, the public defender was appointed counsel and appellant pleaded not guilty. He was represented by counsel at all stages of the proceedings. Thereafter, on November 2, 1965, appellant, although represented by counsel, moved in pro. per. to dismiss the information pursuant to Penal Code, section 995. The motion was denied.
On November 4, 1965, the cause was called for trial. Appellant's "motion and request for proper counsel" and motion to strike the information were denied. Jury trial was legally waived. Appellant was found guilty of second degree burglary and sentenced to state prison.
Appellant testified he was arrested while walking down Central Avenue and that he was not in or near the liquor store at the time. He also stated the officers hit him with the butt of a shotgun and kicked him in the head.
There are no confessions or admissions in this case.
Appellant contends it was error (1) to deny his November motion to dismiss under Penal Code, section 995 (prior to trial but after he had pleaded not guilty); (2) to deny his motion to dismiss made on November 4, because he had not been arraigned until 10 days after his arrest; (3) to deny his *370 motion for proper counsel; (4) for the trial court to refuse appellant's motion for inclusion in the record on appeal of his motions to dismiss and that this court should augment the record to include these motions; and (5) the trial court refused to hear his motion for a new trial.
[1] Penal Code, section 995 provides for the setting aside of an information if "before the filing thereof the defendant ha[s] not been legally committed by a magistrate," or if probable or reasonable cause was lacking for the commitment. Section 996 of the Penal Code provides that if a motion to set aside the information is not made, a defendant is precluded from later taking the objections enumerated in section 995.
"When a defendant is first arraigned in the superior court, he may move to set aside the information on the grounds specified in section 995 of the Penal Code; such a motion must be made before a defendant demurs to the information, or pleads to the charge, and if he does not avail himself of his rights under that section he is deemed to have waived them. (Pen. Code,  996; People v. Gomez, 209 Cal.App.2d 187, 195 [26 Cal.Rptr. 54]; People v. Ahern, 113 Cal.App.2d 746, 750 [249 P.2d 63]; People v. Brown, 72 Cal.App.2d 717, 719 [165 P.2d 707])." (People v. Wester, 237 Cal.App.2d 232, 236 [46 Cal.Rptr. 699].)
[2] Appellant is correct in his contention that denial of a motion to dismiss under Penal Code section 995, may be reviewed on appeal from the judgment of conviction. (People v. Minkowski, 204 Cal.App.2d 832, 841 [23 Cal.Rptr. 92]; see also People v. Elliot, 54 Cal.2d 498, 503 [6 Cal.Rptr. 753, 354 P.2d 225].) However, there is nothing for this court to review. Appellant, represented by counsel, pleaded not guilty to the charge against him. Two weeks later, in pro. per., he filed a written motion, renewed orally by him at trial, under section 995. No motion was made to withdraw the plea to permit the proper making of such a motion. There is no point, therefore, in having said matters included in the record.
[3] There is no showing, and nothing in the record indicates, that appellant was not properly represented by counsel. Appellant ignored his attorney and acted in his own behalf. There is no showing of lack of adequate representation (see People v. Ibarra, 60 Cal.2d 460, 464-466 [34 Cal.Rptr. 863, 386 P.2d 487]); we have a right to assume, therefore, that had a motion under section 995 had a chance of success, or otherwise would have been to appellant's advantage, it would have been made. *371
[4] The trial court properly denied appellant's motion for inclusion in the record on appeal of his motion to dismiss and "other relevant documents," which presumably refers to the municipal court file which would show the ten-day delay in arraignment. He urges that this court augment the record pursuant to rule 12(a) of the Rules on Appeal to include these documents.  [fn. 1] In People v. Wein, 50 Cal.2d 383, 411 [326 P.2d 457], the supreme court, denying a motion to augment in a similar situation, stated: "[The] record is offered to show that defendant was not taken before the municipal court until nearly five days after his arrest. He claims that there was 'unnecessary delay' (Pen. Code,  849) and that his constitutional rights were thus violated, citing Mallory v. United States, 354 U.S. 449 [1 L.Ed.2d 1479, 77 S.Ct. 1356]. However, rule 12(a) on which defendant relies, by its own terms, provides for augmentation only where the record was 'offered at or used on the trial or hearing below and [was] on file in or lodged with the superior court.' (Rules on Appeal, rule 12(a).) Here, defendant makes no showing that the minutes were ever used in the proceedings in the superior court or that they ever became a part of that court's records."
Appellant's motion to augment is denied.
[5] Arrested on August 14, appellant was taken to and remained in the hospital until Friday, August 20. He was arraigned on Tuesday, August 24. Since Saturday is a municipal court holiday (Gov. Code,  72305) and the court does not convene on Sunday, and since section 825 of the Penal Code specifically excludes Sundays and holidays, there was no more than a two-day delay before appellant was brought before a magistrate after his release from the hospital. In People v. Lane, 56 Cal.2d 773, 781 [16 Cal.Rptr. 801, 366 P.2d 57], it was held that it would be unreasonable to require a defendant who is hospitalized to be taken before a magistrate with possible jeopardy to his health. We do not consider the delay unreasonable. [6] Further, there must be a showing of prejudice if the conviction is attacked on this ground. There is no such showing. (People v. Mitchell, 209 Cal.App.2d 312, 320 [26 Cal.Rptr. 89].) There was no unfairness in the trial as a result of the delay, the intervening time was not used to gather any evidence since the only evidence used at the trial, upon which conviction was based, was that of the arresting officers and there were no admissions or *372 confessions obtained during the asserted delay or used at the trial. The cases of People v. Van Eyk, 56 Cal.2d 471, 480 [15 Cal.Rptr. 150, 364 P.2d 326]; Rogers v. Superior Court, 46 Cal.2d 3, 10 [291 P.2d 929]; People v. Garner, 234 Cal.App.2d 212, 228 [44 Cal.Rptr. 217]; People v. Pollart, 208 Cal.App.2d 793, 796 [25 Cal.Rptr. 678], therefore, have no application.
[7a] Finally, appellant's contention that he is entitled to a new trial because the court refused to hear his motion for a new trial, is without merit. The record shows that at the hearing on probation and sentence, the court asked whether legal cause existed why judgment and sentence should not be pronounced. Appellant's attorney responded negatively but pointed out to the court that appellant had already spent 107 days in custody. The court sentenced appellant to state prison. After sentence the following colloquy occurred:
"The Defendant: Your Honor, I want to present this notice of appeal. The Court: Just file it with the clerk. The Defendant: I would like to ask for a new trial too. The Court: The defendant is remanded. The appeal can be filed and we will take care of it."
"A motion for a new trial in a criminal proceeding must be made orally and the grounds relied upon must be specified. Otherwise, the right to make the motion is waived. See People v. Dillard, 168 Cal.App.2d 158, 167 [335 P.2d 702]; People v. Skoff, 131 Cal.App. 235 [21 P.2d 118]. [8a] The Penal Code does not authorize the court to hear and grant a motion for a new trial after judgment in a criminal proceeding. (Pen. Code,  1182 and 1202; People v. Fry, 137 Cal.App. 525, 529 [31 P.2d 204].)" (People v. Grake, 227 Cal.App.2d 289, 292 [38 Cal.Rptr. 666].)
[7b] Appellant's counsel, by stating that no legal cause existed, waived the right to make a motion for a new trial. (People v. Jaramillo, 208 Cal.App.2d 620, 628 [25 Cal.Rptr. 403].) [8b] Appellant's own statement indicates no more than a desire to move for a new trial and was not in itself a motion. This is not the same as the act of making a motion. Independent of its ambiguity and the impropriety of its source since appellant had counsel acting in his behalf, such a motion, assuming it was made, was untimely. The court's failure to "rule" on the motion does not fall within section 1202 of the Penal Code--there was no motion properly before the court before pronouncement of judgment and nothing for it to determine. Unlike Jaramillo, supra, there was no indication *373 by the court that it was "willing" to hear the motion but simply failed to take the procedural step of vacating oral judgment prior to entry in the minutes. Unlike Grake, supra, there is nothing to show that the parties and the court believed the court to be without jurisdiction to hear the motion because sentence had already been pronounced.
The motion to augment the record on appeal is denied.
The judgment is affirmed.
Herndon, J., and Fleming, J., concurred.
NOTES
[fn. 1]  1. Appellant has attached a copy of the motion to dismiss to his brief.

=== CASE 9738599 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:57:48.286667+00 ===

PIERCE, P. J.
This appeal is by the wife from an order by the trial court denying a motion to set aside an order vacating a portion of a divorce decree which declared defendant husband to be the father of a child, Diana. The record discloses he was not the natural father of the child nor had he adopted her. Grounds of the vacating order were that the court in originally making a declaration that Diana was the child of defendant had acted in excess of jurisdiction. Stated broadly, that is the sole question before this reviewing court.
The question, more specifically stated conversely, is an extremely compound one: It is:
(1) where a plaintiff wife makes a perjurious allegation in *4a verified complaint for divorce declaring a child not the child of the marriage to be one, and
(2) where the wife obtains a so-called “appearance and waiver” from her husband in which the child is not even mentioned, and
(3) where an officer of the court, appointed for that purpose, investigating, finds out from the parties that the child is not the child of the marriage, and has not been adopted by the husband and so states in a report submitted to the court, and
(4) where said report is read and considered by the court and filed as a part of the record and the truth of the matters stated therein is never challenged, and
(5) where the court at the hearing of the divorce forgets that the child is not the child of the parties and is encouraged so to forget by the wife (the husband not being present or represented) who repeats her statement that the child is that of the marriage and the court is thereby induced to sign a decree so finding, and
(6) where a year later the wife’s attorney presents a final decree (in which the false statement is effectually compounded by repetition) to a successor judge who signs said decree, and
(7) where more than 6 months elapse before the husband moves for, and the trial court grants, an order vacating those portions of the decrees finding the husband to be the father of the child, must a stepparent adoption thus created in absentia by misoperation of law be perpetuated by this court? The majority of this court holds that it need not and will affirm the judgment of the court below.
The appeal is upon (1) a clerk’s transcript which includes the probation officer’s report, and (2) the testimony taken at the hearing of the divorce. The facts before us on appeal show the following:
On April 16, 1962, Alpha Jo Swain filed a verified complaint alleging inter alia: ‘ ‘ That there are two minor children as the issue of said marriage, Shirley J. Swain and Diana L. Swain. ’ ’ She also alleged that defendant should be ordered to pay to plaintiff for the support of the minor children $156.90 per month until the entry of the final decree, $50 per month for each child thereafter. The complaint also alleged that plaintiff and defendant were married January 17, 1953, and *5had separated November 15, 1959. (The separation was thus over two years before the divorce action was brought.)
On April 19, 1962, there was signed, acknowledged and filed a statement by defendant Thomas E. Swain asserting that he “appears,” that he “admits service of copy of the summons and complaint,” and “stipulates that the within action may be heard without further notice to defendant, on the default calendar or otherwise.” At this point it should be noted defendant does not admit the allegations of the complaint, therefore he does not admit paternity of Diana; he does not even state that he has read the complaint; he does not consent that his default be taken. He was not represented by an attorney.
On May 10, 1962, upon the order of the late Honorable Arthur Coats, then Judge of the Superior Court of Sutter County, the assistant probation officer investigated the status of the children and submitted his report to the judge. The report was filed and is a part of the clerk’s transcript before us on this appeal. The report is based upon information given by both the plaintiff and the defendant. Pertinent here are the following statements: 1 ‘ There was one child born the issue of this marriage : Shirley Jean, age eight years. Plaintiff also has a child, Diane [Diana] Lynn, age thirteen years, from a previous marriage; Diane uses the name of Swain although she has never been legally adopted by the defendant.'’ (Italics added.)
On May 11, 1962, Judge Coats signed a statement attached to the report. It states: “I have read and considered the foregoing report of the Probation officer.” (Italics supplied.) Presumably copies of the report were made available to plaintiff, her attorney and to defendant before the divorce was heard.
The transcript of the testimony taken when the interlocutory decree was heard on May 14, 1962, is a part of the record brought before this court.1
Swain did not appear at the hearing. Plaintiff and her witness appeared with plaintiff’s attorney. The following questions and answers are set forth in the wife’s testimony: “Q. You and Mr. Swain have two children, is that correct Í A. That’s right. Q. Those children are both in your custody and *6control at this time? A. That’s right. . . . Q. Mr. Swain is in the United States Air Force stationed at Beale Air Force Base? A. Yes. Q. Do you get from him now $156.90 a month, or get it from the Government, yes? (No answer.) Q. What you are asking the Court so far as support of the children is that he allow you this amount of money for the period of one year, at which time the allotment would stop and you want a Court order that he pay $50.00 a month for each child? A. That’s right.” The court then asked whether he was out of the service at Beale and the attorney answered: “He won’t be out of the service, but part of this $156.90 she is getting is for her, and they won’t stop the allotment until the final decree is entered.2 So when the final decree is entered, we would like the order just to say that she get $50.00 a month for each child. The Court: Very well.”
One matter absent from the reporter’s transcript is as important as the testimony contained therein: the report of the probation officer is mentioned but the (then and now) undisputed fact contained therein that the child Diana was neither the natural nor adopted child of defendant husband was not disclosed to the judge. On the contrary, it was withheld from the judge who was expressly requested to find Diana to he the child of the parties, and to make allowance for her support beyond the period when there was any legal obligation of support by Swain. It will be noted that there is, to use Walter Lippmann’s polite expression, a sizeable “credibility gap” between Mrs. Swain’s statement to the probation officer regarding Diana’s paternity on the one hand and her complaint allegation and later testimony (led by her attorney) on the other hand. The significance of this will be discussed below.
On May 15, 1962, the wife’s attorney prepared, the court signed and there was filed an interlocutory decree. It contains two references to Shirley J. Swain and Diana L. Swain, “minor children of the parties hereto,” gives custody to plaintiff and $156.90 for their support until the entry of the final decree and thereafter $50 per month each “until each of said children reaches the age of majority or until the further order of any court of competent jurisdiction. ’ ’
*7A final judgment of divorce was entered May 15, 1963, by Honorable John G. Hauck as Superior Court Judge of Sutter County, who had succeeded Judge Coats upon the latter’s retirement. So far as the record indicates it was filed without affidavit (Cal. Rules of Court, rule 233). It provided that the provision of the interlocutory decree wherein it made provision for custody and support of the children be made binding to the same effect as if therein set forth in full.
On May 21, 1965, Swain, then represented by an attorney, noticed a motion which included as a ground that the court had acted in excess of its jurisdiction in the interlocutory and final decrees in declaring Swain to be the father of Diana.3
On June 15, 1965, Judge Hauck issued an order setting aside the provisions of the interlocutory and final decrees relating to the parentage and support of Diana upon the ground the court had acted in excess of jurisdiction.
The former Mrs. Swain moved that this order be vacated, and as stated, has appealed from the order denying this latter motion.
It is, of course, hornbook law, that a stepfather’s liability to support the child of his wife by a former marriage ordinarily ends in the absence of an adoption when he and the mother are divorced. (Civ. Code, § 209; Clevenger v. Clevenger, 189 Cal.App.2d 658, 665-666 [11 Cal.Rptr. 707, 90 A.L.R.2d 569] ; Anderson v. Anderson, 214 Cal. 414 [5 P.2d 881].) The late Judge Coats must be assumed to have been aware of this rule. This leads to an inevitable conclusion: that when he signed the interlocutory decree, after having heard Mrs. Swain give false testimony (in response to a leading question by her attorney) that Diana was the child of her marriage to Swain, Judge Coats had forgotten that both Swain and Mrs. Swain had informed his probation-officer-investigator who had informed him that that statement was not true.
When discussing the legal principles involved on this appeal, we keep in mind both the nature of the probation *8officer’s report in domestic relations proceedings and the status of the probation officer himself in making it. In 1951 the Legislature created in Los Angeles and San Francisco Counties new ministerial officers of the court called domestic relations investigators whose duty it is to investigate and report “all pertinent information as to the care, welfare and custody of the minor children of the parties to a divorce action.” It is provided that the report of such officers may upon stipulation be admitted as competent evidence to all matters contained therein. The investigator is required to be present at the trial and can be called to testify. (Code Civ. Proc., § 263, Stats. 1951, eh. 1360, p. 3275.) The old juvenile court law had had a similar provision giving county probation officers similar duties and powers (Welf. & Inst. Code, § 638.1, Stats. 1949, eh. 322, p. 601), and this has been carried over without change into the new juvenile court law (Welf. & Inst. Code, § 582, Stats. 1961, eh. 1616, p. 347). Stipulation as a condition to consideration of said report is not mentioned.  These reports like those of the domestic relations investigators have the force of evidence. (Forslund v. Forslund, 225 Cal.App.2d 476, 494, 495 [37 Cal.Rptr. 489].) As we see it, however, a significance attaches to these reports beyond the evidence of an ordinary witness. They are, of course, evidence, but they are more than that. Under the statutes cited the probation officer becomes, in a domestic relations proceeding, a special arm of the court to investigate the status of the children and report. True, the statements in the report may be challenged; the officer may be examined and cross-examined. But, as regards undisputed portions of the report, the officer is performing a function which a juvenile court judge might perform himself or even appoint a referee to perform. It is as though the court itself has made the investigation and had obtained the information. The trust is two-pronged: (1) we analogize uncontested facts to facts found by the court itself; (2) a party to the action, reading the report has, and should have, the right to rely upon acceptance, of such facts as official pronouncements—again, as though they were court found. Certainly that should be so where facts in the report are unchallenged and unchallengeable.
These considerations lead us to the conclusion, first, that no judicial estoppel exists here. We concede the rule of judicial estoppel by agreement, i.e., that when two spouses have stipulated to a fact upon the basis of which the court acts, the other party may not invoke the jurisdiction of the *9court to deny the agreement. (Rich v. Silver, 226 Cal.App.2d 60, 64-65 [37 Cal.Rptr. 749].) There was no stipulation or agreement here that Diana was Swain’s child. Appellant equates the so-called “appearance and waiver” with such a stipulation. It was not. Swain did not agree therein that Diana was his child either by birth or adoption. He did not even agree that his default might be taken. His stipulation, as we read it, “that the within action may be heard ... on the default calendar” was no more than a stipulation that his wife might obtain an uncontested divorce.
In the California system of code pleading no such pleading as an “appearance and waiver” is recognized. Permissible pleadings by a defendant are a demurrer, answer, cross-complaint and demurrer to the answer to a cross-complaint. (Code Civ. Proc., §422.) Perhaps in realization that procedural code provisions were enacted in a generation antedating the prevalence of uncontested divorces, i.e., divorces which are not truly adversary proceedings, the so-called “appearance and waiver,” would and should be recognized. It does not follow that such a pleading, if it can be called such, should be accepted as sufficient to effect a “stepchild” adoption in absentia. We have stated that the pleading did not stipulate to the fact of natural or adoptive parentage. Moreover, it did not even consent that a default be taken. So far as the record before us shows, no default was entered and perhaps none could have been since there is no proof as to where the complaint and summons were served or memorandum endorsement as required by Code of Civil Procedure section 670. In any event, of course, no divorce could have been granted by default. (Civ. Code, §130.) Here, even though Swain’s acknowledgment that he had received a copy of the complaint should be deemed an admission that he had read it, including the part which untruthfully alleged Diana was a child of the marriage, there followed before any hearing of the divorce a declaration by both the wife and husband to the court’s investigator, the probation officer, that Diana was not Swain’s child, the probation officer had so informed the court, and the record was set straight. The court had once recognized, then forgotten, the fact, and the judge’s forgetfulness was aided by the unilateral fraud of the wife. She, with the aid of her attorney, “unstraightened” the record. The husband was not in pari delicto. On the contrary, as we see it, he had a right to assume that the court would act upon the knowledge obtained from the report of the court’s own officer, not on the perjury *10of the wife’s complaint compounded by her perjured testimony. There was no estoppel by agreement.
Still to be determined is whether Swain was entitled to attack the decree collaterally by a motion to modify made two years after the entry of decree. Eight to such attack is limited to extrinsic fraud or mistake and to defects appearing on the face of the record. (See 3 Witkin Cal. Procedure (1954) Attack on Judgment in Trial Court, Judgment Void on its Face, § 65, p. 2117.) It is stated in 3 Witkin (idem., p. 2047) under the caption “Lack of Jurisdiction Shown by Record,” “A judgment ‘void on its face’ may be collaterally attacked. This is another way of saying that the presumption of jurisdiction is overcome when the defects may be shown without going outside the ‘record’ or ‘judgment roll’ including the pleadings, proof of service, findings or verdict, and judgment. . . .’’It will be noted that “judgment roll” has been used by Witkin synonymously with “record.” (See Borenstein v. Borenstein, 20 Cal.2d 379, 381 [125 P.2d 465] ; Johnson v. Hayes Cal. Builders, Inc., 60 Cal.2d 572, 576 [35 Cal.Rptr. 618, 387 P.2d 394], But see Witkin, New California Rules on Appeal (Jan. 1944) 17 So.Cal.L.Rev., p. 79, at p. 104.) Unless there is magic in semantics we cannot accept the rigidity of the so-called “judgment-roll” rule and unreasoningly apply it here. This appeal concerns a judgment either valid or void (in part) because of lack of subject-matter jurisdiction.  A court has no power to declare a child not the child of a defendant, either by birth or adoption, to be one, and no power to saddle the nonfather with the support of such child until her majority or emancipation, i.e., it has no such power when nonparentage appears on the face of the record. On the other hand, when the question of parentage or adoption is an issue properly litigated with both parties afforded a fair and equal chance to present evidence, the court does have jurisdiction to decide the issue. The words “judgment roll” are not an open sesame conjuring up the solution to whether presence or lack of subject matter jurisdiction appears “on the face of the record”—not in that part of domestic relations proceedings applicable to children. The facts in the report of the domestic relations officer affirmed and accepted by the parties, read and considered by the court, and filed as a part of the record do present the answer. The report is, as we have shown, sui generis. It is inter alia a means by which the court, acting through a statutorily created agency, ascertains the existence of matters upon which *11its subject matter jurisdiction depends.  Moreover, in this particular case, and the same would be true in every case where a divorce is granted after an “appearance and waiver,” there is no judgment roll as defined by statute.4 Therefore, if there is to be any record at all comprehensible on collateral attack, the report mentioned must be deemed a part thereof. (Appellant must have so regarded it. She brought the report up as a part of the clerk’s transcript on appeal.) The “permissible pleadings” portion of Code of Civil Procedure section 422 has not been changed since 1907. The judgment roll definition in Code of Civil Procedure section 670 has not been changed since 1872. Yet in the period of nearly a century which has intervened a whole system of both procedural and substantive law respecting domestic relations and particularly uncontested divorces has been created in which the report of the probation officer as it relates to child welfare has become an integral part. To keep apace, it should be deemed a part of “the face of the record.” Law which puts it there need not be statutory. It can be properly case-made. Again, validity of the distinction between ‘1 extrinsic” and “intrinsic” fraud should not stagnate in a pool of artificial definitions but should depend upon the nature of the record in the particular proceeding in which that fraud is being examined.
Extrinsic fraud is defined as fraud practiced directly upon the party seeking relief from the judgment which prevents him from presenting all his case before the court. (Ringwalt v. Bank of America, 3 Cal.2d 680, 684 [45 P.2d 967].)
In Jorgensen v. Jorgensen, 32 Cal.2d 13, our Supreme Court states at page 18 [193 P.2d 728] : “. . . The public policy underlying the principle of res judicata that there must be an end to litigation requires that the issues involved in a case be set at rest by a final judgment, even though a party has persuaded the court or the jury by false allegations supported by perjured testimony. [But] this policy must be considered together with the policy that a party shall not be *12deprived of a fair adversary proceeding in which fully to present his ease. Thus, equitable relief will be denied where it is sought to relitigate an issue involved in the former proceeding on the ground that allegations or proof of either party was fraudulent or based on mistake, but such relief may be granted if the party seeking it was precluded by fraud or the mistake of the other party from participating in the proceeding or from fully presenting his case. ...”
And the court adds on page 19 : “The terms ‘intrinsic’ and ‘extrinsic’ fraud or mistake are generally accepted as appropriate to describe the two different categories of cases to which these policies of the law apply. (Freeman, ibid., p. 2568 [Judgments, Vol. 3 (5th ed.)]). They do not constitute, however, a simple and infallible formula to determine whether in a given case the facts surrounding the fraud or mistake warrant equitable relief from a judgment. [Citations.] It is necessary to examine the facts in the light of the policy that a party who failed to assemble all his evidence at the trial should not be privileged to relitigate a case, as well as the policy permitting a party to seek relief from a judgment entered in a proceeding in which he was deprived of a fair opportunity fully to present his ease. ’ ’
The facts of this case bring it within the latter category. Unrepresented by an attorney, unlearned in the law, Swain, through ruse or otherwise, was induced to sign a document unrecognized under our system of code pleading, having not the slightest reference to the purpose for which it is now proposed to give it legitimation. He was visited by a court officer and affirmed a fact which his wife also affirmed—that Diana was not his child. The fact was included in a report which was by law a record of the fact. It was, and is, uncontroverted. It was referred to the court, read by the court, which endorsed its understanding of the matter, and the report was filed with the other papers in the case as a part of the record. The court clearly forgot a fact plainly apparent on the face of that record. The forgetfulness was not only permitted to continue by silence, it was actively shored up by false statements, known to be false and meant to fool the judge that he would make a demand for support payments beyond his power to award in the light of the true facts. The truth was as effectively concealed from the court as though an order of adoption had been presented for the court’s signature upon the pretense that it was a divorce decree. The same fraud upon the defendant, plus a fraud upon the court (in *13the person of Judge Hauck, Judge Coats’ successor) was perpetrated when the final decree was presented for signature and filing. This reviewing court will not be made a party to the fraud. We can see in this case no difference than if we were asked to give approval to a divorce decree in which a marriage was alleged but which it was admitted to us on appeal never had existed.
It has been contended that for all that appears the husband knowingly consented to the support arrangement, then changed his mind. That issue could have been asserted before the trial court on the husband’s motion. It was, however, not raised and no agreement to support was claimed then or is even claimed here. It is not before us. All that is before us is that “on the face of the record,” counting the probation officer's report with its uncontroverted statement as a part thereof, it is an established fact that Swain is not the father of Diana, that he never adopted her, and is not liable to support her. That part of the record was concealed by fraud and was thus subject to collateral attack. The trial court properly so determined.
The order is affirmed.
Regan, J., concurred.
It is to be noted that this transcript was not before Judge Hauek when he made Ms order vacating the interlocutory and final decrees of divorce on June 15, 1965. It was prepared thereafter and submitted to this court at the request of the wife’s attorney.
There was nothing reprehensible on the part of Swain in permitting his wife to collect an allotment from the government which included an allowance for Diana. Until the divorce became final that allowance is payable to a stepchild by the government as a matter of law. (37 U.S.C.A., § 401.) Thus, if all that the wife originally sought by her perjury was the government allotment the deception practiced was unnecessary.
The affidavit accompanying the motion is not a model of draftsmanship. It alleges only by indirection that Swain is not the father of Diana by referring to the report of the probation officer. It must be added, however, that the record shows the sufficiency of the affidavit was not challenged, the motion was unopposed, and the fact Swain is not the father of Diana has never been disputed. In fact, Diana was born four years before Swain and Alpha Jo Swain were married. Also alleged in Swain’s supporting affidavit—and it is a fact which is undisputed—after the dissolution of the Swain marriage, Mrs. Swain again married.
Under Code Civ. Proc. § 670, when a complaint is not answered the judgment roll consists only of the summons, with affidavit of proof of service, the complaint "with a memorandum indorsed thereon that the default of the defendant in not answering was entered,” and a copy of the judgment. Those documents are not all before us in this record. Of those named we have only the complaint, proof of service of summons and interlocutory and final decrees. There is no summons, no memorandum, no entry of default.

=== CASE 9738600 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:57:48.292324+00 ===

FRIEDMAN, J.
I dissent. The principle of judgment finality stimulates less fervor than the urgings of visceral justice. The extent and limitations of res judicata in divorce cases were summarized by us in Farley v. Farley, 227 Cal. App.2d 1, 8 [38 Cal.Rptr. 357]. The law is not inflexibly harsh with a divorced spouse who finds himself saddled with an invalid judgment past the point of appeal. He may attack the judgment in a collateral proceeding if it is void on the face of the judgment roll. (3 Witkin, Cal. Procedure (1954) pp. 2047-2048, 2117.) He may also seek equitable relief, by motion or separate action, for extrinsic fraud or mistake which prevented him from presenting his case. (Ibid., pp. 2124-2132.)
Upon collateral attack the judgment roll is the only evidence on the question of jurisdiction. (Johnson v. Hayes Cal. Builders, 60 Cal.2d 572, 576 [35 Cal.Rptr. 618, 387 P.2d 394] ; Estate of Wise, 34 Cal.2d 376, 382 [210 P.2d 497].) Limited by Code of Civil Procedure section 670, the judgment roll in this case is impeccable. The majority opinion stretches the judgment roll beyond its statutory limits, then finds a flaw in *14it. Such a procedure was flatly rejected in Borenstein v. Borenstein, 20 Cal.2d 379, 381 [125 P.2d 465], in which the court refused to permit expansion of the judgment roll by inclusion of a custody report.
Nor has the husband alleged extrinsic fraud or mistake. For all that appears, he knowingly consented to the support arrangement, then changed his mind when the financial burden shifted from the shoulders of the federal government to his own. Nevertheless, the majority opinion fills the deficiency by hypothesizing a deceived trial court and a mulcted husband.
If the husband was not misled, the wife’s apparent perjury does not signal destruction of the support award. “The public purpose underlying the principle of res judicata that there must be an end to litigation requires that the issues involved in a case be set at rest by a final judgment, even though a party has persuaded the court or the jury by false allegations supported by perjured testimony. This policy must be considered together with the policy that a party shall not be deprived of a fair adversary proceeding in which fully to present his case. Thus, equitable relief will be denied where it is sought to relitigate an issue involved in the former proceeding on the ground that allegations or proof of either party was fraudulent or based on mistake, but such relief may be granted if the party seeking it was precluded by fraud or the mistake of the other party from participating in the proceeding or from fully presenting his case.” (Jorgensen v. Jorgensen, 32 Cal.2d 13, 18 [193 P.2d 728] ; see also Howard v. Howard, 27 Cal.2d 319 [163 P.2d 439] ; Hendricks v. Hendricks, 216 Cal. 321 [14P.2d 83].)
Far from expressing fraud or mistake, the present record is more compatible with knowing consent. The husband’s “appearance and waiver” was like a default in that it manifested his consent to the relief sought by the wife’s complaint upon the conditions alleged in the complaint. (Brown v. Brown, 170 Cal. 1, 5 [147 P. 1168]; Spurr v. Daniels, 152 Cal.App.2d 867, 870 [313 P.2d 621]; Garcia v. Garcia, 148 Cal.App.2d 147, 153-154 [306 P.2d 80].) According to the majority opinion, the appearance and waiver was efficacious to switch on the judicial machinery but did not require the signer to accept the machinery’s output. Judicial machinery should not be frustrated in this cavalier fashion. I would reverse the order and permit the husband to renew his motion, claiming extrinsic fraud or mistake if he is able.

=== CASE 2216739 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:17.310291+00 ===

95 Mich. App. 191 (1980)
290 N.W.2d 121
SCOTT
v.
STACEY'S MOVING LTD
Docket No. 43327.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided January 23, 1980.
Brimacombe & Schlecte, P.C. (by Kurt R. Thornbladh), for plaintiff.
Ellis, Talcott & Ohlgren, P.C. (by Ralph C. Keyes), for defendants.
*192 Before: T.M. BURNS, P.J., and J.H. GILLIS and BASHARA, JJ.
PER CURIAM.
Plaintiff appeals by leave granted from an interlocutory order to separate the trial of the issues of liability and damages.
In this automobile negligence action the trial judge ordered that the issues of liability and damages were to be tried separately. Plaintiff claims that this order was an abuse of the trial court's discretionary authority under GCR 1963, 505.2. We agree.
In Peasley v Lapeer Circuit Judge, 373 Mich 222; 128 NW2d 515 (1964), the Michigan Supreme Court held that discretion to separate issues that constituted a single claim was to be strictly limited. The issues must be clearly separable, and, even if theoretically separable, they might become practically interdependent when the same witnesses must be relied upon for proof of both issues.
In the instant case, the trial judge stated that the reasons for separation centered on the prejudicial effect of the extent of damages and the recovery of a workmen's compensation award, which would cause the jury to question why the plaintiff was not suing his employer or the driver of the plaintiff's vehicle. We find that these reasons do not meet the very strong showing of prejudice as required by Peasley, particularly when the plaintiff stated that a number of the same witnesses would testify on liability and damages.
In every negligence trial the injured party is required to prove damages as an element of a prima facie case. At the hearing on the motion the defendants failed to distinguish this case from any other negligence action. If the defendants fear the possible prejudicial effect of damages on the issue *193 of liability, the proper remedy would involve an objection under MRE 403, or the request for a limiting instruction under MRE 105.
Likewise, plaintiff's recovery of a workmen's compensation award does not amount to a showing of substantial prejudice. The fact that the jury may question why the plaintiff was not suing his employer or the driver of the plaintiff's vehicle could result in prejudice to the plaintiff as well as the defendant. The jury may very well decide that the missing defendants were liable and find no liability on the part of the named defendants.
Despite defendants' argument to the contrary, the complete change in judicial personnel on the Supreme Court since the 1964 Peasley decision does not diminish its authority as the proper interpretation of the current law in Michigan. The promulgation of the new MRE 403 does not alter the trial court's authority to order separation of issues under GCR 1963, 505.2.
The decision of the lower court is vacated and the case is remanded to the circuit court.

=== CASE 2216741 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:17.327776+00 ===

250 Cal.App.2d 799 (1967)
JEROME LeMIRE, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
LOUIE QUEIROLO, Defendant and Appellant.
Civ. No. 11411.
California Court of Appeals. Third Dist.
May 8, 1967.
Tebbe, Correia & Kleaver and J. P. Correia for Defendant and Appellant.
Albert H. Newton, Jr., Charles E. Hurley and Ross L. Bigler for Plaintiff and Respondent.
PIERCE, P. J.
The appeal is by defendant Louie Queirolo from a judgment following a jury verdict for plaintiff Jerome LeMire in the sum of $12,000 against said Queirolo as an individual and against defendants Walter Everett Lyman and Caruso Produce Express for injuries incurred in a multi-vehicle accident on January 3, 1965.  [fn. 1]*801
The principal question on appeal is sufficiency of the evidence to support a judgment against Queirolo as an individual.
[1] We disallow Queirolo's contention that he was not individually liable. Our holding of liability is based upon (1) Queirolo's estoppel (under circumstances we will discuss below) to assert corporate ownership and operation of the truck involved in the accident; also (2) independent substantial evidence supporting the jury's implied finding of Queirolo's individual ownership, operation and liability.
No argument is made that the driver of the Queirolo truck was not negligent proximately contributing to the accident.
On the day of the accident James Brown, its driver, had left unattended the northbound Queirolo truck and semitrailer on a snow-covered, winding two- lane highway in Siskiyou County. California Highway Patrolman Donald Lack arrived and started directing traffic around the equipment, but defendant Lyman driving the Caruso Produce Express truck failed to notice the obstruction to traffic and struck five vehicles (which in turn struck two others). Plaintiff, the driver of one of the five cars, was injured.
He sued Caruso Produce Express and Lyman. He also sued Louie Queirolo, the assumed  [fn. 2] owner of the wholesale produce business operating the stalled equipment, and James Brown, the driver of said equipment. Queirolo was served; Brown was not. (See footnote 1.)
Appellant Queirolo's answer denied all allegations of the complaint but denied them generally. He also alleged contributory negligence and assumption of risk. During the steps preceding trial he also submitted 26 interrogatories and took depositions. In his pretrial statement, although his general denial was repeated, Queirolo also reiterated the affirmative defenses mentioned and requested further discovery. The pretrial conference order framed the issues as follows: "The issues are negligence; all defendants allege contributory negligence. Furthermore, defendant Queirolo alleges assumption of risk. (The issues are as set forth in the pleadings except as herein stated.)"
At that state of the proceedings no disclosure was made of any contention that the business which Queirolo operated was incorporated or that the truck belonged to or was being operated *802 by a corporation. Even on the first day of the trial, which started on November 9, 1965, such disclosure was withheld with apparent deliberation. The court asked: "Is there a question concerning ownership of the truck?" This question was answered by the attorney for Queirolo as follows: "Our defendant was not there. He has no way of knowing what the matters were." On the second day of the trial Queirolo's claimed shield of a corporation emerged.
Queirolo then, for the first time, testified the business was owned by a family corporation. The testimony was corroborated by his manager.
The case is strikingly similar to Mayberry v. Coca Cola Bottling Co., 244 Cal.App.2d 350 [53 Cal.Rptr. 317], decided by this court August 1966 (hearing by Supreme Court denied).
There a complaint mistakenly named a corporation defendant in a personal injury action rather than a partnership bearing the same name. The corporation filed an answer in which it denied the allegations and also, as here, set up an affirmative defense of contributory negligence. There was no hint of a dual identity. There, as here, counsel for the corporation took depositions from the plaintiff. "... The corporation's pretrial statement listed several issues, without the slightest intimation that plaintiff's mistake in identity would be raised at the trial. Plaintiff's counsel, apparently unaware of impending procedural bombardment, filed a routine pretrial statement indicating the issues to be negligence, injury and damages. The court entered a pretrial conference order substantially adopting the defendant's pretrial statement. ..." (Idem., 244 Cal.App.2d at pp. 351-352.) Plaintiff's error did not become apparent until at the trial the sales manager of the partnership was called by plaintiff as an adverse witness. Service of process had never been made on the partnership, nor had it ever appeared in the lawsuit. In Mayberry this court stated at page 354: "The court's file itself exhibited a series of steps by the corporate defendant which could only perpetuate plaintiff's error beyond the point of repair. A defendant with a shatterproof alibi had no need to file an answer alleging contributory negligence, no need to take the plaintiff's deposition." (Italics added.)
There is a close parallel between the conduct of defendant Queirolo in the case before this court and the conduct of the corporate defendant in the Mayberry case. Here, too, affirmative defenses were pleaded, reiterated at pretrial, and intensive *803 processes of discovery were pursued by a defendant who, if his contentions of corporate ownership and operation were true, should have had no interest in the litigation. Throughout, until the explosion touched off by Queirolo at the trial, he conducted himself as the actual owner and operator of the truck and business involved in the accident. This he did with knowledge of plaintiff's belief the right defendant had been named--a belief which, as the discussion below will develop, had been furthered by the highway patrolmen's investigation and their report.
We cannot, of course, be sure that Queirolo's counsel followed the almost invariable practice of attorneys in personal injury litigation of examining the available data from the filed accident report. If he did, he not only knew the fact, he knew the source, of plaintiff's mistake--if there was a mistake--regarding the entity sued. As in the Mayberry case, the mistake did not become apparent until the trial was underway. Even then, as we have noted above, Queirolo's counsel prolonged the deception by evading the court's question as to whether ownership was being contested.
Application of the rule in Mayberry is different than here. Applicability is the same. It is true that in Mayberry the question was one of the bar of the statute of limitations which is not true in the case before us because the case was tried before the one-year statute (Code Civ. Proc.,  340, subd. 3) had expired. Here there is an attempt to upset the verdict of a jury. In one respect the case at bench is stronger than Mayberry. There no doubt existed that the wrong entity had been sued. Here there is a conflict in the evidence. The conflict is whether the corporation, consisting, as Queirolo himself put it, of "Myself, my wife, and a bookkeeper," was real or a wraith. Queirolo in response to the first question asked him when examined under Code of Civil Procedure section 2055 was asked and answered: "Q. Mr. Queirolo, what is your profession or occupation? A. I'm a wholesale produce dealer." (Italics supplied.)
The facts above show, and we hold, that there was a clear and deliberate plan and design (if indeed a bona fide corporation was a proper defendant to have been sued  [fn. 3]) to take *804 advantage of a mistake in which Queirolo was a sedulous actor in perpetuating and perhaps in perpetrating.
The adversary system does not make of the law a mere game of rules. Queirolo tried to do that here. He was playing hide and seek or blindman's buff with plaintiff, with the jury, and with the trial court from the outset of this litigation and throughout its course.
[2] Moreover, there was evidence which, while it was not of the strongest probative value, was substantial that Queirolo, as an individual, was in fact the owner of the equipment and of the business in which it was being used. As to the latter fact we have noted above Queirolo's testimony in answer to the first question asked him when he was examined under section 2055, "I'm a wholesale produce dealer." There was also evidence that at the time of this accident the truck was carrying a cargo of lettuce from Brawley, California, to Oregon, consigned to Safeway Stores.
Two California Highway Patrolmen, Officers Lack and Sosey, testified on direct examination that there was painted on both doors of the cab of the truck "Louis Queirolo Produce" or "Louie Queirolo Trucking." California Vehicle Code section 27900 requires that the name of the owner, lessor or lessee be displayed on equipment carrying freight for hire. Two photographs of the truck are in evidence. One of them (plaintiff's exhibit 3) shows painted in large letters on the left door: "Louie Queirolo Trucking," and underneath that "Portland, Ore." Separating these inscriptions is what appears to us to be a narrow line. Queirolo's counsel when cross-examining Officer Lack produced a magnifying glass and asked the witness if the letters "I-n-c" were written there. He evoked a speculative and equivocal opinion from that witness that they might have been. Officer Sosey could remember nothing he saw that indicated the owner was a corporation. He had stood beside the truck door and was thus in the best position to have seen what was written thereon. We have examined the photograph under a magnifying glass of the highest power available to us. We cannot distinguish the letters "I-n-c," cannot positively state they are not there but have concluded the jury was entitled to draw its own inferences after *805 viewing the photograph and after hearing the testimony of the officers.
The 1965 registration certificates in evidence show both the truck and trailer to be registered to "Louie Queirolo Trucking Inc." Queirolo and his manager stated these were on the equipment at the time of the accident. Officer Sosey, however, testified 1964 certificates and license plates were then on the equipment. Either these, or the door inscriptions, or information received from Brown (the driver of the equipment) that he drove for "Louie Queirolo," or all of these facts in combination, could have been the basis for the statement in the accident report which Officer Sosey prepared that "Louie Queirolo" and not a corporation was the truck owner and employer of the driver.
[3] Appellant contends the statement of Brown to Officer Sosey that he was driving for Queirolo was improperly admitted in evidence as hearsay.
The rule is well established that the extrajudicial statements of an agent are not admissible to prove the fact of agency without independent evidence of the agency. (Kast v. Miller & Lux, 159 Cal. 723, 728 [115 P. 932]; Swinnerton v. Argonaut Land & Dev. Co., 112 Cal. 375, 379 [44 P. 719]; People v. Dye, 75 Cal. 108, 113 [16 P. 537]; Fesler v. Rawlins, 43 Cal.App.2d 541, 544 [111 P.2d 380].)
In the instant case the extrajudicial statement by Brown to Officer Sosey that he was driving for Queirolo was admitted by the trial judge on the theory it was a part of the res gestae and thus an exception to the hearsay rule. There is authority for such admissibility. (See notes in 67 A.L.R. 170 and 150 A.L.R. 623.)
We experience difficulty, however, in classifying Brown's declarations as properly a part of the res gestae rule. Neither the subject matter under discussion between Brown and the officer nor the circumstances under which the declarations were made seems to indicate the type of hearsay intended to qualify under the res gestae exception to the hearsay rule. (Cf. People v. Basaure, 235 Cal.App.2d 21, 37-38 [44 Cal.Rptr. 831]: see Evid. Code,  1240.)
There is another exception to the hearsay exclusion to which the declaration of Brown bears a closer resemblance. Evidence Code section 1224 restates a rule that "When the liability ... of a party to a civil action is based in whole or in part upon the liability ... of the declarant ... evidence of a statement made by the declarant is as admissible *806 against the party as it would be if offered against the declarant in an action involving that liability ...." That rule, quoted in material part, is said in the California Law Revision Commission comment to said Evidence Code section to restate Code of Civil Procedure section 1851 (in effect when this case was tried).  [fn. 4] That section was applied in Ingram v. Bob Jaffe Co., 139 Cal.App.2d 193, 198 [293 P.2d 132] (hearing by Supreme Court denied) where, as stated in the California Law Revision Commission comment, "a statement of a person permitted to operate a vehicle was admitted against the owner of the vehicle in an action seeking to hold the owner liable on the derivative liability of vehicle owners established by Vehicle Code Section 17150." (But note comment of Justice Stone in Markley v. Beagle,   [fn. *](Cal.App.) 54 Cal.Rptr. 916.)
Whether or not admission of the declaration of Brown was proper is not decisive here. If error, it was harmless. We see no reasonable probability the jury would have reached an opposite conclusion had the error not occurred. (Cal. Const. art. VI,  13;  [fn. ] Vasquez v. Alameda, 49 Cal.2d 674, 677 [321 P.2d 1]; Wilkinson v. Southern Pac. Co., 224 Cal.App.2d 478, 484 [36 Cal.Rptr. 689]; Martin v. Pacific Gas & Elec. Co., 204 Cal.App.2d 316, 332-333 [22 Cal.Rptr. 291].)
It may be stated at the outset that Brown's extrajudicial statement that he was driving for "Louie Queirolo" had minimal probative value. Any reasonable jury would realize that a truck driver would know little and care less whether his boss ran his business as an individual or as a family-owned corporation. But finally and conclusively, the evasive procedural practices of defendant designed, as we have shown, to hide the corporate entity to delude plaintiff must inevitably have left the jury as scornful of the deception as they leave this court in declaring an estoppel to exist.
The appeals from the order denying motion for a new trial are dismissed as the order is not appealable.
The judgment on the verdict in favor of plaintiff and against Queirolo is affirmed. A motion for judgment in favor of Queirolo notwithstanding the verdict was purportedly *807 granted by the court. Argument pro and con has been made whether the judgment on said motion was timely made. We do not enter that debate. The judgment notwithstanding the verdict was in any event erroneous and is vacated.
Friedman, J., concurred.
NOTES
[fn. 1]  1. Defendants Lyman and Caruso Produce Express filed timely notices of appeal but have subsequently abandoned their appeals, which we will dismiss. Another defendant, James Brown, driver of the Queirolo equipment, was not served.
[fn. 2]  2. We explain our use of the word "assumed" hereafter.
[fn. 3]  3. After having put the testimony of Queirolo and his manager into evidence stating that the former's business was incorporated, Queirolo's counsel then sought with some success to block all efforts by plaintiff to prove that it was not. All questions on cross-examination calculated to test whether the corporation was fact or sham were objected to on the ground that the corporation was not a party. These objections were sustained. This was error. Since, as stated, the existence of this corporation had emerged as a factor in the case only on the second day of the trial, its reality both as owner of the truck and of the business of hauling was an issue and exclusion of evidence relevant to that issue was error.
[fn. 4]  4. That section provided: "And where the question in dispute between the parties is the obligation or duty of a third person, whatever would be the evidence for or against such person is prima facie evidence between the parties."
[fn. *]  *. Reporter's Note: A hearing was granted by the Supreme Court on February 1, 1967. The final opinion of that court is reported in 66 Cal.2d 951 [59 Cal.Rptr. 809, 429 P.2d 129].
[fn. ]  . Reporter's Note: Amendment adopted Nov. 8, 1966.

=== CASE 2216743 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:17.338659+00 ===

290 N.W.2d 658 (1980)
205 Neb. 865
Shirley Lavon BURTON, Appellee,
v.
Richard Cecil BURTON, Appellant.
No. 42754.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
April 1, 1980.
Cunningham Law Office, P. C., McCook, for appellant.
*659 Sinor, Blount & Sebby, McCook, for appellee.
Heard before KRIVOSHA, C. J., and BOSLAUGH, McCOWN, CLINTON, BRODKEY, WHITE, and HASTINGS, JJ.
BOSLAUGH, Justice.
This is an appeal in a proceeding for the dissolution of a marriage. The trial court dissolved the marriage; divided the property; awarded alimony to the petitioner; and awarded custody of the parties' minor daughter to the respondent. The respondent has appealed and contends the award of alimony and the division of the real property was erroneous.
The parties were married on October 20, 1956. They have three children, two of whom have reached their majority. Rhonda Sue, the youngest child, is now 15.
The petitioner is not a high school graduate and has no particular training or skills. During the marriage she worked as a babysitter in her home for several children. At the time of trial she had a temporary job earning $3.25 per hour.
The respondent has been employed as a postal clerk for over 13 years. At the time of trial his annual salary was approximately $17,000.
The major asset owned by the parties was their home and surrounding acreage. Its appraised value at the time of trial was $69,000, subject to a mortgage in the amount of approximately $36,000. The parties had accumulated household goods which the petitioner valued at $15,000. The respondent estimated their value at $2,000.
The trial court awarded custody of the couple's minor child, Rhonda Sue, to the respondent and awarded him the use of the family residence until Rhonda Sue ceased to live on the property or until June 1, 1983, whichever event occurred first. During this period, the respondent was ordered to keep the premises in good repair and pay all taxes and insurance premiums. Upon the occurrence of either event, the property was to be sold. The remaining encumbrances on the property, the expenses of the sale, and the principal payments on the mortgage made by the respondent between the date of the judgment and the sale were to be deducted from the proceeds of the sale. One-half of the money remaining from the proceeds of the sale was to be paid to the petitioner.
In addition to her share in the proceeds from the sale of the family residence, the petitioner was awarded $9,500 in permanent alimony, payable at the rate of $100 per month, until the sale of the residence, with the balance then due to be paid in full at the time of the sale of the realty. The petitioner was also awarded a few of the household goods.
The respondent contends the trial court should not have awarded alimony to petitioner and that the award which was made was excessive. He further contends that the division of the real property was patently unfair.
The rules for determining the division of property in an action for dissolution of marriage provide no mathematical formula by which such awards can be precisely determined. Such awards are to be determined by the facts in each case. Matlock v. Matlock, 205 Neb. 357, 287 N.W.2d 690 (1980). The fixing of alimony rests in the sound discretion of the District Court and will not be disturbed on appeal in the absence of an abuse of discretion. Ulmer v. Ulmer, 205 Neb. 351, 287 N.W.2d 685 (1980). In a proper case, the division of property and the matter of alimony may be considered together. Ragains v. Ragains, 204 Neb. 50, 281 N.W.2d 516 (1979).
When considered together, we find no error in the division of property and the award of alimony which was made in this case. The alimony which was awarded to the petitioner equalized the division of the property and was not an abuse of discretion by the trial court.
The judgment of the District Court is affirmed and the petitioner is awarded $350 for the services of her attorney in this court.
AFFIRMED.

=== CASE 2216746 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:17.374606+00 ===

95 Mich. App. 396 (1980)
290 N.W.2d 156
PEOPLE
v.
KILLARNEY
Docket No. 78-2326.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided February 6, 1980.
Frank J. Kelley, Attorney General, Robert A. Derengoski, Solicitor General, Edward J. Grant, Prosecuting Attorney, and John L. Wildeboer, Assistant Prosecuting Attorney, for the people.
Susskind, Hedstrom & Falahee, P.C., for defendant on appeal.
Before: R.M. MAHER, P.J., and MacKENZIE and J.H. PIERCEY,[*] JJ.
PER CURIAM.
The people appeal as of right from an order of the Jackson Circuit Court granting defendant's motion for directed verdict in a prosecution for felonious assault, contrary to MCL 750.82; MSA 28.277.
The court granted the motion on the ground that the people had failed to show that the defendant's actions had placed anyone in fear. While this element may suffice to establish that an assault took place, it is not a necessary element of assault. People v Sanford, 402 Mich 460; 265 NW2d 1 (1978). A criminal assault may occur where there is an intentional attempt or offer to harm another, together with the present ability to act. People v Sanford, supra, at 477, People v Carlson, 160 Mich 426; 125 NW 361 (1910), see People v Syakovich, 32 Mich App 356; 188 NW2d 642 (1971), People v Curtis Williams, 57 Mich App *398 612; 226 NW2d 584 (1975). Moreover, felonious assault may be established by the showing of an intent by the defendant to put the victim in reasonable fear or apprehension of an immediate battery. See People v Joeseype Johnson, 407 Mich 196; 284 NW2d 718 (1979).
The trial court erred when it granted defendant's motion for directed verdict. However, defendant may not be retried for this offense. The trial court's erroneous decision was a determination of guilt or innocence on the facts of the case. Therefore, retrial is barred by the constitutional prohibition against placing defendants in double jeopardy. People v Smith (On Rehearing), 89 Mich App 478; 280 NW2d 862 (1979), Sanabria v United States, 437 US 54; 98 S Ct 2170; 57 L Ed 2d 43 (1978), Fong Foo v United States, 369 US 141; 82 S Ct 671; 7 L Ed 2d 629 (1962), United States v Scott, 437 US 82; 98 S Ct 2187; 57 L Ed 2d 65 (1978), People v Killingsworth, 80 Mich App 45; 263 NW2d 278 (1977).
Thus, we hold that the trial court erred, but that the double jeopardy provisions of the Michigan and Federal Constitutions prevent the retrial of defendant.
NOTES
[*]  Circuit judge, sitting on the Court of Appeals by assignment.

=== CASE 2216752 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:17.442835+00 ===

290 N.W.2d 621 (1980)
CITY OF ZUMBROTA, Appellant,
v.
STRAFFORD WESTERN EMIGRATION COMPANY, etc., et al., Respondents.
No. 49670.
Supreme Court of Minnesota.
March 21, 1980.
Rockne & Rockne and David A. Rockne, Zumbrota, for appellant.
Lawrence & Costello and Patrick J. Costello, Red Wing, for respondents.
Heard, considered, and decided by the court en banc.
*622 PETERSON, Justice.
Plaintiff, City of Zumbrota, appeals from an order of the trial court finding plaintiff not entitled to a determination that it is the owner of certain real property in fee simple absolute without restraint of full powers of alienation and enjoining plaintiff from selling the property or terminating or otherwise interfering with its use as a public square.
The real property that is the subject of this action is designated a public square on a plat of the Town of Zumbrota filed in 1856 by the Strafford Western Emigration Company. The plat contains the following language:
We the undersigned Trustees of the Strafford Western Emigration Company, Proprietors of the Town of Zumbrota, hereby certify that we have caused the said Town to be surveyed and plotted, that below is a correct plot thereof, and we do hereby give the Streets Alley and Public Square of said Town for public use.
From 1856 until the present, the property has been maintained by plaintiff and used as a public park. Plaintiff now wishes to sell the property to a private developer for construction of a senior citizens' residence. In August 1977, plaintiff commenced this action, seeking a judgment determining it to be the owner of the property in fee simple absolute without restraint of full powers of alienation and determining defendants to have no estate or interest in or lien upon the property. Defendants Conrad F. and Isabelle F. Hernlem, Eugene and Leona Jacobson, Nora B. Lothrop, Emil P. and Olga H. Burrs, Florence I. and Peter Hovde, all owners of property abutting the public square, answered and by counterclaim sought a permanent injunction prohibiting plaintiff from conveying the public square property or terminating or otherwise interfering with its use as a public square.[1]
In March 1978, the legislature enacted a statute specifically authorizing plaintiff to sell the public square property.[2] On September 14, 1978, the trial court determined that plaintiff does not own the property in fee simple absolute without restraint of full powers of alienation and issued the injunction requested by defendants. We affirm the decision of the trial court.
The effect of the language included on the plat of the Town of Zumbrota, "we do hereby give the Streets Alley and Public Square of said Town for public use," is a dedication by the Strafford Western Emigration Company of the public square for public use. How plaintiff may use property so dedicated is the issue raised by this appeal.
1. Headley v. City of Northfield, 227 Minn. 458, 35 N.W.2d 606 (1949), involved the use to which property dedicated as a public square for public use might properly be put and controls our decision in this case. In 1856, John W. North and his wife platted as the Town of Northfield certain land owned by North. In the plat, they dedicated the public square for public use. The square was used thereafter as a public park. During the years 1946 to 1948, however, the city developed and adopted a plan to convert more than one-half of the public square into a high school athletic field and playground. Several Northfield taxpayers, some of whom owned property abutting the public square, sued to enjoin the city and its contractor from carrying out the plan.
The court found that the public square involved in Headley did not belong to the city but rather was "the property of the dedicator or his successors in interest, in which the city, as trustee for the benefit of the public and not in its own right as such, has such an interest as is necessary to enjoy the use thereof as a public square." 227 Minn. at 463, 35 N.W.2d at 609. The court found that the city, as trustee of the public square, had a duty "to devote the public square to the uses intended by the dedicator." *623 227 Minn. at 464, 35 N.W.2d at 610. Any use of the public square inconsistent with the purpose of the dedication would therefore constitute a breach of trust.
The court said in Headley that a public square is commonly intended to be "an open tract of land for use for purposes of free passage or of ornamentation and improvement as grounds of pleasure, amusement, recreation, or health" to which all members of the public have free access. 227 Minn. at 463-64, 35 N.W.2d at 609. The court found that using the public square as a high school athletic field and playground would be inconsistent with the purpose for which the square was dedicated because it would necessitate the exclusion of the general public from the square. 227 Minn. at 465-66, 35 N.W.2d at 610. Accordingly, the court enjoined the city from carrying out its plan.
In the instant case, construction of a senior citizen's residence on the public square property would make it impossible to use the property in the manner in which a public square is customarily used and would entail the exclusion of the general public from the property. The trial court was therefore correct in enjoining plaintiff from selling the property or terminating or otherwise interfering with its use as a public square.
2. That the legislature has by special legislation authorized plaintiff to sell the public square property cannot affect the result in this case because the legislation is unconstitutional. Under Headley, the public square property must be treated as belonging to the dedicator or its successors in interest. Plaintiff has only such an interest in the property as is necessary to fulfill the property's purpose as a public square. In authorizing plaintiff to sell the public square property, the statute effects a taking of private property without just compensation in violation of Minn. Const. art. 1, § 13. As we stated in Headley:
Authorization of the changed use by the city council does not make it lawful. Use of property for purposes other than those for which it was dedicated cannot be authorized by ordinance (Durkin v. City of New York, 146 App.Div. 472, 131 N.Y.S. 275; 44 C.J., Municipal Corporations, § 4022), or even by statute (City of Jacksonville v. Jacksonville Ry. Co., 67 Ill. 540; Louisville & Nashville R. Co. v. City of Cincinnati, 76 Ohio St. 481, 81 N.E. 983).
227 Minn. at 466, 35 N.W.2d at 611.
Affirmed.
NOTES
[1]  The remaining defendants have not answered the complaint and are alleged by the city to be in default.
[2]  1978 Minn.Laws, ch. 557.

=== CASE 2216763 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:17.65896+00 ===

290 N.W.2d 487 (1980)
STATE of South Dakota, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
Donald RISTAU, Defendant and Appellant.
No. 12844.
Supreme Court of South Dakota.
Argued February 21, 1980.
Decided March 26, 1980.
*488 Lori Wilbur, Asst. Atty. Gen., Pierre, for plaintiff and respondent; Mark V. Meierhenry, Atty. Gen., Pierre, on brief.
William J. Srstka, Jr., Duncan, Olinger, Srstka, Lovald & Robbennolt, Pierre, for defendant and appellant; Richard A. Duncan of Duncan, Olinger, Srstka, Lovald & Robbennolt, Pierre, on brief.
FOSHEIM, Justice.
The defendant, Donald Ristau, was charged with two counts of murder. On Count I, the jury returned a verdict of not guilty by reason of insanity. The jury found the defendant not guilty of murder on Count II, but guilty of the lesser included crime of manslaughter in the first degree. The assignments of error relating to the manslaughter conviction raise three issues. We affirm.
The murder charges involve the shooting deaths of the defendant's parents, Lloyd Ristau and Jeanette Ristau, on January 12, 1979, in Pierre, South Dakota. The defendant's relationship with his parents had been somewhat strained because of his inability to hold a job or fulfill their expectations of him. On the day of the tragedy, he had been drinking following an effort in the forenoon to find a job. It appears that when he returned home in the afternoon, an argument developed with his mother. Shortly thereafter, the killings occurred. It was determined that a total of five shots were fired from the gun, all within a very short time.
Although the state argues otherwise, for purposes of this decision we will accept the position of defendant that the verdicts are inconsistent in that the defendant was found not guilty by reason of insanity as to one of the homicides but was found sane with respect to the other.
There is a division among the authorities with regard to whether consistency in verdicts involving multiple counts in a criminal information is necessary. A majority of states follow the landmark case of Dunn v. United States, 284 U.S. 390, 52 S.Ct. 189, 76 L.Ed. 356 (1932), which holds that consistency in the verdicts is not necessary.[1]
We first addressed this problem in State v. Sinnott, 72 S.D. 100, 109, 30 N.W.2d 455, 459 (1947), cert. denied, 334 U.S. 844, 68 S.Ct. 1512, 92 L.Ed. 1768 (1948), wherein we expressly followed the Dunn decision and concluded:
Conceding that the jury was inconsistent in acquitting defendants on the one count and convicting on the other, we cannot inquire into the motives which prompted the jury to so find. We hold that a verdict on several counts need not be consistent.
Some thirty years later in State v. Gerdes, 258 N.W.2d 839 (S.D.1977), we again held that each count is regarded as if it were a separate indictment and that consistency in a verdict is therefore unnecessary.[2]*489 We there declined the invitation to adopt the minority rule and continue to do so. See, State v. Burkman, 281 N.W.2d 436 (S.D.1979).
Shortly after the shootings occurred, the defendant called the Pierre Police Department and summoned the police to the residence. A tape recording of this call carrying the tone and quality of the defendant's voice was received in evidence for the limited purpose of focusing on the issue of the defendant's sanity at the time of the homicides. Whether the defendant actually killed his parents was not in dispute. The defendant claims the court erred in admitting the tape of the telephone call because of foundational deficiencies and certain technical defects and errors in the tape. The officer who took the recording did not testify, and no one at the police department could explain the interruptions or pauses in the recorded tape. It was admitted in evidence as an exception to the hearsay rule as a business record under the provisions of SDCL 19-16-10[3] which applies to criminal trials by virtue of SDCL 23-1-3 and 23-44-9.[4] The police dispatcher removed the tape containing the conversation from the recording machine on the evening the tragedy occurred and turned it over to Captain Abernathy, who immediately gave it to Detective Swanson. Detective Swanson testified that he was not present at the police station when the call came in, but that tapes such as this containing special information are not put on an open shelf and then reused as are ordinary tapes; rather, they are placed in the custody of a special officer and locked in a receptacle. He stated that he listened to the tape on the evening of January 12, 1979, and that at the time of trial, it did not appear or sound as though it had been altered in any manner. The detective further testified that since the tape was delivered to him on January 12, 1979, it had been locked up in a receptacle according to such police routine.
In State v. Parker, 263 N.W.2d 679 (S.D.1978), we adopted the general rule that evidence in the form of a sound recording is admissible if authenticated by a proper foundation. The fact that a recording may not reproduce an entire conversation has usually been held not to require its exclusion; however, the recording may be rejected if the jury must speculate as to what was said. Whether to admit it is left to the sound discretion of the trial judge. State v. Parker, supra; See also: 29 Am.Jur.2d Evidence § 436 (1967); Annot. 58 A.L.R.2d 1024 (1958).
In State v. Parker, supra, there were numerous breaks in the tape; the operator of the recorder said he turned it off while *490 "kidding around" or talking about music or the weather. We there held that a showing that the person making the recording could control it by pressing a button to turn it off and that he had interrupted the recording for various reasons from time to time was not sufficient to require its exclusion where the evidence established that all pertinent parts of the conversation had been taken down. For the limited purpose for which the tape was introduced into evidence, the unexplained pauses and interruptions did not require its rejection as speculative. In State v. Anderson, 159 N.W.2d 809 (Iowa 1968), the officer testified that the tape offered in evidence had been securely stored, had not been altered in any way, and was an accurate and complete copy of the information on the belt. The trial court apparently found that the record was made in the regular course of business; that it was made at or about the time of the act, and that the source or information from which the record was made, and the method and circumstances of its preparation, were such as to indicate its trustworthiness. Upon that foundation, the trial court admitted the evidence and the Supreme Court of Iowa was satisfied that the trial court did not err in holding that this evidence came within the purview of the business records act and that a proper foundation for its admission was established under that statute as an exception to the hearsay rule. We agree with the conclusions of the Iowa Court that the trial court has considerable discretion as to the admissibility of evidence under the business records exception and that if the trial court finds that the evidence offered complies with the requirements of the statute, it is generally admissible, and the weight thereof is for the jury. In this case, there does not seem to be any serious question that the tape was a part of the business records of the police department. A prima facie showing of continuity from the time the tape was taken from the recorder until it was introduced into evidence was established. The trial court acted within its discretion in determining that a proper foundation had been laid under the provisions of SDCL 19-16-10.
The court refused the defendant's proposed instructions concerning the definition of mental illness. The defendant argues that the definition as adopted by the legislature and followed by this court unduly restricts the application of modern psychiatric techniques to analysis of criminal behavior because it ignores the situation where an accused, because of a mental disease or defect, could not help or restrain himself from committing the act in question. It is urged that the Court should now correct this archaic rule.
The test as to whether a person lacks the capacity to commit a crime because of mental illness is statutorily imbedded in this state.[5] SDCL 22-3-1(4) states in part:
All persons are capable of committing crimes except those belonging to the following classes:
.....
(4) Persons who, at the time of committing the act charged against them, were mentally ill.
SDCL 22-1-2(22) defines "mentally ill" as:
[T]he condition of a person temporarily or partially deprived of reason, upon proof that at the time of committing the act charged against him, he was incapable of knowing its wrongfulness.
Essentially the same defense now urged by the defendant was asserted shortly after statehood in State v. Leehman, 2 S.D. 171, 49 N.W. 3 (1891). We there noted that in most states at that time the test was whether a person has sufficient capacity and reason to enable him to distinguish between right and wrong and whether he is conscious that the act he is doing, or is about to do, is a wrong and forbidden act and one that he ought not do.
In State v. Violett, 79 S.D. 292, 111 N.W.2d 598 (1961), we stated that the *491 "right and wrong" test established in the M'Naghten Case, 8 English Reprint 718, and in substance enacted by statute in this state, is our recognized rule of testing criminal responsibility. See also, State v. Behan, 80 S.D. 370, 124 N.W.2d 179 (1963); Magenton v. State, 76 S.D. 512, 81 N.W.2d 894 (1957). In State v. Waugh, 80 S.D. 503, 127 N.W.2d 429 (1964), we concluded that since the M'Naghten rule is of statutory origin in this state, any changes therein must come from the legislature.
Finally, in State v. Kingston, 84 S.D. 578, 174 N.W.2d 636 (1970), and State v. Kiehn, 86 S.D. 549, 199 N.W.2d 594 (1972), it was suggested that we abandon the M'Naghten rule and adopt in its place either the Durham rule, articulated in Durham v. United States, 94 U.S.App.D.C. 228, 214 F.2d 862 (D.C. Cir. 1954), overruled in United States v. Brawner, 153 U.S.App.D.C. 1, 471 F.2d 969 (D.C. Cir. 1972),[6] or the rule formulated by the American Law Institute appearing in the Model Penal Code. We declined that invitation, referred to our decision in State v. Waugh, supra, and again concluded that because it was a legislative enactment, any change in the rule should come from the legislature.[7] We adhere to that position.
We have considered the other arguments of defendant relating to the mental illness test and find them to be without merit.
The judgment of conviction is affirmed.
All the Justices concur.
NOTES
[1]  See: Annot., 18 A.L.R.3d 259 (1968).
[2]  Counsel for appellant conceded in argument that if the defendant had been tried under separate informations, the inconsistent verdicts would not be subject to attack.
[3]  SDCL 19-16-10 states:
A memorandum, report, record, or data compilation, in any form, of acts, events, conditions, opinions, or diagnoses, made at or near the time by, or from information transmitted by, a person with knowledge, if kept in the course of a regularly conducted business activity, and if it was the regular practice of that business activity to make the memorandum, report, record, or data compilation, all as shown by the testimony of the custodian or other qualified witness, is not excluded by § 19-16-4, even though the declarant is available as a witness, unless the source of information or the method or circumstances of preparation indicate lack of trustworthiness. The term "business" as used in this section includes business, institution, association, profession, occupation, and calling of every kind, whether or not conducted for profit.
[4]  SDCL 23-1-3 provides:
All of the provisions of titles 15, 16, 19, 21 and 30, so far as consistent herewith, shall be applicable throughout this title except as to matters for which a different provision is made in this title or where from the context of this entire title or of any particular section of it a different intention plainly appears or where reasonable application of this title to the matter involved otherwise plainly requires.
SDCL 23-44-9 provides:
The rules of evidence in civil cases are applicable also to criminal cases, except as otherwise provided in this title.
These statutes were repealed by 1978 S.D.Sess. Laws, ch. 178, § 577, effective July 1, 1979. See SDCL 23A-22-2 for reenactment of former SDCL 23-44-9.
[5]  The test as it exists now was first enacted in 1877 Revised Dakota Territory Laws; Penal Code, § 16.
[6]  In Brawner, the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia formally adopted the ALI insanity definition.
[7]  The legislature adopted the ALI definition in 1976 S.D.Sess. Laws, Ch. 158, § 1-1. This statute, however, was repealed by 1977 S.D.Sess. Laws, Ch. 189, § 11, and the legislature essentially re-enacted the M'Naghten rule.

=== CASE 2219866 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:26.028496+00 ===

761 N.E.2d 467 (2002)
Bill C. THOMPSON, Appellant-Defendant,
v.
STATE of Indiana, Appellee-Plaintiff.
No. 49A04-0103-CR-107.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
January 16, 2002.
*468 Kurt A. Young, Nashville, IN, Attorney for Appellant.
Steve Carter, Attorney General of Indiana, Martha Warren-Rosenfeld, Deputy Attorney General, Indianapolis, IN, Attorneys for Appellee.
OPINION
RILEY, Judge.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
Appellant-Defendant, Bill C. Thompson (Thompson), appeals his conviction of sexual battery, a Class D felony, Ind.Code § 35-42-4-8. Thompson also appeals the sentence imposed on him by the trial court.
We reverse and remand.
ISSUES
Thompson raises the following issues on appeal, which we restate as follows:
1. Whether the trial court erred in finding sexual battery to be a lesser-included offense of rape.
2. Whether Thompson was denied credit for all the time he had served prior to his sentencing.
FACTS AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY
On May 9, 1998, the victim (T.M.) and a male friend, Kelly Reed (Reed), moved into Kathryn Trent's (Trent) apartment. On that same day, T.M. met Thompson, who was also residing at Trent's apartment. T.M. testified that later that night, as she slept on the sofa, she felt "soft kisses" on her face and her shorts and underwear were removed. (R. 30). T.M. also testified that, at first, she thought it was Reed doing these things to her, but when she realized that it was Thompson, he was already on top of her. According to her testimony, T.M. told Thompson "no." (R. 32). However, Thompson placed his hand over T.M.'s mouth and told her to be quiet. After that, T.M. testified that she "froze" and thought Thompson was "going to hit" her. (R. 32). Thompson pinned T.M. to the sofa with his body weight while he took off his jeans and inserted his penis into her vagina.
Afterward, T.M. testified that she got up and went to Trent's bedroom. She told Trent that Thompson had raped her. T.M. and Trent left the apartment, drove to a restaurant, and the police were contacted. T.M. was taken to a hospital and examined.
On October 6, 1999, the State filed an information against Thompson, charging him with rape, a Class B felony, Ind.Code § 35-42-4-1. On October 31, 2000, the State filed a motion to amend the information to add a date and include Thompson's name. On November 1, 2000, the motion to amend was granted. On December 4, 2000, Thompson and the State waived a trial by jury, and a bench trial was held. The trial court found Thompson not guilty of rape, but did find him guilty of sexual battery as a lesser-included offense of rape.
*469 On January 5, 2001, a presentence investigation report (PSI) was filed. On January 9, 2001, a sentencing hearing was held. Thompson was sentenced to:
Three years in the Department of Corrections [sic], two of those years will be suspended, first six months will be in the Marion County Jail. You have to do a total of ninety days, you have fifty in, got forty left, balance of six months will be on home detention. You'll be placed on probation for the suspended period which is two years.
(R. 208). On February 8, 2001, Thompson filed a Motion to Correct Errors, which the court denied on February 15, 2001.
This appeal followed. Additional facts will be supplied as necessary.
DISCUSSION AND DECISION
I. Sexual Battery as Lesser-Included Offense of Rape
Thompson was charged with rape, but he was convicted of sexual battery as a lesser-included offense. Thompson argues that the trial court erred in finding sexual battery to be a lesser-included offense of rape. We agree.
Ind.Code § 35-42-4-1 provides, in pertinent part, as follows:
(a) ... a person who knowingly or intentionally has sexual intercourse with a member of the opposite sex when:
(1) the other person is compelled by force or imminent threat of force; ... commits rape, a Class B felony.
Ind.Code § 35-42-4-8 provides, in pertinent part, as follows:
(a) ... a person who, with intent to arouse or satisfy the person's own sexual desires or the sexual desires of another person, touches another person when that person is:
(1) compelled to submit to the touching by force or imminent threat of force; or ...
commits sexual battery, a Class D felony.
In order for sexual battery to be a lesser-included offense of rape, according to Ind.Code § 35-41-1-16, it must be "established by proof of the same material elements or less than all the material elements required to establish the commission of the offense charged." A review of these statutes reveals that each crime contains an element that the other does not, thereby excluding sexual battery as a lesser-included offense of rape.
Sexual battery requires a touching with the intent to arouse or satisfy one's own sexual desires or those of his victim, which is not required for rape. See Ind. Code § 35-42-4-8; Ind.Code § 35-42-4-1. This element was not proven by sufficient evidence at trial. Nowhere in the record or in the amended information charging Thompson with rape was it stated that Thompson touched T.M. with the intent to arouse or satisfy his own sexual desires or those of T.M.
Furthermore, in Scrougham v. State, 564 N.E.2d 542, 546 (Ind.App.Ct.1990), trans. denied, this court held that sexual battery is not a lesser-included offense of rape. Granted, we recognize that Scrougham is considered impliedly overruled. In Griffin v. State, 583 N.E.2d 191, 195-196 (Ind.Ct.App.1991), reh'g denied, this court held that "[i]nasmuch as child molesting as fondling and touching with intent to gratify includes all the same elements of sexual battery, the applicability of Bowling [v. State, 560 N.E.2d 658 (Ind.1990)] and Watkins [v. State, 571 N.E.2d 1262 (Ind. Ct.App.1991) ] are apparent as is the implicit overruling of Scrougham." However, as Thompson points out, and we agree, Scrougham appears to be impliedly overruled *470 on grounds that do not change the rule of law stated above. Moreover, we must note that there is no case law that explicitly overrules Scrougham in its holding that sexual battery is not a lesser included offense of rape.
Additionally, "it is well-established that due process requires that a defendant be given notice of the crime or crimes with which he is charged so that he can prepare his defense. Absent sufficient notice that a particular offense is charged, a defendant cannot be convicted of that crime." Lewis v. State, 413 N.E.2d 1069, 1071 (Ind.Ct.App.1980). The State argues that based on its charging information, Thompson was given ample notice and opportunity to prepare a defense. We disagree.
In Downey v. State, 726 N.E.2d 794, 799 (Ind.App.Ct.2000), trans. denied, this court held as follows:
This charging information fails to allege the intent to arouse or satisfy sexual desiresan element of child molesting by fondling or touching. In a similar case, Phillips v. State, 518 N.E.2d 1129 (Ind.Ct.App.1988), we held that where an information charged the offense of child molesting by sexual deviate conduct but did not allege an intent to arouse or satisfy sexual desires, it failed to provide notice of the offense of child molesting by fondling or touching so as to provide the defendant the opportunity "to prepare his defense and be protected from double jeopardy." Id. at 1131 (citing Blackburn v. State, 260 Ind. 5, 11, 291 N.E.2d 686, 690 (1973)). "That the necessary intent may be inferred from the form of touching or other circumstances does not at all alter the necessity of intent as an element of the offense." Id. at 1131 n. 2. Even if the jury could infer intent based on the defendant's conduct, this court cannot make that inference in its place when Downey was not on notice of intent as an element to be defended against and the jury was never so instructed.
The charge brought against Thompson, as set forth in the amended information, states, in pertinent part, as follows:
On or between May 9, 1998 and May 10, 1998, Bill Thompson did knowingly have sexual intercourse with [T.M.], a member of the opposite sex, when [T.M.] was compelled by force or the imminent threat of force;
(Appellant's Appendix at 53).
With this, we find that the charging information failed to advise Thompson of the intent elementthat he intended to arouse or satisfy his own sexual desires or the sexual desires of T.M. See Ind.Code § 35-42-4-8. Thus, Thompson was not given notice of the elements of the crime that he was ultimately convicted of and was unable to adequately prepare his defense. See Downey, 726 N.E.2d at 799; Lewis, 413 N.E.2d at 1071. Therefore, he cannot be convicted of that crime, i.e. sexual battery. See Lewis, 413 N.E.2d at 1071.
Accordingly, we hold that the trial court erred in convicting Thompson of sexual battery as a lesser-included offense of rape.
II. Denial of Credit for Time Served[1]
Thompson argues that he was denied credit for all the time he had served prior to his sentencing. In Weaver v. State, 725 N.E.2d 945, 947-948 (Ind.Ct.App.2000), this court held: "Indiana Code Section 35-50-6-3 sets forth in no uncertain terms *471 that a person confined awaiting trial or sentencing is statutorily entitled to one day of credit for each day he is so confined; therefore, pre-sentence jail time credit is a matter of statutory right, not a matter of judicial discretion." Thus, Thompson is entitled to credit for all the time he served while awaiting trial on the charge brought before him. Bischoff v. State, 704 N.E.2d 129, 130 (Ind.Ct.App. 1998), trans. denied.
Thompson maintains that he had served time when the first information was filed, which set forth the same charge as the second information. However, there is a discrepancy in the amount of time he actually did serve. Further, there is evidence in the record that Thompson was rearrested for public intoxication while out on bond during the pendency of the present cause of action. If, in fact, he did serve some time on another charge prior to his sentencing in this matter, he is not entitled to credit for that. Id.
At the sentencing hearing the following exchange took place between Thompson's counsel and the court.
MR. GARCIA: ... he has served forty
...
THE COURT: Forty-one ...
MR. GARCIA: ... one days on this charge, however, he also has an additional seventy actual days on the same facts, just under a different cause number which really comes to forty, plus seventy, that's a hundred and ten days that he would have actually served on this case.
THE COURT: He's got fifty on this one.
MR. GARCIA: He's got fifty on this one.
THE COURT: Fifty on this one, I was just informed by Ms. Journey.
MR. GARCIA: Okay.
(R. 202-203). From this point on, the trial court used the number fifty. There were no objections to this. Nor was there any evidence presented to rebut this number.
"It is Appellant's duty to present an adequate record clearly showing the alleged error. Where he fails to do so, the issue is deemed waived." Jackson v. State, 496 N.E.2d 32, 33 (Ind.1986) (citation omitted). Because Thompson has failed to present us with sufficient information to determine the credit he should receive for time served, he has waived the issue.
CONCLUSION
Based on the foregoing, we conclude that the trial court erred in convicting Thompson of sexual battery as a lesser-included offense of rape. We also conclude that the trial court did not err in giving Thompson fifty credit days for time served.
Reversed and remanded.
SHARPNACK, J., and NAJAM, J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  We note that our reversal of Thompson's conviction makes the issue of sentencing moot. However, in the event that this issue comes before the trial court again, we would like to address it at this time.

=== CASE 2219873 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:26.244994+00 ===

761 N.E.2d 198 (2001)
326 Ill. App. 3d 629
260 Ill. Dec. 354
The PEOPLE of the State of Illinois, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
Tony GONZALEZ, Defendant-Appellant.
No. 1-00-0311.
Appellate Court of Illinois, First District, First Division.
November 26, 2001.
*200 Michael J. Pelletier, Deputy Defender, Linda Olthoff, Assistant Defender, Office of the State Appellate Defender, Chicago, for Defendant-Appellant.
Richard A. Devine, State's Attorney of Cook County, Renee Goldfarb, William Toffenetti, Alan Spellberg, Michael R. Cannon, Assistant State's Attorneys, of counsel, Chicago, for Plaintiff-Appellee.
Presiding Justice COHEN delivered the opinion of the court:
Defendant Tony Gonzalez was indicted on three counts of first degree murder (720 ILCS 5/9-1(a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3) (West 2000)), three counts of attempt (first degree murder) (720 ILCS 5/8-4 (West 2000)), two counts of aggravated battery with a firearm (720 ILCS 5/12-4.2(a) (West 2000)), two counts of aggravated discharge of a firearm (720 ILCS 5/24-1.2(a)(1), (a)(2) (West 2000)) and seven counts of aggravated battery (720 ILCS 5/12-4(a), (b)(1), (b)(8) (West 2000)). The record reflects the entry of an order of nolle prosequi with respect to the two aggravated discharge of a firearm counts and all of the aggravated battery counts. In October 1999, defendant was tried before a jury in the circuit court of Cook County for the first degree murder of Hector Rivera and attempt (first degree murder) of Luis Marrero, Illuminata Nieves and Yesenia Rodriguez. The jury found defendant guilty of first degree murder as to Hector Rivera and attempt (first degree murder) as to Luis Marrero and Illuminata Nieves. The jury, however, found the defendant not guilty of attempt (first degree murder) as to Yesenia Rodriguez. The trial court sentenced defendant to consecutive prison terms of 30 years for first degree murder and 6 years for each of the two attempt (first degree murder) convictions.
Defendant now appeals his convictions, asserting that: (1) the eyewitness testimony of Luis and Yesenia was insufficient to prove him guilty beyond a reasonable doubt; (2) his convictions should be overturned and a new trial granted because the prosecution misstated the law with respect to evaluating eyewitness identification testimony in closing argument; (3) the trial court similarly erred in instructing the jury with respect to evaluating eyewitness identification testimony; (4) the introduction of gang evidence prejudiced the jury against him and denied him a fair trial; (5) he was denied the effective assistance of counsel predicated on counsel's failure to object to prejudicial gang testimony as well as counsel's elicitation of testimony concerning gang-related activity and defendant's prior criminal conduct; and (6) because consecutive sentences were imposed, based on a matter neither charged nor submitted to a jury, his sentence was unconstitutional under Apprendi v. New Jersey, 530 U.S. 466, 120 S. Ct. 2348, 147 L. Ed. 2d 435 (2000).
Based on the trial court's submission of an erroneous jury instruction with respect to the evaluation of eyewitness identification testimony, we reverse defendant's convictions and remand this cause for a new trial. Because this issue is dispositive, we need not address the remaining issues on appeal.
BACKGROUND
The evidence introduced at defendant's trial reveals that on the evening of July 23, *201 1998, Luis Marrero, Hector Rivera and Waldmar Rodriguez were playing dominoes and drinking rum at Illuminata Nieves' apartment, located at 1215 North Washtenaw in the City of Chicago. Yesenia Rodriguez was also present. Illuminata is the mother of Waldmar and Yesenia. Yesenia is Luis' former girlfriend. Luis, Hector and Waldmar were friends who frequently visited together at Illuminata's apartment.
Around 10:30 p.m., the men ended their dominoes game. Waldmar fell asleep in the living room and Hector, Luis, Yesenia and Illuminata went to the kitchen to have coffee. They were drinking coffee and talking until 2 a.m. when Yesenia and Luis began arguing about Luis' alcohol consumption. While they were arguing, Luis exited the apartment through the back door and walked down a flight of stairs to an alley. Yesenia followed closely behind. As Luis turned to face Yesenia (with his back to the alley), a man emerged from the alley, pointed a gun at Luis' head, and screamed "Jiver killer." Just as the gunman began to shoot, Luis ducked. The first shot struck Luis in his arm and the second struck him in his chest. The second shot caused Luis to fall face down onto the sidewalk.
As Luis lay on the sidewalk, the gunman approached Illuminata's apartment, kicked in the door and began shooting at Illuminata and Hector, who were sitting on the staircase. Illuminata suffered a gunshot wound to the throat and Hector received gunshot wounds to his back, right forearm and left inner thigh. When the gunman finished shooting inside the apartment, he exited the building, returned to where Luis was lying and shot Luis in the back. The gunman then turned toward Yesenia, who was pleading for her life, and struck her in the head with the butt of his gun. The gunman finally escaped down the alley from which he had appeared.
Officer Jesus Sanchez was assigned to beat 1414, routine patrol, on the night of the shooting. Officer Sanchez was assisting two women who were locked out of their car when he heard gunshots. As Officer Sanchez approached his vehicle, a call came over his police radio stating that shots were being fired at 1215 North Washtenaw. Only 2½ blocks away from Washtenaw, Officer Sanchez immediately drove to that location in his squad car. When he arrived, Officer Sanchez observed two gunshot victims and a screaming Hispanic woman. Officer Sanchez spoke to the Hispanic woman, who identified herself as Yesenia. Yesenia provided Officer Sanchez with a description of the clothing and complexion of the gunman. Yesenia was unable to tell Officer Sanchez, however, whether the gunman was African American or Hispanic. After receiving the general description of the gunman from Yesenia, Officer Sanchez dispatched the information over his police radio. When he concluded the call, Officer Sanchez ran down the alley in an attempt to locate the gunman. He was unsuccessful.
Illuminata was taken to Mt. Sinai Hospital for treatment. Shortly thereafter, she was transferred to Saint Mary's Hospital, where she underwent surgery to remove the bullet from her throat. Luis was transported to Cook County Hospital, where he also underwent surgery. Luis was required to remain in the hospital for a week and a half. Hector was discovered by the police in the upstairs bathroom where he had died from multiple gunshot wounds.
On July 25, 1998, Detective Ray Guevara of the Area 5 violent crimes division of the Chicago police department went to 1215 North Washtenaw to interview Yesenia. After a brief conversation, Detective Guevara *202 transported Yesenia to the 14th District police station to view photographs. The book of photographs presented to Yesenia contained photographs related to members of the Spanish Cobra gang. On page 36 of the book, she identified defendant's photograph as the man who shot Luis, Illuminata and Hector on the evening of July 23, 1998.
On the same day, Detective Guevara went to Cook County Hospital to attempt to interview Luis, but Luis was recovering from surgery. The following day, Detective Guevara returned to Cook County Hospital and showed Luis six loose photographs. After viewing the photographs, Luis identified defendant as the gunman. Luis also informed Detective Guevara that the gunman had a mark on his neck and a gold tooth.
Based on the identifications of Yesenia and Luis, Detective Guevara obtained a warrant and defendant was arrested on August 9, 1998. On the same day, Luis and Yesenia went to Area 5 police headquarters to view a lineup. Detective Guevara conducted two separate lineups. Both Yesenia and Luis pointed out defendant as the gunman.
At trial, defendant presented alibi testimony. Edgar Torres, defendant's brother, testified that on July 23, 1998, defendant spent the majority of the day at Edgar's apartment painting a fence in the yard. Edgar testified that defendant remained at the apartment into the evening hours. Edgar further testified that around 9:30 p.m., Tony Gonzalez, Sr., also came to the apartment. According to Edgar, when he went to sleep at 10:30 p.m., both defendant and Tony Gonzalez, Sr., were sitting on the front porch of the apartment.
Defendant's father, Tony Gonzalez, Sr., corroborated Edgar's testimony. Tony Sr. testified that he and defendant were drinking beer on Edgar's porch on the evening of July 23, 1998. Tony Sr. further testified that he and defendant left Edgar's apartment around midnight and arrived home at approximately 12:10 a.m. Thereafter, both sat in the living room watching television and eating sandwiches. According to Tony Sr., defendant went to bed around 12:30 a.m. Tony Sr. continued to watch television until 2:30 a.m. Tony Sr. testified that defendant's room contains no windows or fire escapes and that he never saw defendant exit his bedroom. On cross-examination, however, Tony Sr. admitted that his back was to defendant's room while he was watching television.
Defendant also challenged the reliability of Luis' and Yesenia's identification of him as the gunman. In support, the defense attorney elicited testimony on cross-examination concerning inadequate lighting conditions in the area of the shooting, Luis' position face down after he was shot and Yesenia's state of mind when talking with police. Defendant also presented the testimony of a dentist, who stated that none of defendant's teeth had ever been reduced for a gold crown.
Following closing arguments, the trial court instructed the jury on the applicable law. Immediately thereafter, the jury retired to the jury room to begin deliberations. A half-hour later, the jury sent a note to the court requesting to see both the Spanish Cobra gang book and the six other loose photographs the police had presented to Yesenia and Luis which Yesenia and Luis had used to identify defendant as the gunman. The court denied the request and advised the jury to continue deliberating. Approximately 2½ hours later, the jury tendered another note stating that it was "hung." The court advised the jury to continue deliberating. Following additional deliberations, the jury found defendant guilty of first degree murder of Hector Rivera and attempt (first degree *203 murder) of Luis Marrero and Illuminata Nieves, but not guilty of attempt (first degree murder) of Yesenia Rodriguez. Defendant was sentenced to consecutive prison terms of 30 years for first degree murder and 6 years each for the two attempt (first degree murder) convictions. This appeal followed.
ANALYSIS
We first address defendant's argument that the trial court erred in instructing the jury with respect to evaluating eyewitness identification testimony. According to defendant, the Illinois Pattern Jury Instruction (IPI) submitted to the jury misstated the law with respect to evaluating eyewitness identification testimony.
The State responds that defendant agreed to the instruction submitted to the jury and that the instruction "follows the text provided by the applicable pattern jury instruction." Furthermore, the State asserts that defendant waived the issue because he failed either to object to the jury instruction at trial or to raise the objection in his posttrial motion.
Defendant concedes that he failed to object to the jury instruction at trial or raise the objection in his posttrial motion. Nevertheless, defendant asks this court to review the issue as plain error. Defendant claims that the plain error exception applies to his case both because the improper jury instruction "infected the jury's ability to properly deliberate and consider the identification testimony against [defendant]" and because the evidence in this case was "closely balanced."
"The plain error doctrine (134 Ill.2d R. 615(a)) may be applied where the evidence is closely balanced or where the error is of such magnitude that it denied the accused a fair trial." People v. Tisdel, 316 Ill.App.3d 1143, 1153, 250 Ill. Dec. 570, 739 N.E.2d 31 (2000). "Plain error marked by fundamental [un]fairness, occurs only in situations which `reveal breakdowns in the adversary system,' as distinguished from `typical trial mistakes. [Citation.]'" People v. Keene, 169 Ill. 2d 1, 17, 214 Ill. Dec. 194, 660 N.E.2d 901 (1995). For this court to review an issue under the plain error doctrine, "the asserted error must be something `fundamental to the integrity of the judicial process. [Citation.]'" Keene, 169 Ill.2d at 17, 214 Ill. Dec. 194, 660 N.E.2d 901.
We find that the plain error exception applies under the circumstances presented in this case. The jury instruction at issue misstated the law, was confusing and denied defendant the right to a fair trial. Additionally, the evidence presented was "closely balanced." The State's case was based solely on circumstantial evidence through the identification testimony of Yesenia and Luis. Both eyewitnesses identified defendant as the gunman from photographs, a lineup and in court on the day of trial. However, on cross-examination, the defendant challenged the reliability of the identifications and elicited testimony concerning conflicting accounts of what the gunman was wearing on the night of the shooting, inadequate lighting conditions at the scene of the shooting, Luis' face-down position after he was shot and Yesenia's state of mind when talking with police. The defendant also presented the testimony of a dentist, who stated that none of defendant's teeth had ever been reduced for a crown. Moreover, defendant presented uncontradicted alibi testimony from his father and brother.
The closeness of the evidence can be given some weight by the circumstances that occurred during jury deliberations. A half-hour after the jury retired to the jury room for deliberations, it sent a note to the court requesting to see the Spanish Cobra *204 gang book, as well as the six other loose photographs the police presented to Yesenia and Luis. The court denied this request and advised the jury to continue deliberating. Approximately 2½ hours later, the jury tendered another note stating that it was "hung." It was not until the court instructed the jury a second time to continue deliberating that it found defendant guilty of first degree murder of Hector Rivera and attempt (first degree murder) of Luis Marrero and Illuminata Nieves, but not guilty of attempt (first degree murder) of Yesenia Rodriguez.
The State asserts that defendant has waived this court's review of his plain error argument on appeal because defendant failed to demonstrate in his brief why plain error should be applied to his case. In support, the State cites to People v. Nieves, 192 Ill. 2d 487, 502-03, 249 Ill. Dec. 760, 737 N.E.2d 150 (2000), for the general proposition that "the failure to present an argument as to each element of plain error analysis waives that argument on appeal."
We find the factual situation presented in Nieves clearly distinguishable. In Nieves, the defendant provided only a single sentence in his brief regarding his plain error argument. Nieves, 192 Ill.2d at 503, 249 Ill. Dec. 760, 737 N.E.2d 150. Our supreme court noted that the defendant failed to argue why the evidence was closely balanced or explain why the error was so severe that it should be remedied to preserve the integrity of the judicial process. Nieves, 192 Ill.2d at 503, 249 Ill. Dec. 760, 737 N.E.2d 150. Pursuant to Supreme Court Rules 341(e)(7) and 612(i) (134 Ill.2d Rs. 341(e)(7), 612(i)), the court held that defendant had waived his plain error argument on appeal. In the case at bar, however, defendant dedicated four pages of his brief to argue why the jury process was rendered unreliable based upon the improper jury instruction and why the evidence in his case was closely balanced. We therefore find that defendant has adequately demonstrated in his brief that the plain error exception should be applied under the facts of this case.
Finding the plain error exception applicable, we will address defendant's argument that the trial court submitted an erroneous jury instruction with respect to evaluating eyewitness identification testimony. "It is well settled that a defendant's claim of improper jury instructions is reviewed under a harmless-error analysis." People v. Amaya, 321 Ill.App.3d 923, 929, 255 Ill. Dec. 181, 748 N.E.2d 1251 (2001). "An error in a jury instruction is harmless if it is demonstrated that the result of the trial would not have been different if the proper instruction had been given." People v. Johnson, 146 Ill. 2d 109, 137, 165 Ill. Dec. 682, 585 N.E.2d 78 (1991); People v. Fierer, 124 Ill. 2d 176, 187, 124 Ill. Dec. 855, 529 N.E.2d 972 (1988).
Our supreme court has outlined a two-part test for the application of the harmless error analysis. First, we are to determine "whether any error occurredin other words, whether the instruction was correct." People v. Dennis, 181 Ill. 2d 87, 95-96, 229 Ill. Dec. 552, 692 N.E.2d 325 (1998). Second, if we find an error in the jury instruction, then we must determine "whether, in spite of that error, evidence of defendant's guilt was so clear and convincing as to render the error harmless beyond a reasonable doubt." Dennis, 181 Ill.2d at 96, 229 Ill. Dec. 552, 692 N.E.2d 325.
"[T]he test of the correctness of an instruction is not what meaning the ingenuity of counsel can attribute to it, but how and in what sense, under the evidence before them, ordinary persons acting as jurors will understand the instruction." People v. Lozada, 211 Ill.App.3d 817, 822, 156 Ill. Dec. 261, 570 N.E.2d 737 (1991). *205 "The sole function of jury instructions is to convey to the jury the correct principles of law applicable to the evidence submitted to it in order that, having determined the final state of facts from the evidence, the jury may, by the application of proper legal principles, arrive at a correct conclusion according to the law and the evidence." People v. Pinkney, 322 Ill.App.3d 707, 717, 255 Ill. Dec. 756, 750 N.E.2d 673 (2000). "Jury instructions should not be misleading or confusing." Pinkney, 322 Ill.App.3d at 717, 255 Ill. Dec. 756, 750 N.E.2d 673.
The trial judge gave the following written instruction to the jury based upon the wording of Illinois Pattern Jury Instructions, Criminal, No. 3.15 (3d ed.1992) (hereinafter IPI Criminal 3d):
"When you weigh the identification testimony of a witness, you should consider all the facts and circumstances in evidence, including but not limited to the following:
The opportunity the witness had to view the offender at the time of the offense; or
The witness' degree of attention at the time of the offense; or
The witness' earlier description of the offender; or
The level of certainty shown by the witness when confronting the defendant; or
The length of time between the offense and the identification confrontation." (Emphasis added.)
The controversy surrounding the wording of this instruction involves the trial court's use of the term "or" between each of the five factors. IPI Criminal 3d No. 3.15 on the evaluation of eyewitness identification testimony reads as follows:
"3.15 Circumstances of Identification
When you weigh the identification testimony of a witness, you should consider all the facts and circumstances in evidence, including, but not limited to, the following:
[1] The opportunity the witness had to view the offender at the time of the offense.
[or]
[2] The witness's degree of attention at the time of the offense.
[or]
[3] The witness's earlier description of the offender.
[or]
[4] The level of certainty shown by the witness when confronting the defendant.
[or]
[5] The length of time between the offense and the identification confrontation." Illinois Pattern Jury Instructions, Criminal, No. 3.15 (3d ed.1992).[1]
The committee note following IPI Criminal 3d No. 3.15 explains that the instruction was compiled from factors already well established by existing case law and cites *206 to Manson v. Brathwaite, 432 U.S. 98, 97 S. Ct. 2243, 53 L. Ed. 2d 140 (1977), People v. Manion, 67 Ill. 2d 564, 10 Ill. Dec. 547, 367 N.E.2d 1313 (1977), and People v. Slim, 127 Ill. 2d 302, 130 Ill. Dec. 250, 537 N.E.2d 317 (1989). See Illinois Pattern Jury Instructions, Criminal, No. 3.15, Committee Note (3d ed.1992).
Defendant argues that the jury instruction as worded misstates the law with respect to evaluating eyewitness testimony. Defendant contends that the instruction reads as if the presence of evidence supporting only one of the five factors is a sufficient basis for the jury to determine the credibility of the identification testimony of the witnesses when case law clearly establishes that the "jury is to consider all the factors which are applicable to the evidence in the case." Defendant explains that the Committee's use of "[or]" in between the five factors is "for the court to determine which factors apply to the evidence and should be considered by the jury." Defendant further asserts that "[i]t is not for the jury to pick one factor which applies to the evidence." Defendant concludes that considering the closeness of the evidence in this case, the instruction submitted to the jury should constitute reversible error.
The State responds that "the evidence was not close, the errors complained of do not rise to the level of serious injustice, and the alleged instructional error was utterly insignificant, as it neither misstated the law, nor affected the jury's ability to weigh the evidence." The State further claims that the instruction "followed the text provided by the applicable jury instruction." Therefore, the State concludes, defendant was not denied a fair trial. We disagree.
All three cases cited by the Committee in its note to IPI Criminal 3d No. 3.15 discuss the five factors to be considered in evaluating witness identification testimony as enumerated by the United States Supreme Court in Neil v. Biggers, 409 U.S. 188, 199, 93 S. Ct. 375, 382, 34 L. Ed. 2d 401, 411 (1972). In all of the cited cases, the five factors are listed in the following manner:
"(1) the opportunity the victim had to view the criminal at the time of the crime; (2) the witness' degree of attention; (3) the accuracy of the witness' prior description of the criminal; (4) the level of certainty demonstrated by the victim at the identification confrontation; and (5) the length of time between the crime and the identification confrontation." (Emphasis added). Slim, 127 Ill.2d at 307-08, 130 Ill. Dec. 250, 537 N.E.2d 317.
Manson, 432 U.S. at 114, 97 S. Ct. at 2253, 53 L.Ed.2d at 154; Manion, 67 Ill.2d at 571-72, 10 Ill. Dec. 547, 367 N.E.2d 1313. The cases clearly state that all five factors are to be considered and weighed in determining whether an identification is reliable. Manson, 432 U.S. at 114, 97 S. Ct. at 2253, 53 L.Ed.2d at 154; Manion, 67 Ill.2d at 571-72, 10 Ill. Dec. 547, 367 N.E.2d 1313; Slim, 127 Ill.2d at 307-08, 130 Ill. Dec. 250, 537 N.E.2d 317. The use of the word "and" in these cases demonstrates that the factors are not mutually exclusive (as the jury instruction submitted in this case suggests) but are all to be considered by the trier of fact in determining the reliability of the eyewitness identification testimony presented.
We agree with defendant that the purpose of the Committee's use of "[or]" between the factors listed in IPI Criminal 3d No. 3.15 is to inform the user that "only the particular * * * factors that are supported by the evidence should be given." People v. Lewis, 165 Ill. 2d 305, 354, 209 Ill. Dec. 144, 651 N.E.2d 72 (1995). The committee note to IPI Criminal 3d No. *207 3.15 instructs the user to only "[g]ive numbered paragraphs that are supported by the evidence." Our interpretation of the Committee's use of "[or]" in IPI Criminal 3d No. 3.15 is supported by the "User's Guide" to the pattern jury instructions. The User's Guide explains:
"IPI Fourth employs two conjunctive forms. The word `and' is used to indicate additional required language. The word `or' is used to separate possible alternatives. A bracketed `or' ([or]') is used when the user must choose between alternative paragraphs or propositions that may be given as part of the instruction when more than one alternative is applicable." (Emphasis added.) Illinois Pattern Jury Instructions, Criminal, User's Guide (4th ed.2000).
The committee notes to IPI Criminal 3d No. 3.15 also refer the user to sample set 27.02 for an example of how to use IPI Criminal 3d No. 3.15. A review of sample set 27.02 further supports our conclusion that the instruction given in this case was in error. The example provided in sample set 27.02 does not place the term "or" between the factors listed in IPI Criminal No. 3.15, stating:
"When you weigh the identification testimony of a witness, you should consider all the facts and circumstances in evidence, including, but not limited to, the following:
The opportunity the witness had to view the offender at the time of the offense.
The witness's degree of attention at the time of the offense.
The witness's earlier description of the offender.
The level of certainty shown by the witness when confronting the defendant.
The length of time between the offense and the identification confrontation." Illinois Pattern Jury Instructions, Criminal, Sample Set 27.02, No. 3.15 (4th ed.2000).
The trial court's incorporation of the term "or" between each factor implies, as a matter of law, that the identification testimony of an eyewitness may be deemed reliable if just one of the five factors listed weighs in favor of reliability. The phrase preceding the five factors, stating that "all facts and circumstances in evidence" are to be considered, does not obviate the erroneous wording of the jury instruction. While an attorney may be able to resolve the court's instruction to "consider all the facts and circumstances in evidence" with its use of the term "or" between each factor, we doubt that an ordinary person acting as a juror could do the same.
The State asserts, however, that even if the jury instruction misstated the law, "any error was corrected by the prosecutor's exhaustive explanation of the elements of the instruction, and how the evidence adduced at trial satisfied each and every element." The record reveals that this statement could not be further from the truth. The assistant State's Attorney made the following statement concerning the identification instruction in closing argument:
"Now, your instruction won't have all this writing on it like my note taking, but basically I'd like to read it to you. It says when you consider the identification testimony of a witness, you should [sic] all the facts and circumstances in evidence, including but not limited to the following: The opportunity the witness had to view the offender at the time of the offense, or-notice that `or,' the witness' degree of attention at the time of the offense, or the witness' earlier description of the offender, or the level of certainty shown by the witness when confronting the defendant, or finally the *208 length of time between the offense and the identification confrontation." (Emphasis added.)
Contrary to the State's assertion, the prosecutor's comments served to reinforce the trial court's error by drawing the jury's attention to the use of the term "or" between each of the factors. The prosecutor not only used the term "or" between each factor, but he specifically asked the jury to take note of it. The error is further compounded by the mysterious omission of the term "weigh" in the prosecutor's recitation of the jury instruction.
The fact that the prosecutor went on to argue how the evidence presented at trial satisfied each and every element listed in IPI Criminal 3d No. 3.15 is not dispositive of the issue before us. What is dispositive is the fact that the erroneous jury instruction came from the trial court itself. We are well aware that: (1) "[j]uries are presumed to follow the trial court's instructions" (People v. Joyner, 317 Ill.App.3d 93, 104, 250 Ill. Dec. 831, 739 N.E.2d 594 (2000)); (2) "arguments of counsel generally carry less weight with a jury than do instructions from the court" (Boyde v. California, 494 U.S. 370, 384, 110 S. Ct. 1190, 1200, 108 L. Ed. 2d 316, 331 (1990)); and (3) instructions from the court are typically "viewed as definitive and binding statements of the law." Boyde, 494 U.S. at 384, 110 S. Ct. at 1200, 108 L.Ed.2d at 331.
Here, we have not only the trial court's improper instructions to the jury regarding evaluation of eyewitness identification testimony, but also the prosecutor's directive to the jury emphasizing the erroneous instruction in closing argument. As previously stated, the evidence presented in this case was close. Therefore, we cannot say that defendant's guilt was so clear and convincing as to render the trial court's error harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. Dennis, 181 Ill.2d at 96, 229 Ill. Dec. 552, 692 N.E.2d 325. The instruction as given may have mistakenly led the jury to rely on but a single factor when deciding that the identification testimony presented was reliable. We therefore hold that the trial court's error in jury instruction was not harmless, but prejudicial. Fierer, 124 Ill.2d at 187-88, 124 Ill. Dec. 855, 529 N.E.2d 972.
We need not address the remaining issues defendant has raised on appeal. For the foregoing reasons, defendant's convictions are reversed and the cause remanded to the circuit court of Cook County for a new trial.
Reversed and remanded.
McNULTY and TULLY, JJ., concur.
NOTES
[1]  Prior to 1992, the Illinois Supreme Court Committee on Pattern Jury Instructions in Criminal Cases (Committee) recommended that no instruction be given on circumstances of identification. See Illinois Pattern Jury Instructions, Criminal, No. 3.15, Committee Note (2d ed.1981). Instead, the Committee directed the user to Illinois Pattern Jury Instructions, Criminal, No. 1.02 (2d ed.1981) and its committee note on the believability of witnesses. In 1992, however, the Committee had a "change of mind" and inserted IPI Criminal 3d No. 3.15. See Illinois Pattern Jury Instructions, Criminal, No. 3.15, Committee Note (3d ed.1992).

=== CASE 9739460 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:15:25.611442+00 ===

*112OPINION OF THE COURT
Rosenblatt, J.
CPL 670.10 authorizes a trial court to allow into evidence the testimony of a witness given at a prior trial if the witness is outside the state and cannot with due diligence be brought before the court. In the appeal before us, we must determine whether the People met this due diligence standard.
After three mistrials (two of which resulted in hung juries), defendant was convicted of robbery in the second degree (see, Penal Law § 160.10 [2] [b]). The only prosecution witness who could identify defendant as the assailant was the victim, Oscar Leal. Immediately after the third trial, Leal left the United States to take up permanent residence in Mexico. Leal, a Mexican national, required the assistance of a Spanish-language interpreter at the first three trials. New York officials telephoned Leal to ask him to return to the United States for a fourth trial. They did not, however, address him in his native language or employ an interpreter. Because the People did not ensure that the witness understood those conversations, we hold, as a matter of law, that the People acted with less than due diligence, and therefore reverse and order a new trial,1
L
At the first three trials, Leal testified, in substance, that defendant threatened to shoot him if he did not surrender his valuables. He complied, surrendering $20 and his wristwatch. On the way to a friend’s house to telephone the police, Leal noticed a patrol car. He stopped the car and reported the robbery. After a brief investigation, the police officers arrested defendant and in his pocket found a $20 bill and Leal’s watch. When arrested, defendant claimed that he did not rob anyone, but had merely found the watch.
*113Following the third mistrial, the defense moved for a trial order of dismissal pursuant to CPL 210.40 (1). After a hearing pursuant to People v Clayton (41 AD2d 204 [1973]), Supreme Court declined to dismiss the indictment. Although Leal had by this time moved to Mexico, the People did not reveal that fact to the Justice deciding the Clayton motion.2
When the case was called for the fourth trial, the People informed the court that Leal would not return to the United States. They sought permission to introduce into evidence a transcript of Leal’s prior testimony in lieu of his live appearance. In opposition, defendant argued that admitting a transcript would violate CPL 670.10 and his constitutional right to confront witnesses against him.
The court conducted a hearing on whether to allow the People to use transcripts in place of Leal’s testimony. At the hearing, the Assistant District Attorney (ADA) testified that during a recess in the third trial, Leal said he intended to return to Mexico to work on his mother’s farm. The ADA believed, however, that Leal was merely musing about the possibility of moving “sometime in the future.” Hearing testimony further revealed that in preparation for the fourth trial, the ADA attempted to contact Leal at his last-known home and workplace, but could not find him. Leal’s employer informed the ADA that he believed Leal had returned to Mexico. Ultimately, police detectives obtained Leal’s Mexican address and phone number from Leal’s cousin.
A detective testified that he telephoned Leal in Mexico and told him, in English, that he was needed in New York for a fourth trial, but Leal said he was too busy to return. The detective testified that in his opinion, Leal could understand English. A different ADA then testified that he telephoned Leal to follow up on the detective’s conversation. Addressing Leal in English, the ADA offered to pay the travel expenses, but Leal still refused to return to New York. The hearing concluded with the ADA’s testimony that Leal “certainly wasn’t fluent in English,” but “appeared to understand me at some point.”
The court granted the People’s motion, concluding “that the People have exercised due diligence” in attempting to bring Leal before the court. The jury convicted defendant of robbery in the second degree, and the Appellate Division affirmed. The *114dissenting Appellate Division Justice granted defendant leave to appeal to this Court, and we now reverse.
II
Insofar as it allows a jury to convict a defendant based on a witness’s previous testimony, CPL 670.10 (1) is an exception to the Sixth Amendment right of confrontation (see, Preiser, Practice Commentaries, McKinney’s Cons Laws of NY, Book 11 A, CPL 670.10, at 382-383). Although the right of confrontation contemplates that testimony against an accused be “delivered live within eyesight and earshot of the jurors” (People v Arroyo, 54 NY2d 567, 577 [1982]), the statute makes, and the Constitution allows, limited departures based on necessity and fairness.
In a number of instances this Court has sustained the use of previous testimony pursuant to CPL 670.10. We did so, for example, in Arroyo (54 NY2d, at 573, supra), by upholding the introduction of a witness’s prior testimony after she had disappeared inexplicably. In Arroyo, however, the People exercised due diligence in trying to locate her. After she had failed to appear, the prosecutor called her apartment twice; detectives visited the apartment several times, questioned neighbors, and searched for her “at the neighboring public hospital, at the Missing Persons Bureau, at the Bureau of Criminal Investigation and at the local [welfare] office” (id., at 573). These lines of inquiry brought investigators “to but one dead end after another” (id.). Accordingly, this Court concluded that the People exercised due diligence. Similarly, in People v Robinson (89 NY2d 648, 651 [1997]), we permitted the defense to introduce a witness’s Grand Jury testimony when the witness could not be brought before the court, notwithstanding the defendant’s due diligence.3
On the other hand, in other CPL 670.10 settings we have barred the use of transcript testimony when the statute’s terms were not strictly met. For example, we refused to countenance the use of transcript testimony in People v Green (78 NY2d 1029, 1030 [1991]) and People v Harding (37 NY2d 130, 133 *115[1975]), in which we cautioned that courts may not freely expand CPL 670.10’s exceptions to confrontation.4
To prevent exceptions from devouring the rule, we have required “that the prosecutor’s failure to produce [a witness] * * * not [be] due to indifference or a strategic preference for presenting her testimony in the more sheltered form of [a transcript] rather than in the confrontational setting of a personal appearance on the stand” (Arroyo, 54 NY2d, at 571, supra).
The case before us confirms the importance of this requirement. The proof rested principally on Leal’s testimony. Considering that defendant was found with a $20 bill and Leal’s watch, the case would seem open and shut. And yet, two juries heard the proof and observed the victim but were unable to conclude that defendant was the robber. It may, of course, be a coincidence, but the fact remains that the only jury to convict defendant had no opportunity to see, hear and appraise the victim. Indeed, in summation at the third trial, defense counsel specifically asked the jury to assess Leal’s demeanor. The defense emphasized Leal’s hesitancy in pointing to defendant as the robber, and argued that this reluctance pointed to defendant’s innocence.
By allowing the People to base their case largely on a cold transcript, the court prevented the fourth jury from evaluating Leal’s demeanor and, thus, his credibility. Before the Appellate Division, and again here, the defense contended that the ADA wanted Leal to remain absent. Regardless of what may or may not have been the People’s subjective intent, we conclude that they undertook insufficient steps to constitute due diligence.
It was obvious that Leal was not confident in English. Due diligence requires that when the People try to secure a witness’s presence at trial, they communicate in language the witness can understand. And there should be no question about the witness’s understanding. The matter should not be left to surmise or impressions as to the witness’s capacity to appreciate the conversation fully. In this case the People were so unsure of Leal’s ability to speak and understand English that they provided him with an interpreter to prove their case before the jury. The People in effect ask us to conclude that Leal did *116not understand English well enough to be an effective witness at trial, but did understand English well enough to grasp the subtleties of a conversation designed to induce him to travel thousands of miles from his home. Compliance with the requirements of due diligence in this case would have posed no extraordinary burden. Asking a Spanish-speaking detective to contact Leal could have been accomplished with minimal effort.
At the hearing’s culmination, the ADA told the court that when he spoke to Leal on the telephone, Leal “appeared to understand me at some point.” (Emphasis supplied.) Under the circumstances this is not enough. The due diligence requirement of CPL 670.10 is not satisfied by mere appearances or equivocation. Before proceeding without the witness, the court must be assured that the witness is beyond the practical reach of the prosecution.
Under CPL 670.10, a party seeking to induce a witness to return to the United States for trial — here, for a fourth trial— must make more than a pro forma request before the court declares the witness unavailable. Even under ordinary circumstances it is often difficult to convince victims to testify in criminal trials. Traveling from distant points, let alone from out of the country, presents even greater difficulties. Such witnesses would understandably be concerned about the length of time required, travel arrangements, expenses and potential personal disruption that might accompany a trip of this sort. Due diligence under these circumstances required the People to explain to the witness, fully and plainly, what they would do to accommodate these concerns. Here, as a matter of law, the People did not exercise due diligence within the meaning of CPL 670.10 (1).5
Contrary to our dissenting colleague’s contention, we have not determined that Leal could speak and understand only Spanish. Indeed, as the dissent emphasizes, Leal had “some proficiency in English” (dissenting opn, at 118). In measuring the People’s diligence in the case before us, however, it is the level of Leal’s comprehension that counts. Even the most *117rudimentary communications — explaining a timetable or giving travel directions — can be labored if not confusing for someone with a limited understanding of the language.
We do not doubt that Leal knew the prosecution wanted him back, but that does not satisfy the People’s burden of establishing due diligence in convincing him to return. Considering that a trial on paper should be conducted only as a last resort, the underlying goal of CPL 670.10 is not for the prosecution to go through the motions come what may, but to succeed in bringing the witness to court. In the face of Leal’s reluctance, the prosecution could have engaged a bilingual individual who could have evaluated Leal’s misgivings and explained the lengths to which the State was willing to go to assuage them. This would have been easy. Just as the importance of having accurate testimony at trial prompted the People to use a translator, the comparable importance of having live testimony required that the People address Leal in his native tongue when trying to secure his presence at trial. In sum, using understandable language to get the witness to the trial is as important as using understandable language to question the witness at the trial.
The dissent recognizes the need for clarity in a witness’s testimony and the potential for confusion when being cross-examined in another language. The same confusion and lack of comprehension, however, are equally likely when explaining the nature and extent of the State’s promises regarding travel, costs and time away from home.
Accordingly, the order of the Appellate Division should be reversed and a new trial ordered.
. [2] The determination whether the People exercised due diligence is normally a mixed question of law and fact precluding this Court’s review if there is any evidence in the record to support it (see, People v Budd, 46 NY2d 930, 931 [1979]). This case presents a legal sufficiency issue: whether due diligence can be met when conversations with the witness occur in a language in which the witness is not fluent. Because this case examines the minimal-requirements of due diligence, the issue is properly before us (cf., People v McRay, 51 NY2d 594, 601 [1980]).
. After defendant’s conviction, he moved to have the Clayton motion reconsidered. Another Justice, who presided over the fourth trial, considered and denied the motion.
. See also, People v Fisher, 223 NY 459 (1918) (allowing, pursuant to former Code of Criminal Procedure § 8 [3] [now CPL 670.10 (1)], the admission of a stenographic transcript of a preliminary examination taken in accordance with former Code of Criminal Procedure § 221-b [now Judiciary Law § 319]); People v Geraci, 85 NY2d 359 (1995) (authorizing the use of Grand Jury testimony where the defendant intimidated the witness).
. See also, People v Ayala, 75 NY2d 422, 428-429 (1990) (holding that prior testimony could not be used when taken at a preliminary hearing in which defendant did not have a sufficient incentive to cross-examine the witness); People v Simmons, 36 NY2d 126, 131 (1975) (same).
. Defendant argues that the Confrontation Clause requires the People to avail themselves of provisions of the Mexico-United States Mutual Legal Assistance Cooperation Treaty (Dec. 9, 1987, 27 ILM 443). Further, defendant suggests that the treaty could be used to require unwilling witnesses to give live testimony via teleconferencing. These arguments are unpreserved for review, and we therefore do not address them.

=== CASE 9739461 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:15:25.61684+00 ===

Wesley, J.
(dissenting). Because the record in this case supports the findings of Supreme Court and the Appellate Division that the People did exercise due diligence in attempting to procure the live testimony of Oscar Leal, we respectfully dissent.
We agree with the majority that “[d]ue diligence requires that when the People try to secure a witness’s presence at trial, they communicate in language the witness can understand” (majority opn, at 115). However, we disagree with the majority’s conclusion that the only acceptable proof of Leal’s ability to understand English was the use of an interpreter during Leal’s testimony at the first three trials. Based on this conclusion, the majority determines that, as a matter of law, the People did not exercise due diligence. Essential to such a *118determination is that Leal can speak and understand only Spanish — a finding not made by either Supreme Court or the Appellate Division.
To our minds, there is ample evidence to support a finding that Leal was able to speak and understand English at a level necessary to comprehend the telephone calls from the New York officials. Assistant District Attorney Guido and Detective McCormack both described conversations they had with Leal during the third trial that indicate some proficiency in English.1 In addition, the People offered testimony describing the details of telephone conversations Leal had with Detective McCormack and Assistant District Attorney Rothstein that indicate *119that Leal had an understanding of English.2 Detective McCormack stated that “[h]is English is, you know, with an accent, but [it] is pretty decent” and that “[h]is English was pretty good” and “understandable.” Assistant District Attorney Rothstein testified that “I guess I would agree with what Detective McCormack said. He described it as ‘understandable.’ ” Rothstein continued, “I could understand him for the limited purposes of this discussion.”
Since there was testimony as to Leal’s ability to understand English, there is ample evidence in the record to support the findings of Supreme Court and the Appellate Division. In People v Budd (46 NY2d 930, 931), we held that due diligence is *120normally a mixed question of law and fact precluding this Court’s review if there is any evidence in the record to support it. Thus, the determinations below are beyond our review powers.
Moreover, it is not “obvious” that Leal was deficient in English just because he was provided a Spanish interpreter at trial. Because of the need for clarity in a witness’s testimony and the potential for confusion while being cross-examined in another language, trial counsel might well choose to allow his or her witness to testify in the language in which they are most proficient. The use of an interpreter at trial does not automatically imply that a witness is unable to speak or understand English. The majority would mandate the use of an interpreter when assessing the ability of a witness to understand post-trial communications such as those under review here.
Due diligence does require that the People communicate with a witness in language the witness can understand. It is the witness’s level of comprehension of that language that counts. There is ample evidence to show Leal clearly understood the People’s attempts to persuade him to return to New York. That conclusion, made by Supreme Court and the Appellate Division, is a mixed question of law and fact. We do not have the authority to overturn it no matter how convinced the majority may be that there was a better way to handle the situation.
Accordingly, we would affirm the order of the Appellate Division.
Chief Judge Kaye and Judges Smith and Ciparick concur with Judge Rosenblatt; Judge Wesley dissents and votes to affirm in a separate opinion in which Judges Levine and Graffeo concur.
Order reversed, etc.
. “A * * * He was downstairs. I had him sit in my cubical and I believe I went out and got him a soda and something to eat and I gave him a couple of magazines to read while he was sitting there that were on my desk, and I had a conversation with him.
“Basically, we started talking about SCUBA diving, that I had been SCUBA diving in Mexico, and we started talking about Mexico and he said that he wanted to go back to Mexico; that his family — his mother had a farm there. That she owned a small bit of land and that his family made money by planting vegetables, and that he was here in the United States working as a waiter/cashier to make money so that he could buy or rent more land so that they could grow more vegetables in Mexico.” (Guido testimony, Dec. 24, 1996 hearing transcript, defendant’s appendix, at 10.)
“Q Do you know, as you sit here now from information you possessed, whether or not he was legally in this country? * * *
“A Only, based on personal conversations. I don’t know for a fact.
“the court: Personal conversations with whom?
“the witness: Mr. Leal.
“the court: What did he tell you?
“the witness: He told me he was here — I believe he didn’t have any documentation. He was just here to work.
“by mr. silberblatt:
“Q For seven years; correct. * * *
“A That’s correct.” (Id., at 20.)
“Q Detective, how many times did you speak personally to Oscar Leal?
“A Back in August we had a lengthy conversation. That would be August 14th.
“Q Did it seem to you on August 14th, that Mr. Leal was reluctant to come to court?
“A Well, he was concerned, he was missing a lot of time from work. So he wasn’t very happy coming to court because of that.
“Q Did he say anything to you which indicated his unhappiness in coming to court?
“A Just in reference to his employment.
“Q He told you he was missing time on his job?
“A Right. For the days he was coming to court, he wasn’t getting paid and he was upset about that.” (McCormack testimony, at 35-36.)
. “A I called and I got a male on the phone and I asked if this was Oscar Leal and he said, ‘Yes, it was.’ I identified myself as being Detective McCormack from the D.A.’s Office.
“Q After you identified yourself, what is the next thing he said to you?
“A Well, he stated he wasn’t coming back to court and I can keep his watch.
“the court: He said what?
“He is not coming back—
“the witness: He is not coming back to court, to get his watch. I could keep his watch” {id., at 31).
“Q And what, if anything, did he tell you after that? Or tell us about the conversation.
“A Then I asked, ‘Well, that wasn’t my purpose. I wasn’t here to bring back property to you. Apparently, the case is continuing and we need you to appear in court again.’
“At that time I said he had to appear in court and I asked if he was coining to the United States in the near future and he said, ‘No,’ and at that point I said that we would provide (sic) any legal problems he would have or transportation, we would arrange that for him to come to the United States and at that point he said he had no desire to come back to America, he was just here temporarily to make money, because the family has a business in Mexico and he had no intention of returning” {id., at 32).
“A * * * I spoke to a person who identified himself as Mr. Leal and I indicated that I was now the Prosecutor on the case and would like him to return to New York to testify at the next trial.
“He indicated to me that he had returned to Mexico and was working on — I forget. I might have said his mother’s or his aunt’s, someone’s farm, and he didn’t want to return nor could he return, because of his immigration situation.
“I offered to have my office pay for his airfare and hotel expenses in New York. I also offered to arrange with Immigration to allow him into the country for the limited purpose for testifying here, and he indicated that he had no intention or desire to return here, even if I took those steps.
“I also asked him when he had left New York for Mexico, and he indicated — I don’t remember the exact date. He said either August 14th or 15th or August 15th or 16th, but it was clear to me that it was a day or two after his testimony in the third trial.” (Rothstein testimony, at 50-51.)

=== CASE 9738601 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:57:58.041446+00 ===

Per Curiam.
Defendant áppéals from the circdit court’s denial of his petition for the return of an assortment of chattels and approximately $2,000 in cash removed from his bedroom by police officers executing a valid search warrant. Defendant previously won an acquittal by directed verdict ori a charge of possession of marijuana with intent to deliver, which arose out of the same search.
The question to be decided in a case of this type is "the superior right of possession as between the seizing authority a.nd the one from whoin the property was seizéd”. People v Rosa, 11 Mich App 157, 161; 160 NW2d 747 (1968), aff'd 382 Mich 163; 169 NW2d 297 (1969). See also, Oakland County v Bice, 386 Mich 143; 191 NW2d 338 (1971);
However, defendant has not claimed that the property in question waS seized from his possession: Nor does he allege that he exercised over the property that dominion and control which is the hallmark of possession. Seé 73 CJS, Property, § 14(a), pp 196-197. He merely claims that the property was found in his room and that he gave no one else permission to put it there. Those *202allegations are insufficient to establish even a prima facie right to possession. The trial court correctly denied defendant’s petition.
Affirmed.

=== CASE 9738602 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:57:58.045351+00 ===

Mackenzie, J.
(dissenting). I dissent. As stated by the majority, the property seized belongs to the party with the superior right of possession. See People v Rosa, 11 Mich App 157; 160 NW2d 747 (1968). I believe that defendant has the superior right in this case.
According to 63 Am Jur 2d, Property, § 39, p 323:
"One may have possession of a chattel, even in the absence of actual personal custody, if the chattel is under his control and in a place where it must have been put by his act or in his behalf, or where the chattel is within his power in such a sense that he can and does command its use.”
In his petition for return of personal property, defendant stated that on November 24, 1976, $2,-046 was seized from his room in Apartment A-59 in the Centaur Apartment building complex. He further stated that no other person had his permission to store any currency in his room or in the premises. It is my opinion that such allegations allege a possessory interest.
It is important to keep in mind that no other party is alleging a possessory interest in the money. Since the prosecution against defendant resulted in his acquittal, I do not believe the state can be considered to have a possessor right superior to that of defendant. In order to be lawful, a search warrant need only be based upon probable cause. If the state can retain the money although *203there is insufficient evidence to convict the defendant, the result, I believe, effectively amounts to a confiscatory fine based upon mere probable cause.
I would reverse.

=== CASE 2216771 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:17.836095+00 ===

290 N.W.2d 809 (1980)
206 Neb. 28
TROY & STALDER CO., a Nebraska Corporation, et al., Appellants,
v.
CONTINENTAL CASUALTY COMPANY, an Illinois Corporation, Appellee.
No. 42701.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
April 8, 1980.
*810 William B. Woodruff, P. C., Omaha, for appellants.
Eugene P. Welch and Thomas A. Grennan of Gross, Welch, Vinardi, Kauffman, Day & Langdon, Omaha, for appellee.
Heard before KRIVOSHA, C. J., and BOSLAUGH, McCOWN, CLINTON, BRODKEY, WHITE, and HASTINGS, JJ.
McCOWN, Justice.
This action began as a declaratory judgment proceeding to require the defendant insurance company to assume the defense of certain malpractice actions against the plaintiff architects under a professional liability insurance policy. The malpractice actions were concluded before the declaratory judgment action was determined and the action proceeded on an amended petition seeking damages and attorney's fees for breach of contract. The District Court found that no coverage was afforded under the policy of insurance and dismissed the action.
On March 27, 1968, the defendant insurance company issued an architects' and/or engineers' professional liability insurance policy to plaintiffs insuring them against legal liability caused by error, omission, or negligent act. The insurance policy was renewed annually through March 27, 1976. The policy was canceled on July 16, 1976, for nonpayment of premium. The defendant provided continuous malpractice coverage *811 for plaintiffs from March 27, 1968, through July 16, 1976. The insurance policy covered
errors, omissions or negligent acts which occur on or after the date stated in item 6 of the declarations (the effective date of the first policy issued and continuously renewed by the Company) provided that claim therefor is first made against the insured during this policy period and reported in writing to the Company during this policy period or within 60 days after the expiration of this policy period.
The policy required:
The insured shall, as soon as practicable after receiving notification of an actual or alleged error, omission or negligent act that might reasonably be expected to create a claim against him, give written notice thereof to the Company along with full and complete particulars of the actual or alleged error, omission or negligent act.
The insured shall, as soon as practicable after a claim has been made against him but in any event within 60 days after the expiration of this policy period, give written notice thereof to the Company along with full and complete particulars of the claim.
If suit is brought against the insured, the insured shall immediately forward to the Company every demand, complaint, notice, summons, pleading or other process received by him or his representative. All notices and other papers shall be sent to the Company at 310 South Michigan Avenue, Chicago, Illinois 60604.
On April 23, 1971, plaintiffs entered into an agreement with Wilson Certified Foods, Inc., for the construction of a new pork processing plant near Marshall, Missouri. Plaintiffs' work under that contract was completed in the fall of 1973. After completion of that project, plaintiffs claimed they were entitled to more architectural fees from Wilson than they had received, and continued to negotiate with Wilson in an attempt to obtain the balance due.
On March 3, 1976, plaintiffs mailed a letter addressed to "Mr. H. Norman Hunt Claims Manager Victor O. Schinnerer & Co., Inc. 5028 Wisconsin, Ave. Washington, D.C. 20016." The letter advised Mr. Hunt that plaintiffs intended to sue Wilson for approximately $90,000, and that Wilson would undoubtedly file a counterclaim. It also stated that, in plaintiffs' opinion, any legitimate counterclaims would be nebulous.
H. Norman Hunt was an agent of the defendant insurance company who was in charge of the Omaha, Nebraska, claims office of the defendant. Hunt had never lived or worked in Washington, D.C., and had never been an employee of Victor O. Schinnerer & Co., Inc. Victor O. Schinnerer & Co., Inc., was the producing agent for architects' and engineers' malpractice insurance policies written by the defendant and had no responsibility for handling claims or defense under such policies.
The evidence was that neither H. Norman Hunt nor anyone in his office, Continental Casualty Company, nor anyone in the Schinnerer office in Washington, D.C., ever received the March 3, 1976 letter.
On April 30, 1976, Wilson advised plaintiffs by letter of claims against the plaintiffs for errors and omissions in the architectural work for the Missouri plant. Plaintiffs did not forward that letter to the defendant or any of its agents, or notify them of its receipt. The insurance policy was canceled by defendant, after notice, effective July 16, 1976, for nonpayment of premium.
In the spring of 1977, plaintiffs were sued by Wilson for professional malpractice in the construction of the Missouri hog plant and copies of the summons and complaint were sent to Victor O. Schinnerer & Co., Inc., in Washington, D.C.
On April 6, 1977, plaintiffs sued Wilson in the United States District Court for Nebraska to recover architectural fees, and on June 6, 1977, Wilson filed a counterclaim against plaintiffs alleging malpractice. A copy of the counterclaim was sent to Victor O. Schinnerer & Co., Inc. Schinnerer advised the defendant of the claims and H. Norman Hunt, the claims manager of the *812 defendant in Omaha, denied coverage on the basis that the claim was not reported to the company during the policy period or within 60 days after expiration.
On August 28, 1978, pursuant to a stipulation of the parties, judgment was entered in the United States District Court for Nebraska in favor of plaintiffs in the sum of $94,910.48, and Wilson was found to be entitled to a setoff against that judgment in the sum of $69,910.48 for damages caused by plaintiffs' professional errors and omissions.
Meanwhile, on June 10, 1977, plaintiffs filed this action for a declaratory judgment in the District Court for Douglas County, Nebraska, seeking to require the defendant to undertake the defense of the malpractice lawsuits.
In December 1978, following the entry of the stipulated judgments in the federal court, plaintiffs filed an amended petition in this action in the District Court for Douglas County, praying for judgment against the defendant for breach of contract in the sum of $69,910.48, together with attorney's fees incurred in the defense of the malpractice actions.
The case was tried to the court without a jury. On February 15, 1979, the District Court entered judgment for the defendant. The District Court found that plaintiffs failed to report in writing to the defendant during the policy period the fact that a claim was made against the insured; that the letter of March 3, 1976, was incorrectly addressed and not entitled to the presumption of delivery; and also that the letter was not delivered to the defendant. The District Court therefore found that plaintiffs had no coverage under the policy of insurance and dismissed plaintiffs' action. The plaintiffs have appealed.
The plaintiffs contend that the letter of March 3, 1976, was properly addressed, stamped, and mailed and is therefore entitled to the presumption that it was received by the addressee in the usual course of the mails. Essentially, plaintiffs' position is that the presumption is irrebuttable and that testimony or evidence that the letter was not received is insufficient to overcome the presumption and is also insufficient to support a finding by the fact finder that the letter was not received.
The addressee of the letter of March 3, 1976, was H. Norman Hunt. Hunt was the claims manager of the defendant in Omaha, Nebraska. The evidence was undisputed that Hunt's correct address was Omaha, Nebraska, and that he was not and never had been a resident of Washington, D.C.
We have recently held that the presumption of receipt of mail by the addressee does not arise unless it is shown that the letter was properly addressed, stamped, and mailed. Waite Lumber Co., Inc. v. Carpenter, 205 Neb. 860, 290 N.W.2d 655 (1980). That case also points out that even if the presumption of receipt of mail arises, it may be rebutted by any relevant evidence and positive testimony that a letter was not received simply raises a question of fact to be decided by the trier of fact. Even where the evidence of proper addressing and mailing is sufficient to raise the presumption of receipt and shift the burden of proof on the issue to the opposing party, the presumption is still rebuttable and the factual issue of whether mail was received is for determination by a jury under proper instructions where the evidence is in conflict.
In the case now before us, the trier of fact not only determined that the letter of March 3, 1976, was not properly addressed to the defendant nor any of its authorized agents and was not entitled to the presumption of delivery, but the court also found on the evidence that the letter of March 3, 1976, was not delivered to the defendant. The court also found that the letter did not constitute sufficient notice of a claim. There was evidence to support those factual findings.
In a law action tried to the court without a jury, it is not within the province of this court to weigh or resolve conflicts in the evidence. The credibility of the witnesses and the weight to be given to their testimony are for the trier of fact. The judgment *813 of a trial court in an action at law tried to the court without a jury has the effect of a verdict of a jury and should not be set aside on appeal unless clearly wrong. Insurance Co. of North America v. Hawkins, 197 Neb. 126, 246 N.W.2d 878 (1976).
The judgment of the trial court is affirmed.
AFFIRMED.
CLINTON, J., not voting.

=== CASE 9738603 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:58:03.85402+00 ===

*169Per Curiam.
Plaintiff-appellant Jimmy E. Greene brings this appeal from a jury verdict in favor of the defendants-appellees Union Optical Center, Inc. and Nu Vision Optical of Michigan, Inc., both Michigan corporations. As a basis for his appeal, the plaintiff claims that the trial court committed reversible error in its jury instructions covering one aspect of the plaintiff’s burden of proof and the applicability of contributory negligence to defeat the original negligence claim.
The facts of this case indicate that one of the two defendants manufactured a lens for the plaintiff’s eyeglasses which shattered in a collision of the plaintiff and an opponent in a basketball game. On December 19, 1972, the plaintiff bought a pair of glasses from defendant Nu Vision. The glasses included a frame and two lenses. On May 14, 1973, the plaintiff made a second purchase from defendant Nu Vision. The nature of this purchase is in dispute. However, testimony indicates that the only merchandise available from Nu Vision at that time for the price paid was a replacement lens. Approximately one year later, on May 18, 1974, the plaintiff purchased another replacement lens for his glasses, this from defendant Union. There is a dispute between defendant Union and the plaintiff as to whether the lens was a right or left lens. On May 30, 1974, the right lens shattered, leaving the plaintiff with a substantial loss of vision in his right eye.
The trial court issued two instructions, now in dispute, regarding the plaintiff’s burden of proof and the applicability of contributory negligence as a defense. As to the burden of proof, the trial court instructed:
"As I have said, both of the defendants cannot be *170liable to the Plaintiff, and the Plaintiff has the burden of proof as to which of them is liable to him.”
"Moreover, if you cannot decide which defendant made and sold the lens that broke because evidence as to this is so evenly balanced or inadequate that it does not satisfy you as to which defendant was the manufacturer of that lens, then you cannot find against either defendant and, therefore, must return a verdict in favor of both defendants.”
Evidence was entered in the trial to show that both defendants failed to comply with the recording requirements of 21 CFR § 801.410 (1979), which provides in part:
"(e) Copies of invoice(s), shipping document(s), and records of sale or distribution of all impact resistant lenses, including finished eyeglasses and sunglasses, shall be kept and maintained for a period of 3 years; however, the names and addresses of individuals purchasing nonprescription eyeglasses and sunglasses at the retail level need not be kept and maintained by the retailer. The records kept in compliance with this paragraph shall be made available upon request at all reasonable hours by any officer or employee of the Food and Drug Administration or by any other officer or employee acting on behalf of the Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare and such officer or employee shall be permitted to inspect and copy such records, to make such inventories of stock as he deems necessary, and otherwise to check the correctness of such inventories.
"(f) In addition, those persons conducting impact tests in accordance with paragraph (d) of this section, shall keep and maintain the results thereof for a period of 3 years. Such records and results shall be made available, upon request at all reasonable hours by any officer or employee acting on behalf of the Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare and shall permit such officer or employee to inspect and copy such records, to make *171such inventories of stock as he deems necessary, and otherwise to check the correctness of such inventories.”
Failure to comply with this administrative regulation constitutes evidence of negligence. Douglas v Edgewater Park Co, 369 Mich 320; 119 NW2d 567 (1963). This evidence was not rebutted by either defendant.
In certain situations, a plaintiffs burden of proof may be shifted to the defendants where more than one defendant has been negligent and the plaintiff is unable to prove which of the two defendants proximately caused his injury. In this case, the trial court incorrectly instructed the jury that if the plaintiff failed to prove which of the two defendants manufactured the broken lens, it should return a verdict in favor of both defendants. This Court ruled in Snider v Bob Thibodeau Ford, Inc, 42 Mich App 708, 718; 202 NW2d 727 (1972), that the question of shifting a burden of proof to multiple defendants was one of "policy and fairness based on experience in the different situations”. We believe that special circumstances did exist in this case, sufficient to shift to the defendants the burden of showing which of them manufactured the broken lens. The plaintiff was unable to show which defendant was the source of the assertedly defective lens. The defendants’ own negligence in failing to comply with applicable record keeping regulations should not be used as a basis for giving the plaintiff an unfair burden of proof. Therefore, we remand this case for a new trial, in which the defendants will bear the burden of proving which of them made the lens.
As to the claim that the trial court improperly instructed on the applicability of contributory negligence, the plaintiff’s reliance upon Funk v General Motors Corp, 392 Mich 91; 220 NW2d 641 *172(1974), is not valid. The regulation involved in this case differs substantially from that of Funk. In Funk, the disputed regulation imposed a duty to provide sufficiently safe working conditions and safety precautions for workers forced to engage in dangerous activities while on the job. Where the defendant employer failed to comply with the statutorily' imposed safety precautions, the Court found the contributory negligence of the plaintiff employee unavailable as a defense to the employer’s negligence. Contrary to the argument posed by the plaintiff herein, Funk does not stand for the proposition that the mere presence of a statutorily imposed duty precludes any consideration of contributory negligence. In this case, the jury could have found that the plaintiff’s own negligent conduct was the proximate cause of his injury, even if the manufacturing standards of 21 CFR § 801.410 were not met. Therefore, the trial court did not err in instructing on contributory negligence.
Accordingly, we hold that the trial court committed reversible error in failing to place upon the defendants the burden of proof as to which of them manufactured the broken lens. For reasons of policy and fairness, the trial court should place this burden on the defendants. Snider v Bob Thibodeau Ford, Inc, supra.
Reversed and remanded for a new trial in accordance with this opinion.

=== CASE 9738604 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:58:03.857649+00 ===

Cynar, J.
(concurring). While concurring with the majority opinion, I believe further comment is in order concerning burden of proof. The instructions on burden of proof were in error because special circumstances did exist in this case, sufficient to shift to the defendants the burden of showing which of them manufactured the broken *173lens. Snider v Bob Thibodeau Ford, Inc, 42 Mich App 708; 202 NW2d 727 (1972). Here the jury may have rested its verdict on the trial court’s instruction that, in the absence of evidence indicating which of the two defendants was liable, the jury should return a verdict in favor of both defendants. Or the jury may have concluded that regardless of any violation of Federal record-keeping requirements under 21 CFR § 801.410, the lens in question was not defectively made. Where the jury verdict is ambiguous and could have been based upon an incorrect jury instruction, or a finding of no negligence, a new trial is warranted. Alston v Tye, 67 Mich App 138; 240 NW2d 472 (1976).

=== CASE 9738605 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:58:04.768136+00 ===

D. C. Riley, J.
Defendants-appellants (hereinafter called defendant even though there were other defendants in the trial court) appeal as of right from the November 17, 1978, judgment of the trial court awarding plaintiffs $203,446.59 plus seven per cent interest, pursuant to a lease agreement.
Plaintiffs leased approximately ten acres of land in Ann Arbor, Michigan, for 50 years at $36,000 per year, to defendant Robert Meyer Company, a partnership, which intended to erect a shopping center on the land. Since part of the land was zoned commercial and part was zoned multiple-dwelling, the lease was delivered into escrow on three conditions. First, the lease was to become legally effective upon the subject premise being rezoned in its entirety. Second, if the land was not rezoned by January 3, 1972, then, at the option of the tenant, the lease could be rendered null and void on written notice by the tenant. Third, waiver of the requirement of rezoning would be implied by the tenant’s election not to serve the written notice.
The partnership never gave written notice of termination to plaintiffs. In fact, rather than terminate the lease because of rezoning problems, the partnership assigned its rights and obligations under the lease to Packard Platt Plaza, Inc., a corporation formed for the express purpose of limiting the personal liability of the Robert Meyer Company partners. Packard Platt Plaza, Inc., was incorporated with approximately $1,000 capital. The only assets of the corporation were the lease and additional funds infused to pay corporate *323expenses. Plaintiffs gave written consent to the assignment based upon the understanding that the individual partners of Robert Meyer Company would remain liable under the lease.
The Robert Meyer Company was dissolved in February of 1972, and a partnership was formed to perform work (unrelated to the instant transaction) which had been done prior to that time by the Robert Meyer Company. This partnership was called the Meyer C. Weiner Co.
The lease was delivered out of escrow on March 14, 1972, and the parties orally modified the lease in April of 1972. The modification cut the rent from $36,000 to $18,000 per annum; the lessees agreed to pay the real estate commission; the portion of the property zoned multiple was deleted and plaintiffs agreed to pay one quarter of the taxes on the whole parcel. Payments under the lease were still to begin on May 1, 1972.
. The City of Ann Arbor refused to issue a building permit for the smaller development and the defendant corporation lost its mandamus action when the Michigan Supreme Court refused to hear the case in April of 1976. Plaintiffs instituted this action on April 24, 1975, seeking the unpaid rent on the orally modified lease.
Defendants Meyer C. Weiner and Benjamin H. Rabin first contend that they were released from personal liability by the assignment of the lease to the corporation. We do not agree.
Individuals cannot avoid their responsibility by assigning a lease to a corporation formed solely to avoid liability. The notion of a separate corporate identity distinct from those persons composing the corporation is merely a legal fiction. Montgomery v Central National Bank & Trust Co of Battle Creek, 267 Mich 142, 147-148; 255 NW 274 (1934). *324A corporate veil will be pierced where there is fraud, sham or other improper use of the corporate form. Williams v American Title Ins Co, 83 Mich App 686, 697; 269 NW2d 481 (1978).
In the instant case, defendants Meyer C. Weiner and Benjamin H. Rabin intentionally assigned the lease to an under-capitalized dummy corporation for the purpose of avoiding personal liability under the lease. The trial court did not err when it pierced the corporate veil and held defendants Meyer C. Weiner and Benjamin H. Rabin personally liable on the lease. See Cinderella Theatre Co, Inc v United Detroit Theatres Corp, 367 Mich 424; 116 NW2d 825 (1962).
The individuals next claim that they are not liable under the following assignment provision contained in the lease:
"In the event this Lease shall be assigned to a partnership, tenancy-in-common, joint tenancy, syndicate, joint venture or similar entity or to more than one person, corporation or other entity, all such persons, corporations and entities and all members of such entities shall assume the obligations of this Lease jointly and severally. Nothing contained herein shall preclude the right of a stockholder or owner of interest at the time of the signing of this Lease to transfer all or part of his or their interest by gift or otherwise, to or for the benefit of his wife, children or heirs.”
Under this provision, defendant Joshua T. Weiner was held personally liable as a stockholder of the corporation. The trial court ruled that the understanding of the parties to the lease was the relevant consideration. It concluded that the parties intended to include corporate stockholders within those persons to be personally liable under the lease. The finding of the trial court is not clearly erroneous. GCR 1963, 517.1.
*325Defendants also contend that plaintiffs failed to mitigate their damages as required by Michigan law. However, defendants did not raise this issue before appealing to this Court. This Court has recognized that a landlord has a duty to mitigate damages when a lessee breaches a lease. Tel-Ex Plaza, Inc v Hardees Restaurants, Inc, 76 Mich App 131; 255 NW2d 794 (1977), Froling v Bischoff, 73 Mich App 496; 252 NW2d 832 (1977). Under well settled Michigan authority cited in Froling, supra, the burden is upon the lessee to show, in mitigation of the damages claimed, that the lessor has not used every reasonable effort within his power to so minimize his damages. In addition to waiving this issue by not presenting it to the trial court, defendants failed to meet this burden.
Defendants’ other allegations of error are without merit.
Affirmed.
E. A. Quinnell, J., concurred.

=== CASE 9738606 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:58:05.005408+00 ===

Bronson, P.J.
(concurring in part, dissenting in part). I agree with the majority that the individual defendants were not released from personal liability by the assignment of the lease to the corporation, and that the trial court’s finding that the parties intended to include corporate members within those persons to be personally liable under the lease was not clearly erroneous. I respectfully dissent, however, on the issue of mitigation.
As the majority has pointed out, a landlord has a duty to mitigate the damages when a lessee breaches. Tel-Ex Plaza, Inc v Hardees Restaurants, Inc, 76 Mich App 131; 255 NW2d 794 (1977), Froling v Bischoff, 73 Mich App 496; 252 NW2d 832 (1977). The burden is on the lessee to show that the lessor has not used every reasonable effort *326to limit the damages. Froling v Bischoff, supra. In the instant case, plaintiff Wayne Klager was questioned regarding his efforts to mitigate his damages:
"Q [by Terrance Page, attorney for defendants]: Since May of ’72, Mr. Klager, have you been making any efforts to lease the property to others?
"A No.
"Q Have you ever — have you made any efforts to sell this property to others?
"A I have spoken to a number of real estate people but I haven’t — we haven’t discussed price or anything. I was just seeing if there was a general interest.
"Q But you have never listed the property with a real estate agent or lease for sale?
"A No.”
This testimony not only demonstrates that plaintiffs did not make every reasonable effort to minimize their damages; it reveals that they made no such effort at all. I would accordingly hold that defendants met their burden of showing plaintiffs’ failure to mitigate.
While it is true that as a general rule issues not raised in the trial court may not be asserted on appeal, the rule is not inflexible and knows several exceptions. Questions may be raised for the first time on appeal where the issue is one of law, and all the facts necessary for its resolution have been presented. Kahn-Reiss, Inc v Detroit & Northern Savings & Loan Ass’n, 59 Mich App 1, 12; 228 NW2d 816 (1975). Similarly, the rule will not be applied when consideration of an issue first raised on appeal is necessary to a proper determination of the case. Prudential Ins Co of America v Cusick, 369 Mich 269, 283, 290; 120 NW2d 1 (1963). Appellate courts have reserved the authority to consider *327manifest and serious errors even though the issue was not raised below in an effort to prevent injustice, and this applies to both civil and criminal cases. People v Snow, 386 Mich 586, 591; 194 NW2d 314 (1972). See generally, Siirila v Barrios, 398 Mich 576, 610-611; 248 NW2d 171 (1976) (Williams, J., concurring).
I would hold that under these authorities the question of plaintiffs’ failure to mitigate is properly reviewable by this Court. Defendants have been held liable in the amount of $203,446.59 on a lease when plaintiffs have admittedly made no efforts to limit their losses. This Court must reach this issue to make a proper determination of the instant case, and to prevent injustice. I would remand for a hearing on damages, instructing the trial court to deduct the amount that would have been saved if plaintiffs had exercised reasonable efforts to mitigate their damages.

=== CASE 2216803 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:18.37656+00 ===

899 N.E.2d 1193 (2008)
The PEOPLE of the State of Illinois, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
Armando GUTIERREZ, Defendant-Appellant.
No. 1-05-3633.
Appellate Court of Illinois, First District, First Division.
December 15, 2008.
*1195 Thomas A. Moore, of Palos Hills, for Appellant.
Richard A. Devine, State's Attorney of Cook County (James E. Fitzgerald, TashaMarie Kelly, and Sheila A. Morrissey, of counsel), Chicago, IL for Appellee.
Justice WOLFSON, delivered the opinion of the court:
A jury, in 2002, found defendant, Armando Gutierrez, guilty of murder and attempt murder. The trial court allowed defendant to file a late notice of appeal in November 2005. Under the circumstances of this case, the late notice of appeal gives this court jurisdiction to consider the direct appeal. We find the evidence sufficient to sustain the convictions, and the trial court did not abuse its discretion in sentencing. Therefore we affirm the trial court's judgment.
BACKGROUND
Jorge and Nester Castaneda considered defendant a close friend. Nester gave defendant keys to the gate that protected his parents' home, where Nester and his 14-year-old sister Melissa lived. Defendant also had keys to a safe in Nester's room. The safe held a gun. In October 2000, defendant, 24 years old, married, with two children, told Melissa he found her attractive. Melissa said to Nester, "You better tell him to quit that."
Later that month defendant crashed his truck. He suffered some bruises but no serious injury. On October 25, 2000, he brought the damaged truck over to the Castanedas' home so that he and some friends could repair the truck. The group in the yard with the truck included Nester, Jorge, and their cousin Antonio Castaneda. Around 8 p.m. Nester went inside to lie down because he did not feel well. Defendant and some of the others outside smoked a joint, and defendant had two beers. A little before 10 p.m., defendant, using the gun from the safe, shot Jorge, and then he went inside and shot Nester.
Police arrived on the scene within minutes. Paramedics took Jorge and Nester to hospitals. Only Nester recovered. Melissa told police at the scene defendant shot her brothers. Police took defendant into custody.
One officer at the police station asked defendant about a cut on his forehead. Defendant said he injured his head in the truck accident a few days before the shooting. He claimed to remember nothing of the shootings, but he said he did not shoot Jorge and Nester. Prosecutors charged defendant with the murder of Jorge and the attempt first degree murder of Nester.
At trial Melissa detailed the sexual comments defendant made to her in the weeks before the shooting. She said defendant asked her to be his girlfriendand Nester stood close enough to overhear that request. She told defendant he was too old.
Nester said that a few days before the shooting defendant said he liked Melissa. Nester and defendant got into an argument and almost came to blows.
Antonio testified as the prosecution's sole eyewitness to the shooting of Jorge. Antonio said some gangbangers drove past shouting gang slogans. Defendant then went in to retrieve the gun from the safe, and he put it on the back of his truck. Defendant, stumbling and mumbling under the influence of the joint and the beers, later headed to the truck, saying he thought he'd go home. Antonio and the others told defendant to sit down, for his own safety. They worried he might crash his truck again. Defendant started cursing as he picked up the gun. Jorge never had a gun. Defendant shot Jorge. Jorge told defendant to stop, but defendant just kept firing. Antonio hid in the garage.
*1196 Melissa testified that when she heard the shots she ran to Nester's room. Nester, wearing only his boxer shorts, had just woken up. Defendant kicked open the house door and cursed. Nester asked him to calm down. Both Melissa and Nester swore Nester took no step towards defendant, he only backed away on seeing the gun. Defendant shot Nester three times. Melissa ran upstairs looking for the phone. Defendant ran after her. Defendant grabbed Melissa and said, "I love you" repeatedly. He tried to kiss her and he banged her head against the wall. She told him to stop and put down the gun. Nester struggled up the stairs to grab defendant. Defendant punched Nester and the two fought before defendant ran out of the house with the gun still in his hand.
Defendant's account of the shooting sharply conflicted with the account the prosecution presented. Defendant admitted he lied to police. He said after the gangbangers passed by, Antonio asked defendant for his keys. Antonio retrieved the gun from the safe and handed it to Jorge. A while later the men in the yard talked about girls. Antonio told Jorge defendant was "trying to hook up" with Melissa. Jorge flew into a rage, saying, "Motherfucker, you better not hook up with my sister. I'll fucking kill you." Jorge then hit defendant's forehead with the butt of the gun. Blood dripped from the gash. Defendant wrestled the gun from Jorge's grasp.
When they got up, with defendant holding the gun, Jorge told Antonio to get him a steel rod from the garage. Antonio dutifully brought a rod about four feet long and three inches thick, and he threw it on the ground by Jorge's feet. Defendant panicked. He started shooting as he ran to the house and to Nester's room, looking for his keys. Nester attacked defendant and defendant shot him. Defendant ran to Melissa and told her not to worry, then he ran back to Jorge and pleaded with Jorge to wake up.
The arresting officer testified that he saw no blood on defendant at the time of the arrest. A photograph of defendant's truck showed a large crack on the driver's side of the windshield.
The jury found defendant guilty of murder and attempt murder. The court denied defendant's posttrial motion.
Defendant had two prior convictions for aggravated battery and one prior conviction for possession of a firearm in public housing. In mitigation defendant presented certificates showing his completion of several classes in which he studied religion. Defendant expressed his remorse and described his acceptance of Jesus as his Lord and Savior. As a Christian he recognized the need to accept responsibility for his actions.
The judge recounted the evidence in mitigation and aggravation, then he sentenced defendant to 40 years in prison for murder and 20 years for attempt murder, with the sentences to run consecutively. At the conclusion of the hearing, held on August 21, 2002, defense counsel said:
"[Defendant's] family has talked to me, and they are not in a position to retain my services for the appeal. I would ask the Court to appoint the * * * State Appellate Defender's office for the purpose of preparing his appeal."
The judge responded, "I will do so. The State Appellate Defender is appointed for purposes of appeal."
In March 2003, more than 6 months after sentencing, defendant wrote to the court, asking for the name of his appellate lawyer and "any other information" about the appeal. The record does not show any *1197 response to the request. No notice of appeal had been filed.
On June 23, 2005, defendant filed a petition under the Post-Conviction Hearing Act (Act) (725 ILCS 5/122-1 et seq. (West 2004)). He claimed appellate counsel provided ineffective assistance because counsel failed to file a timely notice of appeal. The trial court granted the petition and, as relief under section 122-6 of the Act (725 ILCS 5/122-6 (West 2004)), permitted defendant to file a late notice of appeal.
In our initial review we held that we lacked jurisdiction because the late notice of appeal did not comport with Supreme Court Rule 606 (Official Reports Advance Sheet No. 17 (August 16, 2006) R. 606, eff. September 1, 2006). People v. Gutierrez, 376 Ill.App.3d 182, 315 Ill.Dec. 233, 876 N.E.2d 233 (2007). Our supreme court later decided People v. Ross, 229 Ill.2d 255, 322 Ill.Dec. 574, 891 N.E.2d 865 (2008). The court directed us to vacate our opinion and reconsider the case in light of Ross. We have vacated our opinion and we now reconsider the case.
DECISION
In Ross, as in this case, the defendant did not file a timely notice of appeal. The defendant in Ross filed a postconviction petition alleging his trial counsel provided ineffective assistance. The trial court found that counsel's failure to file a timely notice of appeal constituted ineffective assistance, and as relief the court permitted defendant to file a late notice of appeal. Our supreme court, adopting the reasoning of People v. Perez, 115 Ill. App.3d 446, 71 Ill.Dec. 182, 450 N.E.2d 870 (1983), said:
"Section 122-6 is flexible enough to include leave to file a late notice of appeal among the remedies available to a trial court in a postconviction proceeding. The Act, thus construed, constitutes a very limited exception to Rule 606. We hold that when a postconviction petitioner demonstrates that defense counsel was ineffective for failing to file a notice of appeal, the trial court may allow the petitioner leave to file a late notice of appeal." Ross, 229 Ill.2d at 271, 322 Ill.Dec. 574, 891 N.E.2d 865.
People v. Torres, 228 Ill.2d 382, 320 Ill. Dec. 874, 888 N.E.2d 91 (2008), restricts the reach of Ross. In Torres the defendant pleaded guilty to first degree murder. More than two months after sentencing the defendant wrote to the court asking whether counsel had filed a notice of appeal on his behalf. The defendant informed the court that his counsel left the courtroom directly after sentencing without speaking to defendant and without discussing the possibility of an appeal. The clerk notified the defendant that no one had filed an appeal in his case.
The defendant filed a postconviction petition, contending that counsel provided ineffective assistance when counsel failed to consult with defendant about the possibility of an appeal. Our supreme court found a constitutional duty to consult with a defendant about the possibility of an appeal only "`when there is reason to think either (1) that a rational defendant would want to appeal (for example, because there are nonfrivolous grounds for appeal), or (2) that this particular defendant reasonably demonstrated to counsel that he was interested in appealing.'" Torres, 228 Ill.2d at 396, 320 Ill.Dec. 874, 888 N.E.2d 91, quoting Roe v. Flores-Ortega, 528 U.S. 470, 480, 120 S.Ct. 1029, 1036, 145 L.Ed.2d 985, 997 (2000). Because the defendant voluntarily pled guilty to reach a quicker end to judicial proceedings, and the case presented no nonfrivolous grounds for appeal, his counsel had no reason to think the defendant should, rationally, want an appeal. And the defendant had not expressed to counsel any interest in appealing. Therefore, *1198 the court found that the defendant failed to show counsel had a constitutional duty to consult with the defendant about the possibility of an appeal. Without such a duty, defendant could not show counsel failed to provide constitutionally mandated effective assistance.
Section 122-6 gives a trial court authority to allow a defendant to file a late notice of appeal, even beyond the time constraints of Rule 606, if defense counsel provided ineffective assistance when counsel failed to file the notice of appeal. Ross, 229 Ill.2d at 271, 322 Ill.Dec. 574, 891 N.E.2d 865. But the constitution does not require counsel to file a notice of appeal, or even to consult with the defendant about the possibility of an appeal, unless counsel has reason to believe the defendant either actually does or rationally should want to file an appeal. Torres, 228 Ill.2d at 396, 320 Ill.Dec. 874, 888 N.E.2d 91.
The record here shows defendant's family sought to appeal from the conviction and sentence. The court explicitly appointed counsel specifically for the appeal. Unlike the defendant in Torres, who heard nothing from the court or counsel to indicate that anyone would represent him for an appeal, defendant here heard the court appoint counsel for the appeal, and he should be able to rely on that appointment.
On this silent record we must presume the court clerk properly notified the State Appellate Defender of the appointment as counsel for defendant. See Lyons v. Ryan, 201 Ill.2d 529, 539, 269 Ill.Dec. 374, 780 N.E.2d 1098 (2002) (courts presume public officials perform functions of their offices according to law and do their duties). Appointed counsel never contacted defendant and counsel never filed a notice of appeal on defendant's behalf. In this case, as in Perez (115 Ill.App.3d at 450, 71 Ill.Dec. 182, 450 N.E.2d 870), "There is no indication in the record which explains the apparent lack of diligence" by appointed appellate counsel. Following Ross and Perez, we find the trial court properly granted defendant's postconviction petition. The court ordered the correct relief when it permitted defendant to file a late notice of appeal. We have jurisdiction to consider defendant's direct appeal from his 2002 convictions for murder and attempt murder.
Now we reach the merits of the direct appeal. Defendant raises only two issues: the jury should have believed him, rather than Antonio, and the court imposed too severe a sentence.
"When accounts of events conflict, it is the jury's task to decide which account is more credible, and a reviewing court may not overturn that determination unless the evidence is so improbable or unsatisfactory that it creates a reasonable doubt of the defendant's guilt." People v. Wett, 308 Ill.App.3d 729, 733, 242 Ill.Dec. 222, 721 N.E.2d 190 (1999). Defendant contends Antonio's account lacks credibility because people do not shoot close friends without strong provocation. People usually do not fly into a murderous rage when their friends suggest they may be too inebriated to drive. Defendant claims his account is more plausible. He testified that Jorge flew into a rage, bashing a bloody gash into defendant's forehead, when Antonio suggested defendant had made sexual advances towards Jorge's 14-year-old sister. In defendant's account, after defendant wrested the gun from Jorge's grasp, Jorge deliberately continued his attack, demanding a steel pipe from his cousin. Jorge's rage scared defendant to the point that he shot his friend repeatedly. He contends the jury should have found him guilty of only second degree murder because his unreasonable belief in the need to defend himself mitigated the offense.
*1199 The weight of the evidence does not permit us to overturn the jury's credibility assessment. The jury could find defendant not a credible witness because he lied to police. Defendant's story suffers from the absence of any steel rod from the crime scene. The arresting officer saw no blood on defendant's face. The cracked windshield supports an inference defendant injured his forehead in the truck crash, as he initially told police, and not on the night of the shooting.
Antonio's account, in which defendant suddenly flew into an unprovoked murderous rage, seems credible. Defendant in court admitted he found Melissa attractive. Both Melissa and Nester confirmed that Melissa and her brothers disapproved of defendant's attention to Melissa. Defendant's disappointment at rejection and his awareness of the brothers' disapproval may best explain his alcohol-influenced decision to shoot his friends. Of course the prosecution does not show any motive for the crime. People v. Easley, 148 Ill.2d 281, 326, 170 Ill.Dec. 356, 592 N.E.2d 1036 (1992). We defer to the jury's credibility findings. Therefore we affirm the convictions for first degree murder and attempt first degree murder.
Finally, defendant challenges his sentences of 40 and 20 years. He does not dispute the court's imposition of consecutive sentences. See 730 ILCS 5/5-8-4(a)(i) (West 2004). The 40 year sentence fell in the middle of the available range for first degree murder. 730 ILCS 5/5-8-1(a)(1)(a) (West 2004). The 20 year sentence for attempt murder falls 10 years short of the maximum, and only 14 years over the minimum available. 720 ILCS 5/8-4(c)(1); 730 ILCS 5/5-8-1(a)(3) (West 2004). Defendant's significant criminal history and his use of a firearm in an essentially unprovoked attack on trusting friends justified a sentence near the middle of the available range. We cannot say the trial court abused its broad discretion by imposing sentences of 40 and 20 years for the murder and attempt murder. See People v. Patterson, 217 Ill.2d 407, 448, 299 Ill.Dec. 157, 841 N.E.2d 889 (2007).
We affirm defendant's conviction and sentence.
Affirmed.
HOFFMAN and HALL, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 2216815 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:18.511252+00 ===

250 Cal.App.2d 872 (1967)
FRED HENNINGER, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
SOUTHERN PACIFIC COMPANY, Defendant and Appellant.
Civ. No. 23076.
California Court of Appeals. First Dist., Div. Three.
May 11, 1967.
Bledsoe, Smith, Cathcart, Johnson & Rogers and Robert A. Seligson, for Defendant and Appellant.
Boccardo, Blum, Lull, Niland, Teerlink & Bell and Edward J. Niland for Plaintiff and Respondent.
SALSMAN, J.
Respondent brought this action against appellant to recover damages for personal injuries. Appellant *875 admitted its liability, and thus the sole issue presented in the trial court was the amount of respondent's damages. The jury fixed respondent's damages at $650,000. Appellant appeals from the judgment entered upon the verdict.
On December 20, 1963, respondent, a conductor-brakeman for appellant, was injured in the course of his employment. At the time of the accident he was 29.7 years of age. His injuries were extreme. He lost both legs above the knees and was left with very short stumps, four inches on the left side, three and three-quarters inches on the right side. Other relevant facts will be stated hereafter, as they bear upon the various issues raised in the briefs.
Appellant first contends it was denied a fair trial because (1) the trial court refused to permit evidence of its willingness to employ respondent despite his injury and disability: (2) the court refused to permit evidence that would have impeached Dr. Aldes, respondent's medical expert witness, and (3) the court would not permit appellant to show that respondent would not need a full-time attendant, by introduction of evidence that other bilateral amputees get about without assistance.
The Trial Court Properly Refused to Admit Evidence of Appellant's Offer of Employment
[1] Appellant attempted to prove that it had offered respondent a job as a bill sorter in its accounting department at $19.22 per day, and that this job was available to him even if he was confined to a wheelchair. The proof was contained in various letters written by appellant to the State Department of Rehabilitation in San Francisco, to respondent, and to respondent's attorney. Respondent objected to the introduction of these letters into evidence on the ground that they were self-serving and hearsay. The court sustained the objection.
The evidence offered was clearly hearsay and as such properly excluded. If appellant had employment available to respondent and was willing to employ him, it could have established these facts through the direct testimony of a company officer or employee called to the witness stand for that purpose. If such a witness had been called, his testimony would have been given under oath, subject to cross-examination, and thus immune to the hearsay objection. But no such officer or employee was called, and the objection urged against the offered evidence was therefore entirely valid. *876
Rejection of Evidence Offered to Impeach Dr. Aldes Was Also Proper
[2] Respondent's expert medical witness, Dr. Aldes, testified in effect that respondent could never "... wear a functional type of prosthesis and be ambulatory." He based his opinion on his experience, on the fact that respondent had very short stumps, and also upon an evaluation of what remained to be done in respondent's case before prostheses could be fitted to him. It was also Dr. Aldes' opinion that respondent would never be able to "wear a functional type of prosthesis, a functional type that he is going to take steps with."
During the direct examination of appellant's expert medical witness, appellant offered to introduce into evidence a motion picture film which purported to show a double amputee walking on hydrocadence legs without the aid of either canes or crutches. Counsel stated that the film was offered solely for the purpose of impeaching Dr. Aldes. The trial judge observed that Dr. Aldes' opinion on the point in issue was limited to his own experience, and accordingly rejected the film as impeaching evidence. This ruling was correct.
It is elementary that a witness may be impeached by contradictory evidence. But the film offered by appellant would not have contradicted the opinion of Dr. Aldes. Dr. Aldes did not testify about the amputee shown in the film, and apparently had no knowledge of him. The film did show that a certain bilateral amputee, about whom little else was known, had been fitted with workable hydrocadence legs. But the film did not contradict Dr. Aldes' opinion concerning respondent, nor did it contradict the witness's experience. It is the general rule, applicable here, that a witness who expresses an opinion based upon his own experience cannot be impeached by the showing of facts never known to him. (Brown v. City of Oakland, 51 Cal.App.2d 150, 155 [124 P.2d 369].)
The Refusal of The Trial Court to Permit Appellant to Show That Respondent Would Not Need The Services of a Full-Time Attendant, Although Error, Was Not Prejudicial.
[3] One of the issues at trial was whether respondent needed the services of a full-time attendant, and if so, how much such services would cost. Respondent offered evidence to show that he would never be able to use functional artificial *877 legs; that he would always be confined to a wheelchair; that he would always require help from others, and that the cost of a paid attendant would be about $25 for an 8-hour shift. He calculated his damages for this item of expense to be $324,000 over the period of his life expectancy. Appellant sought to establish through testimony of its medical expert that other people who have lost both legs have been rehabilitated and are able to get about without an attendant; that polio victims and paraplegics with heavy, useless limbs are able to get about without an attendant, and that therefore respondent would have no need for the services he claimed. The trial court sustained an objection to this evidence. Appellant now contends that it was effectively prevented from meeting respondent's contention that he was entitled to damages in a large sum for this item alone.
Respondent objected to the offered evidence because it was "incompetent, irrelevant and immaterial." It is clear that the evidence offered related to a material point at issue, namely whether respondent, because of his condition and the nature of his injuries, needed an attendant. But the real question is whether the evidence was relevant to the issue presented. In sustaining the objection the trial court commented that: "We don't want a comparison of misfortunes. We are only concerned with this particular type of case and as to what extent, if any, there can be rehabilitation here. We are not concerned with paraplegics and others who have suffered such misfortune."
It would appear that the court felt the offered evidence was not relevant. But relevancy is a relative term. It describes the tendency of offered evidence to prove an assertion of fact. Its application in the field of evidence involves logic and common sense. (See Larson v. Solbakken, 221 Cal.App.2d 410, 420 [34 Cal.Rptr. 450].) Here the offered evidence would tend to show that respondent would not need an attendant, as he claimed, because logically, if others who are in worse condition do not need the services of a full-time attendant, then perhaps respondent would not need such services. We conclude that the trial court was in error in rejecting appellant's evidence.
Despite the error, however, it is clear that appellant suffered no prejudice. We must look at the record in its entirety, and use care not to focus so intensely upon one portion of it that we lose perspective in viewing the whole body of the evidence. Later in the trial we see that appellant's *878 counsel asked its medical expert if, from the standpoint of rehabilitation, care and re-employment, the cases of persons who had lost the use of their legs from disease, injury or amputation were similar, and the witness answered that they were. The witness further testified that his experience indicated respondent would not need a paid attendant in the future, but would in fact be independent. Thus it appears that, while at one point in the trial the court erroneously excluded relevant and material evidence on a point in issue, the same evidence was later brought to the attention of the jury in but a slightly different context. Moreover, appellant's counsel argued there was no evidence to show respondent's need for "an over-all full-time attendant" and contended that "... all of us know people of that kind [paraplegics and polio victims] and who don't have full-time paid attendants." From the permitted testimony of appellant's medical expert that the cases of other unfortunate persons were similar to respondent's, and that respondent would in the future be independent, as well as from the argument of appellant's counsel, the jury could have inferred, using its collective experience, that respondent needed no paid attendant because others did not. Although the trial court erred in rejecting appellant's evidence when offered, in light of later testimony, the arguments made to the jury and the entire record, the error was not prejudicial.
The Trial Court Correctly Declined to Instruct The Jury That an Award of Damages For Personal Injuries is Not Subject to Income Taxes
[4] Appellant next contends the trial court should have instructed the jury that any recovery of damages for personal injuries is exempt from income taxation under both federal and state law. Appellant offered such an instruction, but the trial court rejected it.
The subject of income taxes came into the trial proceedings at various times. For example, taxes on income derived from any principal sum awarded was mentioned by respondent's counsel. Appellant's counsel, in turn, asked about such taxes on annual wage earnings. Counsel for the parties appeared to differ concerning applicability of the tax laws, although, from the record, it is not clear that at any given time each was speaking of the same set of facts. Both sides made limited reference to income taxes in argument to the jury.
There is no doubt that an award of damages for personal injuries is not subject to income taxes. (See Internal Revenue *879 Code of 1954,  104; Rev. & Tax. Code,  17138.) The question at issue here is whether it is reversible error not to so inform the jury, particularly since appellant requested such an instruction.
We think the court was correct in refusing to give any instruction on the subject of income taxes. The majority of courts to consider income tax instructions have concluded they should be rejected. (See McWeeney v. New York, N.H. & H.R.R. Co., 282 F.2d 34, 36-39; Altemus v. Pennsylvania R.R. Co., 32 F.R.D. 7; Hall v. Chicago & Northwestern R.R. Co., 5 Ill.App.2d 135 [125 N.E.2d 77, 50 A.L.R.2d 661]; Stokes v. United States, 144 F.2d 82, 87; Chicago & Northwestern Ry. Co. v. Curl, 178 F.2d 497; Southern Pac. Co. v. Guthrie, 186 F.2d 926, 927-928; see also 2 Harper & James, Torts,  25.12.) In Altemus, the court declared: "In every American case except one, the Courts have held either that the failure to grant such a prayer is not reversible error or, conversely, that the granting of such a prayer is reversible error [citations]." Only one case, so far as we are able to find, has directly held that it is error to refuse an instruction such as that offered by appellant here (Floyd v. Fruit Industries, 144 Conn. 659 [136 A.2d 918, 63 A.L.R.2d 1378]); in another case (Dempsey v. Thompson, 363 Mo. 339 [251 S.W.2d 42, 45]) the giving or withholding of such an instruction was held to be a matter of discretion with the trial judge.
In the only case to reach our appellate courts on the issue here presented, California has sided with the majority. (Atherley v. MacDonald, Young & Nelson, 142 Cal.App.2d 575, 589 [298 P.2d 700].) In Atherley this court held that it was not error to refuse to give an instruction to the effect that an award of damages in a personal injury case is not subject to federal or state income taxes. In its opinion the court pointed out that the jury had been instructed on the subject of damages and "... was told that it could award compensatory damages only, that is, those damages which would fairly compensate plaintiff for his pecuniary loss. The items of recoverable damage were itemized. The court specifically directed that 'speculative,' or 'conjectural,' or 'remote' damages could not be recovered." Our case is similar. The various elements of special damages were described by the court in its instructions, including damages for medical treatment, hospitalization and attendance, as well as lost earnings and lost earning power. General damages for pain and suffering were also mentioned. The court specifically instructed the *880 jury to award compensatory damages only. No mention was made of taxes of any kind or nature and, if the jury followed the court's instructions as we must presume they did, the award includes nothing to compensate respondent for any supposed loss because of income taxes, but on the contrary, includes only such items of damage as the court described in detail in its instructions. As will later appear, the award itself is well within the range of respondent's evidence.
Alleged Misconduct of Counsel is Not Sustained by The Record
[5] Appellant accuses respondent's counsel of prejudicial misconduct of such magnitude as to require reversal of the judgment. The record does not support this contention.
The first charge leveled at respondent's counsel is that he made a "per diem" argument in asking damages for pain and suffering. Respondent's counsel did argue to the jury, in effect, that an award of $600,000 general damages would be proper because "... it is only about forty dollars per day of his life expectancy."
At the time appellant filed its opening brief in this case, the propriety of an argument of this nature was an open question. In Seffert v. Los Angeles Transit Lines, 56 Cal.2d 498 [15 Cal.Rptr. 161, 364 P.2d 337], the issue was before our Supreme Court but was not directly decided. A minority of the court, however, criticized and condemned the practice. But since Seffert was decided the court has announced its decision in Beogle v. Vasold, 65 Cal.2d 166 [53 Cal.Rptr. 129, 417 P.2d 673]. Under that ruling, the per diem argument is sanctioned. In its closing brief appellant concedes, as it must, that this assignment of misconduct cannot be sustained and has therefore abandoned the issue.
Appellant points to other statements of respondent's counsel which it alleges amount to prejudicial misconduct. For example, during the evidence phase of the case respondent's counsel asked one of his witnesses: "And if he didn't retire at the age of 65 but continued to work at age 70, as most of these men do. ..." (Italics ours.) There was no evidence that most brakemen work beyond age 65 and up to age 70. Thus the question assumed as true a fact not in evidence and was therefore improper in form. Appellant cites Love v. Wolf, 226 Cal.App.2d 378, 390 [38 Cal.Rptr. 183], condemning this form of interrogation and holding its use in that case to be prejudicial. But on our record we see no *881 prejudice. When the question was asked, appellant's counsel made a prompt and proper objection. Moreover, he too made a factual assertion before the jury, also unsupported by the evidence. He asserted that most brakemen do not work to age 70. Respondent's counsel continued to assert that they do. The trial judge quickly quelled the dispute. He sustained appellant's objection and admonished the jury to disregard the statements made by counsel. Appellant's motion for a mistrial was denied. It is apparent that the trial judge, who heard it all, concluded that his admonition to the jury fully corrected the result of any possible misconduct on the part of counsel and that neither party had been prejudiced in the brief but spirited exchange.
[6] Appellant also asserts that portions of respondent's argument to the jury amounted to prejudicial misconduct and denied it a fair trial. In argument counsel asserted that appellant's counsel was insincere in pretending not to understand the concept of the present value of money. He also argued that defense counsel's purpose was to save "... the railroad every bit of money that has already been set aside, mind you, as a deductible expense of doing business." He characterized defense counsel's suggestion of a verdict of $200,000 as "ridiculous," and labelled appellant's efforts as an attempt to "short change a cripple."
The record leaves no doubt that the argument of respondent's counsel was vigorous and effective. But we cannot say it amounted to prejudicial misconduct for which a new trial should be granted. We are drawn to this conclusion in part by the determination of the issue made by the trial judge in his ruling on appellant's motion for a new trial. Misconduct of counsel as a ground for new trial presents a matter primarily committed to the trial court. (Healy v. Market Street Ry. Co., 41 Cal.App.2d 733, 739 [107 P.2d 488].) The judge who presides over the trial, who hears the testimony and the arguments, and whose own experience gives him a fine sense of the general atmosphere of trial proceedings, is in a far better position than appellate judges to evaluate the effect of disputed argument. Thus where, as here, an able and experienced trial judge has denied a party's motion for a new trial, made in part at least on the ground that opposing counsel was guilty of misconduct which denied the moving party a fair trial, the trial judge's determination of that issue will not be set aside on appeal unless it is unquestionably wrong. (Lafargue v. United Railroads, 183 Cal. 720, 724 [192 P. 538].) *882 Here we cannot say that the trial judge's ruling was unquestionably wrong, or wrong at all.
[7] Finally, even assuming that some of respondent's argument amounted to misconduct, appellant is in no position to complain. No objection was made in the trial court. There was no request that the court admonish the jury to disregard the argument now claimed to be objectionable. It is settled that, where no claim of misconduct is made in the trial court, and the judge is not requested to admonish the jury to disregard the argument deemed improper, complaint may not be made for the first time on appeal. (See Harper v. Vallejo Housing Authority, 104 Cal.App.2d 621, 627 [232 P.2d 262]; 2 Witkin, Cal. Procedure (1954) p. 1736.) It is true that if the alleged misconduct is so grave that no admonition from the court can remove its prejudicial effect or cure the flaw, an objection and a request for an admonition is unnecessary. (See Hoffman v. Brandt, 65 Cal.2d 549, 553-554 [55 Cal.Rptr. 417, 421 P.2d 425].) But here the question of misconduct is doubtful at best, and an objection and request for an admonition from the court was clearly necessary in order to save the point for appellate review.
The Size of The Judgment
[8] Appellant's final argument is that the judgment is excessive as a matter of law and hence the judgment should be reduced or reversed and a new trial ordered. This contention must be rejected.
Where the verdict of a jury is attacked as excessive, an appellate court can interfere "... only on the ground that the verdict is so large that, at first blush, it shocks the conscience and suggests passion, prejudice or corruption on the part of the jury." (Seffert v. Los Angeles Transit Lines, supra, 56 Cal.2d 498, 507.) In the same case, the court said at page 508: "Basically, the question that should be decided by the appellate courts is whether or not the verdict is so out of line with reason that it shocks the conscience and necessarily implies that the verdict must have been the result of passion and prejudice." (Italics ours.) (See also Torres v. City of Los Angeles, 58 Cal.2d 35, 53 [22 Cal.Rptr. 866, 372 P.2d 906]; Holder v. Key System, 88 Cal.App.2d 925, 939-940 [200 P.2d 98]; Bondulich v. O. E. Anderson Co., 210 Cal.App.2d 12, 18 [26 Cal.Rptr. 147]; Butler v. Peluso, 154 Cal.App.2d 624, 629-630 [317 P.2d 57].)
Obviously an award of $650,000 to one person for personal injuries is a large sum, but whether it is so great as to shock *883 the conscience of appellate judges and necessarily implies passion and prejudice on the part of the jury depends upon the nature and extent of the victim's injuries, his pain, suffering and humiliation, and the amount of special damages that may have been incorporated in the total award.
In their briefs the parties cite many cases involving injuries more or less similar to those suffered by respondent here, and in which it was contended the damages awarded were excessive. Appellant, of course, cites those cases where damages were found to be excessive for given injuries, and the judgment was accordingly modified or reversed. Respondent, on the other hand, cites cases where verdicts claimed to be excessive were upheld. No useful purpose would be served by a review of such cases in this opinion. In Daggett v. Atchison, T. & S.F. Ry. Co., 48 Cal.2d 655, 666 [313 P.2d 557], the court said: "While a reviewing court, in passing upon the question involved here [whether damages were excessive], may consider amounts awarded in similar cases [citations], in the final analysis the qustion in each case must be determined from its own peculiar facts and circumstances [citation] and it cannot be held as a matter of law that a verdict is excessive simply because the amount may be larger than is ordinarily allowed in such cases."
[9] There is no precise mechanical rule by which an appellate court can measure a personal injury award to determine if it is a just and fair one or is excessive. As the court remarked in Daggett, supra, each case must be determined on its own peculiar facts and circumstances. This simply means that we must look to the record to see if there is evidence to support the jury's verdict, whatever the amount of the verdict may be. Our task is made relatively easy in this case because of the singular fact that evidence of special damages exceeds in amount the total award.
[10] At the time of respondent's injury he was 29.7 years of age. The fruitful and productive years of his life were before him. In the accident he lost both legs high above the knees. His right stump is only three and three-quarters inches in length, his left one four inches. There was evidence that he will never be able to use functional artificial legs; that he will be confined to a wheelchair for the remainder of his days; that he will require personal assistance in the routine affairs of living, and will never be able to hold gainful employment of a significant nature. In sum, so far as the expected pleasures *884 and satisfactions of life are concerned he has become a mere spectator and is no longer a participant.
Respondent introduced evidence of the following special damages: (1) medical expenses at time of trial $14,680.50; (2) accrued wage loss $11,340; (3) cost of rehabilitation program (one year at $500 per month) $6,000; (4) future wage loss, discounted to present value at 3 percent--$461,000; (5) future cost of a paid attendant, discounted at 3 percent--$324,000. As will be seen, special damages, according to this evidence, amounts to $817,020.50, omitting entirely any amount whatever for general damages for pain and suffering. There was other evidence from which the jury could have found that respondent's special damages were not as great as claimed. The verdict of the jury is a general one, and we cannot know from its form what amount was in fact allowed for special damages and what portion of the total is for general damages for pain and suffering. But we need not know these details to resolve the issue here presented. When the verdict is examined in light of the catastrophic injuries suffered by respondent, together with the evidence relating to the extent and amount of his special damages, it is apparent that the verdict is not so large as to suggest any element of passion or prejudice in its composition. It is, in fact, well within the range of the credible evidence.
Finally, we must give due weight to the trial judge's view of the verdict. He heard the testimony and observed the jurors throughout the trial. He would be the first to sense whether their verdict was responsive to the evidence or tinged with passion and prejudice. At the conclusion of the trial he told the jurors that, under all the circumstances of the case, their verdict was fair and just. He reconsidered the verdict upon appellant's motion for a new trial. His denial of that motion reaffirmed his conclusion that appellant had a fair trial and that the verdict should stand. We agree.
The judgment is affirmed.
Draper, P. J., and Brown (H. C.), J., concurred.

=== CASE 9738607 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:58:18.651789+00 ===

AMENDED ORDER
An original action has been filed with this Court contesting the jurisdiction of the Lake Circuit Court over a lawsuit similar to one previously filed in Lake Superior Court, Civil Division, No. 2, concerning the operation of so-called “early voting sites,” as further described below. Original actions are viewed with disfavor, and we do not grant writs of mandamus and prohibition where there is an adequate remedy through the appellate process. Ind.Original Action Rule 2(E). Article VII, section 4 of the Indiana Constitution, however, authorizes this Court to supervise the jurisdiction of the state’s other courts, and we will entertain original actions to resolve jurisdictional conflicts. Ind.Appellate Rule 4(A)(5); Orig.Act.R. 1(A). The conflict in this case between the Superior Court’s and the Circuit Court’s over the orderly conduct of voting warrants our attention. State ex rel. Meade v. Marshall Superior Court II, 644 N.E.2d 87, 88 (Ind.1994).
On October 2, 2008, John B. Curley, as Chairman of the Lake County, Indiana, Republican Central Committee, and as a registered voter, and Jim B. Brown, as a member of the Lake County Board of Elections and Registration and as a registered voter, filed an action in the Lake Superior Court, Civil Division, No. 2, against the Lake County Board of Elections and Registration, and the Honorable Thomas Philpot, not individually but as the Lake County Clerk. We refer to this lawsuit is this order as the “Superior Court Case.”
On October 6, 2008, the United Steelworkers District 7; Hammond Teachers Federation Local 394, American Federation of Teachers; Earline Rogers, and Roxanna Luco filed an action in the Lake Circuit Court against the Lake County Board of Elections and Registration. We refer to this lawsuit as the “Circuit Court Case.”
The Relators in this original action are the plaintiffs in the Superior Court case. The Respondents in this original action are *1272the Lake Circuit Court and the Honorable Lorenzo Arredono, as Judge thereof.
After the Superior Court Case was filed on October 2, the Board immediately removed the case to the United States District Court for the Northern District of Indiana. On October 3, the Superior Court entered a temporary restraining order directing the Board not to open early voting sites in East Chicago, Gary, and Hammond. On October 6, the Circuit Court case was filed. On that date, the Circuit Court entered a temporary restraining order directing the Board to open early voting sites in East Chicago, Gary, and Hammond. The second of these temporary restraining orders was, and it appears that the first also was, issued while the matter was pending before the Federal District Court and, as such, were void. On October 13, the Federal District Court remanded the Superior Court Case to the Superior Court. On October 14, the Circuit Court entered a preliminary injunction directing the Board to open early voting sites in East Chicago, Gary, and Hammond.
Indiana Trial Procedure Rule 42(D) was designed to resolve conflicts that arise “[w]hen civil actions involving a common question of law or fact are pending in different courts.” Id.
In the ordinary course, Trial Rule 42(D) dictates that:
a party to any of the actions may, by motion, request consolidation of those actions for the purpose of discovery and any pre-trial proceedings.
Such motion may only be filed in the court having jurisdiction of the action with the earliest filing date and the court shall enter an order of consolidation for the purpose of discovery and any pre-trial proceedings unless good cause to the contrary is shown and found by the court to exist. In the event two or more actions have the same earliest tiling date, the motion may be filed only in the court having the lowest court identifier number under Administrative Rule 8(B)(1), which court shall be considered as having the action with the earliest filing date.
Upon completion of discovery and any pre-trial proceedings, each case which has been subject to the order of consolidation shall be ordered returned to the court in which it was pending at the time the order of consolidation was made unless, after notice to all parties and a hearing, the court finds that the action involves unusual or complicated issues of fact or law or involves a substantial question of law of great public importance. In the event the court makes such a finding, it may enter an order of consolidation for the purpose of trial.
[T]he right to a change of venue in any action consolidated under this rule shall be suspended during the period of consolidation. Such right shall be reinstated on entry of an order remanding the action to the court in which it was pending at the time of consolidation and the time prescribed for the filing of a motion for change of venue shall be deemed tolled during the period of suspension.
Nothing in this Rule shall restrict the equitable discretion of the court having the earliest filed action to dismiss or stay that action. If such an order is entered, that court shall no longer be considered the court in which is pending the action with the earliest filing date for purposes of this Rule.
Id.
Of course, this is not the ordinary course but the principles of this rule basically, first in time—dictate what we believe to be the most orderly approach. Therefore, we *1273order that the Circuit Court Case be, and hereby is, consolidated with the Superior Court Case in Superior Court and both matters shall proceed before the Superior Court on a consolidated basis. The October 14 preliminary injunction entered by the Circuit Court shall remain in effect pending action, if any, by the Superior Court. This Court expresses no opinion on the merits of any of the issues raised by the parties, including such matters as the validity of the October 14 preliminary injunction, the jurisdiction of the Superior Court over appeals of decisions of the Board, the applicability of the unanimity requirement of IC 3-11-10-26.3, and various constitutional issues.
We note that the parties retain their rights under Trial Rule 76 to a change of judge. Given the need for prompt resolution of the issues presented in this case, the following special procedures shall be followed: (1) the parties shall have until 10:00 a.m. C.D.T. to exercise any right to change of Judge they may have and failure to exercise within this period shall constitute a waiver of the right; (2) if any party exercises the right, the parties shall have until 3:00 p.m. C.D.T. to agree upon a special judge or complete the processes specified by Trial Rule 79; and (3) if no special judge is chosen within that time, the parties shall certify the matter to this Court, which will then select a special judge pursuant to its authority under T.R. 79.
SHEPARD, C.J., and DICKSON and SULLIVAN, JJ., concur.
BOEHM, J., concurs in result.
RUCKER, J., dissents.

=== CASE 9738609 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:58:18.659705+00 ===

RUCKER, J.,
dissenting.
I dissent. With the order entered today the majority does something quite unusual and rather remarkable. Specifically it grants relief the parties themselves do not request and does not at all mention the only issue that is properly before us. In its Verified Petition for Emergency Writ of Mandamus and Writ of Prohibition Re-lators ask the Court to dismiss the lawsuit now pending before Lake Circuit Court Judge Lorenzo Arredondo. This is the only relief requested. And they seek dismissal under a Trial Rule that requires such a remedy where “the same action [is] pending in another state court of this state.” Ind. Trial Rule 12(B)(8). But this Rule applies only where the “parties, subject matter, and remedies” of the two actions -are either “precisely” or “substantially” the same. State ex rel Meade v. Marshall Superior Court II, 644 N.E.2d 87, 89 (Ind.1994). Even if one were to concede that the subject matter and remedies of the two actions at issue here are substantially the same, there can be no *1274doubt that the parties are significantly different. The captions in the two law suits demonstrate this point. Further, the parties represent very different interests.
Writs of mandamus and prohibition are extraordinary remedies, equitable in nature and viewed with disfavor. State ex rel. Woodford v. Marion Superior Court, 655 N.E.2d 63, 65 (Ind.1995). The law is well settled that mandamus does not lie unless the person seeking it has a “clear and unquestioned right to relief,” State ex rel. Gibson General Hospital v. Warrick Circuit Court, 247 Ind. 240, 214 N.E.2d 655, 657 (1966), and the respondent court failed to “perform a clear, absolute, and imperative duty imposed by law.” State ex rel. City of South Bend v. Court of Appeals 273 Ind. 551, 406 N.E.2d 244, 246 (1980). Stated only slightly differently, writs of prohibition and mandate will be issued only where the trial court has an absolute duty to act or refrain from acting. State ex rel. City of New Haven v. Allen Superior Court, 699 N.E.2d 1134, 1136 (Ind.1998).
It is apparent Relators have no “clear and unquestioned right” to a dismissal of the Circuit Court lawsuit. And as a corollary Judge Arredondo obviously has no “absolute duty” to dismiss the lawsuit. In sum Relators request for the extraordinary remedy should be denied.
It is important to note that Relators have not asked this court for an order consolidating these two cases. More precisely, no petition for writ of mandamus or prohibition has been requested on these grounds. As things now stand the trial court that the majority says should hear this matter, is the same trial court that previously entered a temporary restraining order, which was later vacated by a Federal District Court, prohibiting the Lake County Board of Elections from establishing satellite voting offices. By entering its order sua sponte, the majority has foreclosed the opportunity of proper briefing on whether Realtors are even entitled to consolidation and if so which court should assume jurisdiction. I am not at all certain that Judge Arredondo has a “clear, absolute, and imperative duty imposed by law” City of South Bend, supra, to grant a Trial Rule 42(D) motion to consolidate. The issue has not been presented to this Court.
I would simply deny the issuance of the writ thus allowing to stand Judge Arredon-do’s restraining order permitting the existence of satellite voting offices. Any issues concerning consolidation may then be presented to the appropriate court or courts for resolution.

=== CASE 9738610 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:58:18.898445+00 ===

FOX, J.*
This is an appeal from an order denying an alternative writ of prohibition.
Petitioner was charged with violating section 311.2 of the Penal Code.1 The complaint charged, in pertinent part, that defendant “did wilfully, unlawfully and knowingly in this state prepare and exhibit and offer to exhibit obscene matter.” The offense was charged in the language of the statute. The obscene matter was not identified in the complaint. Defendant filed a demurrer to the complaint. It was overruled. Defendant then petitioned for an alternative writ of prohibition. His petition was denied. Hence this appeal.
In seeking a reversal, petitioner, basically, makes three arguments: (1) That due process requires that the specific matter alleged to be obscene must be pleaded, (2) that Penal Code section 311.2 on its face and as applied in the complaint at bench is void because it is too vague, ambiguous and uncertain to form the basis of a valid criminal charge and (3) that he will be unable to establish former jeopardy in the event of his later prosecution for the same offense.
It will be helpful to review, at the outset, the legislative enactments dealing with pleading in criminal cases. People v. Pierce, 14 Cal.2d 639, 645-646 [96 P.2d 784], serves that purpose admirably:
“There can be no doubt that the rules of pleading with reference to criminal charges have been liberalized by the amendments of 1927 and 1929 relating to pleading in criminal cases.2 In People v. Beesly, 119 Cal.App. 82 [6 P.2d 114, 970], [sic] the court said: ‘The sufficiency of an indictment or information is not to be tested by the rules of the common law nor by the rules which existed prior to the amendments of 1927 and 1929 of our statutes relating to pleading in criminal cases. The true rule can be determined only by a consideration *863of all of the statutes affecting the subject as they exist since those amendments. The purpose of an indictment or information is to inform the accused of the charge which he must meet at the trial. At common law, where this information came solely from the indictment, much particularity was required. ... As a part of the accusatory procedure the law now provides that in every case the accused is entitled to a copy of the testimony given before the grand jury or the committing magistrate as the case may be (Pen. Code, §§ 870, 925) and he is to-day better informed as to the case he must meet than was an accused under the detailed form of pleading required at common law. By section 959 of the Penal Code as amended in 1927 (Stats. 1927, p. 1041) we have the statutory provision that an information is sufficient if it can be understood therefrom that it is entitled in a court having authority to receive it, that the defendant is named, or, if his name is not known and that fact is pleaded, he may be charged by a fictitious name, that the offense is one of which the court has jurisdiction and that the offense was committed prior to the filing of the information. The former requirements of subdivisions 6 and 7 of section 959 that the act or omission charged must be clearly and distinctly set forth in ordinary and concise language, without repetition, and in such manner as to enable a person of common understanding to know what is intended and to enable the court to pronounce judgment upon conviction, were repealed by the 1927 amendment and are no longer a part of that section. . . . Section 952,3 which formerly required the pleading to set forth the particular circumstances of the offense charged, as amended, declares that it shall be sufficient if it be “in any words sufficient to give tlie accused notice of the offense of which he is accused.” There, in a nutshell, is stated the principle of our present simplified form of pleading of a criminal offense—the accused is entitled to notice of the offense of which he is charged but not to the particular circumstances thereof, such details being *864furnished him by the transcript of the testimony upon which the indictment or information is founded. ’ ’ ’
Since this criminal proceeding is in the municipal court it is important to see what effect the liberalizing amendments of 1927 and 1929 had upon the statutes that specifically deal with pleadings in criminal cases in that court. People v. Saffell, 74 Cal.App.2d Supp. 967 [168 P.2d 497], provides the answer. At pages 972 to 974 it stated:
‘ ‘ Section 1426 reads as follows: ‘All proceedings and actions before a justice’s or police court, or a municipal court, for a public offense of which such courts have jurisdiction, must be commenced by complaint under oath, setting forth the offense charged, with such particulars of time, place, person, and property as to enable the defendant to understand distinctly the character of the offense complained of, and to answer the complaint. In charging an offense, each count shall contain, and shall be sufficient if it contains in substance, a statement that the accused has committed some public offense therein specified. Such statement may be made in ordinary and concise language without any technical averments or any allegations of matter not essential to be proved. It may be in the words of the enactment describing the offense or declaring the matter to be a public offense, or in any words sufficient to give the accused notice of the offense of which he is accused. In charging theft, it shall be sufficient to allege that the defendant unlawfully took the labor or property of another.’ In construing this section it is to be noted that prior to 1931 it contained only the present first sentence (except the words ‘or a municipal court’), and that everything else now appearing in it was added by the amendment of 1931. The matter so added, except for the reference to a municipal court, was simply a copy of section 952, applicable in the superior courts, as that section had been amended in 1929, which amendment, following that of 1927, omitted the requirement that a pleading be direct and certain. These amendments of section 952 were made as part of a program for simplification and liberalization of the rules of pleading in criminal cases. [Citations.] No doubt the addition of the words of section 952 in its amended form to section 1426 was made for the same purpose, and it should be construed according to the fair import of its terms, to effectuate that purpose. (Pen. Code, § 4.)4 . . .
*865“Looking now at the new part of the section, we note the provision that the statement that the accused has committed a public offense ‘may be in the words of the enactment describing the offense or declaring the matter to be a public offense ’ etc. When this same provision was put in section 952 it was undoubtedly intended to reverse a rule previously declared by the' courts on this point. While recognizing the rule that in general it is sufficient to charge an offense in the language of the statute defining it (14 Cal.Jur. 49-50), the courts had also held that where the words used in the statute have no technical meaning, or where the particular facts or acts which constitute the offense are not specified, it is necessary to set forth the acts constituting the offense. [Citations.] Since the general rule of following the statutory definition was thus recognized except in the one class of cases, without any statutory provision to that effect, the purpose of enacting the rule into statute without any exception [emphasis added by the court] must have been able to abolish the exception and let the rule stand in complete generality, and section 952 is so construed. [Citations.] In People v. Steel (1939) 35 Cal.App. 2d Supp. 748, 751 [92 P.2d 815], and People v. Smith (1939) 36 Cal.App.2d Supp. 748, 753 [92 P.2d 1039], it is held that under the provisions of section 1426 as they now stand a complaint in the words of the statute is sufficient, and in the ‘Smith case it is further held that the provisions of section 1426 to that effect are valid. ...”
Furthermore, section 968,5 Penal Code, provides that in obscenity cases an accusatory pleading is sufficient when the fact of lewdness or obscenity is stated generally.
Petitioner argues that he must know the particular matter that is alleged to be obscene in order to enable him to prepare his defense. There is, of course, merit in this argument. But the machinery is at hand which will enable him to get the desired material, viz., pretrial discovery. (Powell v. Superior Court, 48 Cal.2d 704, 707-708 [312 P.2d 698]; Vance v. Superior Court, 51 Cal.2d 92, 93 [330 P.2d 773]; Tupper v. Superior Court, 51 Cal.2d 263, 265 [331 P.2d 977]; Funk v. *866Superior Court, 52 Cal.2d 423, 424 [340 P.2d 593]; People v. Renchie, 201 Cal.App.2d 1, 2 [19 Cal.Rptr. 734]; People v. Wilson, 222 Cal.App.2d 616, 617 [35 Cal.Rptr. 280].) The purpose of permitting pretrial discovery is “to promote the orderly ascertainment of the truth” (Jones v. Superior Court, 58 Cal.2d 56, 60 [22 Cal.Rptr. 879, 372 P.2d 919, 96 A.L.R.2d 1213]) and in pursuance of “the fundamental principle that an accused is entitled to a fair trial.” (Cash v. Superior Court, 53 Cal.2d 72, 75 [346 P.2d 407].) The rules of discovery in criminal eases in this state provide a defendant with full opportunity for due process. (See cases cited in Jones v. Superior Court, supra, pp. 58-60; see also Canon v. Justice Court, 61 Cal.2d 446, 450-451 [39 Cal.Rptr. 228, 393 P.2d 428].)
The Supreme Court of Rhode Island had the same questions, with which we are here confronted, before it in State v. Ephraim, 80 R.I. 321 [96 A.2d 641]. Defendant was indicted for unlawful possession of obscene literature for purpose of exhibition. He demurred to the indictment contending in support of his demurrer “that by reason of the failure of the grand jury to set out the character of the allegedly obscene material, or excusing its failure to do so by setting forth in the indictment that the material was so obscene it would be offensive to the court to place it upon the record, the defendant was deprived of his constitutional right to know the cause of the accusation. He further contends that the indictment failed to notify him of the cause for which he was indicted. ’ ’ In response the court stated (pp. 642-643) : “We cannot agree with these contentions. The charge against defendant is set forth in the language of the statute applicable to the offense laid in the indictment. [Emphasis added.] [Citation.] We are of the opinion that the charge as specified therein satisfies the constitutional requirements of article I, section 10, of the Constitution of Rhode Island and the provisions of G.L. 1938, chap. 625, § 3. All the essential elements of the offense charged appear in the indictment and the venue was properly laid. The fact that the defendant may require further particulars in order to properly prepare a defense does not of itself constitute an insufficiency in the indictment as a matter of law. Such information is available under G.L. 1938, chap. 625, § 3, clause 7, by way of a bill of particulars. [Citations.] ”
In United States v. Luros, 243 F.Supp. 160, the defendant was indicted for distributing obscene materials through the mails. The defendant challenged the sufficiency of the indict*867ment on the ground that it does not contain all the essential ingredients of an obscenity indictment. In response the court pointed out (p. 166) that “The indictment charges, in the statutory language [emphasis added], that the books and magazines are ‘ obscene, lewd, lascivious, indecent, and filthy. ’ ’ ’ The court noted that ‘ ‘ [A] charge that books and magazines are obscene necessarily refers to and incorporates the legal definition of obscenity.'' The court then held (p. 167): “The allegation of obscenity in the words of the statute is sufficient. ’ ’
In Kirby v. Municipal Court, 237 Cal.App.2d 335 [46 Cal.Rptr. 844], we have a case that is closely akin to the problem at bench. In that case Kirby was charged in a criminal complaint in the municipal court with violation of section 311.5, Penal Code.6 The accusatory pleading alleged that “a misdemeanor was committed on June 3, 1964, by Kirby, ‘who did willfully and unlawfully write and create advertising and promote the sale and distribution of matter represented and held out by said person to be obscene. ’ ” (P. 337.) Defendant filed a demurrer which was overruled, and entered a plea of not guilty. Thereupon, as in the instant case, Kirby filed a petition for writ of prohibition against further proceedings. An alternative writ was denied. He appealed. The judgment was affirmed.
It will be observed that the accusatory pleading in Kirby was in the language of the statute. In holding the pleading good the court relied on section 952, Penal Code, quoting with emphasis this portion: “It [the accusatory pleading] may be in the words of the enactment describing the offense or declaring the matter tobe a public offense, or in any words sufficient to give the accused notice of the offense of which he is accused. . . .’ ” The court then held (p. 337) : “This statute does not offend the Constitution of the United States or that of California. [Citations.] ”
Under both statutory and case law it was sufficient to charge the offense in the language of the statute. It was therefore not necessary to plead the specific material alleged to be obscene.
To adopt the procedure for which petitioner contends would result in trying criminal cases in obscenity matters on *868a piecemeal basis in some, and perhaps in many, situations. For example, if it were determined by our highest court that a particular piece of asserted obscene material was hard core pornography and therefore “not within the area of constitutionally protected speech or press” (Roth v. United States and Alberts v. California, 354 U.S. 476, 486 [1 L.Ed.2d 1498, 1507, 77 S.Ct. 1304]) that would not determine the defendant’s guilt for it would be necessary for the People also to establish that the ‘ ‘ defendant knew the contents ’ ’ of the- material. (People v. Williamson, 207 Cal.App.2d 839, 846 [24 Cal. Rptr. 734], hear. den.; cert. den. 377 U.S. 994 [12 L.Ed.2d 1047, 84 S.Ct. 1902]; rehear, den. 379 U.S. 871 [13 L.Ed.2d 77, 85 S.Ct. 13].) This would mean starting again in the trial court, perhaps with a jury, to determine the factual issue of defendant’s knowledge of the contents of the obscene matter. This is not in harmony with the orderly administration of criminal justice. The trial judge properly could have taken this into account in deciding to exercise his discretion not to grant the alternative writ.
Petitioner vainly argues that Penal Code section 311.2 on its face and as applied in the complaint is void on the theory that it is too vague, ambiguous, and uncertain to form the basis of a valid criminal charge since the word ‘ ‘ obscene ’ ’ used therein is not defined. The word ‘ ‘ obscene ’ ’ is defined in section 311 subdivision (a), Penal Code. The charge in the complaint that the material is “obscene” incorporates the legal definition of that word as defined in section 311 subdivision (a); and that definition is legally adequate. (Alberts v. California, supra, 354 U.S. 476 [1 L.Ed.2d 1498, 77 S.Ct. 1304].)
In Alberts, the court had occasion to consider whether particular language used in a statute dealing with obscene material was too ambiguous to define a criminal offense. In that ease the California statute made it a misdemeanor to keep for sale or advertise material that is “obscene or indecent.” In reaching its conclusion the court stated (pp. 491-492) : “Many decisions have recognized that these terms of obscenity statutes are not precise. This Court, however, has consistently held that lack of precision is not itself offensive to- the requirements of due process. '. . . [T]he Constitution does not require impossible standards’; all that is required is that the language ‘ conveys sufficiently definite warning -as to the proscribed conduct when measured by common understanding and practices. . . .’ [Citation.] These words, applied accord*869ing to the proper standard for judging obscenity, already discussed, give adequate warning of the conduct proscribed and mark ‘. . . boundaries sufficiently distinct for judges and juries fairly to administer the law. . . . That there may be marginal eases in which it is difficult to determine the side of the line on which a particular fact situation falls is no sufficient reason to hold the language too ambiguous to define a criminal offense. . . .’ [Citation.] ”
Petitioner also argues that the charge is unconstitutionally vague and uncertain because of the breadth of the definition of the word “matter” contained in section 311 subdivision (b), Penal Code and its use in the complaint instead of specifying the particular category or medium enumerated in section 311 subdivision (b) that was used to disseminate the alleged obscene material.7
Section 311 subdivision (b) essentially enumerates the method, medium or vehicle by which obscene material must be disseminated in order to violate section 311.2, Penal Code. In this connection it is important to bear in mind that it is the dissemination of obscene material (within the legal definition of obscenity) that is made a public offense. Thus, the gravamen of the offense is the character of the material measured by that definition; not the medium by which it is disseminated. It is therefore unimportant whether the alleged obscene material is distributed by book, magazine or any of the other methods enumerated in section 311 subdivision (b). A defendant suffers no legal disadvantage by a failure to allege the specific medium or vehicle by which he disseminated the ‘ ‘ obscene matter. ’ ’
Earlier in this opinion we pointed out that the established rules of discovery in criminal cases enabled a defendant to ascertain readily the precise alleged obscene material with which he assertedly had been identified, and that these rules satisfied the requirement of due process. In thus ascertaining (if he did not already know) the material in question the defendant will naturally learn the medium by which it was disseminated. If perchance the medium of dissemination becomes an issue in a particular case, the defendant has im*870mediately at hand the means of ascertaining the desired information through the rules of discovery.
We find no merit in the suggestion that petitioner, in the event of his conviction or acquittal of this charge, would be unable to establish his former jeopardy in the event he was again prosecuted for the same offense. There might be some merit in this point were he limited to the judgment roll in making his proof of former jeopardy. But he would not be so limited. In People v. Williams, 27 Cal.2d 220 [163 P.2d 692], the court stated (p. 226) : “It is well settled that on a plea of double jeopardy, extrinsic evidence is admissible on the trial to identify the crime of which a defendant has been convicted. [Citations.] ” In People v. Braddock, 41 Cal.2d 794 [264 P.2d 521], the court pointed out (p. 800) : “If Braddock should be tried again on a charge of violating section 11163 [Health and Safety Code] for any of the acts which form the bases [sic] for the present prosecution, he may show former jeopardy by evidence produced in that proceeding.” To the same effect is People v. Coe, 171 Cal.App.2d 786, 794 [342 P.2d 43], In Heaton v. United States, 353 F.2d 288, 292, appellant contended that the indictment did not sufficiently describe the property unlawfully imported. In answering this point the court commented “it is appellant’s argument that he is not adequately protected against another trial for the same offense. ’ ’ The court then held: ‘ ‘ This contention is to be tested by an examination of the whole record and not the indictment alone.” The same point was raised in Tubbs v. United States, 105 F. 59 [44 C.C.A. 357], The court (p. 61) there noted “that parol evidence is always admissible, and sometimes necessary, to establish the defense of prior conviction or acquittal. ’ ’
Taking into account the principles stated in the cited authorities, the fact that the Legislature has declared that a complaint in a criminal case “may be in the words of the enactment describing the offense or declaring the matter to be a public offense,” and the further fact that our courts have developed discovery procedures in criminal cases which enable a defendant to discover the details of the charge against him, it does not appear that either the statute here in question or the pleading in the municipal court in this matter are vulnerable to the attack made upon them.
The order denying the issuance of an alternative writ of prohibition is affirmed.
Jefferson, Acting P. J., concurred.
Retired Presiding Justice of the Court of Appeal sitting under assignment by the Chairman of the Judicial Council.
Section 311.2, Penal Code reads: “Every person who knowingly: sends or causes to he sent, or brings or causes to be brought, into this State for sale or distribution, or in this State prepares, publishes, prints, exhibits, distributes, or offers to distribute, or has in his possession with intent to distribute or to exhibit or offer to distribute, any obscene matter is guilty of a misdemeanor. ’ ’
Decisions prior to the statutory amendments in the area here under consideration would, of course, not be relevant.
Pen. Code, §952 reads: “In charging an offense, each count shall contain, and shall be sufficient if it contains in substance, a statement that the accused has committed some public offense therein specified. Such statement may be made in ordinary and concise language without any technical averments or any allegations of matter not essential to be proved. It may be in the words of the enactment describing the offense or declaring the matter to be a public offense, or in any words sufficient to give the accused notice of the offense of which he is accused. In charging theft it shall be sufficient to allege that the defendant unlawfully took the labor or property of another.”
Pen. Code, §4 states: “The rule of the common law, that penal statutes are to he strictly construed, has no application to this Code. All its provisions are to he construed according to the fair import of their terms, with a view to effect its objects and to promote justice.”
Pen. Code, § 968 provides: "An accusatory pleading charging exhibiting, publishing, passing, selling, or offering to sell, or having in possession, with such intent, any lewd or obscene book, pamphlet, picture, print, card, paper, or writing, need not set forth any portion of the language used or figures shown upon such book, pamphlet, picture, print, card, paper, or writing; but it is sufficient to state generally the fact of the lewdness or obscenity thereof. ’ ’
Pen. Code, § 311.5 reads: ‘ ‘ Every person who writes or creates advertising or solicits anyone to publish such advertising or otherwise promote the sale or distribution of matter represented or held out by him to be obscene, is guilty of a misdemeanor.”
Pen. Code, § 311, subd. (b) reads: “As used in this chapter:
< t
“ (b) ‘ Matter ’ means any book, magazine, newspaper, or other printed or written material or any picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture, or other pictorial representation or any statue or other figure, or any recording, transcription or mechanical, chemical or electrical reproduction or any other articles, equipment, machines or materials. ’ ’

=== CASE 9739462 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:15:26.720451+00 ===

OPINION
ROBB, Judge.
Leann Chafin appeals the trial court's grant of a motion to correct errors in favor of Cleveland Grayson setting aside the jury verdict and ordering a new trial in Grayson's negligence action against Chaf-in. We remand.
Issue
Chaffin raises two issues for our review, one of which we find dispositive: whether the trial court failed to make special findings of fact as required by Indiana Trial Rule 59(J)(7).
Facts and Procedural History
The facts reveal that on February 11, 1997, Grayson and Chafin were involved in a motor vehicle accident on State Road 35 *476in Muncie, Indiana. Prior to the accident, Grayson, a carpet installer, was traveling north on State Road 85 in a cargo van loaded with several large rolls of carpet. Chafin, in a small automobile, traveled from the Muncie Bypass and exited on the ramp to State Road 35, halting at a stop sign. In order to travel upon State Road 35 South, Chafin had to turn left and cross the two lanes of State Road 35 North,. As Chafin turned left crossing the northbound lanes of State Road 85, her vehicle was "t-boned" by the cargo van driven by Gray-son. The resulting collision caused one of the large rolls of carpet to strike Grayson from behind. Thereafter, Grayson received treatment for his injuries by a physician, a massage therapist, and several chiropractors.
Consequently, on July 9, 1998, Grayson filed a negligence complaint against Chafin in the Delaware Cireuit Court. Grayson claimed that the medical bills he sustained in the accident totaled $46,083.38. The jury found Grayson 45% at fault and Chaf-in 55% at fault for the automobile accident. The jury calculated Grayson's total damages at $9,804.00. The trial court entered judgment in favor of Grayson for $5,392.20. On December 18, 2000, Gray-son filed a motion to correct errors with the trial court alleging that the verdict was inadequate as a matter of law and the total damage amount of $9,804.00 was contrary to the evidence. On December 28, 2000, Chafin filed with the trial court a statement in opposition to Grayson's motion to correct errors. On January 12, 2001, the trial court granted Grayson's motion to correct errors and ordered a new trial. This appeal ensued.
Discussion and Decision
I. Standard of Review for Trial Rule 59(J)
The trial court granted Grayson's motion to correct errors and ordered a new trial pursuant to Indiana Trial Rule 59(J). When considering a Motion to Correct Errors and a request for new trial, a trial court is governed by Indiana Trial Rule 59(J)(7), which provides in part: "[The court shall grant a new trial if it determines that the verdict of a non-advisory jury is ... clearly erroneous as contrary to or not supported by the evidence...." The trial judge sits as a "thirteenth juror" and must determine whether in the minds of reasonable men a contrary verdict should have been reached. Precision Screen Mach., Inc. v. Hixson, 711 N.E.2d 68, 70 (Ind.Ct.App.1999). The trial judge, as a "thirteenth juror," hears the case along with the jury, observes the witnesses for their credibility, intelligence and wisdom, and determines whether the verdiet is against the weight of the evidence. Id.
Onee the trial court has granted a new trial, we will reverse this decision only for an abuse of discretion. Schuh v. Silcox, 581 N.E.2d 926, 927 (Ind.Ct.App.1991). An abuse of discretion will be found when the trial court's action is against the logic and effect of the facts and circumstances before it and the inferences which may be drawn therefrom. DeVittorio v. Werker Bros., Inc., 634 N.E.2d 528, 530 (Ind.Ct.App.1994). We review the record only to see if: (a) the trial court abused its discretion; (b) a flagrant injustice has occurred; or (c) the appellant has presented a very strong case for relief from the trial court's order granting a new trial. Hixson, 711 N.E.2d at 70. However, we neither reweigh the evidence nor judge the credibility of the witnesses. Id. The trial court has broad discretion to grant or deny a motion for a new trial. Schuh, 581 N.E.2d at 927. The trial court's action in granting a new trial is given a strong presumption of correctness. *477Keith v. Mendus, 661 N.E.2d 26, 32 (Ind.Ct.App.1996), trans. denied.
Therefore, it is our duty to affirm the trial court's order for a new trial unless it is clearly demonstrated by Chaffin that the trial court abused its discretion.
IIL. Special Findings of Fact
Chaffin first contends that the trial court erred in setting aside the jury verdict and granting a new trial because special findings of fact required by Trial Rule 59(J)(7) were insufficient. We agree.
Under Trial Rule 59(J)(7):
When a new trial is granted because the verdict, findings or judgment do not accord with the evidence, the court shall make special findings of fact upon each material issue or element of the claim or defense upon which a new trial is granted. Such finding shall indicate whether the decision is against the weight of the evidence or whether it is clearly erroneous as contrary to or not supported by the evidence; if the decision is found to be against the weight of the evidence, the findings shall relate the supporting and opposing evidence to each issue upon which a new trial is granted; if the decision is found to be clearly erroneous as contrary to or not supported by the evidence, the findings shall show why judgment was not entered upon the evidence.
(Emphasis added).
The procedural requirements outlined in Trial Rule 59(J)(7) have been characterized as "paramount," and the process of entering the requisite findings as "arduous and time-consuming." State v. McKenzie, 576 N.E.2d 1258, 1260 (Ind.Ct.App.1991), trans. denied. The purpose of the special findings of fact is to provide the parties and the reviewing court with the theory of, the trial court's decision. DeVittorio, 634 N.E.2d at 531. The findings may summarize the evidence so long as the summary is complete enough to facilitate appellate review. Malacina v. Malacina, 616 N.E.2d 1061, 1063 (Ind.Ct.App.1993).
The trial court's January 12, 2001, order on Chaffin's Motion to Correct Errors provides in pertinent part that:
Comes now the Court by Senior Judge, Betty Shelton Cole, and finds that [Chaffin's] Motion for New Trial should be, and is hereby granted for the reason that the jury verdict was not supported by sufficient evidence either of comparative fault or damages.
Appellant's Appendix at 7-8.
The trial court's order does not satisfy the requirements of Indiana Trial Rule 59(J)(7) in that it fails to contain sufficient findings necessary for this court to review the grant of Grayson's motion to correct errors. Therefore, pursuant to Indiana Appellate Rule 37(B),1 we suspend consideration of this appeal for a period of forty-five (45) days from the date of this opinion and remand this cause to the Delaware Superior Court with instructions to the receiving judge to review Grayson's motion to correct errors, to hold a hearing if deemed necessary and to make specific Findings of Fact pursuant to Trial Rule 59(J)MT) to be filed with the Clerk of the Court of Appeals of Indiana no later than forty-five (45) days from the date of this *478opinion. We retain jurisdiction over this case and will resume consideration of the merits of the appeal after the findings are filed.
Remanded with instructions.
KIRSCH, J. concurs.
SULLIVAN, J., dissents with opinion.
. We note that Indiana Appellate Rule 37(B) provides that:
The Court on Appeal may dismiss the appeal without prejudice, and remand the case to the trial court, or remand the case while retaining jurisdiction, with or without limitation on the trial court's authority. Unless the order specifically provides otherwise, the trial court or Administrative Agency shall obtain unlimited authority on remand.

=== CASE 9739692 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:19:34.377488+00 ===

OPINION
DAVIES, Judge.
The parents of a psychiatric patient who died when he suffered cardiac arrest during a psychiatric “take-down” procedure appeal the dismissal of their medical malpractice action; the district court dismissed the action on the basis that the affidavits of experts offered to satisfy Minn.Stat. § 145.682 (1990) were inadequate. The parents also appeal the district court’s grant of summary judgment on their claims of negligent and intentional infliction of emotional distress. We affirm in part, reverse in part, and remand the malpractice claim.
FACTS
Thirty-year-old Bruce Hempel had a ten-year history of psychiatric disorders, including schizophrenia. On December 10, 1989, Hempel, accompanied by his parents, voluntarily checked into the Fairview Riverside Hospital (“Riverside”) psychiatric unit. During the admission procedure, when Riverside staff would not allow him to smoke, Hempel, who weighed 300 pounds, became upset and announced he was leaving.
Riverside staff called a team of psychiatric attendants who, to control Hempel’s behavior and avert any danger to staff or others, conducted a “take-down” procedure. In the process, Hempel’s sweatshirt was pulled up over his head and he was held face down to the floor by approximate*490ly eight attendants. During the take-down, Hempel suffered cardiac arrest and died.
Hempel’s parents (“the Hempels”) contend they heard him apologize and ask for help during the take-down. They tried to assist him, but were restrained by Riverside staff and eventually were forced to leave the room.
An autopsy revealed no specific trauma or cause of the cardiac arrest. A cardiological autopsy, performed by a cardiology specialist, revealed that Hempel had a 60 percent narrowing of the right coronary artery, a condition that increases the risk of sudden death by cardiac arrest.
The Hempels brought an action against Riverside alleging medical malpractice, assault, battery, false imprisonment, and intentional and negligent infliction of emotional distress. To satisfy the medical malpractice affidavit requirement of Minn.Stat. § 145.682 (Supp.1991), the Hempels filed the affidavits of John McCullough, a psychiatric assistant, and Dr. Garry Peterson, the medical examiner who signed the death certificate.
Riverside moved for dismissal of the medical malpractice claim, contending the affidavits did not satisfy the statute, and for summary judgment on the other claims. The district court granted Riverside’s motion in all respects. It found that: McCullough was unqualified as an expert; the affidavits failed to establish causation; the assault, battery, and false imprisonment claims did not survive Bruce Hempel’s death; and the Hempels’ allegations did not support their emotional distress claims.
The Hempels appeal the dismissal of their malpractice and emotional distress claims.
ISSUES
I. Did the experts’ affidavits satisfy Minn.Stat. § 145.682, subd. 2(2) (1990)?
II. Did the district court err in granting summary judgment on the negligent infliction of emotional distress claim?
III.Did the district court err in granting summary judgment on the intentional infliction of emotional distress claim?
ANALYSIS
I.
Within 180 days of commencing a medical malpractice action, the plaintiff must serve upon the defendant an affidavit stating the identity of experts to be called at trial, and
the substance of the facts and opinions to which the expert is expected to testify, and a summary of the grounds for each opinion.
Minn.Stat. § 145.682, subds. 2(2), 4 (1990). Properly filed answers to interrogatories may be substituted for the affidavit. Minn.Stat. § 145.682, subd. 4. Failure to comply with the statute requires mandatory dismissal with prejudice. Minn.Stat. § 145.682, subd. 6 (1990). A trial court’s dismissal of an action under section 145.682 will not be reversed absent an abuse of discretion. Sorenson v. St. Paul Ramsey Medical Ctr., 457 N.W.2d 188, 190 (Minn.1990).
Section 145.682, subdivision 2(2), has been interpreted as requiring plaintiffs to provide fairly detailed information about their experts’ expected testimony. The affidavits must set out the standard of care, the acts allegedly violating that standard, and an outline of the chain of causation. Sorenson, 457 N.W.2d at 193. The affidavit is expected to set out how the expert will use the facts of the case to arrive at an opinion of malpractice and causation. Id. at 192.
The exclusion of expert testimony lies within the trial court’s broad discretion. Benson v. Northern Gopher Enterprises, 455 N.W.2d 444, 445-46 (Minn.1990); Reinhardt v. Colton, 337 N.W.2d 88, 93 (Minn.1983). We will reverse the trial court’s ruling only where it is based on an erroneous view of the law or constitutes an abuse of discretion. Benson, 455 N.W.2d at 445-46; Reinhardt, 337 N.W.2d at 93.
*491The district court first concluded that expert John McCullough, the psychiatric assistant who testified about the standard of care and breach of that standard, was unqualified. To qualify as an expert in a medical malpractice case, a person must have sufficient scientific and practical experience with the subject matter of the offered testimony. Cornfeldt v. Tongen, 262 N.W.2d 684, 693 (Minn.1977). Lack of a license to practice medicine does not preclude expert status in a medical malpractice action if the expert is otherwise competent to testify under the above standard. Id. at 696-97.
The court disqualified McCullough because
he lacks basic educational and professional training, as well as the practical knowledge of how employees of psychiatric facilities customarily behave when confronted with circumstances similar to those faced by this defendant.
It further found that McCullough
has no medical background with which to buttress his contention that more effective monitoring of Bruce Hempel during the take-down procedure was either required to meet a standard, or that the procedure followed by defendant’s agents represents a departure from that standard.
McCullough has a B.A. in psychology, currently works in the health care field, has conducted and trained others to conduct take-down procedures, and has worked as a psychiatric assistant at Metropolitan Medical Center. In his affidavit, McCullough concluded that Riverside deviated from the standard of care for monitoring patients during and after take-down procedures by failing to “communicate with the patient” and by failing to “provide assurance to the patient through a team leader.” He also concluded that placing Bruce Hempel’s sweatshirt over his head during the take-down was a deviation from the standard of care.
We find the district court abused its discretion in ruling that McCullough was not qualified as an expert. Doctors typically provide expert testimony in medical malpractice actions because the allegedly negligent actions usually are those of other doctors or of persons working under the direct supervision of doctors. In this case, no doctors were involved in the take-down procedure. Likely, few doctors would have the required experience to testify as an expert on take-down procedures.
McCullough, however, has the necessary professional training and experience to testify about how a take-down procedure should be conducted and whether Riverside staff deviated from that standard. Further, his affidavit provided a specific opinion about how Riverside violated the standard of care. See Sorenson, 457 N.W.2d at 192-93 (affidavits expressing empty conclusions about defendant’s violation of the standard of care are insufficient under section 145.682, subdivision 2(2)).
Although the district court was concerned about McCullough’s lack of “medical background” to support his testimony, a more extensive medical background is unnecessary because McCullough’s testimony is not intended to establish a medical link between breach of the standard of care and injuries. McCullough’s testimony is offered only to establish the standard of care for the procedure itself, and breach of that standard.
To establish medical causation the Hem-pels offered the affidavit of Dr. Garry Peterson, the Hennepin County Medical Examiner who signed the death certificate. The district court concluded, however, that the affidavit of Dr. Peterson failed to establish a causal connection between Riverside’s allegedly negligent acts and Bruce Hempel’s death.
Dr. Peterson stated in his affidavit
there is no way to prove what actually caused the heart to stop. However, it is my opinion that the sequence of events, including the restraint itself, was a participating factor in bringing about the cardiac arrest.
The district court concluded that this affidavit failed to establish the “chain of causation” required by Sorenson because it *492states only that “the take-down procedure was part of a scenario that ended” in Bruce Hempel’s death, not that it was a cause.
The Hempels face a difficult situation. Because of the nature of the allegedly negligent actions possibly leading to their son’s death, they have little choice but to offer affidavits from two different experts to satisfy the entirety of section 145.682. Here, one expert must testify that the procedure was negligently performed, essentially a task for a technician like McCullough, not a doctor. The second expert must testify that the negligence resulted in the complained-of injury, a task for a doctor. Constructing a bridge between the two experts, thus establishing the required “chain of causation,” is a complex task, given the limited interaction between the two experts at this point in the litigation. See Sorenson, 457 N.W.2d at 193.
In a situation like this, where two experts are required, section 145.682 does not provide extensive opportunity for a medical expert to gain all the information necessary to offer a substantial opinion on causation. Until the medical expert has had an opportunity to hear the entire story, an opinion on causation is bound to be somewhat indefinite.
The purpose of section 145.682 is not to deprive plaintiffs of legitimate lawsuits, but to weed out actions without evi-dentiary support. We find that the experts’ affidavits offered by the Hempels in combination establish that their lawsuit has evidentiary support; the district court abused its discretion in ruling to the contrary. Dr. Peterson’s opinion that the restraint was a “participating” factor in cardiac arrest, combined with McCullough’s testimony regarding standard of care and breach, satisfy the statute’s purpose of ensuring the legitimacy of this lawsuit.
II.
The Hempels next contend that the district court erred in granting summary judgment on their negligent infliction of emotional distress claim. This court may reverse a summary judgment determination only if there is a genuine issue of material fact or if the district court erroneously applied the law. Offerdahl v. University of Minn. Hosps. & Clinics, 426 N.W.2d 425, 427 (Minn.1988).
To recover for negligent infliction of emotional distress, a plaintiff must either have suffered a contemporaneous physical injury or must have been within the “zone of danger” and suffered physical symptoms subsequent to and because of the resulting emotional disturbance. Leaon v. Washington County, 397 N.W.2d 867, 875 (Minn.1986); Quill v. Trans World Airlines, Inc., 361 N.W.2d 438, 442-43 (Minn.App.1985), pet. for rev. denied (Minn. April 18, 1985).
Although the Hempels claim they were physically restrained from assisting their son during the take-down procedure, neither alleges that they suffered a com-pensable physical injury as a result of the procedure. Further, there is no evidence that either of the Hempels were in the “zone of danger” of physical injury. The district court did not err in granting summary judgment on the negligent infliction of emotional distress claim.
III.
To recover for the tort of intentional infliction of emotional distress, a plaintiff must show that (1) the conduct allegedly causing the distress was extreme and outrageous; (2) the conduct was intentional or reckless; (3) the conduct caused emotional distress; and (4) the distress was severe. Hubbard v. United Press Int’l, Inc., 330 N.W.2d 428, 438-39 (Minn.1983). To qualify as extreme or outrageous, the conduct must be “so atrocious that it passes the boundaries of decency and is utterly intolerable to the civilized community.” Haagenson v. National Farmers Union Prop. & Casualty Co., 277 N.W.2d 648, 652 n. 3 (Minn.1979). Proof of physical injury is not a requirement to recover for intentional infliction of emotional distress, Dornfeld v. Oberg, 503 N.W.2d 115 (Minn.1993), but a showing of physical injury generally serves as evidence of severe *493emotional distress. M.H. v. Caritas Family Servs., 488 N.W.2d 282, 290 (Minn.1992).
The Hempels contend that it was extreme and outrageous to be placed in a situation where they witnessed their son’s death, watching him being held down after he apologized for his conduct. There is no real debate that the take-down procedure itself was necessary and could be conducted safely. The Hempels point to only two aspects of the procedure as being unusual: that Bruce Hempel’s sweatshirt was pulled over his head, and that he was not provided with a “team leader” and appropriate reassurance during the procedure. These deficiencies in the procedure do not qualify as behavior “utterly intolerable to the civilized community.”
There is no doubt that witnessing a son’s death in this manner is distressing. But the threshold for finding severe emotional distress is high. See Hubbard, 330 N.W.2d at 439. The district court did not err in granting summary judgment on this claim.
DECISION
The district court abused its discretion in ruling that the experts’ affidavits did not satisfy the requirements of Minn.Stat. § 145.682 (1990). The district court did not err in granting summary judgment on the negligent and intentional infliction of emotional distress claims.
Affirmed in part, reversed in part, and remanded.

=== CASE 2222253 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:33.964972+00 ===

667 N.W.2d 36 (2003)
Cherri Lea VOS, Rita C. Anderson and Quentin V. Anderson, on Behalf of Themselves and All Others Similarly Situated, Appellants,
v.
FARM BUREAU LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY and FBL Financial Group, Inc., Appellees.
No. 01-1025.
Supreme Court of Iowa.
July 16, 2003.
*37 *38 Marc A. Humphrey of Humphrey Law Firm, P.C., Des Moines, Angela M. Trombly *39 of Law Offices of Angela M. Trombly, East Longmeadow, Mass., Richard A. Lockridge and Katheryn A. Andresen of Lockridge, Grindal, Nauen, P.L.L.P., Minneapolis, Minn., William R. Weinstein, Richard Bemporad, and Vincent Briganti of Lowey, Dannenberg, Bemporad & Selinger, P.C., White Plains, N.Y., and Julian K. Melmed of Law Offices of Julian K. Melmed, Stamford, Conn., for appellants.
CeCelia Ibson Wagner and Janean A. Schaefer Denhart of Smith, Schneider, Stiles & Serangeli, P.C., Des Moines, for appellees.
LAVORATO, Chief Justice.
The plaintiffs, Cherri Lea Vos, Rita C. Anderson, and Quentin V. Anderson, appeal a district court ruling decertifying their class action against Farm Bureau Life Insurance Company and FBL Financial Group, Inc. (collectively "Farm Bureau"). Because we find no abuse of discretion in the court's ruling, we affirm.
I. Background.
A. The allegations. On February 1, 1999, Vos and her parents, the Andersons, filed a class action against Farm Bureau. The plaintiffs alleged that from January 1, 1982 through at least December 31, 1996, Farm Bureau engaged in a pattern of deceptive practices in connection with the sale of whole life and universal life polices. The deceptive conduct as alleged in the petition involved:
(a) Selling whole and universal life insurance policies under the pretense of "vanishing premiums" and/or "fully paid up" policies. Farm Bureau promised its existing policyowners and new customers that, on a given policy, they would not have to make additional premium payments after a specified number or amount of payments or years ("vanishing premiums"); and
(b) Strongly urging policyowners to surrender, borrow, or withdraw cash values from their existing policies to fund an additional policy, or an entirely new Farm Bureau policy which replaced the existing policy, usually with the added incentive that premiums on the second "fully paid up" policy would be paid substantially or entirely from the value of the first policy and at no additional cost to the policyowner ("replacement of policies with vanishing premiums").
The petition further alleged the following additional facts. On May 17, 1988, Farm Bureau agent Merrill Perry met with plaintiffs at their home to "induce them into purchasing an additional `fully paid up' life insurance policy" for Cherri Vos. Perry used policy illustrations and calculations provided by Farm Bureau to represent to the plaintiffs this "great deal" would allow them to obtain a fully paid up $50,000 special whole life policy on Cherri without making further premium payments on the policy. Perry convinced Rita to cash in a $2,000 paid up life insurance policy she owned through another insurance company and apply the proceeds to the policy for Cherri. In addition, Perry persuaded Quentin to write a check in payment of the additional amount necessary to make the new policy "fully paid up." In December 1998, Farm Bureau offered to recognize Cherri's policy as "fully paid up," provided she agree to accept a reduced paid up policy in the amount of $20,710.50.
The petition alleged the following common questions of law and fact predominated over individual questions:
(1) Whether Farm Bureau, through its national general agency system and sales force of agents, engaged in deceptive acts and practices in connection with the sale of whole life and/or universal life insurance policies; and
*40 (2) Whether Farm Bureau, through its national general agency system and sales force of agents, breached its contracts with plaintiffs and the members of the class during the class period by requiring additional out-of-pocket payments on whole and/or universal life insurance policies purchased by plaintiffs and members of the class beyond the amounts or dates represented.
The petition asserted five separate claims against the defendants: breach of contract, negligent misrepresentation, common law fraud, fraudulent inducement, and breach of fiduciary duty. The defendants answered and asserted several affirmative defenses. One of those affirmative defenses is relevant to this appeal: There are no common questions of law or fact which predominate over any questions affecting only individual members.
B. Proceedings related to class action certification. On July 15, 1999, the plaintiffs filed a motion for class certification and a memorandum of law in support of that motion, which Farm Bureau resisted. In its memorandum of law the plaintiffs asserted that the defendants engaged in a uniform and common course of unfair and deceptive conduct that was substantially similar with respect to each member of the proposed class. According to the plaintiffs,
[T]he deceptive acts and practices challenged by plaintiffs are based on uniform sales practices whereby Farm Bureau failed to inform existing policyowners and new customers of the substantial risks associated with these insurance policies, i.e., that the only way in which premiums would "vanish," or would not have to be paid on the additional or new policies, was if interest rates and/or dividend scales remained relatively constant. Defendants also failed to inform their policyowners and new customers, inter alia, that if the interest rates and/or dividend scales declined, by even a fraction of a percent from that used as the basis for the agents' representations and inducements, then the specified number or amount of payments and/or the dividends and/or interest on the policies would be wholly insufficient to pay for the additional premiums and/or "fully pay up" the policies, and policyowners would have to pay the difference out-of-pocket.
Following a hearing in which the district court heard arguments on the motion, the court granted the plaintiffs' motion for class certification on February 14, 2000. In ruling on the motion, the court considered the petition and some thirty exhibits attached to the plaintiffs' memorandum. In its ruling, the court noted that "the class certification order is always subject to modification should later developments during the course of the trial so require." The district court defined the class as follows:
All persons who have or had an ownership interest in one or more whole life and/or universal life policies issued during the period of January 1, 1982 through December 31, 1996 (the "class period") that was sold by Farm Bureau through its exclusive agency force, and to whom it was represented that premiums would "vanish" and/or that a policy would be "fully paid up" and/or that no additional costs would be incurred in excess of the specified number or amount of payments or years. Excluded from the class are defendants, any parent, subsidiary or affiliate of defendants, any entity in which defendants have a controlling interest, and the officers, directors, agents, employees, legal representatives, heirs, predecessors, *41 successors, and assigns of such excluded person or entity.
C. Discovery. Discovery commenced in June 1999 and continued for nearly two years during which Farm Bureau produced over 60,000 pages of documents and the plaintiffs produced over 100 documents. The plaintiffs as well as several of Farm Bureau's present and former employees and senior management officials were deposed. The documentation Farm Bureau produced included sample life insurance contracts, sample illustrations used by Farm Bureau agents, minutes of board of directors' meetings concerning interest rates and dividend declarations, brochures and promotional materials, training manuals, rate manuals, complaint files, Farm Bureau's SEC Prospectus regarding its public offering, actuarial material regarding the policies in question, organizational charts, and affidavits. The documentation the plaintiffs produced included the plaintiffs' life insurance policies and attendant documents, copies of checks regarding premium payments, and documents regarding the plaintiffs' consumer complaint.
The discovery reveals the following information about the type of policy at issue and the marketing scheme Farm Bureau used to sell it.
1. The policies. The plaintiffs purchased identical policies from Farm Bureau: "Special Whole Life Participating." Quentin and Rita Anderson purchased their policies in 1985. The allegations of the petition are limited to the facts surrounding the purchase of Cherri's policy, which was purchased in 1988. Therefore the facts surrounding the purchase of Rita's and Quentin's policy are relevant only to the extent they are included as class members.
The front page of the policy contained the following:
SPECIAL WHOLE LIFE POLICY PARTICIPATING
Payable at Death.
Level Premiums Payable for Life.
Annual Dividends.
....
RIGHT TO CANCEL
The owner may cancel this policy by... returning the policy or contract before midnight of the twentieth day after the date you receive the policy.... Farm Bureau Life will refund any premium paid for this policy within ten days after it receives notice of cancellation and the returned policy.
(Emphasis added.)
The top of the table-of-contents page informed the policyholder, "This policy is a legal contract between the policy owner and the Farm Bureau Life Insurance Company. READ YOUR POLICY CAREFULLY."
The "Policy Data Sheet" is found at page three of the policy. It lists the "annual premium" and states that the "period payable" is "lifetime." The policy data sheet also lists the guaranteed cash value and paid-up insurance the policy will generate or carry at any given point in time.
The policy contained the following provisions related to premiums and dividends, and the following general provisions:
PREMIUM PROVISIONS
Premium Payment. Premiums are to be paid for the term shown on page 3 [Policy Data Sheet]. The amount and frequency of premium payments are also shown on page 3.
DIVIDENDS PROVISIONS
Dividend Participation. As long as this policy is in force, except as extended term insurance, it will share in the company's surplus as set by the company *42 each year. The share will be paid as a dividend at the end of each policy year. However, no dividend will be paid until the second policy year.
Dividend Options. The owner has the following dividend options:
1) CashDividends will be paid in cash.
2) Premium ReductionDividends will be used to help pay premiums. Any balance will be paid in cash.
3) AccumulationsDividends will be left with us to earn interest. We will set the interest rate, but it will not be less than 3% per year.
4) Paid-Up AdditionsDividends will be applied to buy paid-up additional insurance. The insurance will be of the same type as this policy. Paid-up additions will also share in the company's surplus.
The owner may choose a dividend option on the application of this policy or by a later written request to us. If a dividend option has not been chosen, dividends will be applied under the paid-up additions option.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Contract. This policy is issued in consideration of the first premium and the statements in the application. This policy, and the attached application and all other attached papers, if any, which by this reference are made a part of this policy, form the entire contract. All statements in the application are deemed representations and not warranties except in the case of fraud. No statement will void this policy or be used in defense of a claim unless contained in the application.
Modification. No one can change any part of this policy except the owner and one of our officers. Both must agree to a change, and it must be in writing. No agent may change this policy or waive any of its provisions.
Farm Bureau issued a "Premium Deposit Agreement" to each plaintiff in 1988. Such an agreement is issued to each policyholder upon receipt of a sum of money that represents a number of annual premiums on a life insurance policy. The agreements the plaintiffs received acknowledge the receipt by Farm Bureau of a sum of money representing a number of annual premiums on their policies. The agreements explain, "This deposit will be used in prepayment on the above policy of the annual premiums specified above." The agreements indicate four annual premiums prepaid for Quentin, three for Rita, and nine for Cherri.
2. Marketing the policies. Farm Bureau markets its life insurance products through an exclusive agency force. Its agents are independent contractors and exclusive agents of Farm Bureau. This is in contrast to other insurance agents, who may sell insurance products of several different companies.
Farm Bureau provided its agents with software to create illustrations during sales presentations to clients. Before 1988, Farm Bureau agents produced illustrations by inputing information into a hand-held computer. The computer generated a piece of paper resembling an adding machine tape. When interest rates changed, agents would receive a new chip to insert into the hand-held computer. The chip was programmed with the then-current declared interest rate to be used by Farm Bureau agents in calculating dividends.
After 1988, agents used laptop computers and received floppy disks when interest rates changed. An agent could not prepare an illustration using an interest rate higher than that which the board of directors had declared as that period's rate *43 for use in calculating dividends. Agents could not input an interest rate. The interest rate was hard-coded in the chip (and later the software).
Agents could present one of five illustration options for Special Whole Life insurance: (1) dividend to reduce premium, (2) dividends to buy paid-up additions, (3) dividend to accumulate with interest, (4) limited pay concept, and (5) rated policy. All illustrations contained the following language:
This illustration is based on the company's current dividend scale which is sensitive to changing interest rates. Dividends are neither guaranteed nor estimated for the future.
Steven Knutzen, a Farm Bureau employee who trained Farm Bureau agents, explained in an affidavit that
the illustration system was capable of calculating how many advance premiums would need to be paid on a policy to get it to the point where, at the then-current interest rates, it would generate dividends at such a level that the dividends would pay premiums from that point into the future....
We explained to agents, and we expected and trained them to explain to clients, that just because no cash premium payments were being made [in the hypothetical being presented] that it did not mean premiums were not being paid. Premiums still came due, but they were paid out of the cash value of the paid-up additions (dividends). The client knew this every year, because every year the client would receive a form which he/she was required to sign before Farm Bureau was allowed to withdraw any monies from the dividend fund to pay the annual premium.
According to Knutzen, the Universal Life illustration system allowed an agent to run three separate illustrations using three different interest rates: the then-current rate (12%), the guaranteed rate (4.5%), and a rate midpoint between the guaranteed rate and the then-current rate (9%). Agents were trained to project all three rates, because everyone knew the then-current rate was not going to continue. Farm Bureau wanted their agents to be realistic with their clients in terms of how these policies could reasonably be expected to perform. Agents were also trained to communicate to their clients that the illustrations were projections based on the current dividend scale, that dividends were not guaranteed and that the interest rate used to calculate them was not guaranteed. Agents were instructed to leave illustrations with prospective clients after discussing them. Farm Bureau, however, did not require its agents to use illustrations or other materials it provided for use in sales presentations.
3. Dividends/interest rate declarations. Farm Bureau declares dividends each year. Dividends are a function of three factors: a gain from interest, a gain from mortality, and a gain from expenses. Dividends are a distribution of the gain that the company has experienced because actual performance turns out better than the pricing assumptions. Even if the rate does not change from one year to the next, the rate must be redeclared by the board of directors.
Farm Bureau's policies state, "[a]s long as this policy is in force, ... it will share in the Company's surplus as set by the company each year." Special Whole Life policies do not earn dividends, if any, until the second full year of the policy.
Dividend interest rates declared by Farm Bureau's board of directors rose from 9 percent to 10.5 percent in 1984, to 12 percent in 1985, then declined to 11 *44 percent in 1986 and 9 percent in 1987. Rates remained at 9 percent until 1992. The first credited dividends for policies issued in 1981 or 1982 were at rates higher than rates illustrated by the company. In contrast, the first credited dividends for policies issued in 1985 and 1986 were significantly lower.
D. Proceedings related to class action decertification. On February 26, 2001, Farm Bureau filed a motion to decertify the class. The sole ground urged in the motion was that "the individual questions and issues will always predominate over the common." Following a hearing on the motion, the district court granted the motion to decertify. In its ruling, the court concluded:
[F]or each cause of action forwarded by plaintiffs, ... individual questions of law and fact predominate common questions.... [A]fter nearly a full year of discovery, plaintiffs cannot direct this court to any piece of evidence to support their theory of uniform deception.... [T]he individual facts behind each claim [are] more case specific than common.
The plaintiffs appealed from this ruling.
We set out additional information as that information relates to the issues raised in this appeal.
II. Issues.
The plaintiffs contend the district court abused its discretion in decertifying the class action in light of substantial evidence that common issues of law and fact predominate. Whether the district court abused its discretion as the plaintiffs contend turns on our determination whether common questions of law or fact predominate over any questions affecting only individual class members.
III. Scope of Review. Our review of the district court's ruling granting or denying certification of a class action is limited because the district court enjoys broad discretion in the certification of class action lawsuits. Stone v. Pirelli Armstrong Tire Corp., 497 N.W.2d 843, 845 (Iowa 1993). We will reverse an order granting or denying certification only if we find the district court's decision was based upon an abuse of discretion. Varner v. Schwan's Sales Enters., Inc., 433 N.W.2d 304, 305 (Iowa 1988). We find such an abuse of discretion only where the district court's grounds were clearly unreasonable. Id.
The same broad discretion exists in determining whether to decertify a class. 5 James Wm. Moore et al., Moore's Federal Practice § 23.04, at 23-28 to 23-29 (3d ed.2002) (citing In re Int'l House of Pancakes Franchise Litig., 536 F.2d 261, 263 (8th Cir.1976)). See also Iowa R. Civ P. 1.265(1) (providing that in amending the certification order, the court may (1) establish subclasses, (2) eliminate from the class any class member who was included in the class as certified, (3) provide for an adjudication limited to certain claims or issues, (4) change the relief sought, or (5) make any other appropriate change in the order).
IV. Applicable Law.
Iowa Rules of Civil Procedure 1.261 to 1.263, the rules regarding class actions, closely resemble Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 23. Compare, e.g., Fed.R.Civ.P. 23(b)(3), with Iowa R. Civ. P. 1.263(e ), (h)(k). Therefore, we may rely on federal authorities construing similar provisions of Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 23. Vignaroli v. Blue Cross of Iowa, 360 N.W.2d 741, 743 (Iowa 1985).
Iowa Rule of Civil Procedure 1.261 permits the commencement of a class action if there is a question of law or fact common to a class of persons so numerous that *45 joinder of all persons is impracticable. Iowa R. Civ. P. 1.261. The district court may certify an action as a class action if it finds:
a. The requirements of rule 1.261 [numerosity and commonality] have been satisfied.
b. A class action should be permitted for the fair and efficient adjudication of the controversy.
c. The representative parties fairly and adequately will protect the interests of the class.
Iowa R. Civ. P. 1.262(2).
The plaintiff has the burden of establishing that a purported class of plaintiffs meets the prerequisites. Vignaroli, 360 N.W.2d at 744. A failure of proof on any one of the prerequisites is fatal to class certification. City of Dubuque v. Iowa Trust, 519 N.W.2d 786, 791 (Iowa 1994).
Rule 1.263(1) sets forth a number of criteria the district court should consider in determining whether the prerequisite of rule 1.262(2)(b) (the class action should be permitted for the fair and efficient adjudication of the controversy) has been met. The criteria center on two broad considerations: "achieving judicial economy by encouraging class litigation while preserving, as much as possible, the rights of litigantsboth those presently in court and those who are only potential litigants." Vignaroli, 360 N.W.2d at 744. The rule does not require the district court to assign weight to any of the criteria listed, "further evidencing an intent to grant considerable discretion to the trial court." Id. Nor does the rule require the court to make written findings as to each factor under rule 1.263(1). City of Dubuque, 519 N.W.2d at 793. Rather the rule merely requires the court to weigh and consider the factors and come to a reasoned conclusion as to whether a class action should be permitted for a fair adjudication of the controversy. Id.
One of the criteria in rule 1.263(1) is that "common questions of law or fact predominate over any questions affecting only individual members." Iowa R. Civ. P. 1.263(1)(e). It is this criterion that is primarily at issue in this case. Inherent in the court's inquiry into this issue
is the recognition [that] the class action device is appropriate only where class members have common complaints that can be presented by designated representatives in the unified proceeding. The question as to whether common issues of fact or law predominate over those affecting only individuals is a fairly complex one.
Vignaroli, 360 N.W.2d at 744.
The individual claims need not be carbon copies of each other. Id. at 745. If a "common nucleus of operative facts" is present, a class action can be brought even without a "complete identity of facts relating to all class members." Id. (quoting 7A C. Wright & A. Miller, Federal Practice and Procedure § 1778, at 53-54 (1972)). "`Predominate' should not be automatically equated with `determinative' or `significant.' " Id. "A claim will meet the predominance requirement when there exists generalized evidence which proves or disproves an element on a simultaneous, class-wide basis, since such proof obviates the need to examine each class member's individual position." Cope v. Metro. Life Ins. Co., 82 Ohio St.3d 426, 696 N.E.2d 1001, 1004 (1998) (citation omitted).
Certification of a class action does not depend on a determination of whether the plaintiffs will ultimately prevail on the merits. Vignaroli, 360 N.W.2d at 745. Rather, it depends on whether or not the requirements of the rule governing *46 class actions are met. Id. "The appropriate inquiry is not the strength of each class member's personal claim, but rather, whether they, as a class, have common complaints." Martin v. Amana Refrigeration, Inc., 435 N.W.2d 364, 367 (Iowa 1989). For this reason, the court does not conduct a preliminary inquiry into the merits of a suit in a certification hearing. Id. However, "that is not to say that the court may not require sufficient information to form a reasonable judgment in deciding whether to certify a class action." Id. at 367-68; see also Cohn v. Mass. Mut. Life Ins. Co., 189 F.R.D. 209, 212 (D.Conn. 1999) ("Because `the class determination generally involves considerations that are enmeshed in the factual and legal issues comprising the plaintiff's cause of action,' the Rule 23 analysis often requires the court `to probe behind the pleadings before coming to rest on the certification question.' " (Citations omitted.)); In re Jackson Nat'l Life Ins. Co. Premium Litig., 183 F.R.D. 217, 219 (W.D.Mich.1998) ("Maintainability may be determined by the court on the basis of the pleadings, if sufficient facts are set forth, but ordinarily the determination should be predicated on more information than the pleadings will provide." (Citation omitted.)); Kramersmeier v. R.G. Dickinson & Co., 440 N.W.2d 873, 877 (Iowa 1989) ("[A] preliminary inquiry into the legal and factual sufficiency of the plaintiffs' claim is appropriate inasmuch as they seek to represent the interests of the entire class.")
In particular, the question of predominance necessitates a "close look" at "the difficulties likely to be encountered in the management of a class action." Rothwell v. Chubb Life Ins. Co. of Am., 191 F.R.D. 25, 28-29 (D.N.H.1998) (quoting Amchem Prods., Inc. v. Windsor, 521 U.S. 591, 614-17, 117 S.Ct. 2231, 2246, 138 L.Ed.2d 689, 707-09 (1997)). Moreover, "[t]he duty of the trial court to ensure compliance with Rule 23(a) continues after certification of the class, and the court may decertify the class after the initial certification if appropriate." In re Hartford Sales Practices Litig., 192 F.R.D. 592, 602 (D.Minn.1999). See also Roby v. St. Louis Southwestern Ry., 775 F.2d 959, 963 (8th Cir.1985) (holding that district court did not abuse its discretion in decertifying class following trial on the merits).
V. Class Certification of "Vanishing Premium" Cases, Generally.
Federal courts have addressed the issue of class certification in "vanishing premium" cases over the past several years. An examination of these cases and the general trend in the federal (and, to a certain extent, state) courts give us a general framework from which to begin our analysis of the issue before us.
A "vanishing premium" policy
is one where, after a certain number of premium payments, the policy itself generates sufficient income through dividends and interest to pay any additional premiums due. In other words, premiums paid in the initial years of a policy are supposed to generate sufficient value to pay all future premiums due in later years, so that future premiums, in essence, "vanish." The assumption that premiums will "vanish" depends on, among other factors, mortality experience, expenses, dividends, and associated interest rates. A change in any of these variables can affect the date by which premiums will "vanish."
Parkhill v. Minn. Mut. Life Ins. Co., 188 F.R.D. 332, 335 n. 2 (D.Minn.1999). These types of policies became popular in the early 1980s, when interest rates hit record highs. See generally Daniel R. Fischel and Robert S. Stillman, The Law and Economics of Vanishing Premium Life Insurance, *47 22 Del. J. Corp. L. 1, 3-8 (1997) (explaining the economics of the vanishing premium problem).
As one writer indicates, plaintiffs have generally been unsuccessful in certification motions involving vanishing premium cases based primarily on the issue of predominance of common issues to individual ones. See generally James R. Carroll, Recent Developments in "Vanishing Premium," SF81 ALI-ABA 1 (2001) (collecting cases) [hereinafter "Carroll"]. Carroll cites three cases that "have established a body of precedent that is almost always followed in the adjudication of motions to certify class actions." Id. at 2. They include Cohn, 189 F.R.D. at 211, 218 (class certification denied as to claims for breach of contract, negligence, fraud, negligent misrepresentation, unjust enrichment and violations of the Connecticut unfair trade practices statute); Parkhill, 188 F.R.D. at 340-45 (class certification denied as to claims for breach of contract and violations of Minnesota consumer protection statutes); and Jackson National, 183 F.R.D. at 219, 220-23 (class action certification denied as to claims for fraud, negligent supervision, breach of contract, unjust enrichment and statutory violations). In each of these cases the court found that the claims all required case-specific individualized showings of the alleged misrepresentations of the agent and the alleged reasonable reliance of the policyholder. See Cohn, 189 F.R.D. at 218; Parkhill, 188 F.R.D. at 342-45; Jackson Nat'l, 183 F.R.D. at 220-23.
In Cohn, the plaintiffs asserted the predominance requirement was met because
the written illustrations produced by Connecticut Mutual and distributed to the company's network of agents, or printed by the agents themselves using software provided by the company, were identical in all material respects in each of the transactions at issue.... [A]s a result of Connecticut Mutual's centralized training program, the sales presentations used by the sales people in each transaction were uniformly misleading. The evidence concerning these allegedly uniform illustrations and sales presentations, the underlying training programs, and the state of mind of Connecticut Mutual in orchestrating the alleged scheme, and the legal determinations that will be based on this body of evidence,... constitute the core of the controversy regarding each class member.
Cohn, 189 F.R.D. at 212.
Rejecting the contention that the predominance requirement was met, the court concluded:
[T]he predominance requirement is not satisfied. Though there are issues common to the members of the proposed class, including in particular the actions and state of mind of Connecticut Mutual in pursuing the vanishing premium marketing strategy, these common questions are overshadowed by individualized issues such as the nature of the oral representations or disclosures made by the agent or broker at the point of sale, the nature of any questions asked by the consumer, the content of any written illustrations or disclosures given to the consumer, the degree of care exercised by the consumer in reviewing any written illustrations and the policy instrument, the portions of the offer that were attractive to the consumer, the degree of the consumer's financial sophistication and his or her understanding of the product. These individualized issues, which are essential to the determination of the claims of each class member, predominate over questions common to the class.
Id. at 218.
In Jackson National, the court noted the following relevant facts:
*48 Jackson National did not generally communicate directly with prospective consumers or policyholders. Communications were made primarily by independent insurance brokers; brokers who were not subject to and did not follow uniform policies regarding distribution of policy illustrations....
Neither were brokers required to follow uniform sales scripts.... [T]his freedom led to great variance in representations made by brokers; some explaining away and others even exacerbating any misleading tendencies the policy illustrations may have had.
Jackson Nat'l, 183 F.R.D. at 221. The court concluded that a "determination of whether and which illustrations were given to class members, and of the nature of oral representations made to them at the point of sale, ... are matters requiring individualized fact development." Id. In addition, "the materiality of the allegedly misleading illustrations and plaintiffs' reliance on them" were "fact issues requiring individualized treatment." Id.
Other federal courts have reached similar conclusions. See, e.g., In re LifeUSA Holding Inc., 242 F.3d 136, 145-48 (3d Cir.2001) (class certified by district court based on pre-sale actions of LifeUSA was an abuse of discretion because commonality, predominance, and superiority requirements were not met); Keyes v. Guardian Life Ins. of Am., 194 F.R.D. 253, 257 (S.D.Miss.2000) (class certification of action alleging fraud in the sale of "vanishing premium" policies denied because facts did not support finding "that defendant's policies were sold in a sufficiently uniform manner so as to justify a finding that common issues predominate"); Rothwell, 191 F.R.D. at 30-31 (motion to certify "vanishing premium" subclass denied where "even if plaintiffs were able to prove at trial that Chubb trained its agents to use the policy illustrations in a misleading manner, it still would not eliminate the need for a `mini-trial' on each class member's claim to determine the nature of the representations that were made in that case" and resolution of fraud-based claims would require proof "both that Chubb's agents made misrepresentations and that the individual class members reasonably relied on those representations in purchasing their insurance policies").
Against this backdrop, we proceed to our analysis and our determination of the merits.
VI. Analysis.
We first address the plaintiffs' contention that the district court "impermissibly made factual determinations concerning the conflicting evidence presented by plaintiffs and defendants in connection with the decertification proceedings." We note the district court conceded that it could not inquire into the merits of the case in determining whether to grant certification. However, we agree with the district court this principle is not absolute. In reaching a decision on a motion for class certification, the court is not limited to a review of the pleadings. To the contrary, where the issues are not
plain enough from the pleadings to determine whether the interests of the absent parties are fairly encompassed within the named plaintiff's claim ... it may be necessary for the court to probe behind the pleadings before coming to rest on the certification question. Even after a certification order is entered, the judge remains free to modify it in light of subsequent developments in the litigation.
Gen. Tel. Co. of S.W. v. Falcon, 457 U.S. 147, 160, 102 S.Ct. 2364, 2372, 72 L.Ed.2d 740, 752 (1982) (emphasis added).
*49 Given the vast amount of documents produced following the certification order and the depositions taken, we think it was proper for the district court to probe behind the pleadings on the issue of predominance. We conclude therefore that rather than making impermissible findings on the merits the district court simply examined the vast amount of evidence that was available to determine this issue.
Certain evidence surrounding plaintiffs' purchase of insurance from Farm Bureau supports the district court's conclusion that plaintiffs' allegations remained merely speculative after many months of discovery. For example, the district court pointed to the fact that the plaintiffs could not recall their agent ever showing them an illustration in connection with the life insurance sale. As the district court explained, this fact undermines the plaintiffs' allegation that "the inflated and unrealistic performance models (based on `teaser' interest rates) employed within the policy illustrations reveal company-wide deception." Moreover, the court noted that the plaintiffs produced no evidence that the agents uniformly employed said illustrations. As the district court noted, without proof of uniform deception, individual questions of fact and law predominate the common. Additionally, the record shows that Rita cashed in her $2,000 life insurance policy four years before she claimed Merrill Perry had persuaded her to do so.
A. Breach of contract. As to this claim, the district court concluded individual questions of fact and law predominate the questions common to the class:
As to plaintiffs' claim for breach of contract (Count II), because there is no evidence of company wide deception or that the agents uniformly employed the illustrations in the sales calls, the issue of whether the illustrations became part of the insurance contract becomes a question individualized for each putative plaintiff.
The plaintiffs contend that this ruling is incorrect because the plaintiffs' breach of contract claim is predicated neither on the existence of "company wide deception" nor the use of "illustrations in sales calls [or] whether the illustrations become part of the insurance contract." Rather, the plaintiffs contend, their breach of contract claim is based solely on the issue of whether the defendants knowingly created the "reasonable expectation" in connection with the policies purchased by the plaintiffs and the class that premiums would "vanish" and/or the policy would be "fully paid up" and/or that no additional costs would be incurred in excess of the specified number or amount of payments or years. The plaintiffs complain that although they discussed their reasonable expectations theory in their resistance to the defendants' motion to decertify the class, the district court failed to discuss it.
Farm Bureau counters by noting that from the beginning the plaintiffs have focused on the common course of deception pursued by Farm Bureau against all policyholders rather than on the expectations of the policyholders themselves. The reasonable expectations theory, Farm Bureau asserts, was first raised in the plaintiffs' resistance to the motion to decertify. (Actually the record shows the plaintiffs first raised the issue in its reply to Farm Bureau's resistance to the plaintiffs' motion to certify.)
According to Farm Bureau, the shift in theory resulted because the plaintiffs were forced to create some sort of argument in support of their breach of contract claims, particularly after the district court expressed at the first hearing reservations about whether claims which incorporated the illustrationsall of which bore written *50 disclaimerscould really support a finding against Farm Bureau.
Additionally, Farm Bureau contends the doctrine of reasonable expectations simply does not apply in this case.
We too have serious doubt that the doctrine of reasonable expectations applies in these circumstances. We have applied the doctrine to insurance coverage cases
to avoid the frustration of an insured's expectations notwithstanding policy language that appears to negate coverage. It is a narrow doctrine that is primarily employed when the insurance coverage provided eviscerates terms explicitly agreed to or is manifestly inconsistent with the purpose of the transaction for which the insurance was purchased.
Monroe County v. Int'l Ins. Co., 609 N.W.2d 522, 526 (Iowa 2000) (emphasis added).
The doctrine is inapplicable if
(1) an ordinary layperson would not misunderstand the policy's coverage as to this occurrence, and (2) there were no other circumstances attributable to the insurer at the time the policy was negotiated and issued that would foster coverage expectations. Such circumstances may be shown if the policy exclusion: (a) is bizarre or oppressive, (b) eviscerates terms explicitly agreed to, or (c) eliminates the dominant purpose of the transaction.
Zaragoza v. West Bend Mut. Ins. Co., 549 N.W.2d 510, 515 (Iowa 1996) (citations omitted) (emphasis added). The doctrine applies only to representations made by the insurer at the time of policy negotiation and issuance. Id. Additionally, this requirement emphasizes the reliance interest upon which the doctrine is founded. Id. at 516.
Here the issue is not whether insurance coverage exists under the policy. Rather, the issue the plaintiffs are raising relates to the premium and dividend provisions of the policy. We hesitate to expand the doctrine to this situation, where coverage under the policy provisions is not in issue.
We agree with Farm Bureau that even were we to apply the doctrine of reasonable expectations outside the realm of coverage cases, there was no evidence that that the wording of the policies was bizarre or oppressive, or that there was an agreement to a term which is eviscerated by the policies, or that the dominant purpose of the policiesto provide monetary relief to the beneficiary of the deceased insuredwas somehow eliminated.
Moreover, even if the doctrine were to apply, the plaintiffs face an insurmountable reliance issue. The party asserting the doctrine of reasonable expectations must show not only the expectations, but also that they were relied upon by the insurance purchaser in deciding to buy the policy. Id. The reliance showing requires an inquiry into each individual class members' experience in purchasing insurance, as we will discuss further in the context of the plaintiffs' negligent misrepresentation, common law fraud, and fraudulent inducement claims. To determine the "reasonable expectations" of any given class member, the individual inquiries surrounding each class members' purchase of insurance would predominate over any common issues.
For all of these reasons, we conclude the district court did not abuse its discretion in concluding that individual questions predominate common questions on this issue.
B. Breach of implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing. Related to their breach of contract claim, the plaintiffs contend Farm Bureau breached its *51 implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing when it failed to allocate "hundreds of millions of dollars of surplus every year during the class period" to "the ambiguous contracts purchased by the plaintiffs and the class to meet their `limited pay/vanishing premiums' expectations created by" Farm Bureau.
Farm Bureau correctly asserts the "good faith and fair dealing" theory emerged for the first time in the plaintiffs' resistance to the motion to decertify. Farm Bureau also asserts the theory only applies in the context of a bad faith claim for an insurance company's failure to indemnify and defend its insured.
The district court did not specifically address this claim in its decertification ruling. However, as with the reasonable expectations claim, we likewise conclude the implied covenant claim has no application in these circumstances.
"A covenant is implied in an insurance contract that neither party will do anything to injure the rights of the other in receiving the benefits of the agreement." Kooyman v. Farm Bureau Mut. Ins. Co., 315 N.W.2d 30, 33 (Iowa 1982). We have permitted claims against insurance companies for breach of the implied covenant of good faith by recognizing the tort of bad faith in third-party and first-party situations. Johnson v. Farm Bureau Mut. Ins. Co., 533 N.W.2d 203, 207 (Iowa 1995).
The tort of bad faith arises in situations where the insurer has denied benefits or has refused to settle a third-party's claim against the insured within the policy limits. See, e.g., Gibson v. ITT Hartford Ins. Co., 621 N.W.2d 388, 396 (Iowa 2001) ("To establish a first-party bad-faith claim, `a plaintiff must show the absence of a reasonable basis for denying benefits of the policy and defendant's knowledge or reckless disregard of the lack of a reasonable basis for denying the claim.'" (Citations omitted.) (Emphasis added.)); North Iowa State Bank v. Allied Mut. Ins. Co., 471 N.W.2d 824, 828 (Iowa 1991) (noting that the court has recognized "a bad-faith cause of action in an insurer's representation of an insured in a third-party liability claim," and that "an insurer may be responsible for the tort of bad faith in first-party situations in which the dispute involves the insured's right to recover under the policy").
The plaintiffs have neither alleged in their petition nor in subsequent filings that they are relying on bad faith. Furthermore, the tort of bad faith simply has no application in the circumstances of this case.
C. Breach of fiduciary duty.
The district court did rule on this issue:
Finally, in regard to plaintiffs' claim for breach of fiduciary duty (Count V), plaintiffs have again failed to establish beyond mere speculation that there are common questions of law and fact for the entire class. First, the relationship between insurance sales agents and customer does not, by its very nature, appear to necessarily give rise to a fiduciary relationship. Second, because the relationship between insurance agents and their clients is not necessarily a fiduciary relationship, the determination of whether a fiduciary relationship exists must be based upon the particular facts and circumstances of each individual case. Thus, the individual questions predominate the common questions in regards to plaintiffs' claim of breach of fiduciary relationship.
(Citations omitted.)
The plaintiffs contend this ruling is not supported by the record. They further contend a fiduciary relationship may exist *52 on a class-wide basis where, as here, the company selling the insurance is not just an insurance company, but a genuinely unique organization akin to a family. The plaintiffs cite to Farm Bureau's admission that it owed its customers reasonable duties of disclosure and care, and testimony of Farm Bureau's executive vice president regarding the duties of loyalty, honesty, and integrity owed by Farm Bureau to its customers.
Farm Bureau, not surprisingly, contends the district court was correct in its ruling on this issue. For reasons that follow, we agree.
A fiduciary relationship exists between two persons "when one of them is under a duty to act for or to give advice for the benefit of another upon matters within the scope of the relation." Kurth v. Van Horn, 380 N.W.2d 693, 695 (Iowa 1986) (quoting Restatement (Second) of Torts § 874 comment a, at 300 (1979)). Some relationships, such as those between an attorney and client, guardian and ward, principal and agent, and executor and heir, "necessarily give rise to a fiduciary relationship." Id. at 696.
Indicia of a fiduciary relationship include
the acting of one person for another; the having and the exercising of influence over one person by another; the reposing of confidence by one person in another; the dominance of one person by another; the inequality of the parties; and the dependence of one person upon another.
Id. (citation omitted). "Because the circumstances giving rise to a fiduciary duty are so diverse, any such relationship must be evaluated on the facts and circumstances of each individual case." Id.
In Rothwell, a vanishing premium case, the plaintiffs claimed the defendant insurance company and its agents breached their fiduciary duty "by encouraging plaintiffs to replace their preexisting policies when it was not beneficial to their interests." 191 F.R.D. at 32. The court denied class certification, explaining the fiduciary duty claim as follows:
In order to succeed with [the breach of fiduciary duty] claim, each plaintiff would need to prove: (1) the existence of a fiduciary relationship; and (2) that the policy replacement was not beneficial to his or her interests. Both showings, however, necessitate individualized inquiries that render certification inappropriate.
Determining whether Chubb owed a fiduciary duty to each plaintiff would require a fact-intensive inquiry into the nature of the relationship between policyholder and agent.
Id. (citations omitted); see also Kaser v. Swann, 141 F.R.D. 337, 341 (M.D.Fla. 1991) ("To show the existence of a fiduciary relationship the members of the class would have to prove that an exchange of trust and confidence occurred between each plaintiff and the [defendant]. This would require testimony from every [plaintiff] and, as such makes this case unsuited for class certification.")
Because the existence of a fiduciary relationship here depends on the facts and circumstances of each individual case, we conclude the district court did not abuse its discretion in concluding that individual questions predominate common questions on this issue.
D. Negligent misrepresentation, common law fraud, and fraudulent inducement. As to these claims, the district court concluded:
In regard to the plaintiffs' claims for negligent misrepresentation, fraud, and fraudulent inducement (Counts I, III, *53 IV), questions of justifiable reliance become unique to each putative plaintiff. The fact issue of what individual agents may have represented to putative plaintiffs predominate questions common to the class. In other words, the true focus appears to be placed upon the representations made by individual agents rather than the representations (e.g., through sales material and agent training) made by Farm Bureau as a whole. Further, without some evidence beyond mere speculation that Farm Bureau engaged in a uniform practice of misrepresentations or omissions, this Court does not believe the entire class is entitled to a presumption of reliance.
(Citations omitted.)
The plaintiffs challenge the district court's conclusion that "questions of justifiable reliance become unique to each putative plaintiff" and that "what individual agents may have represented to putative plaintiffs predominate questions common to the class." In support of their challenge, the plaintiffs make the following argument. Farm Bureau's agents were as much in the dark as the plaintiffs about the company's approval of false and misleading "teaser rates" and "illustration rates" and the substantial probability that such rates might never be paid. Additionally, there is no evidence that Farm Bureau ever advised its agents of these facts. In short, if Farm Bureau failed to disclose these facts to its agents, then its agents could only fail to disclose these same facts in their sales presentations to the plaintiffs and the class. Therefore, individual presentations by agents to plaintiffs and the class are not relevant to the common issues here. Because material omissions are involved, the plaintiffs and the class are entitled to a presumption of reliance.
The plaintiffs' common law fraud, negligent misrepresentation and fraudulent inducement claims have one element in common: justifiable reliance. See McGough v. Gabus, 526 N.W.2d 328, 331 (Iowa 1995) (common law fraud); Barske v. Rockwell Int'l Corp., 514 N.W.2d 917, 924 (Iowa 1994) (negligent misrepresentation); Lamasters v. Springer, 251 Iowa 69, 72, 76, 99 N.W.2d 300, 302, 304 (1959) (fraudulent inducement). The plaintiffs apparently concede this proposition but steadfastly stand on their presumption of reliance theory grounded on material omissions.
Several vanishing premium cases have addressed the presumption of reliance issue. Those that have refused to apply the presumption did so because the evidence failed to establish essentially uniform misrepresentations. See, e.g., Keyes, 194 F.R.D. at 255-57 (plaintiffs alleged that all class members were victims of standardized misrepresentations and omissions when defendant used its software to create the uniform illustrations; court held that presumption of reliance not appropriate where the individual plaintiffs did not receive the same mix of informationsome agents used the illustrations and others did not and there was no standardized sales pitch); Cohn, 189 F.R.D. at 216-17 (plaintiffs asserted defendant's training video discouraged agents from disclosing possibility that dividend rates could decline in the future; court rejected plaintiff's presumption of reliance argument because there was no evidence that all the agents saw the video and then made uniformly deceptive sales presentations); Jackson Nat'l, 183 F.R.D. at 221 (plaintiffs asserted vanishing premium illustrations "premised on unsupported and unsustainable interest crediting rate assumptions" were centrally prepared in the home office and distributed to brokers; court held presumption of reliance not appropriate where brokers were not subject to and did not follow uniform policies regarding distribution of *54 policy illustrations and brokers were not required to follow uniform scripts; therefore information contained in the illustrations was conveyed to consumers, if at all, in the context of varying oral representations). See also Cope, 696 N.E.2d at 1004 ("[A]lthough having some common core, a fraud case may be unsuited for treatment of a class action if there was material variation in the representations made or in the kinds or degrees of reliance by the person to whom they were addressed." (quoting 1966 Advisory Committee Notes to Fed.R.Civ.P. 23(b)(3)) (emphasis added)).
The plaintiffs have cited several vanishing premium cases that have applied a presumption of reliance where management allegedly made material nondisclosures. See, e.g., In re Great S. Life Ins. Co. Sales Practices Litig., 192 F.R.D. 212, 219-20 (N.D.Tex.2000); Varacallo v. Mass. Mut. Life Ins. Co., 332 N.J.Super. 31, 752 A.2d 807, 814-18 (App.Div.2000). However, as one court in a vanishing premium case has observed on this issue, the plaintiffs here have cited no case in which reliance was presumed when individual plaintiffs did not necessarily receive the same mix of information. See Keyes, 194 F.R.D. at 257 n. 5; cf. Kramersmeier, 440 N.W.2d at 878-79 (district court ruling granting class action certification affirmed where bond purchasers alleged losses they suffered were attributable to material misrepresentations contained in the prospectus published in connection with the bond offering, and a failure to disclose certain material facts; common questions of law and fact concerning "whether the prospectus, as the common source of" information provided by defendant, "misled the plaintiffs and other bond purchasers in alleged violation of statutory and common law").
The complaint files here reveal the individualized nature of the sales presentations by Farm Bureau agents. For example, one client complained he purchased a second policy based on an agent's representation that he was offering a "special policy" to a "select group." Another agent wrote "no premiums due" on a client's policy sheet, and sent a note congratulating the client on the purchase and stating no premiums were due. Even the facts surrounding plaintiffs' purchase of insurance reveals the individualized nature of their claimsnone of them recall receiving an illustration from their agent, Merrill Perry, before their purchase of insurance. In addition, Farm Bureau did not require agents to use materials provided by Farm Bureau for use in making sales. Therefore even assuming the nondisclosures as the plaintiffs allege, there is simply no evidence that the agents made uniform presentations, used scripts provided by Farm Bureau, and used the illustrations in all cases. Presumption of reliance would be inappropriate here because common facts, if any, do not predominate over individual facts that must be developed to determine the reliance issue.
We conclude the district court did not abuse its discretion when it (1) refused to apply a presumption of reliance to the fraud claims and (2) concluded that individual questions predominate common questions on this issue.
The district court summed up its reasons for finding that individual questions of law and fact predominate common questions this way:
In reaching this conclusion, this court is abundantly aware of its prohibition against examining the merits of plaintiffs' claims. However, after nearly a full year of discovery, plaintiffs cannot direct this court to any piece of evidence to support their theory of uniform deception. Without more than mere speculation, this court believes that a trial as a class action would spend more time *55 delving into individual questions of fact (e.g. what individual agents represented to the putative plaintiffs, whether the agents employed illustrations in their sales meetings with putative plaintiffs, whether putative plaintiffs reasonably relied upon misrepresentations) than examining questions common to the entire class.
We agree with this assessment and therefore conclude the district court did not abuse its discretion when it granted Farm Bureau's motion to decertify the class.
VII. Disposition.
Because we find no abuse of discretion in the district court's decertification of the class action, we affirm.
AFFIRMED.

=== CASE 9738611 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:58:18.906203+00 ===

*871KINGSLEY, J.—I dissent.
I concur wholeheartedly with everything in the majority opinion except for one matter; unfortunately that partial disagreement necessitates, in my judgment, a reversal of the action of the trial court.
My dissent is directed to the holding that the complaint need not identify even the class or kind of “material" with which defendant is alleged to have dealt. Section 311 subdivision (a) is a part of Chapter 7.5 of the Penal Code, added by Chapter 2147 of the 1961 Statutes. The first section of that chapter, section 311, provides a set of definitions of the terms used in the subsequent sections, including section 311 subdivision (a). It follows that the allegation in the complaint that defendant dealt with “material” means that he dealt with material as that word is defined in section 311, subdivision (b). But when we read that subdivision into the complaint, we find that defendant is charged with conduct with reference to an obscene book, or magazine, or newspaper, or other printed or written material, or a picture, or a drawing or a photograph, or a motion picture, etc., etc. But it is a well settled rule of criminal pleading that, although the several alternatives set out in a statute may properly be pleaded in the conjunctive, they may not (with an exception not here applicable) be pleaded in the disjunctive. (People v. Tomlinson (1868) 35 Cal. 503; People v. Goodspeed (1948) 85 Cal.App. 2d Supp. 821 [192 P.2d 130]; C.J.S., Indictments and Informations, § 101.) To this much information, defendant was entitled, even under the most liberal rules of pleading; a complaint failing in this particular should not have been allowed to stand.
A petition for a rehearing was denied June 7, 1967. Kingsley, J., was of the opinion that the petition should be granted. Appellant’s petition for a hearing by the Supreme Court was denied Jufy 5. 1967. Peters, J., Tobriner, J., and Mosk, J., were of the opinion that the petition should be granted.

=== CASE 9738612 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:58:19.169074+00 ===

PAÚLSON, Justice.
The appellant, Daniel N. Blomquist [“Blomquist”], brought this appeal from a judgment of the Grand Forks County District Court denying his petition for a writ of mandamus. The district court ruled that Blomquist failed to exhaust his administrative remedies in connection with his “dismissal” from the City of Grand Forks Police Department and that, as a result of this failure to seek an administrative remedy, mandamus could not properly be issued. For reasons set forth in the opinion, we find that the trial court abused its discretion in denying the petition for writ of mandamus. We reverse and remand to the district court with instructions that Blomquist be permitted an evidentiary hearing to determine whether his “resignation” was voluntary or involuntary, and, if involuntary, whether or not proper procedures were followed in bringing about his dismissal. On remand, we. order that Honorable Lawrence A. Le-clerc, a district judge of the East Central Judicial District, preside as trial judge.
Because of the fact that no evidentiary hearing was held in this matter, the facts of this case are at times confusing, conflicting, and incomplete.
On the evening of March 7, 1978, Blom-quist was off duty and traveling in his van with two other off-duty police officers. They were proceeding in a westerly direction on U. S. Highway No. 2 in Grand Forks when they picked up a hitchhiker who indicated a desire to travel in that direction. From conversation with the hitchhiker, Blomquist discovered that the hitchhiker was out on bail for a theft offense. Conversation soon turned to the subject of drugs and Blomquist suspected that the hitchhiker was involved in narcotics trafficking. Blomquist told the hitchhiker that he had 500 pounds of marijuana for sale.
The following morning, March 8, 1978, Blomquist related the information about his conversation of the previous evening with the hitchhiker to a narcotics agent in Grand Forks. Blomquist claims that his intention was to assist the narcotics agent in setting up a “controlled sale” of marijuana. The same morning, however, the hitchhiker had called his attorney and told the attorney about the conversation with the three men in the van on the previous evening. On his attorney’s advice, the hitchhiker went to the sheriff’s department in Grand Forks and agreed to cooperate in setting up a “controlled buy” from the three individuals who had been in the van. Dale Maixner, a narcotics agent in Grand Forks, informed Blomquist that the hitchhiker was working with the police in an attempt to make a controlled purchase from, the men who had been in the van. No such sale or purchase was ever completed because of the fact that the police were involved with both the seller and buyer in the same proposed transaction.'
On March 14, 1978, Blomquist was called into the office of Chief of Police James Clague [“Clague”] and orally reprimanded for his unauthorized activities. The following day, Blomquist was again orally reprimanded for his activities, this time by a Captain Hintz of the Grand Forks Police Department.
*237On March 16, 1978, Blomquist was again called into Clague’s office. Clague informed Blomquist that Blomquist had committed a felony by attempting to deliver a controlled substance. According to Blom-quist’s account, he was told to resign or else he would be fired and charges would be pressed against him. He asked for an opportunity to call Truman Sorenson of the Teamsters Union, in order to discuss the matter with him. The Teamsters Union represents employees of all the law enforcement agencies in Grand Forks. Clague told Sorenson of the felony charges against Blomquist and Sorenson advised Blomquist to resign. Blomquist then submitted his resignation by letter dated March 16, 1978. The létter was typed by Clague’s secretary in his office. Clague accepted Blomquist’s “resignation” the same day.
For the next few weeks Blomquist was upset about losing his job and believed that there was nothing he could do about it because he resigned rather than be fired. After some time he discovered that the circumstances surrounding his resignation could be considered a dismissal. On April 12, 1978, he requested a hearing on his “dismissal” before the Grand Forks City Civil Service Commission [“Commission”]. This was 27 days after he had “resigned” in Chief Clague’s office.
The matter of Blomquist’s request for a hearing came before the Commission for decision on April 27, 1978, but was postponed until June 15, 1978, in order that Blomquist’s attorney could appear. On June 15, Blomquist’s request for a hearing was denied and Blomquist was notified of this by letter dated June 27, 1978.
Blomquist then brought an application for a writ of mandamus dated July 26,1978, and filed an affidavit in support thereof dated July 28, 1978. For some reason, the application for a writ of mandamus was never served until April 3,1979, although it appears that the city attorney of Grand Forks signed an admission of service dated July 27, 1978. Blomquist’s account of this matter is that a hearing on the application for the writ of mandamus was scheduled for August 9,1978, which hearing had to be postponed, however, because City Attorney F. John Marshall suffered a heart attack earlier on that day. In oral argument, Marshall conceded that he had had a heart attack , on August 9, 1978, but that he had only missed 21 days of work thereafter. That does not explain a delay of eight months in scheduling anew the hearing on the application for a writ of mandamus.
On December 11, 1978, Blomquist filed a tort action against the city. That tort action is relevant on this appeal only because it added to the confusion already existing in the case. The clerk of Grand Forks County District Court filed both the tort action and the mandamus action in the same file because the captions were similar and because no express instructions as to filing were received from Blomquist’s counsel. The commingling in one file of the papers in the two actions caused considerable problems with various motions that were made, especially with demands for change of judge. Finally the presiding judge took control of the matter, consolidated the two cases, and decided that he would hear the cases. The presiding judge’s decision to hear these cases was approved by this court, based on representations made to this court in a letter from the presiding judge of the district. That letter did not clarify the fact that, at that time, the two separate actions were filed as though they were one action.
The application for a writ of mandamus was finally heard on August 27, 1979, and was denied by the trial judge without an evidentiary hearing being held.
This court said in Fargo Ed. Ass’n v. Paulsen, 239 N.W.2d 842, 849 (N.D.1976), that it will not overturn a trial court’s denial of a writ of mandamus unless there is a finding that the court has abused its discretion. Section 32-34-06, N.D.C.C., provides for a jury determination if an essential question of fact is presented in the application for a writ of mandamus and disputed in the answer. Section 32-34-06, N.D.C.C., indicates that disputed questions of fact should be resolved before the court proceeds to rule on the legal issues underly*238ing the application for a writ of mandamus. In the instant case, the trial court found that the termination of Blomquist’s employment was a resignation and not a dismissal and that even if it was a dismissal, Blom-. quist failed to file a timely request for a hearing. On that logic, the trial court based its conclusion that Blomquist was not entitled to mandamus relief because he failed to exhaust his administrative remedies. The trial court, however, based its conclusions on findings of fact made without ever having held an evidentiary hearing. Under the facts of this case, an evi-dentiary hearing was required and we hold that it was an abuse of discretion not to provide one.1
The first question which must be answered is whether or not Blomquist’s “resignation” was in reality a dismissal. A resignation obtained by threat of criminal prosecution is obtained by duress and, therefore, invalid. Hassett v. Barnes, 11 A.D.2d 1089, 206 N.Y.S.2d 606, 607 (1960). According to Blomquist, he was threatened with prosecution for attempting to deliver a controlled substance. Chief Clague did not address this issue in the affidavit which he submitted, but counsel for Clague argues that the evidence of Blomquist’s alleged criminal wrongdoing was to be referred to the state’s attorney, regardless of whether or not a resignation was obtained. The trial judge should have held an evidentiary, hearing to determine whether or not Blom-quist’s resignation was obtained through threats of criminal prosecution. Such a question is a question of fact and its resolution is required before a decision can be rendered on the issues of law presented in' the application for a writ of. mandamus.
Whether the termination of Blom-quist’s employment was-a resignation or a dismissal depends on whether it was voluntary. Other courts have been faced with the same issue. Those courts have consistently held that a resignation which is involuntary is tantamount to a dismissal, discharge, or layoff. See Reynolds v. City of Los Angeles, 43 Cal.App.3d 738, 118 Cal.Rptr. 59 (1974) [resignation of police officer obtained by fraud]; Temple v. Horrall, 92 Cal.App.2d 177, 206 P.2d 909 (1949) [resignation of police officer obtained by coercion]; Moreno v. Cairns, 20 Cal.2d 531, 127 P.2d 914 (1942) [assistant fire chief forced to resign under duress]; Cobac v. Davis, 62 N.J.Super. 148,162 A.2d 140 (1960) [alcoholic beverage control inspector forced to resign under duress]. The California Court, in Moreno, supra 127 P.2d at 916, stated:
“Such [involuntary] resignations are akin to lay offs, suspensions, or discharges by virtue of the element of coercion and bear only a formal resemblance to voluntary resignations. Whenever a person is severed from his employment by coercion the severance is effected not by his own will but by the will of a superior. A person who is forced to resign is thus in the position of one who is discharged, not of one who exercises his own will to surrender his employment voluntarily.”
Once it has been determined that a resignation is involuntary and, therefore, tantamount to a dismissal, the analysis should next proceed to the issue of whether or not the dismissal is valid. If it is found that the dismissal is invalid, the discharged employee is entitled to reinstatement. If the dismissal is found to be valid, the question then becomes whether or not the discharged employee failed to exhaust administrative remedies. Courts have held that a civil service employee who has involuntarily resigned must exhaust the administrative remedies provided for in cases of dismissal. See e. g., Moreno, supra; and Reynolds, supra. Counsel for the city contends that Blomquist failed to exhaust his administrative remedies because he failed to comply with § 12(e) of the Grand Forks City Code, which provides as follows:
*239“The appointing authority may, for misconduct, inefficiency, or other just cause, dismiss any employee at any time, effective immediately, without pay, with the approval of the city attorney as to legality. The employee being dismissed shall be furnished a written statement of the reasons for the discharge, and a copy shall be filed with the Civil Service Commission.
“An employee wishing to appeal a notice of dismissal must file a written re-. quest for a hearing with the Civil Service Commission within fifteen (15) calendar days of the effective date of the dismissal. After receiving the written notice of appeal the Commission shall hold a hearing within thirty (30) calendar days. If the Commission determines that the dismissal is not warranted, the employee shall be reinstated to his former position with full restitution of salary, seniority status and all other benefits.”
It is undisputed that Blomquist did not request a hearing within fifteen days of his resignation. The resignation was tendered on March 16, 1978, and accepted the same day. His request for a hearing was made twenty-seven days later; on April 12, 1978. It is for this reason that the trial court concluded that Blomquist failed to exhaust his administrative remedies. We disagree.
If it is determined upon remand that the action of the city was not in compliance with the provisions of § 12(e) of the Grand Forks City Code, then the dismissal would also be invalid. There are several reasons for this. Before the city can invoke the fifteen-day limitation of § 12(e), the appointing authority, defined in § 2(7) of the Grand Forks City Code as the mayor of Grand Forks, must discharge Blomquist and the reasons therefor must be furnished to him in writing. The city cannot use the subterfuge of a forced resignation as a means of circumventing its own procedures for dismissal — procedures which have been designed to protect employees in civil service positions from the very type of tactics used here.
It has been argued by counsel for the city that the mayor and the city attorney were informed of Blomquist’s action and that they advised Chief Clague to obtain Blomquist’s resignation. Once again, the lack of an evidentiary hearing in this case clouds the truth-ascertaining process. As part of its fact-finding process, the trial court should have allowed evidence to be presented by both sides which would have indicated the extent of the control the may- or of Grand Forks exercised in bringing about Blomquist’s dismissal. The trial court should then have determined whether or not the Grand Forks City Code would allow the mayor to delegate his authority to discharge a police officer; whether or not that authority can be delegated to the chief of police; and, if so, whether or riot there was a valid delegation of that authority in this case.
Under the facts of this case, Blomquist had no forum in which to vent his grievances. He was entitled to an evidentiary hearing on the questions raised by his application for a writ of mandamus. In the recent case of Fargo Ed. Ass’n v. Paulsen, 239 N.W.2d 842, 844 (N.D.1976), this court said:
“This court has held that the prerequisites to the issuance of a writ of mandamus are that the petitioner must show that he has no plain, speedy, and adequate remedy in the ordinary course of the law and that he has a clear legal right to the performance of the particular act sought to be compelled by the writ.”
At the very least, the district court should have allowed Blomquist to present evidence which showed that he had no other remedy and that he had a clear legal right to reinstatement to his position with the Grand Forks Police Department. Those points were raised in his affidavit in support of the writ but he was never allowed to present evidence to support the contentions in his affidavit.
Finally, Blomquist requests that on remand the Supreme Court should appoint a judge outside the City of Grand Forks. In United Hospital v. Hagen, 285 N.W.2d 586, 589 (N.D.1979), this court held that *240“when there is an allegation of prejudice presented to this court, we favor granting the change of judge” in a situation where the judge would be presiding at the trial on the merits. We believe that, under the facts and circumstances of this particular case, Judge A. C. Bakken should be removed and Judge Lawrence A. Leclerc should preside at the evidentiary hearing on remand. This is in the best interests of the integrity and fairness of the judicial process and does not indicate that we find any substance to the allegations of prejudice against Judge Bakken or of bias in favor of the Grand Forks Police Department.
The judgment is reversed and remanded for proceedings consistent with this opinion and a change of judge is ordered upon remand.
ERICKSTAD; C. J., and SAND and VANDE WALLE, JJ., concur.
. Blomquist’s counsel requested an evidentiary hearing, but such request was summarily denied by the trial judge, even though Blomquist was prepared to go forward with the evidence and produce witnesses (five witnesses were present in court) at the August 27, 1979, hearing on the application for a writ of mandamus.

=== CASE 9738613 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:58:19.174819+00 ===

PEDERSON, Justice,
concurring and dissenting.
Although I concur in much of the statement of law in the majority opinion, to authorize an evidentiary hearing into the merits of this case has to qualify for Ripley’s “Believe it or Not.” I don’t believe that, on its face, there is an adequate application now pending. Judge Leclerc, have fun. I don’t want to spoil it for you by itemizing all of the incredible things I find in the record certified to us by the Clerk of the District Court of Grand Forks County, but I do want to comment on a few of the choicest.
(1)You might wonder if there is one action or two; whether Blomquist or Bloo-mquist is the plaintiff; whether James Cla-gue (individual) and the City of Grand Forks or James Clague (Chief of Police) and C. P. O’Neil (Mayor) are the defendants; and whether service has ever been made in either case as required by Rules 4 and 5, NDRCivP. You will discover, as I did, that after a docket number “'31755” was assigned by the clerk of court to the $50,000 damage suit against James Clague and the City, that Blomquist’s attorney’s secretary typed the same file number, “Civil No. 31755”, on the Notice of Application for a Writ of Mandamus and on the Affidavit of Service by Mail. This is a separate action which should have had a separate file, yet Blomquist now infers that some errors by the clerk and the district court caused all of this mess. You will have to ignore the dates on many documents.
(2) You may be concerned whether the mandamus proceedings were intended to be a “more definite statement” of the complaint that was being sought by Attorney Marshall, or if Blomquist meant the damage-action complaint to show that he did not have a plain, speedy, and adequate remedy in the ordinary course of law. Section 32-34-02, NDCC.
(3) You will be confused by Judge Bak-ken’s proceeding to hear, on March 12,1979, a motion for more definite statement after acknowledging, on March 9, 1979, that he had received a copy of Blomquist’s demand ■ for change of judge.
(4) You will be amazed that Blomquist assumes that you can, by this writ of mandamus, reinstate him as a patrolman on the Grand Forks Police Department. He doesn’t ask for anything else that he might be entitled to.
(5) Finally, you may even find it amusing that a trained police officer would come up with a fantastic new drug enforcement tool called “a controlled sale,” and that a narcotics agent would tip off the target, even if the target is a police officer, in a planned, controlled purchase. On the other hand, it should not strike you as amusing that Blom-quist’s affidavit in support of application for writ of mandamus says that he was afforded the option of resigning “or being fired,” but when his attorneys, having found authorities critical of resignations under threat of criminal prosecution, now argue that Blomquist resigned under a threat of a felony charge.
A couple of interesting cases to read that involve special proceedings and related problems are Hazelton-Moffit Special School Dist. No. 6 v. Ward, 107 N.W.2d 636 (N.D.1961), and Holcomb v. Hamm, 77 N.D. 154, 42 N.W.2d 70, 52 A.L.R.2d 471 (1950).

=== CASE 9738614 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:58:21.918852+00 ===

BEILFUSS, C. J.
Plaintiff Marian D. Reiter was injured when she slipped and fell on the rear walkway of a house owned by defendants Paul and Linda Dyken and located in the Village of Shorewood.
At the time of the accident the house was unoccupied. The Dykens had moved out of the state several months earlier and were in the process of selling their former residence. They entered into a listing contract with third-party defendant Ogden & Company, a local real estate brokerage company, who then in turn listed the *463property with Multiple Listing Service of which it was a member.
Multiple Listing Service (M.L.S.) is an organization of real estate brokers which compiles and distributes information on each of the properties listed individually with its members. Member brokers are then permitted to show any of these properties and, if a sale results, to share in the commission with the original listing broker.
The plaintiff, Marian Reiter, was an employee of Edward A. Purtell & Company, also an M.L.S. realtor, and at the time of the accident was in the process of showing the Dyken home to Anders and Madeline Arnheim, who were prospective purchasers. As she was walking with the Arnheims from the garage to the rear door of the home, she slipped on the snow-covered walkway and fell to the ground. She suffered a fractured right ankle and aggravated a pre-existing back injury as a result of the fall.
On July 18, 1975, the plaintiff and her husband commenced this action against Paul Dyken. They subsequently amended their complaint to include Linda Dyken, his wife, as a defendant. The complaint alleged that the defendants were negligent in failing to remove the snow and ice which had accumulated on the walkways of their premises and in failing to warn persons on the premises that a portion of the walkway from the garage to the house sloped slightly, which fact was concealed by the accumulation of snow and ice. The complaint further alleged that such negligence on the part of the defendants was the proximate cause of plaintiff’s injuries.
The Dykens as defendants impleaded Ogden & Company, alleging in a third-party complaint that a listing contract between Ogden and the defendants was in full force and effect at the time of the accident, that Ogden knew that defendants’ premises was vacant and unoccupied, but that Ogden had failed to take proper pre*464cautions to protect persons invited onto the premises. Defendants demanded judgment for indemnification, or in the alternative, for contribution against Ogden in the event plaintiffs obtained a judgment against them.
Following a trial before a jury, Ogden moved for dismissal on the ground that, as a matter of law, it owed no duty either as to Marian Reiter or the Dykens to remove snow and ice from the back walkway of the premises or to warn persons on the premises of the fact that the walkway sloped. The trial court granted the motion and entered an order to that effect.
The case was then submitted to the jury in the form of a special verdict which included questions as to negligence and cause with respect to the Dykens, Edward A. Purtell & Company and Marian Reiter. Because Purtell & Company was immune from liability under the exclusive remedy provision of the Workers’ Compensation Act, questions as to its negligence were submitted for purposes of comparison only.1
The jury returned a verdict apportioning the causal negligence as follows: Dykens 30 percent; Edward A. Purtell & Company 20 percent; and Marian Reiter 50 percent. The jury awarded Mrs. Reiter $15,000 for personal injuries to date, $16,000 for future personal disability and $28,500 for loss of earning capacity. Her husband was awarded $1,500 for loss of his wife’s services, society and companionship, and medical expenses were fixed by the court at $5,883.
Counsel for the Dykens then moved for judgment dismissing the complaint on its merits on the ground that defendants were not liable because plaintiff’s negligence was found to be greater than their own.
*465Plaintiffs’ counsel moved the court to change the answers to Questions 5 and 6 of the verdict relating to Marian Reiter’s negligence from “Yes” to “No” or, in the alternative, that a new trial be granted because of the trial court’s failure to instruct the jury as to defendants’ duty under the safe-place statute and its inclusion of Edward A. Purtell & Company in the verdict.
The trial court denied plaintiffs’ motions after verdict, but then, in what the court itself described as “a startling fashion,” it granted judgment to the plaintiffs. The trial court arrived at this result by adding together the negligence of both the Dykens and Purtell & Company, and then comparing the total to that of Marian Reiter. It concluded that because her negligence was not greater than the combined negligence of the others, she was entitled to recover. However, the trial court limited plaintiffs’ recovery to 30 percent of the total damages, representing that portion of the causal negligence which had been attributed to the Dykens. Judgment was entered accordingly.
The principal issue raised on this appeal is whether the trial court erred in combining the negligence of the Dykens with that of Purtell & Company for purposes of determining whether plaintiffs were entitled to recover. Other issues regarding the duty owed by the defendants to the plaintiff, the trial court’s dismissal of Ogden from the action, and the amount of damages awarded are also raised but, because of our determination of the principal issue, need not be addressed.
In support of its decision to compare Mrs. Reiter’s negligence with the combined negligence of both the defendants and Purtell & Company in determining whether plaintiffs could recover, the trial court relied upon this court’s decision in Reber v. Hanson, 260 Wis. 632, 51 N.W.2d 505 (1952). That case established the sole exception to the general rule in this state that the negli*466gence of the parties is to be compared individually for purposes of determining whether liability exists.2
Plaintiffs contend that the trial court was correct in combining the negligence of the defendants with that of Mrs. Reiter’s employer under the rationale of the Reber Case, but that, even if this court concludes that Reber does not apply, it should nevertheless affirm the trial court’s decision by modifying its long-standing construction of the comparative negligence statute. We turn first to a consideration of Reber v. Hanson, supra.
Reber involved a wrongful death action brought by the parents of a child who was killed by a truck making deliveries to their family-owned cheese factory. The family lived in the same building out of which they operated their business. Circling the building was a driveway which was used regularly by truckers making deliveries and picking up goods from the factory. The child who was killed was accustomed to playing in the driveway and had often been seen there by. frequenters to the factory. The parents knew their child played in the driveway and asked the truck drivers to look out for him, but did nothing to keep the boy away from the drive when deliveries were being made.
In submitting the case to the jury, the trial court included in the special verdict a question which required that the parents’ contributory negligence be considered as a unit rather than individually. The jury returned a verdict finding the truck driver 25 percent and the parents 75 percent causally negligent. Judgment was granted for the defendant and the parents appealed claiming that the trial court had erred in combining their negligence.
This court affirmed the judgment and upheld the form of the comparative negligence question submitted by the *467trial court. It based its holding upon the fact that “the duty to protect was joint, the opportunity to protect was equal, and as a matter of law neither the obligation nor the breach of it was divisible.” Reber v. Hanson, supra, 260 Wis. at 638. Under these circumstances, the court concluded, the trial court was correct in requiring the jury to consider the negligence of the separate parents as a unit.
In the case at hand the trial court held that the Reber rationale controlled because “the identical act, the failure to shovel the snow was the item of negligent conduct on the part of both the Purtell Company and the Dykens.” This fact, in the trial court’s opinion, justified comparing plaintiff’s negligence with the combined negligence of both the other parties to determine whether recovery should be allowed.
Under Reber, however, more is required than identical acts or omissions before the negligence of separate individuals may be combined for comparison purposes in determining liability. In addition, the duty breached and the opportunity to fulfill that duty must be the same, and neither the obligation nor the breach of it may be divisible. Considered in light of these requirements, this was not a proper case in which to apply Reber.
The respective duties of the defendants and plaintiffs’ employer were different both in nature and degree. The duty owed by the defendants was the common law duty of ordinary care owed by a landowner to anyone who comes upon his property with consent.3 Whatever duty Purtell & Company owed, on the other hand, arose under the safe-place statute. Instead of ordinary care, an employer’s duty under the safe-place statute is to maintain its place of employment in as safe a condition as the na*468ture of the place reasonably permits.4 As the trial court properly instructed the jury, these duties are not the same.
Nor are they indivisible. Because an employer’s duty under the safe-place statute is greater than that of a landowner at common law, it was certainly conceivable for the jury to have apportioned the entire blame for the unsafe condition of the premises to Purtell & Company. The jury could have found that the Dyken home had been maintained in a sufficiently safe condition under the common-law standard of ordinary care, but that it did not meet the higher standard imposed by the safe-place statute. Unlike the parents’ duty to care for and watch over their child which was at issue in Reber, the duties of the defendants and plaintiffs’ employer in this case to maintain the premises in a safe condition were independent and separable. Thus, the Reber exception to the general rule that the negligence of the parties is to be compared individually does not apply.5
Even if a proper basis for combining the negligence of the defendants with plaintiff’s employer did exist, it would have still been improper for the trial court to have done so after the case had already been tried and submitted to the jury on the assumption that the parties would be compared individually. In Mariuzza v. Kenower, supra, the court affirmed the trial court’s denial of a request for combining the negligence of the defendants in part because the request was not timely. The request *469was first made on motions after verdict. Plaintiff had made no objection as to the instructions or form of verdict which required the jury to determine whether or not the several duties of the defendants had been separately breached by either or both of them. Under these circumstances, said the court, plaintiff “was not entitled to change his game plan after the verdict was returned and argue a theory of the case different from that contained in the complaint, instructions and form of verdict.” Id., 68 Wis.2d at 327.
Similarly in this case, once the case was tried and submitted to the jury on one theory of determining liability, it was improper for the trial court to, on its own intia-tive, decide the case on another theory.
Having concluded that the trial court’s reliance upon Reber v. Hanson, supra, was misplaced, we now turn to plaintiffs’ contention that this court should change its longstanding construction of the comparative negligence statute.
In 1931 the legislature enacted sec. 331.045 (now sec. 895.045), Stats., as a limitation upon the common law doctrine of contributory negligence. As it now exists, that section reads as follows:
“895.045 Contributory negligence. Contributory negligence shall not bar recovery in an action by any person or his legal representative to recover damages for negligence resulting in death or injury to person or property, if such negligence was not greater than the negligence of the person against whom recovery is sought, but any damages allowed shall be diminished in the proportion to the amount of negligence attributable to the person recovering.”
Since its enactment, the court has consistently construed this statute as requiring a comparison of the plaintiff’s negligence with that of each individual defendant in order to determine whether a plaintiff is entitled *470to recover. Recovery has been allowed only where the plaintiff’s own negligence was found to be less than or, since 1971, equal to that of the person from whom recovery was sought.6
In Schwenn v. Loraine Hotel Co., 14 Wis.2d 601, 111 N.W.2d 495 (1961), the court expressly stated that this construction was based upon the legislature’s intent in enacting sec. 895.045, Stats. To construe the statute as calling for a comparison between the plaintiff’s negligence and that of the others combined, said the court, would permit a plaintiff to recover from a defendant less negligent than himself. “We cannot believe that the legislature intended such a result.” Id., 14 Wis.2d at 610.7
Subsequent cases have affirmed Schwenn’s holding that sec. 895.045, Stats., provides for the individual comparison of the plaintiff’s negligence with that of each defendant to determine if the plaintiff is entitled to recover. Soczka v. Rechner, 73 Wis.2d 157, 164, 242 N.W.2d 910 (1976); Mariuzza v. Kenower, supra.
Having authoritatively construed a statute, well-established principles of judicial decision-making require that the chosen construction be maintained unless and until the legislature either amends or repeals the statute. As the court stated in Zimmerman v. Wisconsin Electric *471Power Co., 88 Wis.2d 626, 633-34, 157 N.W.2d 648 (1968):
. . Where a law passed by the legislature has been construed by the courts, legislative acquiescence in or refusal to pass a measure that would defeat the courts’ construction is not an equivocal act. The legislature is presumed to know that in absence of its changing the law, the construction put upon it by the courts will remain unchanged; for the principle of the courts’ decision — legislative intent — is a historical fact and, hence, unchanging. Thus, when the legislature acquiesces or refuses to change the law, it has acknowledged that the courts’ interpretation of legislative intent is correct. This being so, however, the courts are henceforth constrained not to alter their construction; having correctly determined legislative intent, they have fulfilled their function.”
Although the presumption of legislative adoption or ratification of a judicial construction of a statute is entitled to less weight when the court’s construction is followed by nearly complete inaction on the part of the legislature with respect to the statute construed,8 this rule does not apply here. The legislature has taken action with respect to sec. 895.045, Stats., as recently as 1971 when it amended that section to permit recovery when the plaintiffs’ negligence is found to be equal to that of the person from whom recovery is sought. If the legislature was in disagreement with the court’s longstanding interpretation of the comparative negligence law as requiring an individual comparison in order to determine liability, it would have been a simple matter to correct the court’s interpretation by adding a few words to the statute.9 Its failure to do so strengthens the presump*472tion that normally attends legislative acquiescence in the judicial construction of a statute. The original construction should stand.
However, this does not end the inquiry. The fact that the legislature, in enacting sec. 895.045, Stats., limited the application of the common-law doctrine of contributory negligence to those cases in which the plaintiff was more at fault than each individual defendant in causing his own injuries does not mean that this court may not further limit that doctrine.
Contributory negligence is a common-law doctrine which was adopted by this court in Chamberlain v. Milwaukee & Mississippi Railroad Co., 7 Wis. 367, 374 (*425, *431) (1858), and Dressler v. Davis, 7 Wis. 449, 452 (*527, *531) (1858). As such it is subject to modification or complete abrogation by the court within the limits set by the legislature. Holytz v. Milwaukee, 17 Wis.2d 26, 39, 115 N.W.2d 618 (1962).
Obviously, in view of the legislature’s enactment of sec. 895.045, Stats., this court is completely without authority to reinstate the contributory negligence bar to recovery in cases in which the plaintiff is less negligent than the defendant. To do so would be directly contrary to the clear language of the statute. But that is not what is at issue here.
Permitting recovery where the plaintiff’s negligence is less than or equal to the combined negligence of all of those whose conduct contributed to the injury would not extend the bar of contributory negligence beyond the limitation contained in sec. 895.045, Stats., but instead would limit it further than sec. 895.045 requires. Thus, the question presented is not whether the court has the *473power to extend the defense of contributory negligence beyond the limitation placed upon it by the legislature, but whether it may limit the application of that doctrine further than the legislature has required.
We believe it can.
Both the language and history of sec. 895.045, Stats., indicate an intent on the part of the legislature merely to lessen the harshness of the court-made rule that a plaintiff’s negligence in causing his own injury would totally bar his recovery from another, no matter how minor his own negligence was in proportion to that of the person from whom recovery was sought. In enacting sec. 895.-045 the legislature did not create a bar to recovery; it only limited one that the courts had created years earlier. Thus, to the extent that the doctrine of contributory negligence still exists in this state, it is entirely of judicial origin and therefore subject to the inherent power of this court to reconsider matters of its own making.10
However, despite our conclusion that this court does have the authority to effectuate the change in our comparative negligence system that plaintiff has requested, we decline to do so. A majority of the court is of the opinion that this change, like the change to a pure comparative negligence system contemplated in Vincent v. Pabst Brewing Co., 47 Wis.2d 120, 177 N.W.2d 513 (1970), would be better left to the legislature.
In taking this position, we are not unaware of the language contained in the recent case of May v. Skelley Oil Co., 83 Wis.2d 30, 38-39, 264 N.W.2d 574 (1978), *474which indicated that a majority of the court was then willing to make the change in our comparative negligence law now being contemplated. However, because one of the defendants in that case was dismissed, the issue of whether their negligence should have been combined for purposes of determining whether the plaintiff was entitled to recover was rendered moot and the court’s statements regarding that issue were reduced to mere dicta. We do not feel bound by such dicta and upon closer and more careful consideration of the issue have decided not to follow it.
To change from the present rule to one in which a plaintiff would be allowed to recover against a person less negligent than himself would have significant ramifications throughout the tort system of allocating losses as it now exists in this state.11 Specifically, such a change would raise important questions about the extent of a less negligent defendant’s liability and the operation of the rules of joint and several liability, contribution, set-off and release. Indeed, unless accompanying changes are made in these related areas of law, the change requested by plaintiff may very well create far more serious problems than it is intended to resolve. For this reason we think plaintiffs’ request would be better addressed to the legislature.
That body is better equipped to consider the change advocated by plaintiff together with the corresponding changes in other areas of the law that would be necessary to insure a fair and even system of apportioning liability for negligently caused injuries. It is more capable of fashioning and implementing the kind of comprehensive solution that the multiple tortfeasor situation requires.
*475Finally, we also note in this vein that a bill which, if enacted, would make the exact change in sec. 895.045, Stats., that plaintiff has asked this court to make, is presently pending before the legislature. We believe it would be inappropriate for this court to exercise its inherent power to effectuate a change in the law that is presently being considered by the legislature.
We therefore decline to do so.
By the Court. — Judgment reversed with directions to dismiss the complaint.
Although plaintiffs objected to the trial court’s inclusion of Purtell & Company in the verdict for comparison purposes and subsequently moved for a new trial on the ground that consideration of Purtell by the jury was improper, that issue has not been raised on appeal and, therefore, we do not reach it.
Mariuzza v. Kenower, 68 Wis.2d 321, 325-26, 228 N.W.2d 702 (1975).
Antoniewicz v. Reszcynski, 70 Wis.2d 836, 857, 236 N.W.2d 1 (1975).
Presti v. O’Donahue, 25 Wis.2d 594, 599, 131 N.W.2d 273 (1964).
See also Schwenn v. Loraine Hotel Co., 14 Wis.2d 601, 111 N.W.2d 495 (1961), and Mariuzza v. Kenower, 68 Wis.2d 321, 228 N.W.2d 702 (1975), in which the court refused to combine the negligence of defendants for comparison purposes under circumstances almost identical to the case at bar on the grounds that the duty and opportunity to act in those cases were unequal.
See Walker v. Kroger Grocery & Baking Co., 214 Wis. 519, 536, 252 N.W. 721 (1934). In 1971, sec. 895.045, Stats., was amended to permit recovery where the plaintiff’s negligence was equal to, as well as less than, that of the person from whom recovery was sought. Prior to that time recovery was denied when the parties were equally at fault. Laws of 1971, ch. 47.
This construction of the statute is supported by two law review articles, one by the author of the Wisconsin law, which were written contemporaneously with its enactment. See Padway, Comparative Negligence, 16 Marquette L. Rev. 3 (1931), and Campbell, Wisconsin’s Comparative Negligence Law, 7 Wis. L. Rev. 222 (1932).
Green Bay Packaging, Inc. v. ILHR Dept., 72 Wis.2d 26, 35, 240 N.W.2d 422 (1976).
The change to a combined comparison approach in which the plaintiff’s negligence would be compared with that of all of the *472defendants could have been accomplished simply by substituting the words “person or persons against whom recovery is sought,” in place of the phrase “person against whom recovery is sought.”
This view was expressed by a majority of the court in the concurring and dissenting opinions to Vincent v. Pabst Brewing Co., 47 Wis.2d 120, 177 N.W.2d 513 (1970), where the court considered completely abrogating the doctrine of contributory negligence and thereby moving to a system of pure comparative negligence. See also Lupie v. Hartzheim, 54 Wis.2d 415, 195 N.W.2d 461 (1972).
See Comment, Change of the Wisconsin Comparative Negligence Statute in Multi-Defendant Suits; May v. Skelley Oil Co., 62 Marquette L. Rev. 227, 233, (1978).

=== CASE 9738616 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:58:33.420756+00 ===

Mote, J.
The Appellant was charged by amended affidavit, and convicted below, with the crime of robbery. Omitting the formal part of the charge, it is as follows:
“That on or about the 27th day of February, 1958, at the County of Allen and in the State of Indiana, said Defendant, Wayne Marlin Peterson did then and there unlawfully, felo-niously and forcibly and by violence and putting one Byron Bemis in fear, rob, take and steal from the person of the said Byron Bemis lawful currency of the United States of America then and there belonging to Marsh Speedway Market, Inc., and then and there of the value of Fifteen Hundred Dollars ($1,500), being contrary to the form of the statute in such case made and provided.”
After closing the issues by a plea of “not guilty,” the cause was submitted to trial by jury. Appellant was found to be guilty as charged and sentenced according to the statutory provisions.
A Motion for New Trial was filed and overruled, which brings about this appeal. It should be understood that this is the second appeal. See: Peterson v. State (1965), 246 Ind. 458, 206 N. E. 2d 371.
A fair statement of the evidentiary facts indicates the following: Appellant was arrested in Kalamazoo, Michigan; he was handcuffed and taken to the police station in connection with a robbery in Fort Wayne, Indiana. At the time of his arrest, Appellant requested the police to drive his automobile to police headquarters. The Appellant consented to a search of both his automobile and his room. In searching Appellant’s automobile, the police found a 32 caliber revolver, serial number 63255, and One thousand seventy-one ($1,071.00) Dollars in cash, and latter being concealed in the heater of the *271automobile. The cash was placed in a sealed envelope and introduced into evidence, over objection, as State’s Exhibit G. After completing the search of the automobile, photographs were taken of the exterior and interior of the car, and of the money, both in its hiding place and on the seat. These photographs were subsequently introduced at trial as State’s Exhibits Q, R, S and T. They were all admitted over the Appellant’s objections that they were the fruits of an illegal search and therefore violated his constitutional rights. The search of the room where Appellant lived disclosed some newspaper clippings which were introduced as defense Exhibits I, J, K, L, M, N, O and P, and a search of the garage disclosed license plates, State’s Exhibit C, identified by a witness as being the plates she observed on an automobile used in the robbery of the Marsh Foodliner Supermarket in Fort Wayne, Indiana. The record discloses no objection to the testimony concerning the search of Appellant’s automobile by the arresting officers or of the introduction of the revolver, but only of the photographs of the automobile and cash and of the money itself.
In his brief, Appellant relies solely on specification three (3). of his Motion for New Trial, which is as follows:
“3. The- Court erred in overruling the objection of the defendant to the introduction and reading in evidence of States Exhibits Q and R by the State of Indiana during the diréet examination of William E. Robinson, a witness called on behalf of the State, and in admitting in evidence said exhibits Q and R. The preliminary questions by defendant, the objection of the defendant and the ruling of the Court are in the following words:
‘Preliminary Questions by Mr. Flanagan:
Q.. Before the taking of these photographs did you have ■ - a search warrant?
A. I did not.
Q. Did anyone tell you that you might do this?'
A. Detective Cleveland. was along with us at the time.
Q. Did the defendant tell you you might do this?
A. He didn’t tell me, no.
*272MR. FLANAGAN: We object to the introduction of the photographs for the reason that it is a violation of the constitutional rights of the defendant, both the State and National Constitutions, to enter upon the private property of an American citizen without a search warrant and without authority.
THE COURT: Objection overruled.
MR. RIEBER: Does the record show they are admitted?
THE COURT: Let the record show Exhibits Q and R are admitted in evidence.’ ”
Appellant first directs our attention to the search of his automobile and room, as well as the seizure of property consequent thereto, and contends that even though he was taken into custody at his place of employment, handcuffed and taken to police headquarters in Kalamazoo, Michigan, he was not under arrest. It is true that at the time, the police officers did not have a warrant for his arrest.
Predicated upon the admitted lack of a search warrant and the sequence of events, as Appellant himself depicts the same in his brief, he comes to the conclusion, which may not be wholly erroneous from his point of view, that the search of the automobile and his room, with the attendant seizure and without the benefit of a valid search warrant, was a violation of law. We are required to state, however, that Appellant’s concept and appraisal of the evidence in the record, as well as its import, is greatly at variance with what may be considered as fair and impartial.
We think it should be pointed out that the record discloses Appellant to have been placed under arrest at his place of employment. He has admitted in his brief that he then and there was taken into custody, handcuffed and removed to police headquarters. Henry v. United States (1959), 361 U. S. 98, 4 L. Ed 2d 134, 80 S. Ct. 168, holds and supplies authority that when police officers interrupt the freedom of an accused and restrict his liberty of movement, an arrest has been effected.
*273If apprehended in. the State of Michigan, the law of arrest indicates justification therefor without a warrant where the arresting officer has probable cause to believe that a felony has been committed and that the person apprehended is guilty thereof. Leisure v. Hicks (1953), 336 Mich. 148, 57 N. W. 2d 473.
The definition of the term “probable cause” for an arrest without warrant is a reasonable ground of suspicion, based upon facts and circumstances sufficiently adequate to induce and warrant a cautious, reasonable and prudent man to believe that the accused is guilty of a felony. Hammitt v. Straley (1953), 338 Mich. 587, 61 N. W. 2d 641; United States v. Horton (WD Mich. 1949), 86 F. Supp. 92.
The Federal cases, as well as the decisions in our own jurisdiction, appear to be of the same effect as the Michigan cases. See: United States v. White (ED. Va. 1964), 237 F. Supp. 644, affirmed 342 F. 2d 379, Cert. denied 382 U. S. 871, 86 S. Ct. 148, 15 L. Ed. 2d 109; Sisk v. Lane (ND Ind. 1963), 219 F. Supp. 507, affirmed 331 F. 2d 235, Cert. dismissed 380 U. S. 959, 85 S. Ct. 1100, 13 L. Ed. 2d 977; Bays v. State (1959), 240 Ind. 37, 49, 159 N. E. 2d 393, 398, Cert. denied 361 U. S. 972, 80 S. Ct. 605, 4 L. Ed 2d 551; and other cases cited therein.
In our opinion, the record herein well establishes the arrest of Appellant and the validity thereof.
Although the arguments, as well as the evidence as to the facts and the law of search and the seizure of evidence, and the admission of certain exhibits into the evidence at the trial, are sharply in dispute, we are constrained to hold that Appellant’s criticisms and assertions attacking the validity thereof have no merit. Appellant contends that he did not consent to a search and that the entrusting of his automobile, a 1954 Ford, to the arresting officers was involuntary. We deem that we are not called upon to determine whether or not the consent of Appellant was voluntary, *274since the officers had a right to take the car into custody and to search the car, all as a consequence of the lawful arrest of Appellant referred to above.
Actually, by applying only specification No. 3 of his Motion for New Trial to his argument, Appellant limits his appeal, in respect to the admissions of evidence, to the . State’s Exhibits Q and R, which appear to be photo- ' graphs of Appellant’s automobile taken by one William E. Robinson at the direction of Detective Cleveland. Under our rules and the decided cases almost without number, Appellant has. waived any other asserted errors. However, it is fair to state that we find no encroachment on or violation of Appellant’s constitutional rights, Federal or State,' by the entry upon his private property without a search warrant. Maxwell v. Stephens (8th Cir. 1965), 348 F. 2d 325, Cert. denied 382 U. S. 944, 86 S. Ct. 387, 15 L. Ed 2d 353; Rehearing denied 382 U. S. 1000, 86 S. Ct. 532, 15 L. Ed. 2d 490; State v. Harris (1963), 265 Minn. 260, 121 N. W. 2d 327, Cert. denied 375 U. S. 867, 84 S. Ct. 141, 11 L. Ed. 2d 94; Shuck v. State (1945), 223 Ind. 155, 59 N. E. 2d 124; McAdams v. State (1948), 226 Ind. 403, 81 N. E. 2d 671; Dearing v. State (1948), 226 Ind. 273, 79 N. E. 2d 535.
We are. clearly convinced that Appellant has not demonstrated a single harmful or reversible error in this appeal; yet, if there were the slightest question of Appellant’s guilt, as charged or as to the search and seizure and the admission into the evidence of State’s Exhibits Q and R, or any other éxhibits or evidence, there is ample, competent, uncontra-verted and uncontradicted testimony to which there was no objection and which points directly to guilt. Three eye witnesses testified that they saw Appellant commit the robbery, another saw him ieave the scene of the robbery, another identified the one year old license plates on the Ford automobile registered in Appellant’s name and in his possession at the time of the robbery.
*275It is a well settled rule in our jurisdiction that the admission of incompetent evidence to establish a fact which is proved by, other uncontradicted, competent evidence is harmless. Temple et al. v. State (1964), 245 Ind. 21, 195 N. E. 2d 850; Adams v. State (1946), 224 Ind. 472, 69 N. E. 2d 21.
The claimed errors are without merit. We conclude that Appellant had a fair trial and that the evidence obtained as a consequence of his arrest was lawfully seized. The appeal fails to show reversible error and the judgment is affirmed.
Lewis, C. J. and Arterburn, J. concur; Jackson, J. dissents with opinion, in which Hunter, J. concurs.

=== CASE 2216880 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:19.251542+00 ===

90 Ill. App.2d 11 (1967)
234 N.E.2d 356
Velma Stampley, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
Earl Collins, Defendant-Appellant.
Gen. No. 51,749.
Illinois Appellate Court  First District, First Division.
November 20, 1967.
Delars J. Bracy, of Chicago, for appellant.
David S. Bern, of Chicago, for appellee.
MR. PRESIDING JUSTICE MURPHY delivered the opinion of the court.
Defendant, Earl Collins, appeals from the denial of his petition to vacate a judgment entered against him. The *12 petition, filed five months after judgment, was based on section 72 of the Civil Practice Act.
Plaintiff sued defendant for damages allegedly sustained as a result of defendant "forcibly and wantonly" ejecting plaintiff from a store which defendant had leased to plaintiff for a tavern. The complaint alleged that "after two weeks of occupancy, the defendant forcibly and wantonly ejected the plaintiff from said store having first removed the liquor license from the wall and then locked the plaintiff out. By reason thereof the plaintiff has lost $700.00 paid to the defendant, $400.00 in liquor left on the premises, $100.00 in equipment, and conservatively speaking $800.00 in lost profits." The defendant counterclaimed for $600.00 "for rent for two months."
After a nonjury trial, in which the court heard evidence and counsel for both sides, the court, on February 7, 1966, entered judgment in favor of the plaintiff for $500 and denied the counterclaim.
On July 15, 1966, the defendant filed the instant petition to vacate the judgment. The petition was grounded on newly discovered evidence and alleged that at the trial on the merits, plaintiff and her witnesses testified falsely, with intent to defraud the defendant and "thereby defrauded this Court." In support of his petition, the defendant offered the testimony and affidavit of Marcus Lee Fuller, son of the plaintiff, to the effect that he and his aunt, Ophelia Thompson, were the real owners and operators of the tavern; that he had a severe altercation with Ophelia and that she had threatened him with a razor; that she had subsequently removed the liquor from the premises; and that he, in turn, had removed the liquor license from the wall and had the lock changed.
Plaintiff filed no answer to defendant's petition. At the hearing on the petition, the court permitted Marcus Lee Fuller, the affiant, to testify in support of the petition. *13 After considering at length the petition and the supporting affidavit, the testimony of Fuller, and the arguments of counsel, the court denied the petition and remarked: "The Court has no jurisdiction to entertain this petition. The Court heard this matter, heard the witnesses, evaluated the testimony, determined the credibility of the witnesses, we are not going to retry this case under the guise of this petition."
[1] As defendant contends, since there was no answer to his petition to vacate and no evidence was offered by the plaintiff at the hearing of the petition, defendant's allegations stand as admitted. Ill Rev Stats 1965, c 110, § 40.
Defendant further contends that "in the case at bar, justice and fairness require the court to invoke its equitable powers." Defendant cites in support Ellman v. DeRuiter, 412 Ill. 285, 106 NE2d 350 (1952); and Elfman v. Evanston Bus Co., 27 Ill.2d 609, 190 NE2d 348 (1963), where the court said (p 613):
"Since our decision in Ellman v. DeRuiter, 412 Ill. 285, subsequently adopted by the legislature . .., it has become certain that a petition filed under section 72, such as we have here, invokes the equitable powers of the court, as justice and fairness require."
Both of these cases involved default judgments, and the opinions show that the defendant in each case, after learning of the judgment, promptly petitioned for relief. We think these cases are distinguished from the instant case, where the defendant petitioner participated in the trial and waited more than five months before seeking relief.
We believe the guidelines to be used here are set forth in Brockmeyer v. Duncan, 18 Ill.2d 502, 165 NE2d 294 *14 (1960), where the Supreme Court reviewed the use of section 72 and said (p 505):
"Assuming that the present petition alleges facts which would otherwise justify the granting of relief, the absence of any excuse for not asserting them in apt time must preclude it. The rule is well established that a person may not avail himself of the present remedy unless he shows that through no fault or negligence of his own, the error of fact or the existence of a valid defense was not made to appear to the trial court.... Such a motion or petition is not intended to relieve a party from the consequences of his own mistake or negligence."
See, also, People v. Lewis, 22 Ill.2d 68, 70, 174 NE2d 197 (1961).
[2] Using the foregoing guidelines, and assuming that defendant's petition alleged facts which would otherwise justify the granting of relief, the petition, supporting affidavit and record are barren of any statement of facts to show that defendant exercised due diligence in the discovery and presentation of the testimony of Marcus Lee Fuller or a reasonable excuse for the failure to offer this testimony at the trial on February 7, 1966.
We conclude the trial court properly denied defendant's petition to vacate the judgment, and the order is affirmed.
Affirmed.
BURMAN and ADESKO, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9738618 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:58:35.66087+00 ===

SHIRLEY S. ABRAHAMSON, J.
The question on appeal is whether the plaintiff, who engaged in an adulterous relationship with the deceased, may recover from the estate for unpaid salary, wages or other compensation for personal services rendered to the deceased within the two-year period preceding his death.1
Virgil Steffes died without a will on July 17, 1976. His gross estate was valued at $733,644.65. Steffes was survived by a son, who is an heir and the personal representative of the estate, and children of a deceased son, who are heirs. The plaintiff, Mary Lou Brooks, filed a claim against the estate in the amount of $29,200.00 for personal services rendered to the deceased during the last two years of his life (July 17, 1974-July 17, 1976). The estate refused to pay the claim and this litigation ensued. The trial court rendered judgment allowing the claim against the estate in the amount of $14,600.00.
There is no dispute that plaintiff rendered services for Steffes on the farm and in his home and that she gave him excellent nursing care during his lengthy last illness. Steffes’ son had been a guest in his father’s home *493before his father’s death, and he testified that he had eaten meals cooked by the plaintiff, that his father’s home was kept in good condition, and that the plaintiff took good care of his ill father.
The son, as personal representative, appeals the judgment on three grounds: (1) that the facts do not sustain the trial court’s findings that the plaintiff .rendered services at the request of and with the knowledge of the deceased and with the expectation of compensation; (2) that any services rendered are presumed to be gratuitous because plaintiff lived for more than six years as a member of Steffes’ household and that the requirement that there be an express promise to pay for such services was not met; and (3) that the plaintiff cannot recover compensation for the work she performed in the house and on the farm, because Steffes and the plaintiff had engaged in sexual intercourse.
We affirm the judgment of the trial court.
I.
The facts are not in dispute. Mary Lou Brooks, the plaintiff, met Virgil Steffes, the deceased, in 1969, while the plaintiff was working in a tavern, and soon thereafter she moved to Steffes’ farm home where she resided until his death. Plaintiff and Steffes were each married to other persons. Plaintiff knew Steffes was a married man, and he continued to be married until his wife died in 1974. The plaintiff had been married in 1963 and had two children. She continued to be married while she lived in the deceased’s house, initiating divorce proceedings after Steffes’ death. Plaintiff admitted having sexual relations with Virgil Steffes until about a year before Steffes’ death. Plaintiff and numerous witnesses testified that neither plaintiff nor Steffes had represented her as Mrs. Virgil Steffes.
*494According- to the plaintiff’s undisputed testimony she performed the following chores in the house and on the farm: she cleaned the house, did the cooking, washing, and ironing; she helped fix farm fences; she picked the corn crop; she ran the combine and loaded the corn into a “semi” during late 1974; she chased animals which escaped from the pasture; from the end of October until May (1974-1975) she loaded silage; she aided the deceased in pouring concrete walls around the feedlot; she aided the deceased in remodeling his home by “tearing out partitions” and by setting forms, pouring concrete, and pulling the forms; she wrote all the deceased’s checks (with one or two exceptions) under the deceased’s direction over the two-year period in question, signing his name along with her initials; and she cleaned and prepared machinery for the April 1975 farm sale. The amount of work performed by the plaintiff may be gauged by the size of the farming operation. In July, 1974, there were 80 head of Charoláis cattle and approximately 20 registered Morgan horses on the farm. There were also 825 acres of corn on the farm in the spring of 1975.
The plaintiff also described the nursing care she gave Steffes. In the fall of 1974, his health began to deteriorate. He suffered from headaches and dizzy spells. In March, 1975 he was hospitalized and tests revealed a brain tumor; surgery was performed. Plaintiff stayed in a chair beside Steffes’ bed for four days and nights while he was in the hospital. For twenty-eight consecutive days after Steffes’ surgery, plaintiff drove him to the hospital for cobalt treatments. Steffes’ condition continued to worsen during 1976 and plaintiff’s care continued. Plaintiff’s testimony relating to the care she gave Steffes during his illness was summarized by the estate’s counsel as follows:
*495“. . . In the summer of 1975 after surgery, Virgil still had headaches and had so much pressure from the tumor. He went blind in his left eye. I took him for eye tests and he got a little weak in his right side in 1976. In the fall of 1975 there was only horses left. . . . The remodeling of the house was completed in April, 1976. The slight stroke or weakening of Virgil Steffes was when we were working in the house about three weeks before we moved in. We moved in around April 1st. He called me. He couldn’t use his leg it was so weak and his arm. We were still working there. Laudel Culver and Don Urban-ek and Bill and Daisy Crubaugh, we were all in the house working that evening and Virgil and I went up to the other place. He said he did not know what was wrong, his legs seemed weak and that. Then I exercised his leg and his arm by working his leg up and down, back and forth, trying to keep the strength in it and his arm. I took him back to La Crosse for a checkup and they took x-rays and the doctor showed me the x-rays where the tumor was coming back and I told him about Virgil’s leg and that and he says to exercise it, and so I did and that’s when they put him on some pills and he had to have them every four hours. They were to keep the pressure off where the tumor was coming back. Virgil got kidney infection and I took him back, and they gave him pills. They wanted to use a catheter and he said no. I bought a urinal and sat beside him. If he could, for awhile he could help himself when he had to use it and then he got that he couldn’t use it. If he wet himself I changed his clothes and if he had an accident in bed, I would change the bed in the middle of the night. This went on during June, 1976. After March, 1976 he had a stroke that affected the whole one side of him and so then in order for him to walk I would slide my foot under his and pick his foot up and walk him that way. He was going to the doctor and the hospital during this time. I took him for his checkups. I would lift him out of the chair and then I would slide my foot under his and put my arm around him, put my arm around him and he would lean on me and we would get to the car that way. Be the same thing at the hospital. If I had to park some place out in the parking lot too far away, then I would go and get or Greg Gebhard might go with me. *496Sometimes Mike Urbanek rode along and they would run in and get a wheel chair and bring it out and then I would wheel him into the hospital and wheel him out to the car. Then towards the last when his whole side went I couldn’t even walk him no more. I went into Bohlman’s Drug Store and rented a wheel chair for at the house too. . . . Mr. Steffes died July the 17th ’76.”
Plaintiff testified that she received the following items from the deceased during this two-year period: food and lodging; approximately $7,200.00 from the sale of horses and cows which deceased had given to plaintiff to take care of; $3,200.00 towards a $4,544.00 Pontiac which was purchased June 22, 1976 and titled in the plaintiff’s name.
The trial court summarized the plaintiff’s efforts as follows: “Now this lady although she was not a mason [she] did cement work, and although she was not a carpenter she did carpentry work, and although she wasn’t an accountant she did bookkeeping work, although she was not a nurse she rendered nursing services.”
Plaintiff testified that she expected to receive something for the services she performed for Virgil Steffes during the last two years of his life. The deceased’s brother-in-law and friends of both the plaintiff and the deceased testified that Steffes had indicated that he wanted to provide for the plaintiff and that he wanted her to have the house and farm on his death. However, Steffes did not execute a will and sold part of the farm on land contract and gave the purchasers an option to purchase farm property.
h-i HH
The trial court found that the plaintiff went into the deceased’s home as a housekeeper, that the housekeeping, farming and nursing services “rendered by her were per*497formed at the instance and with his knowledge of the decedent;” and that the plaintiff expected compensation for these services over and above room and board and the gratuities she received from Mr. Stef fes.2 These findings are significant because this court, in a long line of cases, has held that where services are performed at the special instance of the deceased and with his knowledge and are performed by the claimant with expectation of reasonable compensation, recovery may be allowed on the basis of a contract to pay, implied in fact or law.3 The trial court concluded that a contract for services can be implied from the facts and can also be implied in law (quasi-contract) on the ground of unjust enrichment4 and that plaintiff can recover the reasonable value of services rendered to the deceased.5
*498The personal representative asserts that the evidence does not support the trial court’s findings of fact that the services were rendered at the instance of and the knowledge of the decedent and with the expectation of compensation.
The personal representative’s brief acknowledges that the plaintiff’s services were performed with the knowledge of the decedent and that while he was ill in the hospital, he asked her to stay and asked her to help him so that he did not have to have a catheter. Nevertheless the personal representative argues that the trial court’s finding that the services were performed at the deceased’s instance and request cannot be sustained because the plaintiff moved to the home of the decedent and became a part of his household and family. The personal representative argues that because all services were performed as a member of the household the performance was not “at the decedent’s instance and request” but was expected under the circumstances. The personal representative further argues that plaintiff’s expectations were fulfilled when she was compensated by room, board, companionship, and gifts.
In effect the personal representative is asking this court to hold that, because the plaintiff was treated as a member of the household and performed services and because there was no direct evidence that the plaintiff was hired as a housekeeper, the trial court erred, as a matter of law, in concluding that the services were rendered at the decedent’s instance and request. The personal representative cites no authority for this proposition of law, and we can find none.
In Kramer v. Bins, 205 Wis. 562, 238 N.W. 307 (1931), the claimant moved into the defendant’s home and cared for him and his ailing father. The defendant alleged that the claimant performed services under an agreement that the parties would be married later and that *499the services were rendered without cost to the defendant. The claimant asserted that she performed services at his special instance and request and that she expected payment. The trial court submitted two questions, inter alia, to the jury: (1) Did the claimant render services to the defendant at the defendant’s request, and (2) were the services rendered pursuant to a marriage agreement that each was to work for the other without pay? The jury concluded that the defendant had requested that services be rendered but that the parties had agreed that no compensation should be paid. This court upheld the verdict of the jury. There is nothing in the Kramer v. Bins opinion to indicate that services performed by a person who is treated as a member of the household but who was not hired as a housekeeper are, as a matter of law, expected and cannot, as a matter of law, be performed “at the instance and request” of the defendant. Indeed the opinion indicates that it is for the trier of facts to determine whether services of a person treated as a member of the household are performed at the request and special instance of the defendant and with the expectation of compensation.
In Estate of Voss, 20 Wis.2d 238, 121 N.W.2d 744 (1963), decedent advertised for a housekeeper and companion. A widow answered the advertisement, a period of courtship ensued, and there were discussions of marriage. The widow then moved into decedent’s home and lived with him for four years, performing services first as his housekeeper and then as his practical nurse until his death. They never married and she never was paid. The trial court allowed her claim against the estate for the reasonable value of her services for the two years preceding Voss’s death. In the Foss case the court found “positive evidence” that the services were performed at his request by the placement of the advertisement and her commencing services. However this court did not *500hold that an advertisement seeking a housekeeper is the only evidence which can show that services were performed at decedent’s request and with his knowledge or that there must be direct evidence that a person was hired as a housekeeper in order for the trier of facts to find that services were performed by that person at the decedent’s request and with his knowledge.
We conclude there is no legal or factual basis to support the personal representative’s argument that because plaintiff was treated as a member of the household the evidence does not support the trial court’s findings that she went into Steffes’ home as a housekeeper with the expectation of payment for services and that her services were rendered at the instance of the deceased and with his knowledge.
III.
The personal representative next argues that the trial court erred in holding that the plaintiff could prevail on proof of an implied contract.6 The trial court held in the instant case that there was a contract implied in fact and law to pay; it concluded that there was no express contract to pay the full value of the services rendered.7
We start with the principle well-grounded in human experience that where one renders valuable services for another payment is expected. This court has frequently stated that “if one merely accepts services from another which are valuable to him, in general, the presumption of fact arises that a compensation equivalent is to pass between the parties, and the burden of proof is upon the recipient of the service to rebut such presumption if he *501would escape from rendering such equivalent.” Wojahn v. National Union Bank, 144 Wis. 646, 667, 129 N.W. 1068 (1911).8
The personal representative’s theory is that a presumption that the services were performed gratuitously applies in the instant case. Where there is a close family or marriage relationship, the law presumes the services are performed gratuitously, and the law will not imply from the mere rendition of services by one family member to another a promise to pay. This presumption of gratuitous service is, as is the presumption that services are rendered for compensation, well-grounded in human experience and rebuttable.9 It is clear that the plaintiff is not related to the deceased by blood or marriage. The personal representative argues that the presumption of gratuitous service should apply anyway because the plaintiff was part of Steffes’ family, the term “family” being used to include anyone who is a member of the household.10 The basis for applying the presumption of gratuitous service to persons cohabiting but not related by marriage is that in the ordinary course of life persons living together in a close relationship perform services for each other without expectation of payment in the *502usual sense because the parties mutually care for each other’s needs and perform services for each other out of a feeling of affection or a sense of obligation.
The personal representative asserts that the law in Wisconsin is that if a presumption of gratuitous service applies, the party seeking compensation must prove the existence of an express contract for compensation.11 The personal representative relies on Estate of Goltz, 205 Wis. 590, 594, 238 N.W. 374 (1931), in which this court said:
“The law is well established that ‘where near relatives by blood or marriage reside together as one common family, and one of them renders services to another, and such other furnishes him board and lodging or other necessaries or comforts, a presumption arises that neither party intended to receive or to pay compensation for the services rendered on the one hand, or for the board and lodging or other necessaries or comforts on the other; that they were intended as mutual acts of kindness done or furnished gratuitously.’ Estate of Kessler, 87 Wis. 660, 664, 59 N.W. 129; Schmidt’s Estate, 93 Wis. 120, 67 N.W. 37; Williams v. Williams, 114 Wis. 79, 89 N.W. 835; Estate of Skinner, 189 Wis. 390, 207 N.W. 942.
“Since the facts of this case bring it within the rule stated and give rise to the presumption of gratuitous services, it was incumbent upon the claimant to prove an express contract by direct and positive evidence or to prove by unequivocal facts and circumstances that which is the equivalent of direct and positive proof of an express contract. Hall v. Finch, 29 Wis. 278; Tyler v. Burrington, 39 Wis. 376; Pellage v. Pellage, 32 Wis. 136; Leitgabel v. Belt, 108 Wis. 107, 83 N.W. 1111.”
Cases decided by this court since Goltz have departed from the principle that a presumption that services were *503rendered gratuitously may be rebutted only by proof of an express contract. This court has upheld judgments awarding compensation on the basis of a contract implied in fact even though the claimant was related to the decedent by blood or marriage.
We do not think it is necessary in the instant case to determine whether a presumption of gratuitous service arises where persons live in the same household in a meretricious relationship, because whether the initial presumption is that services were to be compensated or that they were rendered gratuitously, the final determination of whether the services were to be compensated depends on the circumstances relating to the plaintiff’s entry into and her stay in the Steffes’ household.12 If an express promise to pay is proved or a promise to pay can be implied from the facts, then the plaintiff is entitled to compensation regardless of the fact that she rendered services with a sense of affection, devotion and duty.
As we explained in Estate of Detjen, 34 Wis.2d 46, 52-53, 148 N.W.2d 745 (1967):
“. . . And, whatever the initial presumptions may be, the final determination, we have said in the Estate of Kuepper (1961), 12 Wis. (2d) 577, 107 N. W. (2d) 621, depends not on a rule of law which awards or denies *504compensation for services rendered depending on the family relationship of the parties or the house they live in, but upon the existence or nonexistence of an express promise, or one implied in fact, that the services were to be paid for.
“In respect to the payment of decedent’s debts in her lifetime, when there is no express promise of repayment, one may be implied or negated in fact from the conduct of the parties, the nature of the bill, the amount of payments, the relationship and affection or lack of it between the parties, and whether such payments are usually made under such circumstances as to indicate or negate a promise of repayment. Thus the circumstances may support a presumption or an inference of an implied promise or negate its existence, but whatever the direct evidence is and whatever inferences may be drawn from other evidence, the burden of proving an implied agreement existed between the claimant and the decedent falls upon the claimant. Estate of Kuepper, supra; Wojahn v. National Union Bank (1911), 144 Wis. 646, 129 N. W. 1068; Estate of St. Germain (1945), 246 Wis. 409, 17 N. W. (2d) 582.”
In the case at bar the plaintiff had been employed in a tavern when she met the deceased. The trial court concluded that she left a paying job to take care of deceased’s home; that she went to the deceased’s farm and performed labor usually performed by a housekeeper, farm-hand, mason, carpenter, bookkeeper and nurse; and that she worked long and hard doing heavy work and performing unpleasant tasks. She testified she expected compensation. Witnesses testified that the decedent said he wanted to leave real estate to her and wanted to provide for her.13 Several of the services plaintiff per*505formed were of a commercial variety, and the deceased hired employees to perform services similar to those rendered by the plaintiff.
The trial court in the instant case carefully reviewed the relation and situation of the parties, the nature and character of the services rendered, and all the facts and circumstances and concluded that the plaintiff entered this home and remained there as a housekeeper for the deceased; that although there was a warm and affectionate relation between the plaintiff and the deceased and the deceased made gifts to the plaintiff, the plaintiff expected payment for the services and the deceased expressed his intent to provide for the plaintiff; and that an agreement between the plaintiff and the deceased that he would pay for such services can be implied from the circumstances.
The trial court’s conclusion in the case at bar is consistent with prior decisions of this court holding that under the facts of the particular case an implied promise to pay for services was proved. In Estate of Voss, 20 Wis.2d 238, 121 N.W.2d 744 (1963), which we discussed previously, the claimant, who was not related to the deceased by blood or marriage moved into the decedent’s home and performed household services for him expecting marriage between herself and the deceased. This court refused to say that there was any “relationship between them whereby either party should consider her services to Mr. Voss as housekeeper and companion were given gratuitously.” We viewed the facts in Voss as sufficient to raise the presumption that compensation was expected.
In Estate of Anderson, 242 Wis. 272, 7 N.W.2d 823 (1943), the deceased asked his ex-wife to allow him *506to make his home with her again. She did, but they did not remarry. The court said “They lived as a family thereafter as they had theretofore.” The deceased’s will left all the property to the deceased’s sister, and the ex-wife filed a claim against the estate for services rendered from December 1928 through June 1940. This court held that there was enough evidence in the case to rebut the presumption that the ex-wife’s services were rendered gratuitously and held that the ex-wife could recover on an implied contract for the value of services rendered within the period not barred by the statute of limitations.14
In Estate of Grossman, 250 Wis. 457, 461, 27 N.W.2d 365 (1947), a father requested an adult daughter who lived 100 miles from the parents’ home to come to her parents’ home and help care for her ailing mother. After the mother died, the father became ill, and the daughter again left her job and home to return to the parents’ home to care for the father. The daughter sought reasonable compensation for these services from the father’s estate. She did not prove an express contract for payment. Noting that the intention of the parties may be gathered from the acts, deeds and words of the parties and the surrounding circumstances, this court concluded that the daughter’s evidence, although “not too strong,” was “sufficient to overcome the presumption [that the services were gratuitously performed] and sustain the trial court in granting judgment for the services rendered. . . .”
In Kramer v. Bins, 205 Wis. 562, 278 N.W. 307 (1931), which we discussed previously, it was for the trier of *507fact to determine whether the services of the claimant who moved into the household upon a promise to marry were rendered with the expectation of compensation. See also Estate of Reynold, 24 Wis.2d 370, 375, 129 N.W.2d 251 (1964), for a discussion of evidence indicating whether the furnishing of services was gratuitous in a family unit.
We hold that there is sufficient evidence in the case at bar to support the trial court’s finding that there was an implied promise to pay for. the services plaintiff rendered.
IV.
The personal representative’s final argument is that because the plaintiff voluntarily and knowingly lived in an adulterous relationship with the decedent she cannot recover on implied contract for her household, farm or nursing services.
In support of its contention, the estate quotes the following language from Estate of Fox, 178 Wis. 369, 371, 190 N.W. 90 (1922):
“Courts are practically unanimous in holding that when a woman voluntarily and knowingly lives in illicit relations with a man, she cannot recover on implied contract during the period of such relationship.”
This language was obiter dicta. In the Fox case, this court permitted a woman who in good faith believed she was married to a man, though she was not, to recover for services rendered during the illicit relationship. Our court refused to adopt the harsh Massachusetts rule that the woman could not recover because the law can imply no agreement when no compensation was contemplated by the parties. Instead, our court held that *508the determination of whether a woman who lived in an illegal relationship with a man could recover from the man on the theory of implied contract turns on the equities of the situation. In the Fox case we held that the woman could recover under a theory of implied contract because denying recovery would unjustly enrich his estate at her expense. We said “equity demands that she shall be made whole .... It is inferred from the nature of the transaction, and the supposed husband is held to have assumed to pay because in point of law and equity it is just that he should pay.”
The trial court in the case at bar looked at the equities and decided that unless plaintiff was compensated for her services the Steffes’ estate would be unjustly enriched. The trial court concluded- that fairness and justice required that her claim be paid. The trial court stated:
“. . . I don’t think that there is a person that could sit here in the courtroom today and listen to what I heard too today and listen to all the work that Mary Lou Brooks did for Virgil Steffes during his lifetime and conclude that anything other than that estate has been enriched by reason of her services. Had he hired somebody to do this he would have had to pay them for that and to the extent that he has not paid for those services that estate has been enriched. He was just as much a party to the illicit relationship as this lady was. The question I have in mind is why should the estate be enriched when that man was just as much a part of the illicit relationship as she was and not let her have her fair dues. I don’t understand that law that would interpret unjust enrichment that way and deprive one and let the other benefit and do it on the basis that there was an illicit relationship but not equally held against the both. . . .”
The personal representative also cites Smith v. Smith, 255 Wis. 96, 100, 38 N.W.2d 12 (1949), to support his assertion that the plaintiff be denied compensation by *509reason of the illegal relationship between the plaintiff and the deceased. In Smith the woman, apparently unaware that common-law marriages were invalid in Wisconsin, lived with Mr. Smith ostensibly as husband and wife for more than six years. During that period the parties pooled their labor and earnings. When the woman discovered that the couple was not married, he refused to marry her. She sued him, not for compensation for services, but for an equitable division of the property acquired while they were living together. The court held against the woman reasoning that the couple was not married and that accordingly the rules of law relating to division of marital property were not applicable.15 *510The court treated the parties as it treated business partners who enter into an illegal contract: where parties assert “rights founded upon an illegal and void contract ... a court of equity leaves the parties to such a situation just where they placed themselves and as the court found them. Its doors are closed to any applicant for relief from or under such a contract.”
In Smith the court held against the claimant because
“[I]t is clear that whatever rights she seeks to enforce in this action arise solely by reason of the illegal relationship. Since she was aware of all the facts which make the contract illegal, she cannot be excused for lack of knowledge of the law. The action being one for equitable division of the property of the parties and being based upon an illegal contract of marriage, the demurrer should have been sustained.” 255 Wis. at 100.
We need not consider the rule enunciated in Smith because the Smith case is inapposite. In the instant case, unlike in Smith, the plaintiff does not seek an equitable division of property. She seeks compensation for services lawfully rendered; she does not base her claim on an illegal relationship, on a marital right, on a “quasi-marital right” or on a partnership theory.
The trial court considered the Smith case and distinguished it from the instant case on the facts of the two cases. In this case the trial court found that the plaintiff’s household, farm and nursing services were provided with the expectation of compensation and that these services were separate from and not based upon an illegal or illicit arrangement. The trial court stated:
“[T]here is no evidence here before me at least that there was any agreement by this lady to engage in sexual relations as in return for being hired there for housekeeping services and those relationships that subsequently took place but which I might add here ceased during the last year of his life. I don’t know that there is proof that they continued throughout the relationship or *511throughout the two year period in question. The testimony is that they did not, but they did take place and I don’t believe that those relationships should bar this lady’s action for the services that she rendered and for which she has not been compensated. . . . There is no evidence at all that the arrangement that was entered into between Steffes and Brooks was anything other than a proper arrangement. I would have to speculate one way or the other and what we do know is that she took on these services with him, left her home and two children, and left it according to her testimony with a good feeling between her and her husband and to the point that they are still friends and he was contributing money and gave her money while she was living there. You could just as easily assume that there was no illicit relationship when these services commenced. Services therefore were not based upon an illegal or illicit arrangement that developed. . . . Well, the last page [in the Smith case] is where they say they’re ruling and they said, ‘It’s clear that whatever rights she seeks to enforce in this action arise solely by reason of the illegal relationship.’ Now, that’s a great of difference between what existed there and what exists here. There just is no showing that in this case the rights that this lady seeks to recover or enforce arose solely by reason of any illicit relationship. In fact, the evidence in my opinion would be to the contrary. There is no evidence that these people romanced ahead of time or contemplated any type of romance or any relationship while the services were being rendered. So I fail to see as I said earlier the Smith case in any way changes my opinion, that they said this lady was aware of sufficient facts from which she should have been able had she known the law to conclude that the relationship, the marriage that was contracted was illegal and she is not excused by reason of ignorance of the law. It was illegal and she bases her entire claim on that illegal contract. She said she could not do so and that is not in my opinion the case before us here. Now then, I am going to conclude that this lady is entitled to recover for her services and I base that conclusion on my findings that the services rendered by her were performed at the instance of and with the knowledge of the decedent, Mr. Steffes. We have a lot of talk about her expectations to compensation.”
*512A rationale similar to the one set forth by the trial court in the case at bar was used in Green v. Richmond, 369 Mass. 47, 337 N.E.2d 691 (1975), to award compensation to a woman on an express oral contract to pay for services rendered. In Gh'een, the estate argued that the claimant could not recover from the estate the reasonable value of her housekeeping services because sexual intercourse between the parties was within the scope of their express oral agreement; that the claimant’s illegal activities were not merely incidental to the other services performed under their agreement; and that public policy considerations forbade allowing recovery by the plaintiff. The Massachusetts trial court submitted the issue of illegality, both as to the content of the agreement and the nature of the claimant’s performance, to the jury. The jury found for the claimant. The Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts affirmed the judgment for the claimant, concluding that the interpretation of the parties’ agreement and the determination of the nature of the claimant’s performance of the contract were questions for the trier of fact, and the jury was warranted in concluding that the illicit relationship was incidental to the agreement and the claimant’s performance thereof. Accordingly, the Massachusetts court held that public policy did not require that the plaintiff forego compensation for services lawfully rendered.
We conclude that the trial court’s reasoning in the instant case is sound.16 Although the oft quoted rule is *513that a court will not grant a remedy to parties to an illegal contract,17 there are many exceptions and limitations to the rule.18 One limitation or exception to the *514rule that the law will not grant a remedy to parties to an illegal contract is that a bargain between two people is not illegal merely because there is an illicit relationship between the two so long as the bargain is independent of the illicit relationship and the illicit relationship does not constitute any part of the consideration bargained for and is not a condition of the bargain.19
Sec. 589 of the Restatement of Contracts (1932) states the rule and the exception as follows: “A bargain in whole or in part for or in consideration of illicit sexual intercourse or of a promise thereof is illegal; but subject to this exception such intercourse between parties to a bargain previously or subsequently formed does not invalidate it.”
In the case at bar the trial court found that the illicit relationship was incidental to the plaintiff’s performance of lawful services and was not a condition of nor a consideration for the deceased’s implied promise to compensate. In view of the trial court’s findings and the facts of this case, we conclude that it is not contrary to public policy to permit the plaintiff to recover the rea*515sonable value of the lawful services performed for the deceased.
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the judgment of the trial court.
By the Court. — Judgment affirmed.
Hansen, J., took no part.
Sec. 893.01, Stats., provides:
“Civil actions; objection as to time of commencing. Civil actions can only be commenced within the periods prescribed in this chapter, except when, in special cases, a different limitation is provided by statute. But the objection that the action was not commenced within the time limited can only be taken by answer or motion to dismiss under s. 802.06(2) in proper cases.”
Sec. 893.21(5), Stats., provides:
“893.21 Within 2 years. . . .
“(5) Any action to recover unpaid salary, wages or other compensation for personal services, except fees for professional services.”
No formal findings of fact were made in this case. However, the statements of fact appearing in the court’s decision will be accorded the status of findings of fact. Dombrowski v. Tomasino, 27 Wis.2d 378, 386, 134 N.W.2d 420 (1965); Stevens v. White Corp., 77 Wis.2d 64, 71, n. 3, 252 N.W.2d 88 (1977).
Estate of Voss, 20 Wis.2d 238, 241, 121 N.W.2d 744 (1963); Estate of Ansell, 2 Wis.2d 1, 6, 85 N.W.2d 786 (1957); Estate of Rosenthal, 247 Wis. 555, 565, 20 N.W.2d 643 (1945); Estate of St. Germain, 246 Wis. 409, 411, 17 N.W.2d 582 (1945); Kramer v. Bins, 205 Wis. 562, 567, 238 N.W. 407 (1931); Wojahn v. National Union Bank, 144 Wis. 646, 129 N.W. 1068 (1911); In Re Estate of Happel-Bossi, 133 Wis. 119, 123, 113 N.W. 433 (1907).
“When the parties express their agreement by words the contract is said to be express. When it is manifested by conduct it is said to be implied in fact .... A contract implied in law is not a contract at all but an obligation imposed by law to do justice even though it is clear that no promise was ever made or intended.” Calamari & Perillo, Contraets, sec. 1-12, P. 19 (1977). See Kramer v. City of Hayward, 57 Wis.2d 302, 306-07, 203 N.W.2d 871 (1973); Gerovac v. Hribar Trucking, Inc., 43 Wis.2d 328, 332, 68 N.W.2d 863 (1969); Arjay Inv. Co. v. Kohlmetz, 9 Wis.2d 535, 538-39, 101 N.W.2d 700 (1960); Wojahn v. National Union Bank, 144 Wis. 646, 666-667, 129 N.W. 1068 (1911).
The trial court concluded that the reasonable value of the services was $20 per day, computed at $2 per hour, ten hours per day. Neither party challenges this figure.
See note 4 supra.
The trial court did not determine whether there was an express contract to pay less than full value for the services rendered.
See also, Estate of St. Germain, 246 Wis. 409, 411, 17 N.W.2d 582 (1945); Estate of Voss, 20 Wis.2d 238, 242, 121 N.W.2d 744 (1963).
Estate of Goltz, 205 Wis. 590, 594, 238 N.W. 374 (1931) and cases cited therein.
For cases extending the presumption of gratuitous services to unmarried cohabitants, see, e.g., Roznowski v. Bozyk, 73 Mich. App. 405, 251 N.W.2d 606 (1977); Lawrence v. Ladd, 280 Ore. 181, 570 P.2d 638 (1977); York v. Place, 273 Ore. 947, 544 P.2d 572 (1975); In re Gorden’s Estate, 8 N.Y.2d 71, 168 N.E.2d 239 (1960). See also, Annot., Establishment of “Family” Relationship to Raise a Presumption That Services Were Rendered Gratuitously, As Between Persons Living in Same Household But Not Related By Blood Or Affinity, 92 ALR3d 726, 743-45 (1979).
For cases involving proof of an express contract, see Estate of Rienow, 16 Wis.2d 403, 114 N.W.2d 840 (1962); Estate of Clark, 221 Wis. 569, 267 N.W. 273 (1936); Estate of Ghent, 217 Wis. 631, 259 N.W. 865 (1935).
Sec. 903.01, Rules of Evidence, provides:
“Presumptions in general. Except as provided by statute, a presumption recognized at common law or created by statute, including statutory provisions that certain basic facts are prima facie evidence of other facts, imposes on the party relying on the presumption the burden of proving the basic facts, but once the basic facts are found to exist the presumption imposes on the party against whom it is directed the burden of proving that the nonexistence of the presumed fact is more probable than its existence.”
See Judicial Council Committee’s Note, 59 Wis.2d R 49, 51, for a discussion of the procedure for application of the presumptions.
“ [A] verbal promise to make provision by will in consideration of the services or support, though it relates to real estate and is void under the statute of frauds as far as specific enforcement is concerned, will nevertheless suffice to rebut the presumption that the services were gratuitous, permitting recovery on quantum meruit. The promise or intention need not be particularly definite. The object is to combat the presumption of gratuitousness. If this *505can be done, there is a right of recovery, with such matters as amount, terms, and legal basis determinable under general principles of law.” 2 MacDonald, Wisconsin Probate Law, sec. 9.140, p. 49. (Citations omitted.) (7th ed. 1972).
Cf. Estate of Fox, 178 Wis. 369, 190 N.W. 90 (1922), in which this court allowed a woman who was fraudulently led to believe she was lawfully married to the deceased to recover from his estate on the implied promise to pay for services rendered within the period not barred by the statute of limitations.
In recent years there have been a number of cases in other jurisdictions involving the property rights of the parties upon termination of their' cohabitation without marriage. See, e.g., Marvin v. Marvin, 18 Cal.3d 660, 134 Cal. Rptr. 815, 557 P.2d 106 (1976); McCullon v. McCullon, 410 N.Y.S.2d 226 (1978); Hewitt v. Hewitt, 62 Ill. App.3d 861, 380 N.E.2d 454, (1978); Carlson v. Olson, 256 N.W.2d 249 (Minn. 1977). For a discussion of issues raised in these cases, see, e.g., Marderosian, The Property Rights of Unmarried Cohabitants—A Proposal, 14 Calif. W.L. Rev. 485 (1979); Kay & Amyx, Marvin v. Marvin: Preserving the Options, 65 Calif. L. Rev. 937 (1977); Folbey & Buren, Domestic Partnership: A Proposal for Dividing the Property of Unmarried Families, 12 Willamette L. J. 453 (1976); Bruch, Property Bights of De Facto Spouses Including Thoughts on the Value of Homemakers’ Services, 10 Fam. L. Q. 101 (1976); Weitzman, Legal Regulation of Marriage: Tradition and Change, 62 Calif. L. Rev. 1169 (1974).
The plaintiff in this case does not, on the ground of cohabitation, seek property rights granted married persons. The relevance of the parties’ cohabitation in the instant case is to the question of whether there is a presumption of payment for services or a presumption of gratuitous services and to the question of whether the court will render relief in a claim for compensation for services in which there is an acknowledged “meretricious” relationship. See Annot., Recovery for Services Rendered by Persons Living in Apparent Relation of Husband and Wife Without Express Agreement for Compensation, 94 A.L.R.3d 552 (1979).
Cf. In re Estate of Thornton, 81 Wn.2d 72, 499 P.2d 864 (1972).
Compare McCall v. Frampton, 415 N.Y.S.2d 752 (1979), where the court refused to allow the woman to recover for breach of contract or to impose a constructive trust in her favor on real estate. The court held that the contract pleaded in the complaint is void and unenforceable as a matter of public policy because the consideration for the agreement was her commission of adultery.
One court commented on the doctrine of not aiding the parties to an “illegal bargain” involving a meretricious relationship as follows:
“[T]his court and the courts of other jurisdictions have, in effect, sometimes said, ‘We will wash our hands of such disputes. The parties should and must be left to their own devices, just where they find themselves.’ To me, such pronouncements seem overly fastidious and a bit fatuous. They are unrealistic and, among other things, ignore the fact that an unannounced (but nevertheless effective and binding) rule of law is inherent in any such terminal statements by a court of law.
“The unannounced but inherent rule is simply that the party who has title, or in some instances who is in possession, will enjoy the rights of ownership of the property concerned. The rule often operates to the great advantage of the cunning and the shrewd, who wind up with possession of the property, or title to it in their names, at the end of a so-called meretricious relationship. So, although the courts proclaim that they will have nothing to do with such matters, the proclamation in itself establishes, as to the parties involved, an effective and binding rule of law which tends to operate purely by accident or perhaps by reason of the cunning, anticipatory designs of just one of the parties.” West v. Knowles, 50 Wash.2d 311, 315-16, 311 P.2d 689 (1957).
“There are many varieties and degrees of ‘illegality’ and these varieties and degrees must be taken into account in determining the juristic effect of a transaction that involves some form of illegality.” 6A Corbin, Contracts, sec. 1534, p. 816 (1962).
This court has held that even if a contract is made in violation of an express statute it is not necessarily void. “Not all contracts made in violation of the provision of a statute are void. Chapman v. Zakzaska, 273 Wis. 64, 76 N.W.2d 537. In determining whether such a contract is void, this court has observed that the intent and purpose of the objectives of the legislature must be ascertained. Posnanski v. Hood, 46 Wis.2d 172, 174 N.W.2d 528 (1970).” Vic Hansen & Sons, Inc. v. Crowley, 57 Wis.2d 106, 116-117, 203 N.W.2d 728 (1973).
For a discussion of the enforceability of contracts in violation of the law of crimes or torts or contrary to public policy, see 6A Corbin, Contracts, ehs. 51 and 52 (Jaeger 3d ed. 1972); and Restatement, Contracts, ch. 18 (1932).
*514Comment 6 to sec. 320, Restatement (Second) of Contracts, Tentative Draft No. 12 (March 1, 1977), explains that a court’s decision as to the enforceability of an agreement on the grounds of illegality and public policy is reached “only after a careful balancing, in the light of all the circumstances, of the interest in the enforcement of the particular promise against the policy against the enforcement of such terms. . . . Only if the factors that argue against enforcement clearly outweigh the law’s traditional interest in protecting the expectations of the parties, its abhorrence of any unjust enactment, and any public interest in the enforcement of the particular term will enforcement be denied.”
6A Corbin, Contracts, sec. 1476, p. 622 (1962); 15 Williston, Contracts, sec. 1745 (Jaeger 3d ed. 1972); Schara v. Thiede, 58 Wis.2d 489, 495, 206 N.W.2d 129 (1973).

=== CASE 9738619 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:58:35.66906+00 ===

COFFEY, J.
(dissenting). The plaintiff, Mrs. Brooks, left her husband and two children to live in an adulterous relationship with the deceased, a much older man who was also married. They maintained an intimate sexual relationship until his health no longer permitted it. The “services” she performed for the deceased were owed to her husband under her solemn marriage vows. After the deceased became ill, she took care of him and performed some of the farm work. But this was not a separate undertaking. It was a continuation of the meretricious relationship she had established earlier.
The majority claims that Mrs. Brooks provided the decedent with “excellent nursing care during his lengthy last illness.” Moreover, they claim that the decedent’s son testified that when he visited his father’s home he found it was kept in good condition and that Mrs. Brooks was taking good care of his ill father. I find, after a thorough examination of the record, no evidence to substantiate the majority’s opinion that Mrs. Brooks provided “excellent nursing care,” but rather she provided “intermediate care” as he was not totally independent in taking care of his own needs. Secondly, the record also fails to substantiate that the decedent’s son testified that Mrs. Brooks “took good care of his ill father,” but rather he testified as follows:
“Q. And what’s the condition of the house when you were here ?
“A. It was in good shape.
“Q. And did she cook meals for you at that time ?
*516“A. Yes.
“Q. And your father?
“A. Yes.
“Q. When was the last time that you saw your father ?
“A. I saw him about the first week in May of 1976.
“Q. And that was at his home ?
“A. Right, that was at the south house.
“Q. And did you observe Mary Lou Brooks do anything for him at that time?
“A Yen T did
“Q. And what did she do ?
“A. She cooked dinner and she cooked meals for us.
“Q. Did she assist him in any way in getting around?
“A. She prepared his food for him and gave him a fork and he ate with his left hand.
“Q. Did she have to help him walk ?
“A. No, not on that date.
“Q. He was able to walk all by himself ?
“A. Yes.”
Out of a misguided sense of fairness, the author of the majority opinion implies a promise to pay from the “circumstances relating to the plaintiff’s entry into and her stay in the Steffes household.” I have examined the circumstances cited and can only reach the conclusion that sexual intimacy, in violation of their marriage vows, was the underlying motivation for Mrs. Brooks’ entry into and stay in the home of the deceased. In Estate of Fox, 178 Wis. 369, 190 N.W. 90 (1922) this court said that:
“Courts are practically unanimous in holding that when a woman voluntarily and knowingly lives in illicit relations with a man she cannot recover on an implied contract for services rendered him during the period of such relationship. 29 L.R.A.n.s. 787.” Id. at 371.
The majority opinion says Mrs. Brooks testified she expected compensation. I disagree. Her actual testimony was as follows:
“Q. Did you receive any wages from Mr. Steffes?
“A. No sir.
*517“Q. From July of’74 until his death?
“A. No sir.
“Q. Did you expect to receive any money for the work that you did ?
“A. No.
“Q. Pardon?
“A. No, but he always told me that—
“By Mr. Antoine: I would object to what he said. That’s hearsay and she’s not competent to testify to it.
“By the Court: I’ll sustain the objection.
“By Mr. Urban:
“Q. Did you understand that question ?
“A. No.
“Q. Let me ask you differently. Did you expect to receive anything for the services you performed for Virgil Steffes from July 17, 1974, until the time of his death ?
“By Mr. Antoine: Object to that. It’s already been answered.
“By the Court: No, the previous question was a little different. The other question was, do you expect to receive any money, and this question is, do you expect to receive anything, and that’s a different question. Answer the question.
“A. Yes.”
In Estate of Detjen, 84 Wis.2d 46, 148 N.W.2d 745 (1967) this court held that:
“Whether the claim involves services rendered to the decedent or payments made for her benefit, the foundation for recovery generally is the same — a contract express or implied. And, whatever the initial presumptions may be, the final determination, we have said in the Estate of Kuepper (1961), 12 Wis. (2d) 577, 107 N.W. (2d) 621, depends not on a rule of law which awards or denies compensation for services rendered depending on the family relationship of the parties or the house they live in, but upon the existence or non-existence of an express promise, or one implied in fact, that the services were to be paid for.” Id. at 52, 53.
Furthermore, in In the Matter of Guardianship of Kordecki, 95 Wis.2d 275, 290 N.W.2d 693 (1980) this court, *518quoting- from Estate of Detjen, supra, held, with regard to the general rule of implied-in-fact contracts, that:
. a promise to pay will not be implied if a benefit is conferred with no expectation of payment but is conferred from motives of friendliness, neighborliness, kindliness or charity.” Id. at 280.
In this case, Mrs. Brooks did not expect to be paid, although it should be pointed out that Mrs. Brooks did not go uncompensated, she received clothing, board, food, lodging, plus $7,200 from the sale of horses and cattle and $3,200 towards the purchase of a car while living with the deceased. She expected the deceased to leave her the farm, but he sold it before his death and did not leave her the proceeds. Of this fact she was well aware, but still did not leave and return to her husband and children she had abandoned. Now the majority gives her money compensation she never expected as a consolation prize. The amount of money compensation that the majority awards to the plaintiff is minor in comparison to the total value of the decedent’s gross estate. However, the fact that the plaintiff’s recovery is small when compared to the gross value of the estate does not support the court’s holding because the total value of the estate is immaterial. Likewise, the amount of money taken in an armed robbery or the amount of money obtained in a check forgery scheme are immaterial, but the underlying principle of law is this court’s granting of a consolation prize to a woman who has abandoned her family and entered an adulterous relationship with a married man in violation of the laws of this state. In affirming the trial court’s award of $14,600 from the estate to Mrs. Brooks, are we not depriving the decedent’s lawful heirs, his children, of their just and complete inheritance? Is she also allowed to inherit from her own lawful husband should he predecease her *519and before a lawful divorce? Is she entitled to her dower-elective share rights ? Within the past six months, the Illinois Supreme Court, when confronted with a similar problem, commented in Hewitt v. Hewitt, 77 Ill.2d 49, 394 N.E.2d 1204 (1979) as follows:
“The issue of unmarried cohabitants’ mutual property rights, however, as we earlier noted, cannot appropriately be characterized solely in terms of contract law, nor is it limited to considerations of equity or fairness as between the parties to such relationships. There are major public policy questions involved in determining whether, under what circumstances, and to what extent it is desirable to accord some type of legal status to claims arising from such relationships. Of substantially greater importance than the rights of the immediate parties is the impact of such recognition upon our society and the institution of marriage. Will the fact that legal rights closely resembling those arising from conventional marriages can be acquired by those who deliberately choose to enter into what have heretofore been commonly referred to as ‘illicit’ or ‘meretricious’ relationships encourage formation of such relationships and weaken marriage as the foundation of our family-based society? In the event of death shall the survivor have the status of a surviving spouse for purposes of inheritance, wrongful death actions, workmen’s compensation, etc.? And still more importantly: what of the children born of such relationships? What are their support and inheritance rights and by what standards are custody questions resolved ? What of the sociological and psychological effects upon them of that type of environment? Does not the recognition of legally enforceable property and custody rights emanating from nonmarital cohabitation in practical effect equate with the legalization of common law marriage — at least in the circumstances of this case? And, in summary, have the increasing numbers of unmarried cohabitants and changing mores of our society . . . reached the point at which the general welfare of the citizens of this State is best served by a return to something resembling the judicially created common law marriage our legislature outlawed in 1905 ?” Id. at 1207-08.
*520In the case at bar, there could not be a common-law marriage without a lawful divorce. Mrs. Brooks and the deceased were content to maintain their prior marital status while living together in open defiance of their vows and the laws of the state of Wisconsin. This court ought not to allow Mrs. Brooks to assert a right to compensation growing out of a relationship which offends the standards of decency of any age. Their lifestyle has not been condoned, but has been rejected by our legislature. Moreover, the majority’s decision contravenes the intent and policy of “The Family Code” of this state as recited in sec. 245.001(2), Stats., which reads in part as follows:
“(2) Intent. It is the intent of chs. 245 to 248 to promote the stability and best interests of marriage and the family. Marriage is the institution that is the foundation of the family and of society. Its stability is basic to morality and civilization, and of vital interest to society and the state. The consequences of the marriage contract are more significant to society than those of other contracts, and the public interest must be taken into account always. . . .”
The majority, in its opinion, cites a California Supreme Court case, Marvin v. Marvin, 18 Cal.3d 660, 134 Cal. Rptr. 815, 557 P.2d 106 (1976), as establishing the existence of certain mutual property rights between parties living together outside of marriage. California, unlike Wisconsin, has repealed its statute imposing criminal sanctions for sexual activity between unmarried, consenting adults. Thus, in California there is no barrier to adults living together out of wedlock. However, where a state has established a statutory barrier to cohabitation between unmarried adults that law should be given full force and effect and not be undermined. Attempts have been made in Wisconsin, in fact as recently as the current legislative session to abolish or eliminate the *521statutory barrier preventing consenting adults who are married to another person from living together and engaging in adulterous behavior but these attempts have been unsuccessful. In a recent tax case, Ensminger v. Commissioner of Internal Revenue, 610 F.2d 189 (1979) the 4th Circuit Court of Appeals held that a taxpayer could not claim as a dependent a 21 year old woman, not his wife, with whom he lived and supported because their relationship “was in violation of local law.” In that case North Carolina had a statute holding that lewd and lascivious cohabitation between a man and woman not married to each other was a misdemeanor. The court also stated that:
“The regulation of marriage, family life and domestic affairs ‘has long been regarded as a virtually exclusive province of the states.’ ” Id. at 191.
I believe the majority has resorted to an unfortunate form of judicial surgery that can only serve to accelerate the growth of the self-destructive cancer of the ’70’s “immorality” and the decline of the family. If there is to be a direct, frontal assault on the traditional values, principles, ideals and pattern of family life, the very lifeline and backbone of our American society, it should be accomplished within the confines of the legislative halls — not in the courts. The judicial system is ill equipped to deal with a social change of this magnitude because we are without the benefit of up-to-date economic, social and psychological data in the field of domestic relations and the far reaching implications of court approved abandonment and the problems accompanying fatherless and motherless children in the decades ahead. With this decision are we not condoning abandonment? broken homes? Are not 95% of all juvenile law violators from broken homes? Are not by *522far the vast majority of welfare problems directly attributable to abandonment? If there is a need for a change in this far reaching public policy question, and I fail to see the necessity, let it be done after a legislative fact-finding hearing where a more thorough discussion can only lead to greater knowledge and expertise in the solving of this most delicate question. The Illinois Supreme Court in Hewitt v. Hewitt, supra, held that the decision of whether the present law should be changed so.as to grant legal rights or status to a non-marital relationship, such as existed in this case, is best left to the legislature:
“. . . The question whether change is needed in the law governing the rights of parties in this delicate area of .marriage-like relationships involves evaluations of sociological data and alternatives we believe best suited to the superior investigative and fact-finding facilities of the legislative branch in the exercise of its traditional authority to declare public policy in the domestic relations field.” Id. at 1209.
Therefore, I would reverse.

=== CASE 2216888 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:19.354093+00 ===

290 N.W.2d 273 (1980)
Glenn STADHEIM and Harlan Stadheim, Plaintiffs and Appellants,
v.
Richard BECKING, Defendant and Respondent.
No. 12673.
Supreme Court of South Dakota.
Argued January 22, 1980.
Decided March 26, 1980.
R. Greg Bartron of Osheim, Fox & Bartron, Watertown, for plaintiffs and appellants.
Thomas P. Tonner of Maynes, Tonner, Maynes & Tobin, Aberdeen, for defendant and respondent.
FOSHEIM, Justice.
Appellants, Glenn Stadheim and Harlan Stadheim, were engaged in a father-son farming operation. They brought this action to enjoin the respondent from obstructing a drainage ditch and to recover damages. The trial court granted the injunction, but denied damages. This appeal is from that part of the judgment denying damages. We reverse and remand.
On January 26, 1968, appellant Glenn Stadheim was granted an easement for a drainage ditch across a half section of land in Codington County. From 1972 through 1977, respondent Richard Becking leased one of the servient tenement quarters of land. In the summer of 1976, appellant Harlan Stadheim verbally informed the respondent *274 of the easement and warned him not to plug the drainage ditch. In November of 1976, however, the respondent created an obstruction to the drainage system, which was promptly discovered by appellants. Appellants recorded the easement on December 8, 1976, but did nothing further until April 28, 1977, when they had an attorney send the defendant a copy of the easement. On that same day, Harlan Stadheim informed the respondent by telephone that his attorney was mailing him a copy of the easement and demanded that he remove the obstruction so that appellants' newly planted barley would not be damaged in the event of a heavy rain. On May 4, 1977, the appellants checked the drainage ditch and concluded that because the water level had receded, the respondent must have cleaned out the obstruction. On June 14 and 15, 1977, however, a heavy rain occurred and the barley field on the lowland was flooded. Appellants then commenced this action. The respondent removed the obstruction approximately four days after being served with process. In the meantime, damage had been sustained to a large part of appellants' barley field.
Respondent does not seek review of that part of the judgment granting appellant an injunction. The essential issue on appeal is whether the trial court erred in denying damages to appellants by finding that appellants failed to avoid the consequences of the respondent's wrongful act and to mitigate their damages.[1] This rests on the argument that appellants should have promptly sought injunctive relief when they discovered the obstruction.
The doctrine of "avoidable consequences" is expressed in 22 Am.Jur.2d Damages § 43 (1965) as follows:
If the owner of property which is injured or threatened with injury fails to take reasonable precautions or to make reasonable expenditures to guard against or to minimize such injury, he cannot recover damages for any injuries which by the exercise of reasonable care he could have avoided. The law will not allow one to sit idly by and see his property injured or destroyed through forces negligently set in motion by another and then collect damages occasioned by his own failure to make reasonable exertion to arrest such injury or destruction. However, if the owner of property uses reasonable efforts to avoid further losses, his recovery will not be reduced in a suit for damages. [footnotes omitted].
The trial court indicated in its decision that the respondent was aware of the easement and that his actions were the proximate cause of the appellants' damage.
In Chicago, Burlington & Quincy Railroad v. Wheaton, 76 S.D. 467, 80 N.W.2d 868 (1957), the owner of land adjoining the railroad's right-of-way constructed a dam on a creek abutting the railroad grade, thus causing a lake to be formed with the railroad grade being the western retaining wall. When the creek flooded, a substantial portion of the railroad grade was washed away. As in this case, the plaintiff there sought an injunction and damages. The defense was that the railroad company, upon becoming aware of the existence of the dam, should have promptly sought an injunction to mitigate the damages which later occurred. We rejected that claim with this language:
The law does not require a person to take affirmative legal action to prevent another from suffering the result of his tortious act. It would seem to us that the duty to take the ambiguous action that appellant claims respondent should have taken would primarily lie with appellant whose continuous trespass was the underlying cause of the injury to respondent's property.
Hence, respondent cannot be held to have failed to mitigate the damages in *275 this case because he didn't apply for injunctive relief prior to the time of injury.
76 S.D. at 471-72, 80 N.W.2d at 870-71.
We need not decide here whether the Chicago, Burlington & Quincy Railroad v. Wheaton decision allies us with those jurisdictions which do not apply the avoidable consequences rule in cases of intentional and continuous torts involving property,[2] as where one riparian proprietor continuously detains the water in a stream unreasonably with reference to the rights of another riparian proprietor who is damaged thereby. 22 Am.Jur.2d Damages § 44 (1965). According to such cases, there is then an illegal invasion of the property rights of the latter, and he is under no legal obligation to exercise ordinary care to avoid or lessen damages. Price v. High Shoals Manufacturing Co., 132 Ga. 246, 64 S.E. 87 (1909); 78 Am.Jur.2d Waters § 36 (1975). In this case, appellants employed all available avenues of persuasion short of promptly seeking an injunction. Suffice it to say that our holding in Chicago, Burlington & Quincy Railroad v. Wheaton, supra, excuses them from taking affirmative legal action to mitigate their damages under the circumstances existing in this case.
Finally, respondent claims that appellants did not exercise all reasonable efforts to avoid damage because the terms of the easement allow appellants access to the drainage system to clean it out and remove obstructions. It appears, however, that considerable tension and ill-feeling existed between the parties as evidenced by this statement attributed to the respondent and not denied: "You tell that * * * [Stadheim] that there is going to be two funerals." Any attempt on the part of appellants to go upon the land occupied by the respondent and clear the ditch may well have been hazardous. The duty to mitigate requires only reasonable efforts to prevent or minimize the damage within the bounds of common sense. Steel v. J. I. Case Co., 197 Kan. 554, 419 P.2d 902 (1966). It is not reasonable to expect the injured party to risk serious harm. Christman v. Maristella Compania Naviera, 349 F.Supp. 845 (S.D.N.Y.1972).
That part of the judgment denying damages to appellants is reversed. The case is remanded accordingly.
All the Justices concur.
NOTES
[1]  Some jurisdictions draw a distinction between the doctrine of avoidable consequences and the duty to mitigate damages. It was agreed at oral argument by counsel for both sides, however, that the terms may be used interchangeably for present purposes.
[2]  American Smelting & Ref. Co. v. Riverside Dairy & Stock Farm, 236 F. 510 (8th Cir. 1916); Niagara Oil Co. v. Ogle, 177 Ind. 292, 98 N.E. 60 (1962); Allen v. Morris Bldg. Co., 360 Mich. 214, 103 N.W.2d 491 (1960); McCullagh v. Goodyear Tire & Rubber Co., 342 Mich. 244, 69 N.W.2d 731 (1955); Johnston v. City of Galva, 316 Ill. 598, 147 N.E. 453 (1925); Cumberland Grocery Co. v. Baugh's Adm'r, 151 Ky. 641, 152 S.W. 565 (1913); Shannon v. McNabb, 29 Okl. 829, 120 P. 268 (1911).