=== CASE 2225686 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:53.257314+00 ===

245 Minn. 438 (1955)
STATE
v.
WILMA POAGUE.[1]
No. 36,676.
Supreme Court of Minnesota.
October 28, 1955.
Peterson, Karigan & Schneider, for appellant.
Miles Lord, Attorney General, Charles A. Sawyer, City Attorney, and Leo P. McHale, Assistant City Attorney, for respondent.
DELL, CHIEF JUSTICE.
Defendant was convicted in the municipal court of the city of Minneapolis of violating an ordinance of said city enacted for the *439 purpose of restraining and punishing prostitutes.[2] She appeals from the judgment of conviction and also from the order denying her a new trial.
Defendant is a married woman, 40 years of age, and the mother of three young children. For five years prior to the trial she was employed as a bookkeeper at a beauty shop in downtown Minneapolis. Besides working as a bookkeeper, after 6 p.m. she operated a "Date and Escort Club" on the second floor of the building located at 825 Hennepin Avenue. The business of the club, according to her testimony, was to register the names of men and women, make introductions, and match dates. Patrons were charged a registration fee of $10.
On January 6, 1955, at about 6:30 p.m. James Jahr, an officer of the Morals Squad of the city police force, called upon the defendant at her club. He was a stranger to her, and his call was because of a complaint concerning the club received earlier that same day. In an effort to ascertain whether defendant was violating the law, Jahr misrepresented the true facts and told her that he would only be in the city for a few hours since he had to leave by train that night at 9:30 and he indicated that he would like to meet a girl. Defendant placed two or three calls in an effort to procure one for him but to no avail.
She then said, so Jahr testified, "Well, about the only thing I can suggest now is that I can take care of you myself. * * * I could lock the door and the phones could be busy for a while * * * but *440 it is going to cost you $30." Jahr consented and gave her three $10 bills, the serial numbers of which had been previously recorded by another officer. Defendant placed the bills in her desk drawer and locked the interoffice door. The parties then proceeded into an adjoining room where defendant, so Jahr said, took from her purse a carton of prophylactics and stated "I hope you don't mind but you will have to use this," to which he agreed. Both the defendant and Jahr then partially undressed. It is clear from the record, not only from the officer's testimony but from that of the defendant as well, that the defendant was at that time preparing to engage in an act of sexual intercourse with Jahr. He then showed her his badge and placed her under arrest.
1. Defendant contends that the evidence presented did not justify her conviction. The first question presented for our consideration is the meaning, legal force, and effect of the phrase, "indiscriminate sexual intercourse with men," as used in the ordinance. The wording of the ordinance follows the generally recognized definition of prostitution.[3] The word "indiscriminate" is not defined by the ordinance. We must, therefore, look to its common and accepted meaning.[4]
Defendant argues that "indiscriminate" requires a showing that she offered to, or actually did engage in, illicit intercourse with more than one man. Thus, she contends that proof of an offer to have illicit intercourse with only one man, as in this case, is not sufficient to justify her conviction as a prostitute. Defendant cites State v. Marsh, 158 Minn. 111, 196 N.W. 930, in support of her *441 contention. The case does not stand for the proposition suggested by the defendant. That was a case of abduction in which the defendant was indicted for abducting a female under the age of 18 years "for the purpose of prostitution." This court, in holding that the evidence was insufficient to show that the girl was taken for the purpose of prostitution, said (158 Minn. 112, 196 N.W. 930) "There was no proof that the girl was taken for any purpose other than the satisfaction of defendant's lust." The court inferred, however, that if the girl had been motivated by pecuniary gain rather than affection she would have been considered a prostitute even though she engaged in illicit intercourse with but one man.[5]
Conviction as a "common prostitute" places a social stigma on a person that is difficult, if not impossible, to erase. Thus, the evidence should be carefully scrutinized before convicting a woman of such a charge. That does not mean, however, that additional unnecessary impediments should be placed in the way of law enforcement officials. There is no valid reason why the indiscriminate conduct required by the ordinance may not be inferred from the accused's acts, conduct, and utterances, together with the surrounding circumstances. To construe the language of the ordinance as the defendant suggests would thwart the intent and purpose of the municipality in enacting it.[6]
We conclude that whether a woman is a common prostitute does not depend alone upon the number of persons with whom she had illicit intercourse but rather may be judged from all the surrounding circumstances, including her acts, conduct, and utterances in determining whether she was lacking in discrimination within the commonly accepted meaning of that word in submitting to, or offering her body for, illicit sexual intercourse.[7]
*442 Here, the defendant was a complete stranger to officer Jahr. Nevertheless, she was not only willing but, according to Jahr's testimony, suggested that she have sexual intercourse with him for the price of $30. Such conduct indicates a total lack of selection or discrimination other than on a purely pecuniary or economic basis. The trial court so found and was justified in concluding that the acceptance of the monetary consideration under the circumstances of this case carried a sufficient implication of defendant's lack of discrimination in offering to engage in sexual intercourse and that it established such a definition of character as to sustain the conviction despite proof of only one actual offer.[8] This court is bound by the trial court's findings on fact issues where such findings have sufficient support in the evidence.[9]
Municipal ordinances are not criminal statutes and violations thereof are not crimes nor governed by the rules of criminal law except in certain exceptional particulars not present here. Nor is it necessary that violations of an ordinance be proved beyond a reasonable *443 doubt.[10] We conclude that the evidence was amply sufficient to sustain the conviction.
2. Defendant further contends that, if any offense was committed, she was entrapped into its commission. The generally recognized principle of entrapment as a defense is well stated in the case of Newman v. United States (4 Cir.) 299 F. 128, 131, as follows:
"* * * It is well settled that decoys may be used to entrap criminals, and to present opportunity to one intending or willing to commit crime. But decoys are not permissible to ensnare the innocent and law-abiding into the commission of crime. When the criminal design originates, not with the accused, but is conceived in the mind of the government officers, and the accused is by persuasion, deceitful representation, or inducement lured into the commission of a criminal act, the government is estopped by sound public policy from prosecution therefor." (Italics supplied.)
Entrapment exists where it appears that officers of the law lured the accused into committing an offense which he otherwise would not have committed and had no intention of committing.[11] However, the general rule is that it is not unlawful to provide a person with the opportunity to voluntarily and deliberately do what there was reason to believe he would do if afforded the opportunity.[12]
From the evidence it could be found that the defendant was willing to commit the offense of prostitution and that the police arrangements simply afforded her an opportunity to do so. True, the officer misrepresented the facts in an effort to ascertain whether the defendant was violating the law, but it is no defense that the "facilities" for the commission of an offense were purposely placed at the defendant's *444 disposal.[13] Artifice and strategem may be employed to catch those engaged in criminal enterprises. A trap may be set.[14] The trial court found against the defendant on the issue of entrapment and the issue being one of fact, the finding must be sustained.
Affirmed.
NOTES
[1]  Reported in 72 N.W. (2d) 620.
[2]  Minneapolis City Charter and Ordinances (Perm. ed.) 37:25 reads in part:
"PROSTITUTES
"An ordinance to restrain and punish prostitutes.
"Section 1. The offering or subjecting of her body, by any female over the age of ten (10) years, within the City of Minneapolis, to or for the purpose of concubinage or to or for indiscriminate sexual intercourse with men, whether the same be for hire or not, constitutes such female a common prostitute, and any such person so offending, shall, upon conviction thereof before the Municipal Court of said city be punished by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100) or by imprisonment in the county jail not exceeding ninety (90) days." (Italics supplied.)
[3]  Prostitution is the practice of a female offering her body to an indiscriminate intercourse with men, usually for hire. 73 C.J.S., Prostitution, § 1; State v. Thuna, 59 Wash. 689, 109 P. 331, affirmed on reargument, 111 P. 768; People v. Phillips, 70 Cal. App. (2d) 449, 160 P. (2d) 872.
[4]  Webster's New International Dictionary (2 ed.) (1950) defines "indiscriminate" as follows: "Not discriminate; wanting, or not making, discrimination; undistinguishing. * * * That is INDISCRIMINATE which lacks, or shows the absence of, selection or discrimination." See State v. Marsh, 158 Minn. 111, 113, 196 N.W. 930, 931, where the court said: "It is elementary that the legislature is considered to have used common words in their ordinary meaning."
[5]  "However illicit the relation may be, so long as a woman remains faithful to one lover and is motivated only by affection or passion and not pecuniary gain, she is not, in the language of ordinary folk, termed a prostitute." (Italics supplied.) State v. Marsh, 158 Minn. 111, 114, 196 N.W. 930, 931.
[6]  Bates v. State, 27 Ohio App. 391, 161 N.E. 344.
[7]  State v. Rice, 56 Iowa 431, 9 N.W. 343; State v. Clark, 78 Iowa 492, 43 N.W. 273; People v. Berger, 169 N.Y.S. 319, 321: "That the defendant is a common prostitute or nightwalker may be established in a variety of ways. * * * It may also be proved by competent testimony as to what took place at the time, as by proof of conversation in which the defendant took part, or of conduct from which it appears that she was a common prostitute or nightwalker"; State v. Thuna, 59 Wash. 689, 690, 109 P. 331: "Whether a woman is a common prostitute is a question of fact which does not depend alone upon the number of persons with whom she has had illicit intercourse, * * *. Her avocation may be known or inferred from the manner in which she plies it"; Wilson v. State, 17 Ala. App. 307, 84 So. 783; Curran v. United States (D.C. Mun. App.) 52 A. (2d) 121; see Bates v. State, 27 Ohio App. 391, 161 N.E. 344, where the court held that the word "indiscriminate" did not require a showing of illicit relations with persons other than prosecuting witness.
[8]  In State v. Burke, 187 Minn. 336, 245 N.W. 153, arising under the same ordinance, this court, in a per curiam opinion, based its decision on two illicit solicitations in finding the degree of indiscrimination necessary to sustain a conviction under the ordinance. The court, however, did not lay down a rule requiring that at least two different illicit acts be shown. The opinion was based solely upon the circumstances of that particular case.
[9]  Walsh v. Dahl, 195 Minn. 36, 261 N.W. 476.
[10]  State v. Jamieson, 211 Minn. 262, 300 N.W. 809.
[11]  Sorrells v. United States, 287 U.S. 435, 53 S. Ct. 210, 77 L. ed. 413; State v. McCornish, 59 Utah 58, 201 P. 637.
[12]  State v. Boylan, 158 Minn. 263, 197 N.W. 281; People v. Smith, 296 Mich. 176, 295 N.W. 605; State v. Gutilla, 94 Ohio App. 469, 116 N.E. (2d) 208; City of Duluth v. Verdi, 186 Minn. 393, 243 N.W. 394.
[13]  Nelson v. City of Roanoke, 24 Ala. App. 277, 135 So. 312.
[14]  Sorrells v. United States, 287 U.S. 435, 53 S. Ct. 210, 77 L. ed. 413; State v. Boylan, 158 Minn. 263, 197 N.W. 281; 5 Dunnell, Dig. (3 ed.) § 2448b.

=== CASE 9740978 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:46:38.206882+00 ===

JUSTICE DUNN delivered the opinion of the court: Defendant, Christopher Lamb, was convicted of residential burglary (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 38, par. 19—3(a)). Defendant contended in a post-trial motion that a portion of his grand jury testimony was erroneously admitted into evidence because he was not admonished during the grand jury proceedings about certain constitutional rights. The trial court vacated defendant’s conviction and granted him a new trial. The State now appeals and asserts that the trial court erred by ruling that defendant’s grand jury testimony should have been suppressed. We reverse and remand. Defendant was arrested in June 1984 and charged by information with taking part in a residential burglary that had occurred a few weeks earlier. After his arrest defendant gave a statement to Sergeant Richard Wilkinson of the Ogle County sheriff’s department. Defendant was subsequently subpoenaed to testify before a grand jury investigating the burglary. On June 28, 1984, defendant appeared before the grand jury. He was accompanied by counsel. The State’s Attorney asked defendant if his attorney had advised him of his rights in testifying before the grand jury. Defendant stated that his attorney had done so. After asking several questions about events that had transpired on the day of the burglary, the State’s Attorney asked if defendant had anything else to say. Defendant then read a prepared statement which said that he was at the scene of the burglary on the day it took place with other alleged perpetrators but had not participated in the offense. Defendant’s attorney had a copy of the statement introduced into evidence. The grand jury indicted defendant for the residential burglary. On January 7, 1985, defendant was tried in absentia. The trial judge suppressed defendant’s statement to Sergeant Wilkinson but allowed the State to introduce into evidence portions of defendant’s grand jury testimony concerning the statement to Wilkinson. The jury found defendant guilty, and he was subsequently sentenced to a 15-year term of imprisonment. Defendant argued in a prior appeal to this court that his grand jury testimony about the statement to Wilkinson should have been suppressed. This court agreed and granted defendant a new trial. (See People v. Lamb (1988), 176 Ill. App. 3d 203, 208.) The new trial, a bench trial, commenced on August 8,1989. The State sought to introduce defendant’s prepared statement to the grand jury into evidence at the new trial. The trial judge stated that the testimony would only be admitted if the State could show as part of the foundation that defendant had been advised of his Miranda rights. The prosecuting attorney then read the portion of the grand jury testimony in which defendant acknowledged that his attorney had advised him of his rights. Defendant’s attorney at trial argued that this was not sufficient because it could not be determined from the transcript what rights defendant had been advised about by his attorney from the grand jury proceeding. The trial judge rejected this argument and allowed defendant’s prepared statement to the grand jury to be admitted into evidence. The trial judge found defendant guilty. In his post-trial motion defendant contended that his aforementioned grand jury testimony should have been suppressed because he was not advised during the grand jury proceedings of certain rights as allegedly required under section 112 — 4(b) of the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1963 (Code) (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 38, par. 112—4(b)). At the hearing on this motion, the State presented an affidavit from George Fischer, the attorney who represented defendant during the grand jury hearing. The affidavit states that Fischer twice advised defendant prior to his grand jury testimony that defendant had the right to refuse to testify in order to avoid self-incrimination and that anything he said to the grand jury could be used against him in court. The trial judge granted the motion and ruled that defendant was entitled to a new trial. The trial judge ruled that defendant’s grand jury testimony should have been suppressed because a defendant who testifies before a grand jury is entitled to assert his or her fifth amendment right not to testify at trial. The State now appeals.  The reasoning employed by the trial court in granting defendant’s motion was not correct. A defendant who waives his or her privilege against self-incrimination may reassert the privilege and refuse to testify at a subsequent proceeding concerning the same matter. (People v. Ramirez (1983), 98 Ill. 2d 439, 448-49.) Defendant’s reassertion of the privilege does not render defendant’s testimony in the former proceeding inadmissible in the later proceeding, however. (Ramirez, 98 Ill. 2d at 465.) We must therefore determine whether the trial court’s ruling should be sustained upon a different basis. The relevant portion of the statute at issue here, section 112 — 4(b) of the Code, states as follows: “Any person subpoenaed who is already charged with an offense or against whom the State’s Attorney is seeking a Bill of Indictment shall have the right to be accompanied by counsel who shall advise him of his rights during the proceedings but may not participate in any other way. Before any testimony is given by such a person, he shall be informed that he has the right to refuse to answer any question that will tend to incriminate him, that anything he says may be used against him in a court of law, that he has the right to be accompanied and advised of his rights by counsel, and that he will have counsel appointed for him if he cannot afford one.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 38, par. 112-4(b).) The official heading of section 112 — 4 is “Duties of Grand Jury and State’s Attorney.”  The State contends that the above requirements of section 112 — 4(b) were met in this case because defendant’s attorney twice advised him prior to his grand jury testimony that he had a right to refuse to testify and that anything he said to the grand jury could be used against him in court. Relying largely upon the official heading of the statute, defendant argues that the State’s Attorney must provide the necessary admonishments, and a review of the grand jury hearing transcript reveals that the State’s Attorney failed to do so. The official heading or title of a statute can provide guidance in interpreting the provision if its meaning is unclear. (People v. Malone (1979), 71 Ill. App. 3d 231, 232.) We do not believe section 112 — 4(b) is unclear, however, with respect to the issue in question. Section 112— 4(b) merely states that a so-called target witness must be informed of certain rights before he or she gives any testimony at a grand jury proceeding. The provision does not specify who must inform the witness of those rights. By contrast, in other portions of section 112 — 4 the legislature clearly specified that the State’s Attorney was required to perform certain duties. For example, section 112 — 4(d) states that if 12 grand jurors agree that the evidence presented constitutes probable cause that an individual committed a crime, “the State’s Attorney shall prepare a Bill of Indictment charging that person with such offense.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 38, par. 112—4(d).) Additionally a portion of section 112 — 4(b) says that if the State’s Attorney is seeking an indictment against an individual previously charged by complaint or information and there was a finding of no probable cause at the preliminary hearing, “[t]he State’s Attorney shall file an affidavit as part of the Grand Jury record indicating whether the jurors were advised of such previous findings of no probable cause and of their rights based upon such previous finding.” Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 38, par. 112—4(b). Therefore, in section 112 — 4, if the legislature intended to designate certain tasks as duties which were to be performed by the State’s Attorney it explicitly did so. As we have seen, however, section 112 — 4(b) only states that a target witness must be informed of the rights specified therein; it does not say that the State’s Attorney must perform this task. We thus conclude that the affidavit presented by the State which showed that George Fischer twice advised defendant prior to his grand jury testimony that defendant had a right to refuse to testify and that his grand jury testimony could be used against him at trial was sufficient to establish compliance with section 112 — 4(b). The fact that Fischer was present at the grand jury hearing shows that defendant was also aware of his right to have counsel present during his grand jury testimony. We are not persuaded to the contrary by defendant’s contention that the purpose of the statutory requirement at issue is to ensure that defendants receive admonishments concerning their Miranda rights and that the court recognized in Miranda v. Arizona (1966), 384 U.S. 436, 469, 16 L. Ed. 2d 694, 720, 86 S. Ct. 1602, 1625, that such admonishments have greater impact when given by law enforcement officials. The court also recognized in Miranda that the presence of counsel during custodial interrogation is an adequate measure to protect the accused’s right to avoid self-incrimination. (See Miranda, 384 U.S. at 466, 16 L. Ed. 2d at 719, 86 S. Ct. at 1623-24.) Section 112 — 4(b) not only permits a target witness to have counsel present during his or her grand jury testimony, but also further provides that counsel will be appointed if the witness cannot afford one. The legislature apparently felt that while some admonishment requirement was necessary to assure that target witnesses were aware of their Miranda rights, there was no need to require that the admonishments be given by the State’s Attorney in order to lessen the coercive atmosphere of the proceeding when the provision concerning the presence and appointment of counsel was adequate to achieve that end. The dissenting justice contends that section 112 — 4(b) admonishments must be given during the grand jury proceeding itself rendering the admonishments given by Fischer to defendant inadequate. The dissent relies upon a sentence from section 112 — 4(b) which states that a target witness who is testifying before a grand jury is entitled to be accompanied by counsel “who shall advise him of his rights during the proceedings but may not participate in any other way.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 38, par. 112—4(b).) The dissent interprets this sentence as requiring the attorney of a target witness to admonish the witness during the grand jury proceeding about the rights mentioned specifically in the next sentence of the provision including the right to avoid self-incrimination. We disagree with this interpretation. The sentence relied upon in the dissent does not mention any specific rights concerning which the attorney for the target witness must advise the witness. This is in complete contrast to the next sentence in section 112 — 4(b) which, as we have seen, mentions the rights the witness must be informed about, including the right to avoid self-incrimination and the right to the presence of counsel. The fact that the legislature did not specify any rights in the initial sentence indicates that its intention was to provide that the role of the attorney for the target witness is to give the witness advice during his or her testimony whenever the witness has a question about any of his or her rights. The sentence does not require any specific admonishment as the next sentence does. Accordingly, we conclude with regard to the issue presented here that section 112 — 4(b) of the Code only requires that a target witness be informed of the rights specified therein, including the right to refuse to answer incriminating questions prior to presenting any testimony. Because the record in this case reveals that defendant was informed of those rights prior to presenting his grand jury testimony, the circuit court erred by granting defendant’s post-trial motion, vacating his conviction, and ordering a new trial. Accordingly, we reverse the order of the circuit court of Ogle County granting the above relief, reinstate defendant’s conviction and remand the cause for further proceedings. Reversed and remanded. GEIGER, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9740979 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:46:38.210808+00 ===

JUSTICE NICKELS, dissenting: I respectfully dissent from the majority’s interpretation of section 112 — 4(b) of the Code (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 38, par. 112—4(b)). Initially, I disagree with the majority’s conclusion that section 112 — 4(b) is not unclear. While the section directs that a target witness be informed of certain rights, it is not clear who has the duty to so admonish the witness or when such admonishments should be made. The majority finds that the State’s Attorney is not required to apprise a target witness of the rights specified in the last sentence of section 112 — 4(b). The majority does not address who should provide such warnings since the target witness herein, defendant, had an attorney who advised him prior to his testimony. I am not fully persuaded that the State’s Attorney is not charged with the duty to inform a target witness of his or her rights. Although the United States Supreme Court has not conclusively determined that warnings are constitutionally required when a witness testifies before a grand jury (United States v. Mandujano (1976), 425 U.S. 564, 48 L. Ed. 2d 212, 96 S. Ct. 1768; United States v. Washington (1977), 431 U.S. 181, 52 L. Ed. 2d 238, 97 S. Ct. 1814), Illinois has long provided for such warnings (see, e.g., People v. Cochran (1924), 313 Ill. 508). The Illinois Supreme Court has recently overruled Boone v. State (1894), 148 Ill. 440, in People v. J.H. (1990), 136 Ill. 2d 1, based upon the remedy provided in that case (indictment was quashed in Boone because the prosecutor failed to advise the defendant of his constitutional rights before the grand jury), finding instead that suppression of the grand jury testimony would be a proper remedy. I do not read J.H. as providing that there was no violation of the defendant’s rights in Boone which would go unremedied today but only that the remedy in Boone is no longer applicable. I note that the target witness in J.H. had received warnings by the prosecutor. (See generally People v. Green (1988), 179 Ill. App. 3d 1; People v. Wurster (1980), 83 Ill. App. 3d 399.) From a practical standpoint, it would behoove a State’s Attorney to admonish a target witness rather than leave to chance that such rights will be given, as is the result under the majority’s opinion. It would also remove any problems due to the attorney-client privilege should it be necessary to determine whether a witness’ attorney advised the witness of his or her rights off the record. No issue regarding privilege was raised in the instant case. In any event, the majority finds that the instant defendant’s attorney advised defendant of his rights. Under section 112 — 4(b), a target witness has the right to be accompanied by an attorney “who shall advise [the witness] of his rights during the proceedings.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 38, par. 112—4(b).) It is evident from the legislative history that this provision was intended to allow the witness’ attorney to be physically present in the grand jury room during the proceedings. The other justices find, however, that a target witness’ attorney is not required to provide the specific admonishments found in the last sentence of section 112 — 4(b) in advising the witness of his or her “rights.” They interpret the first sentence as merely providing that the role of the attorney for the target witness is to give the witness advice during his or her testimony whenever the witness has a question about his or her rights. I do not disagree that a target witness’ attorney would be present to advise the witness of his or her rights during the proceedings. The attorney’s role in this respect is broader than merely advising the witness of the specific rights enumerated in the last sentence of section 112 — 4(b). However, such “rights” would obviously include the right to refuse to answer questions which may tend to incriminate the witness and that anything the witness says could be used against the witness in a court of law. I find that the last sentence specifies what those “rights” must include, at a minimum, when a witness’ attorney “shall advise him of his rights during the proceedings.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 38, par. 112—4(b).) Furthermore, the phrase “during the proceedings” indicates the time that such admonishments must be given. I base this interpretation on the fact that the purpose of the first sentence in section 112 — 4(b) is to ensure that the witness’ attorney is physically present during the proceedings to advise the witness of his or her rights. Also, prior case law in Illinois shows that such admonishments should be given at or during the proceedings. The close proximity of the warnings to a target witness’ testimony and the solemnity of the grand jury setting seem likely to increase their effectiveness as well. See Washington, 431 U.S. at 191, 52 L. Ed. 2d at 247, 97 S. Ct. at 1821. While the majority’s opinion states that a target witness’ attorney is not required to give any specific admonishments under section 112 — 4(b), the effect of its decision has placed that duty on the witness’ attorney. It acknowledges that certain rights must be given to the target witness, but that there is no duty on the State’s Attorney to so advise the witness. By the majority’s reasoning, the duty to admonish the witness herein fell on the witness’ attorney in the absence of some other individual advising the witness. Thus, the “rights” the witness’ attorney was required to give the witness included the specific rights listed in section 112 — 4(b). The majority’s decision has placed the duty to provide specific admonishments on the witness’ attorney despite their conclusion that there is no such duty on the witness’ attorney. Since the witness’ attorney gave the instant defendant certain admonishments prior to the proceedings, the majority concludes that the statute was met. I disagree. The rights must be given “during the proceedings.” The defendant’s attorney’s affidavit does not provide that the rights were given during the grand jury proceedings but “just prior to” the grand jury testimony. I believe requiring such advice during the proceedings largely removes any questions concerning how long “prior to” the testimony is too long to make the warnings effective. Therefore, I do not believe the statute has been complied with, and I would reverse.

=== CASE 9740980 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:46:39.595303+00 ===

Carr, C. J.
It does not appear that any material facts in this case are in dispute. On February 15, 1952, and for several years prior thereto, plaintiff whs employed by defendant as a turbine operator. He was on said date 39 years of age. His employment was concerned with the operation of a steam turbine which generated electricity for the use of defendant’s plant. Said turbine was located on 2 floors, or levels, of the building in which it was *184placed, separated by a set of metal stairs comprising 26 steps. He was required each hour to make a tour of inspection of the equipment to ascertain if it was operating properly, such tour requiring approximately 5 minutes. Otherwise he observed certain gauges and meters in the furtherance of the same general purpose.
In connection with his work plaintiff was furnished a list of specific instructions as to what should be done in case of a power shortage. It appears from his testimony that 1 such shortage had occurred when he was on duty prior to February 15, 1952. The employer had also caused drills to be carried out by employees connected with the operation of the turbine, the purpose being to' prepare each one concerned with reference to the course to be followed in event of the occurrence of a power shortage.
On the date mentioned plaintiff began work at 10 o’clock in the evening. Approximately an hour later, while in the washroom, he heard a noise that caused him' to hurry up the stairs to the second floor. He then" discovered that the voltage was out of control. From' then on it appears that he followed the instructions that had been given- to him, taking each step as directed and without any uncertainty on his part as to what it was necessary to do. In the course of his operations another employee, who was plaintiff’s superior in the plant, came to his aid. They finally succeeded in getting the equipment working and were Advised by another employee that they might turn on an auxiliary switch, which operation resulted in the receipt of electric current from the Consumers Power Company.' The turbine was then' started. The entire operation consumed approximately 45 minutes.
In-endeavoring to restore the turbine to its normal functioning plaintiff hurried, or ran as he testified, up and down the stairs referred to at least 6 times. *185His instructions did not specifically require him to run, but apparently he was anxious to restore the equipment under his supervision to its normal operation as soon as possible. At one time during the 45-minute period referred to he experienced a dizzy feeling, which he testified passed away as the result of his shaking his head. After the situation had been corrected, however, he again experienced dizziness, and he was taken to the first-aid room of the plant and then to a hospital where he remained for approximately 10 hours. Thereafter he returned to his home and remained in bed for a period of about 3 weeks.
On April 28,1952, as found by the workmen’s compensation commission, he was employed by defendant as a first-aid attendant, which position he held until September 12th, following, when he was laid off. His application to the workmen’s compensation commission for hearing and adjustment of his claim for compensation recited the occurrence on February 15, 1952, as above indicated. Following a hearing before a deputy commissioner an award of compensation was made which, on appeal to the commission, was set aside. On leave granted by this Court, plaintiff has appealed.
The physician who attended plaintiff on the occasion in question was called as a witness in his behalf, testifying that plaintiff had suffered a heart attack referred to as a coronary infarction or coronary occlusion. He summarized his diagnosis of plaintiff’s trouble as follows:
“This particular type of infarction that he had, in my opinion was this: That his circulation, his coronary circulation, was sufficient to take care of the needs of his heart under ordinary conditions. There was probably — must have been — -narrowing of the lumen, that is, of the hole in the blood vessel, and this sudden exertion made the heart demand *186more blood and it couldn’t get it. Consequently he had an ischemia present in the heart muscle due to the fact that that particular part of the blood vessel didn’t give the heart muscle enough blood, and that developed into the infarction.”
The witness further indicated in his testimony, in accordance with the above-quoted statement, that plaintiff on the 15th of February, 1952, did not have a normal heart, and that the coronary thrombosis or occlusion that he then had indicated such fact. It thus appears that there was testimony before the deputy commissioner indicating that there was a pre-existing heart condition apparently unknown to plaintiff. Undoubtedly his activity during the 45-minute period following the power failure aggravated this condition and brought about the heart attack.
Plaintiff bases his claim for compensation on part 2 of the workmen’s compensation law.* It is urged, in substance, that the power failure was a fortuitous event, that it resulted in plaintiff’s disability, and that the compensation commission was in error in declining to award him compensation. The primary question at issue is whether the statute may properly be interpreted as covering the factual situation presented on this record. It is apparent that the failure of the turbine to function properly was not the result of an accident in the ordinary acceptance of that term. Such failure had occurred on prior occasions and once, at. least, when plaintiff was on duty. The conducting of drills in order to prepare defendant’s employees concerned in the operation of the turbine for any such occurrence, and the giving of specific instructions as to each step to be followed in remedying the situation, must be regarded as indicating that power shortages wére anticipat*187ed by the employer and said employees. The loss of power on the occasion in question may not be regarded as accidental or fortuitous.
It must be borne in mind also that plaintiff’s disability did not result directly from the power short-' age or from any accidental occurrence in the course of or arising out of his employment. Rather, his unfortunate condition was brought about by his own acts during the 45-minute period following the development of the power shortage. His running up and down stairs was actuated by his own desire to restore the operation of the turbine as soon as possible. A conclusion that there was an accidental occurrence bringing about the heart attack may not be predicated, under the facts here involved, on the fact that his exertions in conjunction with the preexisting heart condition brought about the result. In Robbins v. Original Gas Engine Co., 191 Mich 122, 128, it was said in referring to the distinction to be observed between the means by which an injury is produced and the result of the producing cause or causes:
“It is not sufficient that there be an unusual and unanticipated result; the means must be accidental— involuntary and unintended. There must, too, be some proximate connection between accidental means and the injurious result.”
The foregoing statement was quoted by this Court in the recent decision in Nichols v. Central Crate & Box Company, 340 Mich 232, 235. See, also, Kutschmar v. Briggs Manufacturing Co., 197 Mich 146, 150 (LRA1918B, 1133).
In United States Mutual Accident Association v. Barry, 131 US 100, 121 (9 S Ct 755, 33 L ed 60) the court, in construing an insurance policy,- said:
“If a result is such as follows from ordinary means, voluntarily employed, in a not unusual or unexpected *188way, it cannot be called a result effected by accidental means; but that if, in the act which precedes the injury, something unforeseen, unexpected, unusual occurs which produces the injury, then the injury has resulted through accidental means.”
In the instant case, as above pointed out, there was nothing in the occurrence preceding plaintiff’s acts that resulted in his disability that was unforeseen or unexpected. On the contrary, power shortages were anticipated and arrangements made to deal with them in a proper and methodical manner when they occurred. An unfortunáte result may not be given the retroactive effect of making a particular event or happening accidental in nature which was not of such character when it took place.
This Court has repeatedly considered eases involving situations analogous to that in the case at bar. In Hagopian v. City of Highland Park, 313 Mich 608, it was held that an employee engaged in lifting cans containing rubbish and who suffered an acute heart ailment was not entitled to compensation, said ailment being an ordinary disease of life to which the public generally is exposed and from which plaintiff had suffered prior to the attack on which his claim was based. As in the case at bar, it was not argued that the heart condition was an occupational disease. Likewise, as here, there was no accident. In O’Neil v. W. R. Spencer Grocer Co., 316 Mich 320, dependents of an employee of the defendant company sought to recover compensation because of his death which was claimed to have resulted from undue exertion on his part in operating his automobile in heavy snow. There was no showing of an accident in which the employee was involved. In holding that the statute did not authorize the payment of compensation under the facts, it was said (p 324):
*189. “In- our opinion, plaintiffs have failed "to supply competent evidence of the fact that deceased received an-injury from an accident growing out of and in the course of his employment. Nor can it he said that the death of Mr. O’Neil was caused from a disease due to causes and conditions which are characteristic of and peculiar to the business of the employer and which arises out of and in the course of the employment. The record substantiates the claim that deceased’s death w.as due to a disease of life to which the public in general is exposed.”
.In Kasarewski v. Hupp Motor Car Corp., 315 Mich 225, 232, it was held that the aggravation of a previously-existing nonoccupational disease is not compensable under part 2 of the workmen’s compensation law unless the aggravating injury is accidental, in character. See, also, Mooney v. Copper Range Railroad Company, 318 Mich 120. In the case at bar it is not disputed that plaintiff was suffering from a pre-existing heart condition. Under the interpretation of the statute- recognized in the cited, cases and in. other decisions of like character, he is not entitled to compensation unless his injury was the result of an accident. However, there is no proof - in this record on which to base a conclusion that, plaintiff sustained an injury by accidental means.
In May v. A. H. Powell Lumber Company, 335 Mich 420, the claim for compensation was presented, by dependents of Victor May who was an employee of the Powell Lumber Company. On the day prior to his death he operated a bulldozer which did not function properly. In consequence fumes and smoke resulted from oil splashed over the motor. This, caused the employee .to cough and gag, and apparently such effects of inhaling the fumes persisted, during the evening and night. The next morning at approximately 4 o’clock his death occurred from a. heart condition. Medical testimony disclosed that.. *190he was in fact suffering from' an advanced coronary condition of a serious nature of which he apparently had no knowledge. It was held that the death of the employee had not been brought about by accidental means aggravating the existing ailment, and that, in consequence, the provisions of part 2 of the work-' men’s compensation law, under which the claim was filed, could not be construed as authorizing compensation.
In denying compensation in the instant case the-commission relied specifically on McGregor v. Conservation Department, 338 Mich 93. There the plain-, tiff employee had a pre-existing arteriosclerosis. He was employed by the defendant as a fire warden. On the 11th of May, 1950, following exertion on his part in fighting fires, he suffered a coronary thrombosis, and later sought compensation for the resulting disability. Citing with approval the decision in Hagopian v. City of Highland Park, supra, it was held that such disability was noncompensable. The plaintiff’s claim was first filed under part 2 of the compensation law and subsequently amended to cover claims under part 2 and part 7, in the alternative. The award of the compensation commission was based on part 7, it being concluded that plaintiff’s injury was not brought about by accidental means. In the case at bar there is no basis for any claim that plaintiff’s disability resulted from conditions characteristic of and peculiar to his employment.
Among other cases, counsel for plaintiff rely on LaVeck v. Parke, Davis & Co., 190 Mich 604. In that case the employee suffered a cerebral hemorrhage, resulting in paralysis, while working in a room heated to a high temperature. An award of compensa-' tion was made on the theory that the hemorrhage was an accidental occurrence, and this Court affirmed on the ground that such finding was supported by *191testimony. Counsel also cite Schlange v. Briggs Manufacturing Co., 326 Mich 552. There this Court affirmed an award of compensation, it appearing from the record that plaintiff employee, while engaged in the performance of his duties, was thrown or jerked against a machine that he was operating, and that at the time he felt a sharp pain in his chest. It was not disputed that such happening was accidental.
Each case arising under the workmen’s compensation law must he determined on the basis of the particular facts involved and in accordance with pertinent statutory provisions. We are bound by such provisions and must interpret them in accordance with the apparent legislative intent. The facts in the case at bar are not in dispute and, in consequence, the question is, as before indicated, whether the statute entitles plaintiff to compensation on the theory that his disability resulted from an occurrence accidental in nature. We cannot so find. The principles followed in the decisions above cited, particularly the McGregor Case, are controlling. It is, we think, unnecessary to cite other decisions in accord therewith. The workmen’s compensation commission was correct in so holding.
The order from which the appeal has been taken is affirmed, with costs to appellee.
Butzel, Sharpe, Boyles, Beid, Dethmers, and Kelly, JJ., concurred with Carr, C. J.
PA 1912 (1st Ex Sess), No 10, as amended (CL 1948, §411.1 et seq. [Stat Ann 1950 Rev and Stat Ann 1951 Cum Supp § 17.141 et seq.~\).

=== CASE 9740981 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:46:39.60204+00 ===

Smith, J.
{dissenting). I regret that I cannot join in the opinion of the Chief Justice. It is my belief that his opinion perpetuates a misconstruction of a remedial statute and amendment thereto and that the law is growing more confused with the passage of time and the accumulation of cases.
Claim is made under part 2 of the act. The theory of the plaintiff is that he suffered an “accident” at *192Ms work. The Chief Justice concludes that he did not. I cannot agree.
What is the meaning of the word “accident” as employed in the workmen’s compensation act? Our Court has frequently and recently divided on the question. Much of our present difficulty traces back .to language employed by Mr. Justice Stone in Adams v. Acme White Lead & Color Works (1914), 182 Mich 157 (LRA1916A, 283, Ann Cas 1916D, 689, 6 NCCA 482). For that reason alone I will examine ■it in some detail. The case involved lead poisoning, an ailment which we would today class as an occupational disease and, in fact, it was so classified by the then industrial accident hoard (p 158). The claim was made on behalf of the injured workman that our act, in granting compensation for “a personal injury arising out of and in the course of his employment,” was broad enough to cover occupational diseases. The Court held not. It held that the act required an accidental injury. As to what was an accident, it cited and quoted (p 164) from Hensey v. White, (1900) 1 QB 481, 485 (69 LJQB 188, 81 LT 767) the following language, ■ which r in essence' is found in our cases up to the present time:
“ ‘I think the idea of something fortuitous and unexpected is involved in both words, “peril” or “accident.” ’ ”
The Hensey Case, so relied upon in both language and, subsequently, in principle, warrants critical examination. It was a case in which.a workman was injured (ruptured) while “doing his ordinary work in the ordinary way,” there being nothing fortuitous ■ in what happened. For this reason it was held that he had not suffered an accident and recovery was denied.
There are 2 difficulties with this English decision. The first is that such construction of the word “ac*193cident” does violence to our language. Words in a statute should receive their ordinary meanings, unless the context forces some subtle use. In our usual speech, when a man goes to his work and breaks his leg, or ruptures himself in the performance of such work, .even though it was merely his' ordinary work done in the ordinary way, he has suffered an accident at his work. It is no less an accident, of course, if something falls from the ceiling and hurts him. That, too, is an “accident.” The idea of the unexpected is predominant, and it is present in both uses of the word. The difference in the uses, putting it very roughly, is that the one use refers to a cause and the other to an effect. But both uses are permissible and both form a part of our constant, daily speech.
Not only did the construction of the English court in the Hensey Case do violence to the language, but also to the plain purpose, of the act. The statute, as well as the employer, takes human beings as it finds them. Not all are stalwart and able. The weak and the stumbling must also work, and, if they are injured in their work, even though one stronger might not have been, they are equally protected. Hills v. Oval Wood Dish Co., 191 Mich 411. There are some who complain that this means opening wide the flood gates, turning a workmen’s compensation act into general insurance for the sick and needy. Not so. The claimant still must prove a direct causal connection between work and injury. This is the essential link. Lacking it, the act does not speak. But if the injury comes from the work, compensation should be paid, even though one of more robust physique would not have suffered therefrom.
Not surprising is it, then, to find that the Hensey Case was overruled, in the land of its birth, after a very brief span of life. The point at issue, the precise point now plaguing our commission, our *194bench, and our bar, was explored in detail by the highest English court in Fenton v. J. Thorley & Co., Ltd., (1903) AC 443 (72 LJKB 787, 89 LT 314), some 10 years prior to our decision in the Adams Case. This Fenton Case was, like the quoted Eensey Case, a rupture case. According to Lord Macnaghten (p 445):
“Fenton was a man of ordinary health and strength. There was no evidence of any slip, or wrench, or sudden jerk. It may be taken that the injury occurred while the man was engaged in his ordinary work, and in doing or trying to do the very thing which he meant to 'accomplish.”
Lord Macnaghten then continued, commenting on Hensey v. White, supra (pp 445, 446):
“The court of appeal held that the injury which Fenton sustained was not ‘injury by accident’ within the meaning of the act. In so holding they followed an earlier decision of the court in the case of Hensey v. White, which in its circumstances is not distinguishable from the present case. In Hensey v. White a passage was cited from the opinion of Halsbury L.C. in Hamilton, Fraser & Co. v. Pandorf & Co.,* in which his lordship said: T think the idea of something fortuitous and unexpected is involved in both words “peril” or “accident.” ’ Founding themselves upon that expression, the learned judges of the court of appeal held in Hensey v. White, as they have held here, that there was no accident, because (to quote the leading judgment) there was ‘an entire lack of the fortuitous element.’ What the man ‘was doing,’ it was said, ‘he was doing deliberately, and in the ordinary course of his work, and that which happened was in no sense a fortuitous event.’ To the expression as used by Lord Halsbury in the passage in which it occurs, no possible objection can be taken; but it is, I think, to be regretted that the *195word .‘fortuitous’ should have been applied to the term ‘injury by accident’ in the workmen’s compensation act. If it means exactly the same thing as ‘accidental,’ the use of the word is superfluous. If it introduces the elemeint of haphazard (if I may use the expression), an element which is not necessarily involved in the word- ‘accidental,’ its use, I venture to think, is misleading, and not warranted by anything in the act.”
Lord Robertson’s opinion concurred. Addressing himself to the meaning of the word “accident” he held as follows (p 452):
“Much poring over the word ‘accident’ by learned counsel has evolved some subtle reasoning about these sections. I confess that the arguments seem to me to be entirely over the heads of parliament, of employers, and of workmen. No one out of a law court would ever hestitate to say that this man met with an accident, and when all is said, I think this use of the word is perfectly right. The word ‘accident’ is not made inappropriate by the fact that the man hurt himself. This use is indeed directly sanctioned by the act itself, for s. 1, sub-s. 2 (c),* plainly implies that an accident giving right to compensation may be attributable to the fault of the injured man himself. In the present instance the man by an act of over-exertion broke the wall of his abdomen. Suppose he had by the same act broken his leg, the question would he the same. But suppose the wheel had yielded and been broken by exactly the same act, surely the breakage would be rightly described as accidental. Yet the argument against the application of the act is in this case again exactly the same — that there is nothing accidental in the matter, as the man did what he intended to do. The fallacy of the argument lies in leaving out of account the miscalculation of forces, or inadvertence *196to them, which is the element of mischance, mishap, or misadventure.”
The house of lords, then, and upon this reasoning, overruled the case of Hensey v. White, supra. In the same decision the court, through Lord Macnaghten (p 448), used the expression, also quoted in the Adams Case (p 164), that:
“The expression ‘accident’ is used in the popular and ordinary sense of the word as denoting an unlooked-for mishap or an untoward event which is not expected or designed.”
Not only is it clear from the quotations heretofore cited that the court completely rejected the theory of.the fortuitous event (as distinguished from an incident in the course of ordinary work) as the sole meaning of the word “accident” but Lord Macnaghten explains in detail (p 446) the meaning of the term “mishap” in the above quotation, employed by our Court in the Adams Case:
“If a man, in lifting a weight or trying to move something not easily moved, were to strain a muscle, or rick his back, or rupture himself, the mishap in ordinary parlance would be described as an accident. Anybody would say that the man had met with an accident in lifting a weight, or trying to move something too heavy for him.”
The Court accordingly held for the claimant, that in suffering the rupture, he had suffered an accident.
We note, in passing, that there thus seems to be much support for the statement in Justice Potter’s dissent in Twork v. Munising Paper Co., 275 Mich 174, 184, almost a quarter-century later, that the decision in the Adams Case “is based upon false premises and disregards the plain language of the statute.”
*197Why have we reviewed in detail these English cases? Certainly they do not control us. Yet we are shortly to examine the 1943 amendments to our act and their full significance can be appreciated only against the background of the pre-1943 situation. It is important to this background to bear in mind that the language of our Michigan act was adopted from the English and Scottish acts on the same subject (Hills v. Blair, 182 Mich 20), and that, generally speaking, under such conditions of adoption it will be presumed that the gloss of decision was recognized by the adopting State and was imported with the act. People, ex rel. Attorney General, v. Welch’s Estate, 235 Mich 555. Our decisions, however, followed the overruled Hensey theory, namely, that a workman who is injured in his employment while doing his ordinary work in the ordinary way has not suffered an accident. We thus assigned a restricted and curtailed meaning to the word “accident,” a meaning at variance with its meaning in ordinary speech. Since such meaning excluded that great body of cases in whieh a man suffered disabling injury at his work through no fault of his own, but without the intervention of any fortuitous or outside force or condition, subtle distinctions grew through the years, as the court sought, as always, to interpret the act in the light of its objectives in the mass of cases pressing upon it. In some, in fact, I find nothing more than an unexpected result of doing one’s ordinary and usual acts in his . usual way. Thus in Watson v. Publix Riviera Theatre, 255 Mich 115, the plaintiff was an actor who.turned somersaults. On one of them “plaintiff’s leg gave way and he fell.” The Court held that his injuries were the result of an accident. As recently as Nichols v. Central Crate & Box Co., 340 Mich 232, 236, we interpreted this case as involving a truly accidental occurrence. It involved, we said (p 237), *198“the sudden giving way of a member and consequent falling.” Yet in the case at bar we have the sudden giving way of the heart and it is held no accident. I cannot reconcile the 2 cases. Does proper distinction lie in the circumstance that in the case before us claimant had (unknown to himself) a pre-existing heart difficulty? ' If so, we are confronted with Hurley v, Selden-Breck Construction Co., 193 Mich 197. There the plaintiff was Arthur Hurley, a brick mason by trade. While lifting a terra cotta window sill into place he suffered a strangulated hernia. It was argued that he had not suffered an accidental injury. But our Court allowed, compensation. It cited (p 199) with approval Bell v. Hayes-Ionia Co., 192 Mich 90, 94, and held that:
“‘structural weakness or actual pain, antedating the injury alleged, in the region where the injury occurred, does not preclude a recovery if the injury itself is distinct and the result of a particular strain causing a sudden protrusion of the .intestine.’ ”
Again I have trouble with reconcilation. The claimant’s heart condition was equally the result of a particular strain. Dr. Ramsdell so testified.
As the cases have multiplied through the years the distinctions have grown more subtle and more numerous and I must confess anguish at any thought of reconcilation on sound differences in legal principle. Fact differentiations, of course, can always be pointed out, but they furnish no guide for tomorrow’s case. The truth of the matter is, we have been attempting the impossible, the differentiation of the accidental means from the accidental result, a differentiation easy to hypothesize but impossible to make in practice. Thus a man is at work. He is straightening a bent piece of material. He does it every day. On this occasion he exerts too much pressure. If the material breaks, we say he broke *199it by accident. If his abdominal wall breaks, we say it is no accident. Or is it? We commence onr laborious search. Is this his ordinary work? Or does his ordinary work involve less stubborn material? How will we define the strength of material which causes him to pass the border enclosing ordinary work? Bid his work involve over-exertion? What is standard exertion for the work?
This factor of the exertion of the claimant has assumed a role of much prominence in our determination of whether or not the workman had suffered an accident. This is probably an inevitable result of our emphasis upon the fortuitous element to the exclusion of the ordinary work done in the ordinary way. The exertion test goes back for many years. We find it before the 200th volume of the Michigan reports and we find it in today’s advance sheets. In Stombaugh v. Peerless Wire Fence Co., 198 Mich 445, a heart-failure case, the industrial accident board found that the workman was “not used to this heavy work and exertion.” This Court, in reversing the award, pointed out that “the wall of one auricle being '[was] so thin that ‘any exertion at all might have been the cause of its breaking.’ ” And in Nichols v. Central Crate & Box Co., 340 Mich 232, 237, we note that the claimant’s work “ ‘required a degree of physical exertion not shown to have been unusual to or greater than that ordinarily experienced in the general field of common labor. Exertion to that extent did not constitute a fortuitous event.’ ”
But the difficulty with making compensation turn upon the difference between ordinary exertion and overexertion is that it forces the commission and this Court into an appraisal of degrees of exertion as between respective claimants, or as between respective jobs. If we apply the exertion test to measure exertion beyond the capacity of the ordinary person, then *200the workman who is, unfortunately, substandard in strength can never recover, while his muscularly well-endowed brother will always receive compensation. I cannot accept this result. I cannot believe that it was the legislative intent to protect only the strong, letting the weak lie where they fall.
The act contemplates no such appraisal of degrees of exertion. It takes the workman as it finds him. What is overexertion for one is underexertion for another. What is stress and strain for one is relative peace and quiet for a third. Humans differ in all of these characteristics.
The exertion test leads to equally untenable results if we apply the test to measure the exertion usually required by the employee’s job. In such event, if we have a job that is so voracious in its demands upon the human system that no one, not even the strongest, can do the work and keep his health, then no one will ever recover compensation for it. I cannot conclude, either, that it was the legislative intent to give such work immunity, so far as compensation is concerned. Combinations of the above tests may be employed, but aside from the confusion and complications resulting there is a decisive and compelling circumstance militating against the use of any measure of exertion as a test for compensability: The legislature has set up no standard whatever for guidance. A factor so crucial could not have been left undefined,- had it been the legislative intent that it control.
The question we have been forced to answer, then, upon our interpretation of the meaning of the aet, is this: Is the injury the unexpected result of ordinary work or is it the ordinary result of unexpected work? This question is nothing more or less than a verbal puzzle. As long as compensation is made to turn on it we will have constant litigation and distinc*201tions will multiply beyond all hope of reconciliation. Mr. Justice Cardozo’s concern in bis dissent in Landress v. Phoenix Mutual Life Insurance Co., 291 US 491, 499 (54 S Ct 461, 78 L ed 934, 90 ALR 1382), comes forcibly to mind:
“The- attempted distinction between accidental results and accidental means will plunge this branch of the law into a Serbonian bog.”
Thus we draw close to the 1943 amendment. By the year 1941 there was much publicly expressed dissatisfaction with the act. Two governors, one now a distinguished member of this Court, had recommended revision. The law, it was said, was “inadequate today for our present industrial economy.” Amendments were recommended “to bring about comprehensive liberalization of its provisions.” (Anderson v. General Motors Corporation, 313 Mich 630.) A study commission was set up accordingly.  Its report is found in 1943 House Journal, page 318, et seq. The matter of personal injuries received much attention. The committee’s report (not unanimous) read in part as follows (p 320):
“Part II
Definition of Injuries; and Computation of Benefits
“One change in this part of the proposed act abolishes the schedule of 31 occupational diseases contained in the 1937 amendment to the present law and also abolishes the requirement that injuries be accidental.”
Other members of the study commission were not, however, like minded. Their views respecting the matter of the requirement of an “accident” and their *202statutory recommendation with respect thereto follow verbatim (p 337):
“But we do insist that there should not he deleted from the present law, as the other 2 voting members propose, the fact that all other personal injuries must be accidental. Otherwise it is evident to any reasonable minded person that grave injustice will be worked against an employer and force up insurance rates.”
It was proposed by them that section 1 of part 2 he amended to read as follows (p 337):
i “Sec. 1. If an employee receives an accidental personal injury arising out of and in the course of his employment by an employer who is at the time of such injury subject to the provisions of this act, he shall be paid compensation benefits in the manner and to the extent hereinafter provided, or, in case of his death resulting from such injury, compensation benefits shall he paid to his dependents as hereinafter defined.”
It is fair to say, then, that the legislature had clearly before it at this time the question of whether or not the requirement of accident in the act, as interpreted by the Court, should be retained. Its decision is found in the act as amended and passed, reading, in part, as follows:
“Sec. 1. An employee, who receives a personal injury arising out of and in the course of his employment by an employer who is at the time of such injury subject to the provisions of this act, shall he paid. compensation in the manner and to the extent hereinafter provided, or in case of his death resulting from such injuries such compensation shall be paid' to his dependents as hereinafter defined. The term ‘time of injury’ or ‘date of injury’ as used in this act shall in the case of a disease or in the case of an injury not attributable to a single event he the last day of work in the employment in which *203the employee was last subjected to the conditions resulting in disability or death.” (CL 1948, § 412.1, ! [Stat Ann 1950 Rev § 17.151].) '
It will be observed that the insertion of the suggested word “accidental” has been rejected. It should also be noted that the same amendment undertook a wholesale excision of the words “accident” and “accidental injury,” from other portions of the act, and the substitution of the word “injury.” Anderson v. General Motors Corporation, supra. Our words in People v. Adamowski, 340 Mich 422, 429, would seem particularly applicable at this point:
“When the legislature affirmatively rejected the statutory language which would have supported the State’s present view, it thereby made its intention crystal clear. We should not, without a clear and cogent reason to the contrary, give- a statute a construction which the legislature itself plainly refused to give.”
Legislative action of even greater significance was,' however, embodied in the same amendment. The legislature, it will be noted, has now authorized compensation for personal injury due to disease, for per-1 sonal injury not attributable to a single event, and for personal injuries attributable to a single event. Why the employment of this word “event” in speaking of injuries? It will be recalled that the word “accident,” in its common usage, and as interpreted by the highest English court in the Fenton Case, involved both the idea of cause and the idea of effect. One might suffer an accident, not in doing his ordinary work in the ordinary way, but by some wholly unexpected or fortuitous'condition or incident. Such was the “cause” aspect.. Or he might suffer an accident as the unexpected result of some ordinary task, such as the rupture case. This is the “effect” aspect. As we have seen, however, our *204Court interpreted the word “accident” to embody only the cause aspect, excluding the unexpected result of ordinary work. The word “event,” however, is properly subject to no such ellipsis. It is clearly and indisputably a word referring to both cause and result. It is a word synonymous with occurrence and includes all of the steps or incidents from first cause to final effect. Should authority be demanded, beyond the authority of common speech, Webster’s New International Dictionary (2d ed) will illumine the point. The result, then, is that the word “accident,” even where applicable in the act and its title, has now been restored to its original meaning. It refers to both cause and effect. It includes not only the unexpected incident or condition but also the unexpected result of ordinary work. Thus we have come full circle and have reached by remedial legislation the same result as the English courts by interpretation.
It is my opinion, then, that the word “accident” as employed in the act comprehends the unexpected result, as well as the unexpected cause, that we should now so hold, and that we should overrule those cases inconsistent, therewith. Let it not be thought that such action would unsettle the law of our jurisdiction. Our Court has divided repeatedly on this matter, and such divisions have contributed little to clarity or certainty in a branch of the law which, above many others, should be as certain, as clear, and as nonlitigious as possible.
The State of Florida has undergone similar travail on this very question. It would not be fruitful to point out in detail how the Florida law became confused and unsettled. The supreme court’s recent action, in Gray v. Employers Mutual Liability Ins. Co. (Florida), 64 So2d 650, 651, is self-explanatory :
*205“It is enough, then, if there is an unexpected result, even though there was no unexpected cause, such as a slip, fall or misstep, in order to constitute an ‘accident’ within the meaning of the workmen’s compensation law; and insofar as the McNeill and Peterson Cases, supra,  hold that an injury is not compensable if it happens while the claimant is performing his ordinary work in the usual manner, these decisions are hereby modified, and we re-affirm the rule laid down in Duff Hotel Co. v. Ficara, 150 Fla 442 (7 So2d 790), that an unexpected injury received in the ordinary performance of a duty in the usual manner is an injury ‘by accident’ within the purview of the workmen’s compensation law, without the showing of anything fortuitous.”
Upon the above analysis, Wieda is entitled to compensation. The disability arose out of and in the course of employment, and, as the commission properly found, there was a direct causal relation between the power failure and his heart failure.
But even should my view as to the proper interpretation of the word “accident” be rejected, Wieda is still entitled to compensation under the facts of this particular case, because certain distinctions, urged upon us by the plaintiff, must be made.
The defendant, American Box Board Company, insists that there was no “accident.” It argues, citing Nichols v. Central Crate & Box Company, supra, that, “this Court has consistently maintained that it is not sufficient that the results be unexpected— the means must be involuntary or unintended.” It then points out that the remedial steps to be undertaken in event of power failure had often been rehearsed, hence, it argues that it could not be said that the incident was unexpected, though, of course, the results (the physical injuries and death) were. *206As it says: - “One does not train for, drill and rehearse an ‘accident.’” It relies upon the case of McGregor v. Conservation Department, 338 Mich 93, 101, in which compensation was denied a fire warden, the Court stating:
“In the instant case, plaintiff, at most, was doing .the hard labor customarily performed by him and ■fellow employees during at least 2 months of each ■year which required a degree of physical exertion not shown to have been unusual to or greater than ■that ordinarily experienced in the general field of ■ common labor. Exertion to that extent did not 'constitute • a fortuitous event.”
It should be observed, in connection with the McGregor Case, that the compensation commission relied upon this case in denying Wieda compensation, its holding in this' connection being as follows:
“There can be.no doubt from an examination of the medical testimony that there was a causal relationship between the power failure and the coronary occlusion through aggravation of an unknown preexisting arteriosclerotic condition in his heart. The • disability arose out of and in the course of the employment. However, we can see no valid distinction between this case and the case of McGregor v. Conservation Department, 338 Mich 93, decided by our. Supreme Court on November- 27, 1953. . The award of the deputy commissioner is reversed and the plaintiff is not entitled to compensation.”
The plaintiff-appellant, on the other hand, insists that the power failure was an unexpected and fortuitous event, in the sense heretofore employed by "this Court, and that its remedy involved more than ordinary exertion.. In partial reply to the McGregor Case, supra, he points to a night watchman case (Schroetke v, Jackson-Church Co., 193 Mich 616 [LRA1917D, 64]), in which the premises caught *207on fire, the night watchman’s previously-affected heart gave out due to his fire-fighting efforts, and this Court reversed an order denying compensation, stating (pp 621, 625),:
“We think this case fairly presents the question whether compensation can be recovered where death or disability results from overexertion and excitement caused by an accidental fire such as broke out in this case, where the deceased was afflicted with heart ailment, and where death was due to heart failure caused by deceased’s condition of the heart and the excitement and exertion incident to the fire. % * *
“In the instant case the whole circumstance, including the fire, the overexertion and the excitement of the deceased, may be said to have been an accident. It was certainly a fortuitous circumstance.”
If I were called upon to base this decision upon whether or not there was an “accident,” in the sense of an extraneous, fortuitous occurrence as distinguished from ordinary work, I would feel no hesitation in saying that there was. The emergency confronting the plaintiff was serious in the extreme. The plant was threatened with the “disintegration,” according to the record, of a revolving turbine. The fact that careful foresight makes plans for rapid and efficient remedial measures in case of an accident makes the accident nonetheless á threatening emergency when and if it occurs. The danger of the turbine’s distintegration, the plaintiff’s repeated and hasty trips up and down the stairs as various measures of relief (yes, measures long planned for such a catastrophe) were employed, the sense of pressure and peril so well described in the record, all constituted and contributed to unusual exertions in coping with an out-of-the-ordinary and fortuitous event. The “rehearsal” aspect is completely imma*208terial. There is constant rehearsal of fires in our school buildings, and of “man overboard” at sea, as well as of power failures in industrial power plants. Let those who will deny that, when the fire actually occurs, or the seaman falls overboard, the dreaded emergency does not involve the most intense pressures and exertions, far beyond normal routine, eveiT the routine of drills. Our mind goes back to the morning of Pearl Harbor. Our ■ understanding is that Admiral Bellinger, at 0758 that fateful morning, from his headquarters on Ford Island, broadcast the news of the Japanese attack simultaneously with the dropping of the first bomb. His words were “Air Raid, Pearl Harbor.” Then, knowing something of the human reaction we must take into account in the case now before us, he added the pregnant words: “This is no drill.” It was the real thing. There is a vast difference.
But I do not place my decision on this ground, valid though I believe it to be. I place it on the ground that the word “accident” includes both the unexpected cause and the unexpected result, that the claimant suffered an accident, an injury from a single event or series thereof which arose out of and in the course of his employment.
The commission’s denial of award should be reversed and the award of the deputy commissioner should be affirmed, with costs to appellant.
(1887) 12 AC 518 (57 LJ QB 24, 57 LT 726).
This is the wilful misconduct exclusion; Michigan counterpart, section 2 of part 2 of original act (PA 1912 [1st Ex Sess], No 10, now CL 1948, §412.2 [Stat Ann 1950 Rev §17.152]).

=== CASE 2225697 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:53.478644+00 ===

72 N.W.2d 636 (1955)
William MURPHY, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
FARMERS EDUCATIONAL AND COOPERATIVE UNION OF AMERICA, NORTH DAKOTA DIVISION commonly known as North Dakota Farmers Union, a corporation, Defendant and Appellant.
No. 7503.
Supreme Court of North Dakota.
October 27, 1955.
*638 Quentin Burdick, Fargo, for defendant and appellant.
Hjellum, Weiss & Nerison, Jamestown, for plaintiff and respondent.
SATHRE, Judge.
This is an action for libel. The defendant made a motion to strike part of the complaint. Upon denial of the motion to strike, defendant interposed a demurrer to each of the four causes of action alleged in the complaint. The demurrers were overruled and defendant was given thirty days within which to answer. Defendant answered by general denial, and further alleged that the complaint did not state facts sufficient to state a cause of action; that the alleged defamatory words set forth in the complaint are true, and that the defamatory words complained of constitute fair comment of a public official. The case was tried to the court and a jury. The jury returned a verdict for the plaintiff. Judgment was entered accordingly and the defendant appealed from the judgment and the whole thereof.
The complaint, the sufficiency of which is attacked is as follows:
Plaintiff for his cause of action against the defendant alleges:
"1.
"That the Defendant is now and has been at all times mentioned in this Complaint a domestic corporation.
"2.
"That the North Dakota Union Farmer, a newspaper published semimonthly in the City of Jamestown, North Dakota, with additional entry at Frederic, Wisconsin, is and at all times mentioned in this Complaint has been the official organ of the Defendant; that said newspaper enjoys a wide circulation among the citizenry of North Dakota, principally among farmers.
"3.
"That on June 16, 1952, the Defendant, through its official organ, the North Dakota Union Farmer, did knowingly, intentionally, wilfully and maliciously print, publish and cause to be circulated among its subscribers, purchasers and others in a regular issue of said paper of that date, the following statements, to-wit:
"(a) In a heavily outlined rectangle on page one:
"`Inside Stuff
"`What's the "inside" of the dairy industry of North Dakota. This being Dairy Month, you'll probably be interested in reading about it on Page 6, this issue.'
"(b) On page six, under a headline, `June "Dairy Month" Points Up Problems Of ND's Dairy Industry':
"`Victims of "Centralizers"
"`North Dakota is known as a `butterfat' state. Only a small portion of the total milk production in the state is sold as "whole milk". This is true for a number of reasons: sparse herds, seasonal milk production, long distances, bad winters which hamper delivery.
*639 "`A great percentage of the milk is separated on the farms. At infrequent intervals the cream is delivered at "centralizer" way stationsit stands in unsanitary placesis handled by people who handle the cream as "an accommodation"and often the cream sits at a railroad station in the hot sun or freezes in cold weather. The total result is that the state has a reputation for "poor" butter.
"`By the very nature of their operations, "centralizers" are not interested in `quality' butter. Quality butter can be made only from fresh sweet creamand because of the time-lag set-up of the centralizersfrom farm, to cream station to processing plantsweet cream is an impossibility and poor butter is the result.'
"(In bold face type)
"`But the big centralizers like Fairmont, Armour, Swift, Cudahy, and Mandan (in North Dakota) control the pricing of butter and since almost all of their butter is of poor quality, they have a stake in poor quality production and they favor and maintain a pricing system of butter which protects poor quality.
"`But this pricing system does not work to the advantage of the North Dakota dairy farmer. He takes a low score on his butterfat but the centralizers take a big price for the finished "poor" butter. Proof of this can be found on the market places. There is only a cent or fraction difference between high score butter and low score butter. But the farmers takes a very low price for low-score cream.
"`There is little incentive for farmers to produce better quality as there is in the case of premium wheat, premium durum, barley, etc.
"`Dairy Organization
"`The big centralizers also dominate the American Butter Institute and the American Dairy Association. Ostensibly these organizations are established to encourage the dairy industrymake it more profitable for the farmersincrease use of dairy products,' etc., etc.
"(In bold face type)
"`But the big centralizers levy a heavy check-off from the farmer for each pound of milk or butterfat that is marketed and then, in effect, use the funds to `sell' consumers second grade dairy products.
"(In bold face type)
"`At the same time the big centralizers like Swift, Armour, Cudahy and others are using the farmers' money to help pay advertising costs, these same big companies are spending millions of dollars to promote the increased use of butter substitutesprincipally oleomargarine.
"`Dairy Commissioner
"`Furthermore, in North Dakota you have a state official, the State Dairy Commissioner, Bill Murphy, spending most of his time acting as the errand boy for the ADApersonally supervising the cream check deductions every spring and enjoying ADA expense accounts that nearly equal his state pay. This is wrong. Particularly when ADA is completely dominated by the big centralizers.
"`The Dairy Commissioner has, as one of his principal duties, the job of enforcement. It is a strange sight then to see an enforcement officer soliciting fundsit's like having a police chief soliciting funds for advertising in a police handbook from the tavern operators. And farmers are given no general accounting of how the funds are used.
"(In bold face type)
"`Anyone reading the Dairy Record (the industry's magazine) could find out that the dairy enforcement division in Minnesota reports a number of arrests each week. No such arrests have *640 ever been reported in this state. Apparently the dairy commissioner is more concerned with collecting funds for the centralizers' ADA than he is with performing his job as enforcement officer and supervisor of the industry in the farmers' behalf.
"`A few year ago, a number of bills were introduced in the state legislature that would correct some of the problems of milk distribution in the state. Something that the Dairy Commissioner and the State Department of Agriculture should have supported vigorously. Instead, they led the fight against the bills.
"`Dairying Has a Place
"`With all the thousands upon thousands of dollars which farmers of this state have kicked into the ADA and with the thousands upon thousands which taxpayers have paid to maintain the Dairy commissioners department, no real effort has been made to promote the dairy industry in this state.
"`The only good workand it has been considerable considering the funds allotted to ithas been accomplished by the small group of earnest scientists and trained men at the NDAC'.
"4.
"That the statements which refer to Bill Murphy and to the Dairy Commissioner are directed at the Plaintiff William Murphy and were deliberately designed to, and did convey to the readers of the North Dakota Union Farmer the fact that the person to whom said statements referred was the Plaintiff, and said statements are false and defamatory.
"5.
"That at all times the Plaintiff has been a man of ability, integrity, honesty and industry and has at all times since becoming Dairy Commissioner of the State of North Dakota diligently, honestly, conscientiously and industriously pursued the duties of said office to the best of his ability.
"6.
"That the aforesaid statement:
"`Furthermore, in North Dakota you have a state official, the State Dairy Commissioner, Bill Murphy, spending most of his time acting as the errand boy for the ADApersonally supervising the cream check deductions every spring and enjoying ADA expense accounts that nearly equal his state pay.'
was deliberately designed to, and did convey the impression and statement that the Plaintiff was morally dishonest, derelict in his duty, impotent in his work, and said statement was libelous per se.
"7.
"That the aforesaid statement:
"`The Dairy Commissioner has, as one of his principal duties, the job of enforcement. It is a strange sight then to see an enforcement officer soliciting funds,it's like having a police chief soliciting funds for advertising in a police handbook from the tavern operators.'
was deliberately designed to, and did convey the impression and statement that the Plaintiff was morally dishonest, derelict in his duty, and guilty of misfeasance in the performance of his work and said statement was libelous per se.
"8.
"That the aforesaid statement:
"`Apparently the Dairy Commissioner is more concerned with collecting funds for the centralizers' ADA than he is with performing his job as enforcement officer and supervisor of the industry in the farmers' behalf.'
was deliberately designed to, and did convey the impression and statement that the Plaintiff was morally dishonest, *641 derelict in his duty and guilty of misfeasance and nonfeasance in the performance of his work and said statement was libelous per se.
"9.
"That the aforesaid statement:
"`With all the thousands upon thousands upon thousands of dollars which farmers of this state have kicked into the ADA and with the thousands upon thousands which taxpayers have paid to maintain the Dairy Commissioner's department, no real effort has been made to promote the dairy industry in this state.'
was deliberately designed to, and did convey the impression and statement that the Plaintiff was morally dishonest, derelict in his duty and guilty of nonfeasance in the performance of his work and said statement was libelous per se.
"10.
"That the complained of statements quoted in paragraphs 6, 7, 8 and 9 above and referring to this Plaintiff were false and defamatory; that on May 21st, 1953, this Plaintiff caused to be served upon Defendant a Notice in accordance with section 14-0208 of the North Dakota Revised Code of 1943, wherein said Defendant was notified that Plaintiff was aggrieved by said publication of the quoted statements set forth in paragraphs 6, 7, 8 and 9 above because of their false and defamatory nature; and that if a full and fair retraction of said erroneous statements were not published in the next issue of the North Dakota Union Farmer in as conspicuous a place and type as the original article, said Plaintiff would bring suit for libel because of said publication; that in spite of the service of said Notice upon Defendant, said Defendant has failed, neglected and refused to make a full and fair retraction of said quoted statements either in the next issue of the North Dakota Union Farmer or in any subsequent issue of the North Dakota Union Farmer in as conspicuous a place and type as the original article.
"11.
"That because of the printing, publishing and circulation of the complained of and quoted statements in paragraphs 6, 7, 8 and 9 above this Plaintiff has been exposed to hatred, contempt, ridicule and obloquy and has been shunned and avoided and said quoted statements have had a tendency to injure this Plaintiff in his occupation, all to this Plaintiff's damage in the sum of $10,000.00.
"Wherefore, Plaintiff prays for judgment against the Defendant for said sum of $10,000.00 as actual damages and for the further sum of $5,000.00 as exemplary damages and for his costs and disbursements herein."
Before bringing this action and in accordance with Section 14-0208 NDRC 1943, the plaintiff served upon the defendant a notice and demand for retraction of the alleged libelous article as it appeared in the issue of the defendant's paper on June 16, 1952. The notice contained an exact copy of the language as used in the published article and made a demand that unless a full and complete retraction was made an action for damages would be brought against the defendant. This notice was served on the defendant on the 21st day of May 1953, and was admitted in evidence as plaintiff's exhibit No. 4.
After the service of the complaint the defendant served notice of motion upon the plaintiff to strike paragraph three of the complaint upon the ground that it was irrelevant and redundant and that the defendant was aggrieved by the insertion thereof in the complaint. After hearing thereon the motion was denied by the trial court. Defendant then demurred to each of paragraphs 6, 7, 8 and 9 of the complaint on the ground that they did not state facts sufficient to constitute a cause of action. The demurrers were overruled. The defendant then answered admitting its corporate *642 existence, denying generally the allegations of the complaint, alleging that it did not state facts sufficient to constitute a cause of action, that the statements in the article complained of were true, and were fair comment of a public official, and denied that the publication of said article was malicious. The answer further alleged that defendant made a correction and retraction of the alleged defamatory matter in said article according to its best knowledge and information.
At the opening of the trial and when the first witness was called and sworn on behalf of the plaintiff the defendant objected to any testimony and the introduction of any evidence upon the grounds and for the reason that the complaint in the action did not state facts sufficient to constitute a cause of action. The objection was overruled.
The plaintiff is the dairy commissioner of the State of North Dakota and had held that position for more than 17 years. The dairy department is a division of the state department of agriculture and labor, and the dairy commissioner is appointed by the commissioner of agriculture and labor and his duties are prescribed by Section 4-1701 NDRC 1943.
"The dairy department is a division of the department of agriculture and labor, and shall promote, improve, and regulate the dairy products of this state and enforce proper rules and regulations pertaining thereto."
There is no material dispute as to the facts in the case.
The first witness for the plaintiff was Robert F. Dugan. He testified that he was the editor of the North Dakota Union Farmer and that he was editor of said paper on June 16, 1952. He admitted that the article complained of by the plaintiff as alleged in the complaint was published on the 16th day of June 1952. The article was admitted in evidence as plaintiff's exhibit 2.
The plaintiff testified in substance as follows:
The term ADA as used in the pleadings and in the record refers to an organization known as the American Dairy Association. This organization consists of units from a number of States in the Union. The organization is established to promote the dairy industry, advertise merchandise and the sale of dairy products. The membership of the ADA is composed of dairy farmers who contribute funds of their own to do the particular work of the organization. The board of directors of the State Association is composed of 10 dairy farmers and 10 creamery operators. As Dairy Commissioner he has assisted the American Dairy Association to some extent. He considered that as part of his duties because it is the purpose of this association to promote increased sales and consumption of dairy products.
During the month of June or July the month known as the Dairy Month, the dairy farmers voluntarily contribute 1¢ per lb. of the cream sold to create a fund for defraying the expenses of the state ADA. This contribution is not required but is voluntary on the part of the dairy farmers. The proceeds of these collections are sent to the Dairy Commissioner who keeps a record of the amounts and creamery stations from which they are sent. The checks are then forwarded to the treasurer of the State ADA.
The plaintiff as Dairy Commissioner attends approximately six meetings annually within the state of the State ADA. The traveling expenses to and from these meetings are paid out of the expense fund collected from the dairy farmers to which reference has been made. The Commissioner also attends approximately six meetings annually of the National ADA and these meetings are held in different cities within the United States. The traveling expenses to and from these meetings are paid by the National ADA.
Under the provisions of the by-laws of the State ADA the Dairy Commissioner is ex-officio member of the board of directors. He has a voice at the meetings but does not have a vote. The plaintiff as Dairy *643 Commissioner never made any charges or collected compensation for his personal services to the State ADA or to the National ADA. The only charges that have been made are for actual expenses and cash expended in his office for clerk hire and other help in the matter of keeping the records of the State ADA.
He testified further that the total amount of expenses for clerk-hire and other items incurred for the State ADA as of March 31, for the years 1950, 1951, 1952 and 1953 are as follows:
1950....$717.77 1952....$1086.95 and for
1951....$954.24 1953....$ 686.09
These figures were taken from the annual audit of the ADA for said years. The audits were introduced in evidence as plaintiff's exhibits 5, 6, 7 and 8. He stated further that he had nothing to do with the solicitation of funds for the State ADA and never did solicit funds for the ADA.
As part of his duties he or members of his staff supervised the creameries of the state as to sanitation, efficiency and proper methods of operation, and since 1950 he assigned one member of his staff to give his full time to work with the creameries, assisting them in securing more efficient operation, better care of the products of the plants, and better sanitary conditions. His department made several thousand laboratory analyses of milk and cream from biennium to biennium, and that these analyses were made for the purpose of testing and improving the quality of these products.
With reference to enforcement by the dairy department of the laws, rules and regulations covering the dairy industry he stated that several hundred hearings had been had and many prosecutions had been conducted for faulty readings of the Babcock Test, undertesting, giving the farmer less than he was entitled to and not grading his cream properly.
Plaintiff further testified that seventy-five percent of the dairy farmers of the state belong to the State ADA.
Several other witnesses testified for the plaintiff as to plaintiff's efficiency in the discharge of his duties as Dairy Commissioner. John Eagleson from Buchanan, North Dakota testified that he had been a farmer in the state since 1914 and that he is now a dairy farmer. He was a director of the ADA and had been its president, and a member thereof for 10 years. He stated that he was well acquainted with the Dairy Commissioner; that from his own knowledge as director of the ADA he knew that plaintiff did not solicit or collect funds for the ADA, nor did plaintiff supervise check deductions from dairy farmers for the ADA. He stated also that the plaintiff did not enjoy expense accounts for personal services for the ADA.
A. M. Femrite testified that he was manager of the creamery division of Mandan Creamery & Produce Co., and had been engaged in the creamery business 25 to 26 years; he was a member of the board of directors of the ADA. He stated that the deductions from the dairy farmers' cream checks of one cent per pound during the dairy month was done at the creamery where the cream was delivered and that the plaintiff did not supervise the cream check deductions. He testified further that during plaintiff's administration as Dairy Commissioner the general quality of cream in the state had been raised twenty-five percent. He stated that to his knowledge plaintiff had diligently enforced the dairy laws of the State of North Dakota.
Ray Bryngelson, manager of the Barnes County Coop. Creamery at Valley City stated he had been in the creamery business 23 years and that he had known the plaintiff for many years. His testimony was to the same effect as the testimony of the witnesses John Eagleson and A. M. Femrite. He stated in substance that the plaintiff as dairy commissioner brought about a general quality improvement in dairy products and that he diligently enforced the dairy laws of the state.
Other witnesses for the plaintiff were Ben Haines, a creamery operator from *644 Wishek, North Dakota, Otto Spies, a creamery operator from Mayville, North Dakota, Vernon Cooper, a dairy farmer from near New Rockford, North Dakota, all of whose testimony was of like nature as the testimony of Bryngelson and Femrite, and it is not necessary to rehearse it here, except to state that they agreed that the plaintiff did good work as dairy commissioner.
O. A. Amundson testifying for the plaintiff stated that he was manager for the Jamestown creamery of Bridgeman-Russell Company and was also treasurer of the State ADA. He had been in the creamery business since 1915. He stated that Bridgeman-Russell had three creameries in North Dakota and 125 local stations where they purchased cream. With reference to the deductions of 1¢ per pound for cream purchased during the dairy month he stated that they were all made at the local stations and that the plaintiff as dairy commissioner made no solicitations and collected no funds; that the local stations and creameries forwarded the funds to the dairy commissioner who made a record of them and then sent the checks to the ADA treasurer. He testified at great length as to the dairy and creamery industries in North Dakota and stated that the quality of dairy products improved during the administration of the plaintiff as dairy commissioner and that he was an outstanding public official.
Math Dahl, Commissioner of Agriculture and Labor testified that the plaintiff was his appointee and was an employee of his department whom he approved.
Robert F. Dugan, editor of defendant's paper the Union Farmer, testifying for the defendant stated that after demand by the plaintiff and on June 15, 1953 he published a correction or retraction of the article of June 16, 1952. That the retraction was published on page 6 of the issue of the Union Farmer of June 16, 1953. The correction was admitted in evidence as defendant's exhibit B, and is as follows:
"Correction
"The June 16, 1952 issue of the North Dakota Union Farmer Stated:
"`Furthermore, in North Dakota, you have a state official, the State Dairy Commissioner, Bill Murphy, spending most of his time acting as the errand boy for the ADA personally supervising the cream check deductions every spring and enjoying ADA expense accounts that nearly equal his state pay * * *' Since the statement was printed, Mr. Murphy advised the North Dakota Union Farmer that he does not spend most of his time on ADA business, but that he devotes his evenings, nights and holidays to ADA business; accordingly, the statement is hereby corrected and retracted.
"Since the statement was printed, Mr. Murphy advised the North Dakota Union Farmer, that he does not enjoy ADA expense accounts that nearly equal his state pay; accordingly, the statement is hereby corrected and retracted."
Defendant's exhibits D and C were admitted in evidence. Defendant's exhibit D is a letter from Dugan the editor of the North Dakota Union Farmer to the plaintiff dated May 4, 1953. Exhibit C is plaintiff's reply to exhibit D. These exhibits will be referred to later in this opinion.
At the close of all of the testimony when both parties had rested the defendant made a motion for a directed verdict upon the grounds and for the reason that the plaintiff had failed to sustain the allegations of the complaint. The motion was denied whereupon the defendants made a motion for a dismissal of the action upon the same grounds which motion was also denied. The case was submitted to the jury and the jury returned a verdict awarding damages to the plaintiff. Thereafter the defendant made a motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict or in the alternative for a new trial upon the ground of errors of law occurring at the trial and the insufficiency *645 of the evidence. The motion was denied and the defendant appealed. The defendant assigned numerous errors which were argued in its brief under the following heads:
"1. error in refusing to strike pleadings and admission of redundant matters.
"2. error in overruling demurrers.
"3. insufficiency of the evidence.
"4. errors in reception of evidence.
"5. errors in instructing the jury."
We shall consider these specifications in the order stated.
Before interposing answer the defendant made a motion to strike paragraph 3 of the plaintiff's complaint. The motion was based on the contention that said paragraph 3 was repetitious, redundant and prejudicial to the defendant. The first part of the publication that the defendant sought to have stricken appeared on the first page of the issue in which the article was published. It reads as follows:
"`Inside Stuff' What's the inside of the dairy industry of North Dakota, this being dairy month you will probably be interested in reading about it on page 6 of this issue."
On page 6 of the issue appears that portion of the article quoted in paragraph 3 of the plaintiff's complaint which the defendant moved to strike. This portion of the article is an unfavorable report of the condition of the dairy industry in the State of North Dakota. It refers to the big centralizers like Swift, Armour, Cudahy and others using millions of dollars of the farmers' money to advertise increased use of butter substitutes to the detriment of the farmers. This part of the publication is in the nature of an introduction to and lays the foundation for the charges made in the remainder of the article and is an integral part thereof.
"In determining whether or not the newspaper publication is libelous, the words used in the article must be construed as a whole. All the words contained in the article should be given their ordinary meaning as read and construed by people of ordinary intelligence, and the publisher's intent and the effect of the publication must be gathered from the words and the circumstances under which they were uttered." * * * 53 C.J.S., Libel and Slander, § 121, p. 198.
"`In determining the actionable quality of words claimed to be libelous, the entire writing, including the title or headlines, must be considered, 18 Am. & Eng.Ency.L. 985; 25 Cyc. 357. And particular words or phrases must be construed in connection with remainder of the article of which they form a part.' McCue v. Equity Co-Op. Pub. Co., 39 N.D. 190, 167 N.W. 225, 229." Ellsworth v. Martindale-Hubbel Law Directory, 69 N.D. 610, 289 N.W. 101, 105.
We conclude therefore that it was not error on the part of the trial court to refuse to grant the defendant's motion to strike the portion of the article complained of by the defendant.
The defendant demurred separately to each of paragraphs 6, 7, 8 and 9 of plaintiff's complaint upon the ground that they did not state facts sufficient to constitute a cause of action against the defendant. That portion of the alleged defamatory publication contained in paragraph 6 states that the dairy commissioner, the plaintiff, is "spending most of his time acting as the errand boy for the ADA,personally supervising the cream check deductions every spring and enjoying ADA expense accounts that nearly equals his pay."
Clearly, the language quoted charges the plaintiff with failure to perform the duties of his office and that he spends most of his time in other activities not connected with his office for which he collected compensation nearly equal to his salary as dairy commissioner.
Paragraphs 7 and 8 of the complaint may be considered together. The portion of the *646 article quoted in paragraph 7 states that the dairy commissioner has as one of his principal duties, the job of enforcement and then continues "it is a strange sight then to see an enforcement officer soliciting fundsit's like having a police chief soliciting funds for advertising in the police hand-book from tavern operators." The "strange sight" and the comparison of the plaintiff as an enforcement officer with a "police chief soliciting funds for advertising in a police hand-book from tavern operators" would undoubtedly leave an impression in the minds of readers of the publication that plaintiff was guilty of reprehensible conduct and would probably subject him to their hatred and contempt. The introductory paragraph of the publication describes the "big centralizers" as engaged in a concerted practice to take advantage of the dairy farmers in the state and that the ADA is controlled by the centralizers. Then follows the charge quoted in paragraph 8 of the complaint that the plaintiff is more concerned with collecting funds from the dairy farmers for the benefit of the centralizers' ADA than in doing his job as enforcement officer and supervisor of the industry in the farmers' behalf. The language quoted purports to state facts, which if true, would establish that the plaintiff, as dairy commissioner, had failed to enforce the dairy laws of the state.
It is well settled that a demurrer admits the truth of all issuable relevant facts that are well pleaded. In the case of Roethke v. North Dakota Taxpayers Association, 72 N.D. 658, 10 N.W.2d 738, 740, this court said:
"The demurrer deals with the substance rather than the form. McCurdy v. Hughes, 61 N.D. 235, 237 N.W. 748. Even where a cause of action contains statements of different items and the sufficiency of some of these is disputed as not stating a cause of action, the demurrer cannot be sustained, for `unless all are bad the demurrer should be overruled.' King v. Stark County, 67 N.D. 260, 263, 271 N.W. 771, 773. With respect to the alleged allegation of facts set forth in the complaint it is commonplace that the demurrer admits the truth of all issuable relevant material facts that are pleaded, including the falsity, publication and the malice alleged, in an action for libel. Englund v. Townley, 43 N.D. 118, 174 N.W. 755. See, also, Federal Land Bank [of St. Paul] v. Koslofsky, 67 N.D. 322, 327, 271 N.W. 907, 908."
We are of the opinion that the statements in the published article quoted in paragraphs 6, 7, 8 and 9 of the complaint, if true are derogatory of the plaintiff. They charge him with breach of official duty and therefore state a cause of action. The demurrers were therefore properly overruled.
The defendant next argues that the evidence is insufficient to support an action for libel per se. 53 C.J.S., Libel and Slander, § 121, p. 199, defines libel per se as follows:
"In order to be libelous per se it is not essential that the words should involve an imputation of crime, or otherwise impute the violation of some law, or moral turpitude, or immoral conduct, and newspaper articles generally may be libelous and actionable per se if they tend to expose plaintiff to public hatred, contempt, ridicule, aversion, or disgrace, and to induce an evil opinion of him in the minds of right-thinking persons, and to deprive him of their friendly intercourse and society. Publications charging dishonesty or fraud, drunkenness, falsehood, unchastity, or which tend to injure a person in his occupation, trade, business, or profession, have been held libelous per se."
To the same effect is the following statement from 33 Am.Jur., Libel and Slander, Sec. 79, page 92:
"It is libelous per se to impute to a person in his character as a public officer incapacity or any kind of fraud, dishonesty, misconduct, or a want of integrity, or to charge that he has been induced to act in his official capacity by *647 a pecuniary or other improper consideration. The libel of a public officer, affecting him personally, is governed by the same rules that apply to an individual; but libel affecting him in his official character, and of such nature that, if true, it would be cause for his removal from office, is actionable per se. Even spoken words which impute unfitness or incapacity as regards an office of profit are actionable."
Publications which tend to injure a person in his occupation, trade, business or profession, have been held libelous per se.
The complaint alleges that the statements in the publication charging plaintiff with failure to discharge his official duties are false. The plaintiff and his witnesses testified to facts and circumstances establishing that he had discharged the duties of his office. The defendant's answer alleges that the statements in the published article are true and that they are fair comment of a public official. However, defendant has adduced no evidence that the published statements are true, and therefore the testimony of the plaintiff and his witnesses is uncontradicted. Published statements purporting to be facts, citing specific instances of failure to perform official duties cannot be said to be fair comment of a public official when such statements are not based upon any factual foundation. Defendant's exihibit D, its letter to the plaintiff of May 4, 1953, is in effect an admission that the publication was made without knowledge of its correctness. It requests the plaintiff to furnish information with respect to the statements contained in the published article-information which the defendant should have obtained before the article was published. We quote from the exhibit:
"You stated that the audit of the ADA in North Dakota revealed that an amount between $1000.00 and $1500.00 was expended under your direction for clerical help, etc. Since when we publish the correction, we wish to be absolutely correct, we would like to have the exact amount for the story. Would you also send us a statement of all funds advanced and expended under your direction or for you, which you received from the national ADA? This should include all expense incurred in out-of-state travel, which was not paid by the State of North Dakota, and was paid by the state and/or national ADA, and any and all expense which may have been paid to you and through you by the national and state ADA."
The general rule is that the doctrine of fair comment does not permit newspapers to make derogatory statements concerning a public official unless such statements are based on facts or the occasion is privileged.
"Generally, however, comment or criticism of the acts of a public officer must be based or founded on truth. So it has generally been held that the right to comment or criticize does not embrace the right to make false defamatory statements of fact imputing a criminal offense or moral delinquency, or otherwise aspersive of the character of plaintiff, although made in good faith, and although the charge relates to the act of an officer in the discharge of his official duties." 53 C.J.S., Libel and Slander, § 134, pp. 218, 219.
In the case of Rogers v. Courier Post Co., 2 N.J. 393, 66 A.2d 869, 873, the Supreme Court of New Jersey held that:
"While matters of public interest and concern, such as the public acts of a public man, if truly stated, are legitimate subjects of criticism, and every one has the right to comment thereon so long as he does so fairly and without malice, nevertheless, the rule is well settled in this state, and in the great majority of jurisdictions elsewhere, that the defense of fair comment and criticism must be founded on true facts. What is thus privileged, if we may use that term, is the comment and criticism, and not the statement of alleged facts on which they *648 are based, and if one states facts otherwise libelous, he will not be privileged under the plea of fair comment if they are not true. Such a plea does not extend to the making of false statements, and it is no defense that they were mistakenly or honestly made, although such matters may be considered in mitigation of damages. News papers have no greater rights or privileges in this respect than ordinary citizens.
"Generally speaking, comment or criticism must be founded on truth. While ordinarily it does not consist of the assertion of facts, an allegation of fact may be justified by its being an inference from other facts truly stated, as discussed supra § 131. The right to comment or criticise does not extend to, or justify, allegations of fact of a defamatory character. If the publication is not a comment or criticism, but a statement of fact, the rules to be applied to the nature of recovery are those applicable to any other case of defamation, if defamatory and false, it is actionable, although made in good faith, without malice, and under the honest belief that it is true. Probable cause for making it is not a factor to be considered in determining whether or not it is privileged. Where the accusation is defamatory, the damage does not result from criticism based on the facts but from the false accusation that the facts exist for which the criticism is made." 53 C.J.S., Libel and Slander, § 132, pp. 215, 216.
Section 14-0203 NDRC 1943 defines Civil Libel as follows:
"Libel is a false and unprivileged publication by writing, printing, picture, effigy, or other fixed representation to the eye, which exposes any person to hatred, contempt, ridicule, or obloquy, or which causes him to be shunned or avoided, or which has a tendency to injure him in his occupation."
Appellant argues that since no special damages are alleged or proved in the case, if the plaintiff is to prevail at all, it must be on the theory that he has pleaded and proved the alleged matter to be actionable per se, yet, after each paragraph alleging defamatory matters, innuendo is pleaded.
The general rule is that a defamatory publication is libelous per se when, without aid of innuendo, it must be presumed to expose the plaintiff to hatred, contempt, ridicule, or obloquy, or to cause him to be shunned, or to have a tendency to injure him in his occupation. Ellsworth v. Martindale-Hubbell Law Directory, 66 N.D. 578, 268 N.W. 400. If the publication is libelous per se, no innuendo is necessary. The question in the instant case is therefore whether the language in the published article is in fact libelous per se.
We have referred to the published article set out in the complaint. In paragraph 6 of the complaint the quoted portion of the publication charges the plaintiff with being engaged in activities not connected with the duties of his office and for which he enjoys expense accounts nearly equal to his state salary. No innuendo is necessary to explain the meaning of the language to readers of the publication.
The language quoted in paragraph 7 of the complaint is an odious comparison of the plaintiff with "a police chief soliciting funds for advertising in a police handbook from the tavern operators." The language quoted in paragraph 8 charges the plaintiff with failure to enforce the dairy laws of the state, and paragraph 9 charges that the taxpayers of the state have received no benefit for the thousands upon thousands they have paid to maintain the dairy commissioner's department because no effort has been made to promote the dairy industry in the state. No innuendo or explanation is necessary to point out that the plaintiff as dairy commissioner is responsible for the lack of effort to promote the dairy industry of the state. The complaint alleges that all of the charges made in the published article are libelous per se. Where the publication complained of is libelous per se, innuendo if pleaded, is harmless and may be treated as surplusage.
*649 "On the other hand, the innuendo may be treated as surplusage where it is used in connection with words which are unequivocal and actionable per se. In such case plaintiff is not confined to the meaning ascribed in the innuendo, and if sufficient remains to show that the article is libelous per se the action may be maintained. So it is generally held that, where plaintiff in an action has, by innuendo, put a meaning on the alleged defamatory publication which is not supported by its language or by proof, the court may nevertheless sustain the pleading and submit the case to the jury, if the publication is defamatory per se." 53 C.J.S., Libel and Slander, § 162, p. 253.
The trial court held as a matter of law that the publication was libelous per se and submitted the issues to the jury. We think the language of the published article is of such character as to warrant the trial court's conclusion that it was libelous per se and therefore it was not error to submit the issues to the jury.
The next contention of the defendant is that the trial court erred in the reception of evidence. Many alleged errors are cited but they are not argued to any extent in defendant's brief.
The plaintiff in one instance had testified without objection that the object of the ADA was to improve and promote the greater use of dairy products. He was then asked by his attorney: "I will ask you this: if, from your experience with ADA and as dairy commissioner, it has accomplished and does accomplish those purposes?" Over objection that it was calling for a conclusion plaintiff was permitted to answer: "It has accomplished its purpose." If the answer was a conclusion of the witness, it had but little, if any, bearing on the issue as to whether the published article was libelous, and therefore was harmless error. Other alleged errors in the reception of evidence were assigned in the specifications, but they were not argued except in a general statement to the effect that several witnesses were permitted to testify under paragraph 3 of the complaint which it is alleged the trial court erroneously refused to strike. Since we have held that the refusal of the trial court to strike paragraph 3 of the complaint was not error it is not necessary to consider it further here.
Defendant concedes in its brief that since there was no denial of the matter claimed to have been published there were but two questions for the jury to decide: was the matter true, and if not, how much damage should be given.
Defendant argues however that the court erred in instructing the jury as follows:
"The term nonfeasance has been used in the pleadings. Nonfeasance means neglect to do what should have been done. You are also instructed that in regard to the duties of public officials, the laws of the State of North Dakota provide as follows:
"`Any public officer and any person holding any public trust or employment who wilfully neglects or refuses to perform the duties of his office as prescribed by law is guilty of a misdemeanor.'"
The published article charged the plaintiff with neglect and failure to perform his official duties. If the charges thus made were true the plaintiff would be guilty of nonfeasance in office. The truth or falsity of the charges of nonfeasance was therefore a question of fact for determination by the jury. The instructions of the trial court on the question of nonfeasance were therefore correct. The jury returned a verdict in favor of the plaintiff. After due consideration we are of the opinion that the evidence is sufficient to support the verdict.
Finding no reversible error in the record the judgment is affirmed.
BURKE, C. J., and MORRIS, GRIMSON and JOHNSON, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9740982 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:46:44.435107+00 ===

SHEPARD, Chief Justice.
Michael G. Barger was found guilty by a jury of child molesting, a class D felony. Ind.Code § 35-42-4-3(d) (West 1986). The evidence revealed that Barger was the principal at the victim's elementary school. He invited the victim to sit on his lap, and placed the victim's hand outside his clothing on his penis. The Indiana Court of Appeals reversed, finding the evidence of the victim's age was insufficient to sustain the conviction. Barger v. State (1991), Ind. App., 576 N.E.2d 621, reh'g denied, 579 N.E.2d 621. We grant transfer, vacate the opinions of the Court of Appeals, and affirm Barger's conviction.
*1306Barger raises the following issues on appeal:
I. Whether the evidence was sufficient to sustain his conviction;
II. Whether the court erred in allowing testimony about the victim's reputation for truthfulness;
III. Whether the court erred in allowing the State to present evidence of other acts allegedly committed by Barger; and
IV. Whether the prosecutor engaged in misconduct.
I. Sufficiency of the Evidence
Barger argues the evidence was insufficient to sustain his conviction because the State failed to prove the victim was over twelve years of age at the time of the offense.
Indiana's statutes make it a felony to molest children under the age of sixteen. If the child is younger than twelve, the offense is a class C felony. Ind.Code § 35-42-4-3(b). Molesting older children, those aged twelve through fifteen, is a class D felony. It is this latter provision under which Barger was convicted:
A person sixteen (16) years of age, or older who, with a child twelve (12) years of age or older but under sixteen (16) years of age, performs or submits to any fondling or touching, of either the child or the older person, with intent to arouse or to satisfy the sexual desires of either the child or the older person, commits child molesting, a class D felony.
Ind.Code § 35-42-4-3(d).
Barger argues that one of the elements of the class D felony is that the act occurred "with a child twelve years of age or older," and the State could not prove the victim in this case was over twelve years of age. That being so, he says, the State did not prove beyond a reasonable doubt all the elements of the crime of child molesting, a class D felony.
When reviewing a claim of insufficient evidence, this Court does not reweigh evidence or judge the credibility of the witnesses. Alfaro v. State (1985), Ind., 478 N.E.2d 670. We affirm the conviction if, looking to the evidence and reasonable inferences therefrom which support the verdict, there is substantial evidence of probative value to support the conclusion of the trier of fact. Id.
This case is unusual in that the molestation took place right around the victim's twelfth birthday. The evidence most favorable to the verdict indicates the molestation occurred in January or February of 1988. The victim turned twelve years old on February 22, 1988. We have the rare set of cireumstances in which the State apparently cannot prove definitively whether the victim was eleven years old or twelve years old at the time of the molestation. It is thus difficult to know whether Barger is guilty of a class D or a class C felony. We do not think it follows that Barger is guilty of no felony at all.1
Penal statutes should be interpreted in order to give "efficient operation to the expressed intent of the legislature." State v. Bigbee (1973), 260 Ind. 90, 93, 292 N.E.2d 609, 611. See also McAnalley v. State (1987), Ind., 514 N.E.2d 831. Penal statutes are strictly construed against the State. Cape v. State (1980), 272 Ind. 609, 400 N.E.2d 161. The statutes are not to be overly narrowed, however, so as to exclude cases the statutes fairly cover. Id. Criminal statutes "should not be wantonly narrowed, limited or emasculated and rendered ineffective, absurd, or nugatory. If possible, they should be allowed to perform their intended mission as shown by the existing evils intended to be remedied." Morris v. State (1949), 227 Ind. 630, 632, 88 N.E.2d 328, 329.
Since 1908, our legislature has prescribed a harsher penalty for sexual offenses committed against children under the age of twelve. In 1908, the penalty for the crime *1307of rape was imprisonment for not less than two years nor more than twenty-one years. The statute further provided: "[IIn cases where the female upon whom the crime is committed is a child under the age of twelve years, the punishment shall be imprisonment in the state prison for life." Burns' Annotated Indiana Statutes, Revision of 1908, Volume 1, § 2250. The statute was modified over the years, but the stronger penalty for offenses against children under the age of twelve always remained. In 1976, the child molesting statute was enacted in its present form, retaining the harsher penalty for sexual crimes against victims under twelve. See Ind. Code § 35-42-4-3. Thus, for most of this century, the legislature has enacted and reaffirmed a consistent public policy aimed at punishing offenders more harshly when the offenders commit crimes against younger children. Younger children are more in need of protection; they are less likely to be able to defend themselves and are more susceptible to adult suggestion and schemes.
This Court has had numerous occasions to analyze the purpose and operation of these statutes. Among other things, we have concluded that time is not of the essence in the crime of child molesting. Hodges v. State (1988), Ind., 524 N.E.2d 774. See also Hoehn v. State (1984), Ind.App., 472 N.E.2d 926. It is difficult for children to remember specific dates, particularly when the incident is not immediately reported as is often the situation in child molesting cases. The exact date becomes important only in limited cireumstances, including the case where the victim's age at the time of the offense falls at or near the dividing line between classes of felonies.
While one might always wish for statutes drafted so as to make the job of interpretation easier, we think it is inconceivable that the legislature intended through Ind.Code § 35-42-4-8 to absolve defendants who molest children around their twelfth birthdays such that it is impossible to tell whether the victim was eleven or twelve at the time of the offense. In effect, the prosecutor strictly construed the statute against the State by charging Bar-ger with the class D felony rather than the class C felony. It is beyond question that Barger's victim was under sixteen years of age, as required for the class D felony. To read Ind.Code § 35-42-4-8 as providing no protection to a victim who was molested around her twelfth birthday would render the statute absurd given the legislature's long and constant history of providing more severe penalties for crimes against victims under the age of twelve.
Barger argues that Mahla v. State (1986), Ind., 496 N.E.2d 568, supports his position. In Makic, the defendant was charged with and convicted of class B felony child molesting.2 He argued the jury should have been instructed to consider the crime of class C felony child molesting. We upheld the trial court's refusal of this request because the C felony was not a lesser included offense of the B felony under the test outlined in Henning v. State (1985), Ind., 477 N.E.2d 547. We also noted that all the evidence against Mahla pointed to the conclusion that the victim was under twelve at the time of the molestation; Mahla was charged with and properly convicted of the class B felony. Mah-la did not involve the factual situation presented here, in which it is difficult to tell whether the victim was under or over twelve years of age at the time of the offense.
We hold when it is difficult to tell whether the child molesting vietim was eleven or twelve at the time of the offense, it is sufficient to charge and convict the defen*1308dant of the lesser felony, a class D felony in this case, because the child is clearly under the age of sixteen, as required for the lesser class felony.3 We reach this conclusion based upon the legislative intent to punish offenders more harshly when they commit crimes against younger children, and the notion of strict construction of criminal statutes.
The essence of the child molesting statute is that the victim be younger than some age-under sixteen or under twelve years old. There was proof beyond a reasonable doubt that the victim was under sixteen years of age at the time of the offense.
The victim in this case testified that Barger took her hand and placed it on his penis while she was sitting on his lap in his office. Convictions for child molesting may rest upon the uncorroborated testimony of the victim. Baxter v. State (1988), Ind., 522 N.E.2d 362. The evidence was sufficient to sustain Barger's conviction for child molesting, a class D felony.
IL Victim's Reputation for Truthfulness
Barger argues the court erred in allowing three of the State's witnesses, all teachers at the elementary school, to testify about the truth and veracity of the victim.
"No witness, whether lay or expert, is competent to testify that another witness is or is not telling the truth." Stewart v. State (1990), Ind., 555 N.E.2d 121, 125. Adult witnesses may be allowed, however, to state an opinion about the child victim's general competence and ability to understand the subject of sexual conduct. Id. Such testimony is allowed because of the special problem in assessing the credibility of children who are called upon as witnesses to describe sexual conduct. Lawrence v. State (1984), Ind., 464 N.E.2d 923. Di rect assertions of the witness's belief in the child's testimony are prohibited. Stewart, 555 N.E.2d 121. The witnesses did not make such assertions in this case.
The State asked two witnesses if they were acquainted with the victim's reputation for truth and veracity or how well they knew the victim, and the witnesses responded with their assessment of the victim as a student. The State asked a third witness how well she knew the victim, and whether she was acquainted with the victim's reputation for truth and veracity. This witness was the only one to indicate anything about the victim's truthfulness, and she did not directly assert her belief in the victim's testimony.
None of the witnesses directly testified they believed the victim was telling the truth about the molestation.
Barger's counsel attacked the victim's truthfulness on cross-examination. He questioned her about a discrepancy between her testimony in court and a prior statement she made to him, and asked her if she was lying. When a witness has been impeached by proof that he made prior inconsistent statements, the party may support that witness by proof of the witness's reputation for truth and veracity. Lutz v. State (1989), Ind.App., 536 N.E.2d 526.4 It was not erroneous for the State to ask questions about the victim's general reputation for truthfulness.
Barger also argues his trial counsel was ineffective for failing to object to the testimony about the victim's reputation for truthfulness. Because it was not erroneous to admit this testimony, Barger's trial counsel was not ineffective for failure to object. Siglar v. State (1989), Ind., 541 N.E.2d 944 (to establish inadequate representation based on failure to object, defendant must show counsel's objections would have been sustained had they been made).
*1309III, Evidence of Extrinsic Offenses
Barger contends the trial court erred in admitting evidence of other acts he allegedly committed against children in the school. Several witnesses testified about Barger's actions they observed. These acts included rubbing the inner thighs and faces of first grade girls, excessive frontal hugging and touching of young girls, and comments about the bodies of the young female students, including, "Isn't that the cutest little ass you've ever seen on a little girl" and “lo\ok at the boobers on that kid. Wouldn't you like to get your hands on those." One former student also testified. She stated that twice Barger hugged her so tight she could feel his penis, and that he played with her bra strap.
The general rule in Indiana is that evidence of extrinsic offenses may not be used to establish guilt except where relevant to show intent, motive, purpose, identification, and common scheme or plan. McKim v. State (1985), Ind., 476 N.E.2d 503. We have recognized an exception for acts involving or showing a depraved sexual instinct. Id. The basis for this exception is that in prosecutions for depraved acts the prosecuting witness is unlikely to be believed because the victim's testimony, standing alone and not connected with anything which led to or brought about the testimony, "would appear unnatural or improbable in itself." Id. at 505.
This same rationale was cited years ago by this Court in the context of a prosecution for sodomy. State v. Robbins (1943), 221 Ind. 125, 46 N.E.2d 691. The Court stated the general rule regarding evidence of other independent crimes, and noted "this rule deﬁes not apply to cases where the chief element of the offense consists in illicit intercourse between the sexes." Id., 221 Ind. at 136, 46 N.E.2d at 695, quoting State v. Markins (1884), 95 Ind. 464, 466. When a witness has testified about a fact or transaction which standing alone would appear unnatural or improbable in itself, "such previous facts are not only admissible and relevant, but they constitute a nee-essary part of such principal transaction...." Id., 221 Ind. at 136, 46 N.E.2d at 695, quoting People v. Jenness, 5 Mich. 305, 323 (1958). In Robbins, evidence of similar acts by the defendant judge toward young girls was thus admissible to show his depraved sexual instinct toward young girls.
In this case, the State used evidence of other acts to show Barger's depraved sexual instinct toward young girls in school over whom he held a position of power by virtue of his job as principal. The acts about which the witnesses testified concerned the touching of and suggestive comments about young girls in the school. It is not necessary that the uncharged acts be identical to the crime with which Barger was charged; the acts need only demonstrate the same sexual instinct toward young girls. Jarrett v. State (1984), Ind., 465 N.E.2d 1097 (acts used to show depraved sexual instinct need not be identical to crime for which defendant is charged; sufficient if same sexual instinct is shown). The trial court did not err in admitting this evidence.
Barger argues some of this evidence was inadmissible because the acts occurred after the event with which Barger was charged. He provides no authority for this contention. This Court stated in Robbins, 221 Ind. 125, 46 N.E.2d 691, that in addition to acts occurring prior to the charged offense, subsequent similar acts were admissible provided the acts were not too remote in time. Additionally, our Court of Appeals has rejected any distinction based solely upon whether the uncharged acts occurred before or after the charged crime. Lutz v. State (1989), Ind.App., 536 N.E.2d 526, trans. denied. See also Hall v. State (1987), Ind.App., 504 N.E.2d 298. The charged and uncharged acts in this case were similar in time and proximity; they all occurred in the elementary school within a two to three year time frame. The trial court did not err in admitting evidence of Barger's acts toward other young girls in the school which occurred after the incident at issue in this case.
One of the State's witnesses, a teacher at the school, testified about Bar-ger's inappropriate conduct toward her. *1310She testified he hugged her inappropriately and on occasion would play with her bra and camisole straps. This evidence does not fall under the depraved sexual instinet exception because it does not evidence Bar-ger's desires toward young girls in the school, and it should not have been presented to the jury. There is no substantial likelihood these relatively innocuous comments contributed to the jury's guilty verdict, however, thus the error in its admission was harmless. See Jaske v. State (1989), Ind., 589 N.E.2d 14.5
IV. Prosecutorial Misconduct
Barger contends the prosecutor committed misconduct when she failed to provide Barger with the names of all the people who were mentioned at trial, made representations during a hearing on a motion in limine about the testimony of witnesses which later proved to be false, and asked questions of witnesses about acts which occurred in 1989.
To determine whether a defendant was subjected to prosecutorial misconduct which deprived him of a fair trial, we first determine whether the prosecutor engaged in misconduct. Maldonado v. State (1976), 265 Ind. 492, 355 N.E.2d 843. If misconduct is established, then we must determine whether the misconduct, under the circumstances, placed the defendant in a position of grave peril to which he should not have been subjected. Id. "The gravity of the peril is determined by considering the probable persuasive effect of the misconduct on the jury's decision, not the degree of the impropriety of the conduct." Timmons v. State (1986), Ind., 500 N.E.2d 1212, 1214.
Barger cites no authority, and we are aware of none, for the proposition that the prosecutor must provide the defendant with a list of all people who may be mentioned at trial. We see no misconduct in the failure of the prosecutor to provide Barger with these names.
Barger contends the prosecutor made repeated representations during a pre-trial hearing about the testimony of witnesses which later turned out to be false. The record simply does not support this contention. There was only one incident in which the prosecutor stated a witness would testify about certain events and the witness later denied these events. The prosecutor, during the hearing on the motion in limine indicated one of the teachers would testify she saw Barger fondle two named students. The witness denied this at trial. We conclude this erroneous comment by the prosecutor made during a lengthy recitation to the court about expected testimony was not misconduct.
Barger contends the prosecutor engaged in misconduct by eliciting testimony from witnesses about other acts which occurred after the incident in question. We have already determined that this evidence was admissible; it was not misconduct for the prosecutor to ask witnesses these questions. Barger's allegations, standing alone or cumulatively, do not constitute prosecu-torial misconduct.
The judgment of the trial court is affirmed.
GIVAN and KRAHULIK, JJ., concur.
DeBRULER, J., dissents with opinion in which DICKSON, J., concurs.
. If Barger was charged with either the class D or class C felony child molesting, or even with both offenses, under the Court of Appeals analysis his conviction would have to be reversed. The State could not prove whether the victim was eleven or twelve years old. The evidence was "not sufficient to establish the element of the alleged victim's age beyond a reasonable doubt" for either class of the child molesting felony. Barger, 576 N.E.2d at 623.
. Mahla was convicted of a class B felony under Ind.Code § 35-42-4-3(a), performing or submitting to sexual intercourse or deviate sexual conduct with a child under twelve years old. The offense is a class C felony if the child is over twelve. Ind.Code § 35-42-4-3(c). Like the offense of which Barger was convicted, performing or submitting to any fondling or touching, the only difference between the class B and C felonies of sexual intercourse or deviate sexual conduct is whether the victim was under or over 12 years of age. The same analysis is thus applicable to the offenses of sexual intercourse/deviate sexual conduct and performing or submitting to fondling or touching.
. Of course, if the alleged molestation occurred around a victim's sixteenth birthday and it was impossible to tell whether the victim was fifteen or sixteen, the choice would be between a lesser class felony and no felony. In that situation the defendant could not be convicted of any felony.
. We note Barger availed himself of this technique as well. While presenting his case, Bar-ger's counsel asked two witnesses to give their opinions about Barger's reputation for telling the truth.
. Barger also argues the trial court erred in denying his motion in limine concerning the witnesses who were to testify about these other acts committed by Barger. The ruling on a motion ir limine is not a final ruling on the admissibility of evidence and is not reviewable on appeal. Akins v. State (1981), Ind., 429 N.E.2d 232.

=== CASE 2225840 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:56.341688+00 ===

396 Mass. 421 (1985)
486 N.E.2d 698
JOHN DOE
vs.
COMMONWEALTH.
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Suffolk.
November 7, 1985.
December 17, 1985.
Present: HENNESSEY, C.J., WILKINS, ABRAMS, NOLAN, & LYNCH, JJ.
Willie J. Davis for the juvenile.
Maria I. Lopez, Assistant Attorney General, (Joan Entmacher, Assistant Attorney General, with her) for the Commonwealth.
WILKINS, J.
A single justice of this court has reported to us a case that presents the question whether a complaint may be brought in the Superior Court against a juvenile for criminal contempt of an order entered in a Superior Court civil action. The juvenile moved in the Superior Court to dismiss the complaint, contending that the Commonwealth could only have proceeded against him as a delinquent child (G.L.c. 119, §§ 61, 74 [1984 ed.]), and that the Superior Court had no authority to consider the complaint for criminal contempt. A judge of the Superior Court denied the motion to dismiss. The juvenile brought this action seeking relief under G.L.c. 211, § 3.
The relevant facts, although not agreed on or found by the single justice (see Mass. R. Civ. P. 64, 365 Mass. 831 [1974]), are not in dispute. On August 30, 1984, pursuant to G.L.c. 12, *422 § 11H (1984 ed.), the Attorney General obtained a Superior Court restraining order in a civil action brought against the juvenile, a white male, who was accused of harassing a black family that lived in a housing project in Somerville. The juvenile was ordered to refrain from harassing the black family and to stay clear of the housing project. Within one week, the Attorney General filed a complaint in the Superior Court against the juvenile for criminal contempt of court. The denial of the motion to dismiss, the petition for relief from the single justice, and the reservation and report followed.
A court has the inherent power to impose sanctions for contempt of its orders. See Furtado v. Furtado, 380 Mass. 137, 142-143 (1980); Walton Lunch Co. v. Kearney, 236 Mass. 310, 315-316 (1920). See also Mass. R. Crim. P. 44, 378 Mass. 920 (1979). The question here is whether any statute denies the Superior Court its inherent power to punish a juvenile for contempt of its own order.[1] A statutory mandate denying a court the power to try a person for criminal contempt of its orders should not be found by implication.
The juvenile relies on G.L.c. 119, § 74, which provides (as relevant here) that "no criminal proceeding shall be begun against any person who prior to his seventeenth birthday commits an offense against the law of the commonwealth" (emphasis supplied), unless proceedings against him as a juvenile have been begun and dismissed under G.L.c. 119, § 61. The juvenile concedes that a court has authority to punish a juvenile for direct criminal contempt, such as contumacious conduct before a judge in the courtroom. In the face of statutes concerning exclusive juvenile court jurisdiction over criminal charges against juveniles, courts elsewhere have uniformly recognized the right of a nonjuvenile court to punish direct contempt by a juvenile. See Application of Balucan, 44 Haw. 271, 280 (1960) (juvenile refused to testify); Bryant v. State, 256 Ind. *423 587, 591 (1971) (same); Young v. Knight, 329 S.W.2d 195, 200 (Ky. 1959) (same); State v. DeLong, 456A.2d 877, 880 (Me. 1983) (same); Thomas v. State, 21 Md. App. 573, 578-579 (1974) (misconduct in the courtroom); State v. Tripp, 36 Or. App. 141, 144 (1978) (refusal to testify).
The juvenile argues that alleged contemptuous conduct committed in violation of a court order, but not in open court, is different, however, because it is an offense against the law of the Commonwealth which, pursuant to § 74, must first be presented through the juvenile justice system. A similar argument concerning the power of a Federal District Court to consider contempt charges against juveniles who violated a court order was rejected in Matter of Williams, 306 F. Supp. 617, 619-620 (D.D.C. 1969). We do not read the requirement in § 74 that juvenile proceedings be used initially for "an offense against the law of the commonwealth" as applying to the violation of a court order. Accordingly, the restrictions of G.L.c. 119 concerning the disposition of charges against juveniles do not apply to a charge of criminal contempt of court based on the violation of a court order.
A Superior Court judge who tries a contempt complaint against a juvenile has discretion, within constitutional limits, to impound papers in the case, to protect the juvenile's identity, and to close the proceedings to the public. If the juvenile is found guilty of contempt, the trial judge can consider whether the pleadings and other papers in the case should remain impounded. Here the public interest in knowing that violations of orders issued to protect civil rights will be punished will have to be balanced against the interests of the juvenile. As to disposition, assuming a finding of guilt, the judge will have all the discretion available to a Juvenile Court judge. We leave open the question whether a sentence of incarceration as an adult would be an appropriate disposition in such a proceeding. The petition for relief under G.L.c. 211, § 3, should be dismissed.
So ordered.
NOTES
[1]  Because of the conclusion we reach we need not consider whether the Legislature may purport to eliminate a court's contempt jurisdiction without violating the separation of powers principles established by art. 30 of the Massachusetts Declaration of Rights. See Opinion of the Justices, 314 Mass. 767, 777-778, 782 (1943).

=== CASE 9741007 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:47:29.511052+00 ===

PRENTICE, Justice.
Defendant (Appellant) was charged with rape, a class A felony, Ind.Code § 85-42-4-1 (Burns 1979 Repl.), and criminal deviate conduct, a class A felony, Ind.Code § 35-42-4-2 (Burns 1979 Repl.). Following a jury trial he was convicted of the lesser-included offenses of rape and criminal deviate conduct as class B felonies. The trial court sentenced him to concurrent terms of twelve (12) years imprisonment. This direct appeal contends that the evidence was not sufficient to sustain the convictions.
We affirm the conviction for criminal deviate conduct but reverse the conviction for rape.
We begin with our familiar standard of review:
"Upon a review for sufficient evidence, this Court will look only to the evidence most favorable to the State and all reasonable inferences to be drawn therefrom. If the existence of each element of the crime charged may be found therefrom, beyond a reasonable doubt, the verdict will not be disturbed. In such a review, we will not weigh conflicting evidence nor will we judge the credibility of the witnesses." . (Citations omitted.)
Loyd v. State (1980), 272 Ind. 404, 407, 398 N.E.2d 1260, 1264, cert. denied 449 U.S. 881, 101 S.Ct. 231, 66 L.Ed.2d 105.
The evidence most favorable to the State demonstrated that Defendant forced the victim into his car at knifepoint and then forced her to commit various sexual acts.
Defendant first contends that the evidence did not demonstrate that the victim acted under compulsion or threat of force. . He cites certain evidence in the record which, he contends, demonstrates that the victim consented to his conduct. We disagree.
Defendant by this contention merely invites us to reweigh the evidence. A conviction for rape or criminal deviate conduct may rest upon only the testimony of the victim. See, Bowen v. State (1985), Ind., 478 N.E2d 44, 46-47; Shippen v. State (1985), Ind., 477 N.E.2d 903, 904 and authorities cited. Moreover, this Court has very recently re-emphasized that the question of consent is an issue to be determined by the trier-of-fact dependent upon the particular cireumstances, and that a victim of sexual assault need not physically resist when resistance is prevented by threats and fear of injury. Woodson v. State (1985), Ind., 488 N.E.2d 62, 64. This record includes substantial evidence that the vie-tim did not consent to Defendant's conduct.
Regarding the rape conviction, Defendant contends that the record does not include substantial evidence of probative value of the vaginal penetration necessary to effect a rape. We agree and reverse that *518conviction, which will be of small comfort to Defendant, inasmuch as he was sentenced to concurrent terms upon this charge and the charge of criminal deviate conduct.
Ind.Code § 85-42-4-1(a) (Burns 1979 Repl., retained in current code with minor amendments) punished anyone who had sexual intercourse with a member of the opposite sex who was compelled by force or the imminent threat of force. Ind. Code § 35-41-1-2 (Burns 1979 Repl., now recodified at Ind.Code § 35-41-1-26 [Burns 1985 Repl.]) defined "sexual intercourse" as "an act that includes any penetration of the female sex organ by the male sex organ." Thus to prove the crime of rape the State was required to establish that the victim suffered sexual intercourse as defined.
There was evidence that shortly after the criminal episode transpired, Defendant drove his automobile, in which the acts had occurred, to a service station. The victim exited from the vehicle with Defendant and told bystanders that he had "raped" her. Her testimony, in court, however leaves much doubt as to whether his violation of her was in fact, a rape under the statutory definition. In both the parlance of men of letters and of those of little grammatical sophistication, the word "rape" has meanings, some of which denote various activities, some of which are carnal. (Webster's Seventh New Collegiate Dictionary, 1970).
The victim's testimony upon this matter was as follows:
"Q After that happened, what happened?
A He made me get in the back seat of the car and laid on my stomach.
Did you do that? ©
Uh huh. >
Did he tell you to do it? ©
(Indicating yes), uh huh. >
Then what did he do? ©
Then he made love to me from the back. >
Q Did you have vaginal intercourse? | Did you have vaginal sex?
I don't know what you mean by that. A
Q Can you describe the intercourse in the back seat?
A (Indicating no), no.
u # * # * *
Q Did the defendant have any type of intercourse with you other than regular, deviate intercourse?
A .I don't know what you mean."
Although her vocabulary was obviously limited, from her testimony elsewhere in the record upon the deviate conduct charge, it is clear that she had ample knowledge of the male and female sex organs, and she displayed no reluctance to relate the acts which Defendant compelled. Although we may question her knowledge of Oxford English, her testimony concerning that charge was quite graphic and left no doubt.
Although it is probable that by her testimony upon the rape charge, previously set out, the victim intended to relate that she had suffered vaginal penetration, for us to infer such from her testimony requires speculation not permitted under the requirement that proof be made "beyond a reasonable doubt." Her testimony would simply leave serious doubt in the mind of any reasonable man as to the manner in which she was violated.
The record also includes expert medical testimony that a vaginal smear taken from the victim after the assault included a chemical found in semen. However, the testimony did not disclose the presence of semen itself, and at most demonstrated that the victim had engaged in sexual intercourse within about thirty (80) hours of the examination. Thus the expert testimony, in light of the indefinite testimony by the victim, is also too tenuous to permit an inference that the victim suffered vaginal penetration by the Defendant.
This Court has been very liberal in allowing trial judges and juries to infer that *519vaginal intercourse occurred based upon somewhat vague testimony by victims, particularly if supported by substantial expert medical testimony. See, eg., Thomas v. State (1984), Ind., 471 N.E.2d 681, 682-83; Brown v. State (1982), Ind., 442 N.E.2d 1109, 1118-14; Page v. State (1980), 274 Ind. 264, 266-67, 410 N.E.2d 1304, 1806-07, after remand on other grounds (1981) 424 N.E.2d 1021; McClain v. State (1980), 274 Ind. 250, 260-61, 410 N.E.2d 1297, 1304 Sizemore; Sandlin v. State (1979), 272 Ind. 26, 27-29, 395 N.E.2d 783, 784-85. In this case, however, the testimony of the victim and the expert medical testimony were too tenuous to support the conviction for rape.
Although our Court of Appeals upheld a conviction for rape in a case presenting an analogous problem, Judge Staton noted:
"Although the evidentiary presentation by the prosecution was technically correct, the argument could have been avoided on appeal if more specific information had been elicited from the vice-tim."
McCormick v. State (1979), 182 Ind.App. 541, 545, N. 1, 895 N.E.2d 856, 858-59, n. 1. It is the responsibility of counsel having the burden of proof to assure that his witnesses' testimony is clear.
The conviction for rape is reversed; the conviction for criminal deviate conduct is affirmed. The cause is remanded with instructions to enter judgment accordingly.
GIVAN, C.J., and DeBRULER, J., concur.
PIVARNIK, J., concurs and dissents with opinion in which SHEPARD, J., concurs.

=== CASE 3027428 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2015-10-13 22:38:14.231196+00 ===

Opinions of the United
2007 Decisions                                                                                                             States Court of Appeals
for the Third Circuit
6-29-2007
USA v. Morales-Aponte
Precedential or Non-Precedential: Non-Precedential
Docket No. 06-3570
Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.law.villanova.edu/thirdcircuit_2007
Recommended Citation
"USA v. Morales-Aponte" (2007). 2007 Decisions. Paper 857.
http://digitalcommons.law.villanova.edu/thirdcircuit_2007/857
This decision is brought to you for free and open access by the Opinions of the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit at Villanova
University School of Law Digital Repository. It has been accepted for inclusion in 2007 Decisions by an authorized administrator of Villanova
University School of Law Digital Repository. For more information, please contact Benjamin.Carlson@law.villanova.edu.
NOT PRECEDENTIAL
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE THIRD CIRCUIT
No: 06-3570
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
v.
FREDDY MORALES-APONTE,
Appellant
Appeal from the District Court for the Virgin Islands,
Division of St. Thomas and St. John
(Crim No. 05-cr-00095)
District Judge: Hon. Curtis V. Gomez
Submitted pursuant to Third Circuit LAR 34.1(a)
December 8, 2006
Before: McKEE, BARRY, and STAPLETON, Circuit Judges
(Opinion filed: June 28, 2007)
OPINION
McKEE, Circuit Judge.
Freddy Morales-Aponte appeals the sentence that was imposed after he pled guilty
to illegal reentry and false impersonation of a citizen of the United States. For the
reasons that follow, we will affirm the sentence.
I.
Morales-Aponte was removed from the United States to the Dominican Republic
1
on December 6, 2000. On November 10, 2005, he attempted to reenter by presenting a
fraudulent Puerto Rican driver’s license and birth certificate, both bearing the name,
“Joel Vasquez Morales,” to immigration officers in St. Thomas. He was thereafter
referred to secondary inspection where he claimed to be a United States citizen.
However, a microscopic test of the birth certificate showed that the name of the true
owner had been removed and replaced with “Joel Vasquez Morales.” The parents’
names had also been removed and replaced with other names. Morales-Aponte was
identified based upon fingerprint comparisons that also disclosed his prior removal.
Thereafter, Morales-Aponte was charged with illegal reentry by a removed alien,
in violation of 8 U.S.C. §§ 1326(a) and (b)(2) (Count One) and false impersonation of a
citizen of the United States, in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 911 (Count Two). Trial was
scheduled for February 21, 2006. However, on February 8, 2006, new counsel was
appointed at Morales-Aponte’s request, and trial was rescheduled to May 15, 2006.
Approximately a week before the scheduled trial date, Morales-Aponte entered an
open guilty plea to both counts of the indictment. Under the Sentencing Guidelines, the
base offense level for his offenses was 24. His extensive criminal record resulted in a
criminal history category IV with a corresponding advisory sentencing range of 77 to 96
months. His acceptance of responsibility reduced his offense level to 22, and the
sentencing range was thereby reduced to 63 to 78 months.
During the unsuccessful plea negotiations that preceded his open guilty plea, the
2
government offered an additional one point reduction for extraordinary acceptance of
responsibility if Morales-Aponte agreed to waive his appellate rights. That additional
point would have further reduced the advisory sentencing range to 57 to 71 months.
However, the parties were never able to reach a plea agreement.
On July 5, 2006, Morales-Aponte filed a motion for downward departure arguing:
(1) that he should receive a four level departure under U.S.S.G. § 5K3.1 to avoid
sentencing disparity with defendants in districts that have an early disposition or “fast-
track” policy; (2) that he should receive a downward departure under U.S.S.G. § 5K2.0
for cultural assimilation; and (3) that he should receive an additional point under
U.S.S.G. § 3E1.1(b) for extraordinary acceptance of responsibility. He claimed that,
after United States v. Booker, 543 U.S. 220 (2005), the district court had discretion to
award each of these departures without a motion from the government.
During the sentencing proceeding that followed, Morales-Aponte’s counsel stated
that he was making the same arguments that he had made on behalf of Kevin Bryan who
had been sentenced earlier the same day. The court sentenced Morales-Aponte to 63
months imprisonment followed by two years of supervised release, and imposed a special
assessment of $200. The district court explained:
Having considered the advisory guideline range of 63 to 78
months, which is based on an offense level of 22, and a
criminal history category of IV, the criteria set forth at Title
18, Section 3553 and the sentencing factors enumerated at
Title 18, Section 3553(a), and pursuant to the Sentencing
Reform Act of 1984, it is the judgment of the Court that the
3
defendant, Freddy Morales-Aponte, also known as Joel
Vasquez Morales, be committed to the custody of the U.S.
Bureau of Prisons for a term of 63 months.
This appeal followed.
II.
A. Downward Departures Pursuant to U.S.S.G. § 5K3.1.
Morales-Aponte relies upon the absence of a “fast-track” program in the Virgin
Islands to argue that he received a sentence that is significantly longer than that received
by similarly situated aliens in judicial districts with “fast-track” programs. He claims that
the use of “fast-track” departures in some districts but not others creates a sentencing
disparity that the court should have tried to mitigate under 18 U.S.C. § 3553(a)(6) when
imposing his sentence. Section 3553(a)(6) requires courts to consider: “the need to avoid
unwarranted sentence disparities among defendants with similar records who have been
found guilty of similar conduct.”
We have recently explained that this “fast-track” argument has been “almost
uniformly rejected” by “nearly every court of appeals in the United States.” United States
v. Vargas, 477 F.3d 94, 98 (3d Cir. 2007). In Vargas, we joined the majority of those
courts in rejecting the argument that Morales-Aponte makes here. Accordingly, his
argument that the district court erred in not reducing his sentence to mitigate the disparity
arising from the absence of a “fast–track” program in the Virgin Islands is meritless.
B. Decrease in offense level pursuant to U.S.S.G. § 3E1.1(b).
4
Morales-Aponte also contends that the government’s refusal to file a motion to
award an additional point under U.S.S.G. § 3E1.1(b) was made in bad faith and, the
district court should therefore have granted him the one point reduction despite the
absence of a motion from the government. He also claims the government’s refusal to
file such a motion is tantamount to a “denial of equal treatment under the U.S.
Constitution.” Appellant’s Br. at 11. Both contentions are without merit.
Morales-Aponte’s claim that the government acted in bad faith in not filing a
motion for the additional one point reduction under § 3E1.1(b) is based solely upon his
unsupported assertion. He points to nothing in the record to support that claim, and we
can find nothing to support it. It is clear from § 3E1.1 and the relevant commentary that
the government has discretion to file such a motion based upon its assessment of the
relevant circumstances in a particular case. The absence of a motion for an additional
reduction based upon extraordinary acceptance of responsibility is certainly consistent
with the protracted nature of the unsuccessful plea negotiations that led up to the open
guilty plea. This record simply does not support Morales-Aponte’s claim that he was
somehow denied “equal treatment.”
C. Denial of Motion for One Point Decrease
in Criminal History Score.
Morales-Aponte also argues that the district court erred by denying his motion for
a one point decrease in his criminal history score. U.S.S.G. § 4A1.1(c) directs that 1
point should be added for each prior sentence that was less than 60 days, up to a total of
5
4 points. Section 4A1.2(c) further specifies that sentences for certain prior offenses, such
as reckless driving, driving without a license or driving with a revoked or suspended
license and leaving the scene of an accident are counted only if “(A) the sentence was a
term of probation of at least one year or a term of imprisonment of at least thirty days, or
(B) the prior offense was similar to an instant offense.”
Morales-Aponte objected to a criminal history point for the traffic offense set
forth in ¶ 42 of his Presentence Investigation Report. After reviewing the PSR,
conferring with the probation officer and hearing argument from counsel, the district
court rejected Morales-Aponte’s objection. Morales-Aponte now argues that the one
point should not have been added to his criminal history score for the traffic offense
because the “record is silent as to whether [his] suspended driving privilege was
extended for a year or whether he was given a term of imprisonment which was
suspended for a year.” Appellant’s Br. at 13.     However, he either misinterprets the
record or chooses to ignore it.
The PSR at ¶ 42 states that Morales-Aponte was convicted of operating a motor
vehicle after having his license suspended, leaving the scene of an accident, property
damage, and related offenses. He was sentenced to one year probation. The police report
stated that he responded to police efforts to pull him over for a traffic violation by
speeding away after the police lights were turned on, weaving in and out of traffic at a
high rate of speed and striking another vehicle during the high speed pursuit. A District
6
Court may rely a factual statement in a PSR at sentencing, absent a timely and substantial
objection from one of the parties. See United States v. May, 413 F.3d 841, 848-49 (8th
Cir. 2005) (“Together, Rules 32(f)(1) and 32(i)(3)(A) establish that an untimely objection
to a fact in the presentence report does not change the fact’s ‘undisputed’ status, and the
district court may adopt the fact without additional evidence.”); United States v. Cyr, 337
F.3d 96 (1st Cir. 2003) (“Generally, a PSR bears sufficient indicia of reliability to permit
the district court to rely on it at sentencing. The defendant is free to challenge any
assertions in the PSR with countervailing evidence or proffers, in which case the district
court is obliged to resolve any genuine and material dispute on the merits. But if the
defendant's objections to the PSR are merely rhetorical and unsupported by countervailing
proof, the district court is entitled to rely on the facts in the PSR.”) (citations and internal
quotation marks omitted); accord United States v. Cothran, 302 F.3d 279, 286 (5th Cir.
2002); United States v. Willis, 300 F.3d 803, 807 (7th Cir. 2002); United States v. Love,
134 F.3d 595, 606 (4th Cir. 1998). Here, Morales-Aponte’s objection was raised for the
first time at sentencing, and consisted merely of his attorney’s denial of the statement in
the PSR that Morales-Aponte received a year of probation for his 1996 traffic offense.
Under these circumstances, the District Court was entitled to rely on the PSR without
additional inquiry. The resulting conviction was correctly counted under §§ 4A1.1(c)
and 4A1.2(c).
D. Cultural Assimilation.
7
Although this court has not addressed the propriety of a downward departure for
cultural assimilation in a precedential opinion, other courts of appeals have. The United
States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit has stated that such a departure may be
appropriate in an “atypical or extraordinary case.” United States v.
Rodriguez-Montelongo, 263 F.3d 429, 433-34 (5th Cir.2001). The Court of Appeals for
the Ninth Circuit has recognized the validity of such a departure in dicta, see United
States v. Lipman, 133 F.3d 726, 730-31 (9th Cir.1998); and the Court of Appeals for the
Eleventh Circuit has hinted at such a departure. See United States v. Sanchez-Valencia,
148 F.3d 1273, 1274 (11th Cir.1998) (per curiam) (citing Lipman ). The district court
understood that the guidelines were only advisory and appreciated that it could depart
downward within the confines of § 3553(a). The court's refusal to do so was a lawful
exercise of its discretion which we lack jurisdiction to review. See United States v.
Denardi, 892 F.2d 269, 272 (3d Cir.1989) (“To the extent this appeal attacks the district
court's exercise of discretion in refusing to reduce the sentences below the sentencing
guidelines, it will be dismissed for lack of appellate jurisdiction.”); see also United States
v. Cooper, 437 F.3d 324, 332-33 (3d Cir.2006).
III. Conclusion.
For all of the above reasons, we will affirm the district court’s imposition of
sentence.
8

=== CASE 3027431 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2015-10-13 22:38:14.598189+00 ===

Opinions of the United
2007 Decisions                                                                                                             States Court of Appeals
for the Third Circuit
6-29-2007
USA v. Mathis
Precedential or Non-Precedential: Non-Precedential
Docket No. 05-4089
Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.law.villanova.edu/thirdcircuit_2007
Recommended Citation
"USA v. Mathis" (2007). 2007 Decisions. Paper 863.
http://digitalcommons.law.villanova.edu/thirdcircuit_2007/863
This decision is brought to you for free and open access by the Opinions of the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit at Villanova
University School of Law Digital Repository. It has been accepted for inclusion in 2007 Decisions by an authorized administrator of Villanova
University School of Law Digital Repository. For more information, please contact Benjamin.Carlson@law.villanova.edu.
NOT PRECEDENTIAL
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE THIRD CIRCUIT
__________
No. 05-4089
____
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
v.
JAMES MATHIS,
Appellant
__________
On Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania
(D.C. Criminal No.98-cr-00495-1)
District Judge: Honorable Bruce W. Kauffman
__________
Argued May 8, 2007
Before: RENDELL and JORDAN, Circuit Judges,
and VANASKIE, District Judge.
(Filed June 29, 2007)
__________________
* Honorable Thomas I. Vanaskie, Judge of the United States District Court for the
Middle District of Pennsylvania, sitting by designation.
James M. Fox [ARGUED]
Suite 300
84 State Street
Boston, MA 02109
Counsel for Appellant
James Mathis
Nancy B. Winter [ARGUED]
Office of U.S. Attorney
615 Chestnut Street, Suite 1250
Philadelphia, PA 19106
Counsel for Appellee
United States of America
__________
OPINION OF THE COURT
__________
RENDELL, Circuit Judge.
James Mathis appeals the District Court’s dismissal of his § 2255 motion as
time-barred. Six years ago Mathis filed a motion that would have been deemed timely
had the District Court found it to have complied with the forms for § 2255 motions, or
had deemed the filing timely subject to amendment. The District Court entered various
orders regarding Mathis’s compliance with form requirements before it accepted Mathis’s
filing in June 2002. The District Court subsequently dismissed the motion as time-barred
in July 2005. We find that the motion should be deemed timely filed and will remand for
a determination on the merits.
2
FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY
Mathis pleaded guilty in federal court to two drug offenses on November 23, 1998.
A sentence of 120 months was imposed on June 26, 2000. Mathis did not pursue a direct
appeal. His conviction became final ten days after his conviction,1 on July 12, 2000, and
thus Mathis had until July 12, 2001 to file his § 2255 motion.
Mathis signed his pro se motion on June 28, 2001, and the District Court docketed
it as a § 2255 motion to vacate, set aside, or correct the sentence.2 Had the motion been
in strict compliance with the form requirements, it would have been timely. The District
Court issued a noncompliance order on July 9, 2001, stating: “[T]his petition was not
filed with the standard 28 U.S.C. § 2255 form, as required by Local Civil Rule 9.3 . . . .”
App. 1. The District Court ordered that Mathis be provided with the official § 2255 forms
and ordered that he re-file the motion on the appropriate forms within 30 days or the
motion would be dismissed. Mathis was told that when he re-filed, he could indicate
whether he wanted to proceed with the pro se motion, or wanted to file one new all-
inclusive habeas motion. The Court concluded: “if the petitioner meets the requirements
1
Kapral v. United States, 166 F.3d 565, 577 (3d Cir. 1999) (“If a defendant does not
pursue a timely direct appeal to the court of appeals, his or her conviction and sentence
become final, and the statute of limitation begins to run, on the date on which the time for
filing such an appeal expired.”).
2
The substantive claims supporting the § 2255 motion are: (1) the conviction was
obtained by an illegal and defective superseding indictment, (2) the district court lacked
jurisdiction, (3) Mathis was denied effective assistance of counsel, and (4) Mathis’s
conviction and sentence were obtained unlawfully where the charged statute lacks a
corresponding penalty provision in the sentencing guidelines.
3
of Local Civil Rule 9.3 but does not within thirty (30) days announce his intention to
withdraw, the court will proceed to decide the pro se motion as filed and captioned.”
App. 1. Mathis did not re-file within 30 days.
The District Court dismissed the § 2255 motion on January 25, 2002, without
prejudice, but on March 20th, 2002, the District Court vacated the dismissal and
forwarded forms to Mathis with instructions to reply within 30 days. App. 20-21.
According to a subsequent order by the District Court, “on March 19, 2002, this court
Ordered petitioner to complete the standard 28 U.S.C. § 2255 form as directed by Local
Rule 9.3 (that is, by setting forth his entire argument on the forms, without recourse to
any attachments or reference to any other filings in this court.).” App. 2.
Mathis replied to the order by filing a motion dated April 15, 2002, which was
docketed on April 22, 2002.3 Mathis listed his four grounds plainly on the form, but
included an attachment that set forth his argument, and in the spaces where the form
asked him to list facts in support of his argument Mathis typed “See Memorandum of
Law.” On April 29, 2002, the District Court dismissed the § 2255 motion without
prejudice, citing Mathis’s failure to include all of his argument on the form. The Court
wrote:
3
The record does not reflect when the motion was given to prison authorities for
mailing, which would be the appropriate filing date. See Houston v. Lack, 487 U.S. 266
(1988).
4
on March 19, 2002, this court Ordered petitioner to complete
the standard 28 U.S.C. § 2255 form as directed by Local Civil
Rule 9.3 (that is, by setting forth his entire argument on the
forms, without recourse to any attachments or reference to
other filings in this court), and, to return these correctly
completed forms to the Clerk of the Court within thirty days,
or this action would be dismissed . . .
. . . on April 22, 2002, petitioner returned the standard form,
but it was not completed in the manner dictated by Local
Civil Rule 9.3 and this Court’s Order of March 19, 2002;
more specifically, petitioner did not set forth his argument
completely on the form, but instead made reference to an
attached 21-page brief, plus exhibits . . . .
Id.
As the dismissal was without prejudice, Mathis filed a new form which was
docketed on May 17, 2002. The District Court accepted this version and reopened the
case “for all purposes” in June 2002. App. 3. The matter then appears to have
languished.4 On June 29, 2005, the District Court issued an opinion denying the § 2255
motion as untimely. The District Court stated: “Although Petitioner’s first letter, if
construed as a 2255 motion, may have been considered timely filed, it was dismissed as it
did not comport with the standard for filing a 2255 motion and Petitioner did not notify
the Court as ordered . . . of any intent to have this letter deemed a habeas corpus motion.
All subsequent filings were untimely.” App. 6.
4
The docket reflects no activity on the motion between April 4, 2003 and March 19,
2004 except for a letter from Mathis informing the Court of a new mailing address.
5
Mathis argues that his § 2255 motion was in substantial compliance with the filing
requirements, and that the “flawed, but timely, 2255 motion is properly docketed when
mailed, provided the defendant later cures any defect within a reasonable time.”
Appellant’s Br. 17. He argues that the April 2002 filing accomplished this.
DISCUSSION
We have jurisdiction pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 2253. We issued a certificate of
appealability on June 8, 2006 on the issue of whether Mathis’s motion was properly
denied as time-barred. We exercise plenary review over questions of law and review
findings of fact for clear error. Lambert v. Blackwell, 134 F.3d 506 (3d Cir. 1997).
Under Rule 2(c) of the Rules Governing Section 2255 Proceedings, § 2255 motions “must
substantially follow either the form appended to these rules or a form prescribed by a
local district-court rule.” Rule 9.3 of the Local Civil Rules for the Eastern District of
Pennsylvania states the following:
(a) All petitions for writs of habeas corpus and all motions
pursuant to 28 U.S.C. 2255 shall be filed on forms provided
by the Court and shall contain the information called for by
such forms. The required information shall be set [forth]
concisely and legibly. Ordinarily, the court will consider only
those matters which are set forth on the forms provided by the
court. Any attempt to circumvent this requirement by
purporting to incorporate by reference other documents which
do not comply with this Rule may result in dismissal of the
petition.
(b) Any petition filed under 28 U.S.C. 2254 or motion filed
under 28 U.S.C. 2255 which does not substantially comply
with Rules 2 and 3 of the Rules governing petitions and
motions filed under those sections may be returned by the
6
Clerk of the Court to the petitioner, if a judge of the court so
directs, together with a statement of the reason for its return.
A copy of any petition or motion returned for failure to
comply shall be retained by the Clerk.
The parties agree that the Rules Governing § 2255 motions were amended in 2004
to make explicit the instruction, established by two pre-2004 cases (Jones v. Bertrand,
171 F.3d 499 (7th Cir. 1999), and Spotville v. Cain, 149 F.3d 374 (5th Cir. 1998)), that
courts deem partially flawed § 2255 motions timely so as not to jeopardize a petitioner’s
AEDPA year.5 Similarly, the parties agree that, pre-2004, a motion that substantially
complied with the Local Rules should be deemed timely.
The District Court chose not to deem the initial filing timely because it was not on
the right forms, and instead dismissed it “without prejudice.” It took up the case (perhaps
not realizing that the AEDPA year had run), and dismissed a second time “without
prejudice” because the forms stated “See Memorandum of Law” where it asked for the
facts supporting the motion, even though the grounds for the motion were listed clearly
on the forms. In each case, the District Court unnecessarily jeopardized Mathis’s
AEDPA year in the face of his persistent efforts to comply substantially with the form
requirements.
5
See, e.g., Appellee’s Br. 27 (“Although Harris [v. Vaughn, 129 Fed. Appx. 684 (3d Cir.
2005) ] was decided according to the version of the Rules existing prior to the 2004
amendments . . . the post-amendment Rules simply appear to codify the reasonableness
standard embraced by Harris and Jones for assessing the timeliness of improper petitions
filed before the termination of the one-year period, but corrected afterwards.”).
7
Pro se § 2255 motions are to be read liberally, see Higgins v. Beyer, 293 F.3d 683
(3d Cir. 2002), and that fact was given insufficient consideration here. We conclude that
writing “See Memorandum of Law” in the fact section of the forms did not mean that
Mathis had failed to “substantially follow” the Rules Governing § 2255 Proceedings and
Local Rule 9.3. Mathis listed his grounds plainly on the forms, and his actions reflect a
diligent attempt to navigate the rules governing § 2255 motions. There is no indication
that Mathis’s attachment was intended to circumvent the filing requirements or to burden
the District Court with the task of determining the grounds for his motion.6 His April
2002 motion was dated April 15, and the District Court may have unfairly considered the
motion as having been filed when docketed, rather than the day it was handed to the
prison official. See Houston v. Lack, 487 U.S. 266 (1988). Moreover, in light of the
District Court’s acceptance of the May 2002 motion and the Court’s reopening of the case
“for all purposes” we find the dismissal–three years later–to be arbitrary. In sum, we
think it clear that substantial compliance with the rules requires no more than what Mathis
has done here.
CONCLUSION
6
We do not rule that the statement “See Memorandum of Law” required the District
Court to consider the arguments set forth in that document. We need not decide that issue
here. It is sufficient to say that Mathis’s insertion of that statement did not, in and of
itself and light of the circumstances here, render his filing anything less than substantially
compliant with the applicable rules.
8
For the reasons set forth, Mathis’s filings substantially followed the rules
governing § 2255 proceedings, and accordingly his § 2255 motion should have been
deemed timely. We will accordingly VACATE the District Court’s Order and REMAND
the motion for a determination on the merits.
_______________
9

=== CASE 9740983 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:46:44.440802+00 ===

DeBRULER, Justice,
dissenting.
The trial court construed this charge of child molesting together with the child molesting statute, and in Final Instruction Number 15, instructed the jury as follows:
To convict the defendant of child molesting the State must have proved each of the following elements:
* * # La % *
5. [S.M.] was at the time of the occurrence twelve (12) years of age or older but under sixteen (16) years of age. If the State failed to prove each of these elements beyond a reasonable doubt, you should find the defendant not guilty. *1311If the State did prove each of the elements beyond a reasonable doubt, you should find the defendant guilty of child molesting, a class D felony.
The State did not object to this instruction and the construction of the child molesting statute upon which it is based. It did not for example tender an instruction that the victim, S.M., was at the time of the occurrence under the age of sixteen years. Nor did it tender an instruction that she was around twelve years old, or between eleven and twelve. Thus the State at the time of trial agreed with or at least acquiesced in the trial court's construction of the statute and charge making age a full-fledged crime element and requiring proof of age of the victim as stated in the court's instruction. ILC. 85-87-22. Criminal Rule 8. The State also did not ask for, or argué for the Court to instruct on any possible lesser included offenses, which it might well have done.
The jury, after being instructed returned the following verdict:
We the jury find the defendant Michael Barger guilty of the crime of Child Molesting a Class D Felony.
This verdict is based upon the determination of the jury that beyond a reasonable doubt the victim was over twelve and under sixteen at the time of the occurrence. On appeal, appellate counsel claimed the evidence was insufficient to warrant that determination, and the sole response of the State in its brief is that the victim's testimony was sufficient evidence to support that determination. The Court of Appeals steadfastly applied the correct appellate standard in reviewing this claim, declared the age of the victim to be a required element, determined the proof of that element to be insufficient, and reversed the conviction. In so doing that Court followed established legal principles to the correct legal result.
DICKSON, J., concurs.

=== CASE 2225715 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:53.821746+00 ===

343 Mich. 413 (1955)
72 N.W.2d 105
McGIVERIN
v.
CITY OF HUNTINGTON WOODS.
Calendar No. 46,308.
Supreme Court of Michigan.
Decided October 3, 1955.
*415 David Colman and Moll, Desenberg, Purdy & Glover, for plaintiffs.
H. Eugene Field, for defendants city and city officials.
Berger, Manason & Kayes, for intervenor.
SMITH, J.
This is a mandamus action. Plaintiffs want a building permit. The property involved is located on the north side of 10 Mile road and west of Scotia road in defendant city of Huntington Woods. Ten Mile, it should be noted, is the southern boundary between the city of Huntington Woods and its southerly neighbor, Oak Park, while Scotia road, at this point, forms the western boundary of the Rackham municipal golf course. Both roads carry heavy traffic, and a light for the control thereof is located at the intersection.
The lots involved are 8 in number, each (with the exception of a triangular corner lot) having a 20-foot frontage on 10 Mile, with a depth of 100 feet (plus 10 feet of vacated alley). The subdivision restrictions provide that on the lots in dispute may be erected 2-family dwellings or stores. Immediately north of the lost are 5 residential dwellings. Diagonally across from them, however, is a substantial shopping center and at the southwest corner is found a doctor's clinic. Such is the immediate area involved.
Plaintiffs are William L. McGiverin and Triangle Development Company, a Michigan corporation, owners of the lots involved, who will hereafter be referred to in the singular as plaintiff. Mr. McGiverin was the original subdivider of the subdivision in which the lots involved are located. On or about March 3, 1953, plaintiff filed an application for a building permit for the construction, on these lots, of *416 several stores, specifically a 7-store building of a type described as a "Williamsburg Row," which is of colonial design. This permit was denied by the defendant city because of noncompliance with the zoning ordinance and the fire limits ordinance, the latter of which specified full fireproof construction. Subsequently the plans were changed to meet the fireproofing requirement and were resubmitted. On April 22, 1953, the revised plans were rejected as not being in compliance with the zoning ordinance. Plaintiff thereafter, on June 27, 1953, petitioned the court for a writ of mandamus to compel the issuance of the building permit.
At issue in this case is the validity of various zoning ordinances adopted by the city of Huntington Woods. It is undisputed that under ordinance No 87 of the city of Huntington Woods, as amended, the use contemplated by plaintiff was a permitted use. Under this ordinance the property was zoned for business. On May 13, 1948, ordinance No 96 was adopted by the defendant city, purporting to amend ordinance No 87. Under its provisions, plaintiff's property was placed in zone 2, a duplex residential classification. After this action was filed by plaintiff, in which it attacks the validity of ordinance No 96, on the ground of improper publication (CL 1948, § 125.584 [Stat Ann 1949 Rev § 5.2934]; see Krajenke Buick Sales v. Hamtramck City Engineer, 322 Mich. 250), the defendant city enacted ordinance No 130, which was adopted on August 18, 1953. It placed plaintiff's property in zone 1, a single-family residential classification.
While much emphasis has been placed on the validity and legal status of each of the ordinances, and, particularly on whether the last enactment of the city of Huntington Woods is retroactive, thus barring effectively plaintiff's proposed use of its property, the crux of the case is whether the action of *417 the defendant city is an unreasonable, oppressive and a discriminatory exercise of the police power insofar as it affects plaintiff.
Little is to be gained by a lengthy discussion of the numerous cases holding that a zoning ordinance must be reasonable and that its reasonableness becomes the test of its legality, Hammond v. Bloomfield Hills Building Inspector, 331 Mich. 551; Janesick v. City of Detroit, 337 Mich. 549; and Anchor Steel & Conveyor Co. v. City of Dearborn, 342 Mich. 361.
In Janesick v. City of Detroit, supra, the sole question to be determined by the court was whether or not the city zoning ordinance, as applied to plaintiffs' property, was a reasonable exercise of police power. We there said at pages 553, 554, that:
"This Court has had frequent occasion to pass upon zoning ordinances. General principles have evolved from our decisions and have been adhered to, but the application of those principles to particular cases is sometimes difficult. We have held that zoning ordinances, when related to the public health, morals, safety or general welfare, are a valid exercise of police power, but that such ordinances must be reasonable in their application. One who seeks to have an ordinance declared invalid has the burden of affirmatively proving by competent evidence that the ordinance is an arbitrary and unreasonable restriction upon the use of his property. Hammond v. Bloomfield Hills Building Inspector, 331 Mich. 551.
"Defendant insists that the 2 primary factors that motivate plaintiffs in their effort to remove the residential zoning restrictions from their property are the present lack of available financing for construction purposes and the potential increase in the market value of the property if light manufacturing uses were permitted. Such matters, the city says, should be given little or no consideration in a determination of the reasonableness of the ordinances. It is their contention that the public welfare outweighs *418 possible injury to the individual and that any zoning ordinance is apt to bring about a reduced valuation to the owner of property along the division line between an area zoned for residential purposes and one zoned for commercial and manufacturing purposes.
"It is to be conceded that the zoning of any city will result in so-called `buffer' areas, but it does not follow that such lines of division can be arbitrarily drawn by the zoning authorities without regard to the existing characteristics of the area itself or without regard to the reasonable rights of the owners. In every case of hardship the rights of the general public must be weighed against the right of the individual land owner to use his property to the greatest advantage. Significant but not conclusive factors in such a determination are depreciation and loss of use by the property owners as a result of the application of the ordinance."
It has been noted that both ordinance No 96 and ordinance No 130 purported to exclude commercial use of the property here in question. Ordinance No 96 was held by the trial court to be nugatory because of fatal defects in adoption, and as to ordinance No 130, it was of the opinion, after hearing the proofs and viewing the premises, "that this ordinance is unreasonable, and confiscatory in nature, depriving the plaintiff of his property without due process of law."
The testimony amply sustains the conclusion that plaintiff's property is not suitable for residential purposes. It is at the intersection of 2 principal thoroughfares, each carrying substantial volume of traffic. So far as the subdivision restrictions are concerned, business has been permitted thereon. From the time it was originally platted, because of its location, it was not restricted to residential use. As the area has grown, the corner has in fact become a business corner. There is already located thereon, and directly across the street, a large super market, *419 a drug store, a beauty parlor, small neighborhood stores and a physician's clinic. The lots in question are narrow, being only 20 feet in width. In view of their size it was testified that while single dwellings might be put thereon, "the selling value would be quite low." Obviously, residences in such a location, directly and diagonally facing a commercial center, with its lights, noise, and traffic, would have little appeal for the average home owner. Such undesirability, as always, finds reflection in the market value of the property. As residential property, it was testified, it would bring approximately $25 to $40 a foot, whereas for business purposes the corresponding figure would be $200. The difference is revealing. As we said in Ritenour v. Township of Dearborn, 326 Mich. 242, 250:
"While depreciation in value is not a definite yardstick by which to measure the reasonableness of a zoning ordinance, the Court will give it consideration. The record here shows that most of the value of plaintiff's property has been destroyed by the change in its use required by the ordinance.
"`A zoning ordinance which renders property almost worthless is unreasonable and confiscatory, and therefore illegal.
"`In determining whether the invasion of property rights under a purported police power, is unreasonable and confiscatory, the extent to which property values are diminished by the provisions of a zoning ordinance must be given consideration.' Ervin Acceptance Co. v. City of Ann Arbor (syllabi), 322 Mich. 404."
See, also, Hering v. City of Royal Oak, 326 Mich. 232, and Grand Trunk Western Railroad Co. v. City of Detroit, 326 Mich. 387.
Under the circumstances of the instant case we are constrained to agree with the trial judge that the exclusion of business activities upon the property *420 involved is unreasonable and confiscatory in nature.
Finally, appellants urge that our holding in City of East Lansing v. Meridian Township Building Inspector, 332 Mich. 96, controls our disposition of the case at bar, since, they assert, plaintiff did not apply for a certificate of occupancy at the time the application was made for the building permit We cannot agree with appellants' contention The East Lansing Case, supra, involved an ordinance which read, in part:
"`No permit for excavation for, or the erection or alteration of, any building shall be issued before the application has been made for certificate of occupancy and compliance.'"
In the case at bar the ordinance omitted the words "or the erection or alteration of," an omission of considerable significance with respect to the matter here litigated, namely, the issuance of a building permit. In view of this and other differences in the 2 ordinances, we deem it pertinent to observe that the East Lansing Case does not have the breadth ascribed to it by appellants.
Affirmed, with costs to appellee.
CARR, C.J., and BUTZEL, SHARPE, BOYLES, REID, DETHMERS, and KELLY, JJ., concurred.

=== CASE 9740984 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:46:47.300507+00 ===

MILLER, Judge.
Corbin Bardonner (age 20) was charged with burglary and theft of property from the home of Theresa Zimmerman of Hamilton County. A jury acquitted Bardonner *1355of burglary, but found him guilty of theft,1 a Class D felony. The judge sentenced Bardonner to three years imprisonment. -
Bardonner appeals, raising the following issues:
1) Whether the court erred in overruling objections to the comments of the prosecutor during voir dire; and
2) Whether the court erred in refusing Bardonner the opportunity to present evidence of the confession of another individual for the burglary and theft.
We reverse because the prosecutor's comments during voir dire denied Bardonner a fair trial.
DECISION
The evidence pertinent to our opinion (the sufficiency of which is not challenged by Bardonner) follow:
The Hamilton County home of Ms. Zimmerman was burglarized on November 27, 1989. Various items were stolen from the home including televisions, VCR, stereo speakers, banks, satellite control, a jar filled with loose change and a magnum of champagne. On the day of the theft, a Chem-Lawn truck driver observed a dark hatchback car with side pinstripes parked with the back open in the Zimmerman driveway. The truck driver observed a man of general description enter the car and speed away in such a manner as to spin the tires and throw gravel. Bardon-ner borrowed a friend's Mercury Lynx, a black hatchback car with side pin-stripes, to haul some "stuff" from Bardonner's home to his apartment. When he returned the car, he brought various items into the apartment, including a large jar filled with loose change, televisions, satellite equipment, stereo speakers, and a large bottle of champagne. Several witnesses, including Christopher Williams, who also lived in the apartment, testified that Bardonner told him that he had stolen the items. Bardon-ner sold some of the items to a neighbor, Shayne Marcum. Police, who received a tip that stolen items could be found in Marcum's apartment, recovered items marked with serial numbers matching those of the missing Zimmerman property.
I. Prosecutorial Misconduct
During voir dire the prosecutor read excerpts from Justice White's separate opinion in United States v. Wade (1967), 388 U.S. 218, 256-258, 87 S.Ct. 1926, 1947-1948, 18 L.Ed.2d 11492 and discussed with the prospective jurors what it meant as far as the roles of the prosecutor and defense counsel in a criminal trial. First, Prosecutor Wayne Sturtevant asked a juror whether both sides have an obligation to seek the truth. When the juror responded in the affirmative, Sturtevant stated:
""Does everybody feel that way? Both sides in this courtroom have an obligation to seek the truth. How many people would be surprised if I told you that wasn't the law? Let me, just so we can discuss it a little bit, read you something here. This is from a United States Supreme Court case in 1967 and it's by Justice Byron White.
'Law enforcement officers have the obligation to convict the guilty and make sure they do not convict the innocent.' [Id. at 256, 87 S.Ct. at 1947.]
"Does everybody agree that that's the way it should be? I think on this side we should have an obligation to make sure we don't convict innocent people ... an innocent person. All right.
'They must be dedicated to making the criminal trial a procedure for the ascertainment of the true facts surrounding the commission of a crime. [/d.]
"So from this side there is an obligation to seek the truth.
*1356The State's obligation in a criminal prosecution 'is not that it shall win a case but that justice shall be done. [Id. at 256, n. 5, 87 S.Ct. at 1947, n. 5.]
"Does everybody agree with that ... that proposition too?
The prosecutor 'may prosecute with earnestness and vigor-indeed, he should do so. But while he may strike hard blows he's not a liberty to strike foul ones. It is as much his duty to refrain from improper methods calculated to produce a wrongful conviction as it is to use every legitimate means to bring about a just one.' [Zd.]
"Does that sound like the system that you would expect coming into the courtroom?
'Defense counsel need present nothing even if he knows what the truth is." [Id. at 257, 87 S.Ct. at 1948.]
"Again, that's in line with what I told you that he doesn't have any obligation to do anything. The burden is on the State of Indiana.
'He [defense counsel] need not furnish any witnesses to the police or reveal any confidences of his client, or furnish any other information to help the prosecution's case. If he can confuse a witness, even a truthful one, or make him appear at a disadvantage, unsure or indecisive, that will be his normal course.! [Id. at 257, 87 S.Ct. at 1948.]
¥ * * * * a
'Undoubtedly, there are some limits which defense counsel must observe but more often than not, defense counsel will cross-examine a prosecution witness, and impeach him if he can, even if he thinks the witness is telling the truth ...'
'In this respect, as part of our modified adversary system and as part of the duty imposed on the most honorable defense counsel, we countenance or require conduct which in many instances has little, if any, relation to the search for the truth. "
[Id. at 258, 87 S.Ct. at 1948.]
(R. 189-192, emphasis added). Defense counsel Gregory Caldwell objected as follows:
"Your Honor, I'm going to object. I'm going to move that be stricken and move for a mistrial. Irrespective of the Court's articulation of that language in a Supreme Court decision to offer that language as an explanation to my role in this trial at this part of the proceeding has no purpose other than to prejudice this jury and to set the Prosecutor ... to establish his position of being one of the Lone Ranger for truth and justice only and I am here to color the truth and alter the truth just like the previous argument that I argued against in a prior trial in this case. Now, that is improper, it is wrong, it is inflammatory, it is prejudicial. It is dictum of a Court in a decision explaining a decision. It has no part in this trial and there is no way I can overcome it at this point when he tries to prejudice this jury like that. I move for a mistrial."
(R. 192-198). The trial court did not strike the comments and denied the motion for mistrial. Sturtevant continued with the same line of questioning to the jurors about the differences in roles of trial counsel without further objection by defense counsel. Caldwell attempted to overcome the prosecutor's position by engaging in a discussion with prospective jurors to counter the prosecutor's suggestions that, as defense counsel, his duty was to conceal the truth. After further questioning, six jurors were stricken from the panel, and they were replaced by other jurors who had been seated in the courtroom. When the new prospective jurors were seated in the jury box, the prosecutor and defense counsel asked individual questions of these jurors. There was no question by the judge whether they had heard the questions which had been asked of the first group of jurors; however, Caldwell asked some individual jurors whether they had any questions or comments upon anything that had been said during the day. At the close of the State's case-in-chief, Bardonner's defense counsel renewed the motion for mis*1357trial on the basis of the improper questioning during voir dire.
Bardonner contends the prosecutor committed misconduct as he read excerpts from Justice White's opinion-interspersed with questions and comments to the prospective jurors-and prejudiced the jury against him from the outset. He further argues that because the court did not admonish the jury, such conduct placed him in a position of "grave peril" necessitating a reversal. Bardonner acknowledges that when reviewing a charge of prosecutorial misconduct, this court first must determine whether the prosecutor in fact engaged in misconduct and then determine whether the misconduct placed the defendant in a position of grave peril to which he should not have been subjected. Andrews v. State (1989), Ind., 536 N.E.2d 507; Burris v. State (1984), Ind., 465 N.E.2d 171, cert. denied (1985), 469 U.S. 1132, 105 S.Ct. 816, 83 L.Ed. 2d 809; Maldanado v. State (1976), 265 Ind. 492, 355 N.E.2d 843. Whether the misconduct results in subjecting the defendant to "grave peril" is determined by the probable persuasive effect on the jury's decision, not by the degree of impropriety of the conduct. Maldanado, supra.
Bardonner cites several cases involving instances of prosecutorial misconduct meriting reversal, including Robinson v. State (1973), 260 Ind. 517, 297 N.E.2d 409. In Robinson, our supreme court stated that interrogating jurors in order to cultivate or condition them to be receptive to the cause of the examiner is a practice "repugnant to the cause of justice" and, if properly raised by a motion for mistrial at the end of the State's case-in-chief, warrants reversal. Id. at 521, 297 N.E.2d at 412.3
The State contends that the prosecutor did not commit misconduct because he was reading directly from an opinion of the Supreme Court and, even if improper, no reversal is necessary because Bardonner failed to show how he was placed in a position of grave peril, citing Andrews, supra, and Hubbard v. State (1974), 262 Ind. 176, 313 N.E.2d 346.
The granting of a mistrial is an extreme remedy within the sound discretion of the trial court and will be reversed only upon a showing of clear error. Szpyrka v. State (1990), Ind., 550 N.E.2d 316.4 We note that following the denial of the mistrial, the defense counsel did not request the court to admonish the jury, which has been held to be a waiver of any claim of error resulting from the failure to admonish the jury. Greer v. State (1989), Ind., 543 N.E.2d 1124. However, defense counsel renewed his motion for mistrial at the close of the State's case-in-chief and, thus, preserved the error as required by *1358Robinson, supra.5
In Hubbard, the prosecutor, during closing arguments, read an excerpt from the Wade opinion. On appeal, Hubbard argued that the reading of the opinion was misconduct requiring reversal. Our supreme court stated:
"'The passages read by the prosecutor emphasized the point of. view that at trial the role of the defense attorney is to serve his client rather than to join with law enforcement officers in an abstract search for truth. Appellants suggest that the reading of such a passage to the jury prejudiced them. We think that by the end of a long trial a jury can hardly be unaware of the role of the defense counsel in our adversarial system. In any event, this act of the prosecutor was not such as to place the defendants "in grave peril" and thereby warrant a new trial."
313 N.E.2d at 350, (emphasis added and citations omitted). Accord, Abercrombie v. State (1985), Ind., 478 N.E.2d 1236; Drossos v. State (1983), Ind.App., 442 N.E.2d 1.
We do not agree with the State that Hubbard is controlling and find that the circumstances there are distinguishable from the present case. First, it is not clear from the Hubbard court's opinion whether the prosecutor read verbatim from the same passage in Wade or-like the prose-ecutor in this case-interspersed his own comments interpreting the passages as he read them to the jury. Secondly, this case is clearly distinguishable because, here, the reading from Wade occurred during voir dire instead of during closing arguments where counsel are granted greater leeway in arguing the law and the facts. Our supreme court in Hubbard noted that the reading came at the end of a long trial and after the evidence had been presented. Thus, the Hubbard court indicated such tactics were improper and, under other circumstances, could place a defendant in grave peril and merit reversal. In essence, the main difference is the evidence came in "clean" in Hubbard and, in this case, the evidence came in "tainted."
The prosecutor, in this case, began his comments by asking whether both sides have an obligation to seek the truth. When a juror responded "Yes", he told the jurors that such was not the law and then quoted from Wade. While we agree that a defense counsel does not have to put on any evidence and the burden of proof is on the State, we know of no rule of "law" that only the State has an obligation to seek the truth.
One might ask whether it would have been misconduct for the prosecutor to make these kinds of statements as his own opinion-without quoting from an opinion of a Justice of the Supreme Court? The New Jersey Supreme Court addressed this issue in State v. Thornton (1962), 38 N.J. 380, 185 A.2d 9, cert. denied (1963) 374 U.S. 816, 83 S.Ct. 1710, 10 L.Ed.2d 1039. The Thornton court criticized the prosecutor's comments which, in essence, misstated the role of defense counsel as requiring him to do anything to acquit his client and then glorified the role of the prosecutor as being different from the defense attorney's in that the prosecutor has to determine whether the facts indicate the guilt or innocence of the defendant before proceeding to trial. Because there was no contemporaneous objection, the Thornton court did not find reversible error; however, the court opined that the prosecutor's comments were clearly improper and the prosecutor committed misconduct, stating:
"Pursuit of an acquittal is not the 'sole area' in which [defense counsell oper*1359ates. His duty is to see to it that the lawful rights and privileges of an accused are not invaded and that [the defendant] is not convicted except on legal evidence and by due process of law.
"To suggest in a public forum, as the prosecutor did here, that a defense counsel's sole objective in a murder trial is acquittal, is to demean the profession generally and to use the dignity of the prosecutor's office not only to disparage counsel but also the quality of evidence he has submitted for consideration."
Id. 38 N.J. at 397, 185 A.2d at 18-19. The Thornton court further stated that it was improper for the prosecutor to inform the jury that he would not prosecute if he did not believe in the defendant's guilt because the weight of the prosecutor's official and personal influence might create the possibility that the jurors would consciously or unconsciously adopt the prosecutor's view without applying their own independent judgment to the evidence.
The fact that the prosecutor in the present case read remarks from Justice White's comments in a Supreme Court opinion does not make it the law or proper for instructing the jury on the law. See, e.g., Abbott v. State (1989), Ind., 535 N.E.2d 1169, 1172; Drollinger v. State (1980), 274 Ind. 5, 408 N.E.2d 1228. Other courts have recognized that the comments of Justice White are not the law, but merely an expression of his view of the roles of court and law enforcement officers. See Pierce v. State (1977), 34 Md.App. 654, 369 A.2d 140, 148, cert. denied (1977) 434 U.S. 907, 98 S.Ct. 307, 54 L.Ed.2d 194. The California Court of Appeals stated in People v. Pic'l and Martin (1981), 114 Cal.App.3d 824, 171 Cal.Rptr. 106, 133:
"Mr. Justice White's assessment of the role of the defense counsel in a criminal case vis-a-vis the role of the prosecutor is not one that is shared by all judges or courts. It paints with too broad a brush. In seeking to determine the true facts in our adversary system, it is inappropriate and inaccurate to describe prosecutors in general as being more apt to be the real searchers for the truth than are defense counsel in general."
The purpose of voir dire is to ascertain whether prospective jurors can render a fair and impartial verdict in accordance with the law and evidence. Emmons v. State (1986), Ind., 492 N.E.2d 303. It plays a critical role in assuring criminal defendants that their Sixth Amendment right to an impartial jury will be honored. United States v. Spaar (8th Cir.1984), 748 F.2d 1249. Our supreme court has observed:
"This purpose 'can be best accomplished by the trial judge's assumption of a more active role in the voir dire proceedings and by exercising, rather than abdicating, his broad discretionary power to restrict interrogation to that which is pertinent for testing the capacity and competence of the jurors.!"
Hall v. State (1986), Ind., 497 N.E.2d 916, 918, quoting Robinson, supra, 260 Ind. at 521, 297 N.E.2d at 412. In Hall, the defendant alleged that he was prejudiced by the prosecutor's misstatement of the law during voir dire. The State argued that the incorrect statement was cured by the court's proper instructions on the elements of the crime. However, in reversing, our supreme court acknowledged the significance of effective voir dire, stating:
"This argument misses the importance of effective voir dire. Many experienced advocates believe their case has been determined by the time that the jury has been sworn. If a jury is misinformed during voir dire of the elements of proof required by the State, then it will receive and evaluate evidence throughout the trial relying on this misinformation. We cannot say that a proper final charge would remove the taint. One party cannot place the other in a 'dying condition' and then expect to revive that party with instructions."
Hall, at 918, (citations omitted, emphasis added).6
*1360Even though Hall involved a misstatement of an element of the crime, we find the Hall court's comments are just as applicable to the present case-if jurors are tainted by the viewpoint that only the prosecutor is presenting the truth and the defense counsel's role is to obstruct the search for truth, they may evaluate every bit of evidence from this perspective.
Furthermore, we find no redeeming legal value in the prosecutor's comments as far as the purposes of selecting an impartial jury are concerned. First, we think these comments could be viewed as improper comments on the guilt of the defendant. "The danger of prejudice to the defendant by such statements is they may imply that the prosecutor has independent personal knowledge of facts other than those introduced at trial." Garrett v. State (1973), 157 Ind.App. 426, 300 N.E.2d 696, 700. A defendant is entitled to the presumption of innocence-a conclusion drawn by law in favor of the defendant, whereby his innocence is established until sufficient evidence is introduced to overcome the proof which the law has created. Coffin v. United States (1895), 156 U.S. 432, 15 S.Ct. 394, 39 L.Ed. 481. It is the principle that no person may be convicted of a crime unless the government carries the burden of proving his guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. United States v. Friday (E.D.Mich.1975), 404 F.Supp. 1343. Moreover, our constitution guarantees a defendant a right to cross-exam the witnesses against him. U.S. Const. amend. VI; Ind. Const. art. I §§ 12 & 13. There is no rule of law or presumption-nor should there be-that the prosecutor, in presenting the State's case, may only ask questions which elicit honest and truthful answers, but defense counsel's examination and cross-examination are for the purpose of obstructing the truth. If there were such a rule, we believe it would negate the defendant's presumption of innocence and shift the burden of proof to the defendant.7
Secondly, the prosecutor's conduct impinged on defendant's right to effective assistance of counsel. U.S. Const. amend. VI, XIV and Ind. Const., art. I, § 13. Once the right to counsel has attached and been asserted, the prosecution and the police have an affirmative obligation not to act in a manner that circumvents or dilutes that protection. 22 C.J.S. Criminal Law § 277 (1989), citing Maine v. Moulton (1985), 474 U.S. 159, 106 S.Ct. 477, 88 L.Ed.2d 481; DeAngelo v. Wainwright (11th Cir.1986), 781 F.2d 1516, cert. denied (1986), 479 U.S. 953, 107 S.Ct. 444, 93 L.Ed.2d 392. "The government violates the right to effective assistance of counsel when it interferes in certain ways with the ability of counsel to make independent decisions about how to conduct the defense." 22 C.J.S. Criminal Low § 310 (1989), citing Strickland v. Washington (1984), 466 U.S. 668, 104 S.Ct. 2052, 80 L.Ed.2d 674. The government may not establish detailed rules which prescribe conduct for defense counsel or limit the range of decisions about how to best represent a criminal defendant because such rules would interfere with the
"constitutionally protected independence of counsel and restrict the wide latitude counsel must have in making tactical decisions. Indeed, the existence of detailed guidelines for representation could distract counsel from the overriding mission of vigorous advocacy of the defendant's cause."
Strickland, at 689, 104 S.Ct. at 2065.
Ineffectiveness of counsel resulting in prejudice to the defendant is reversible error. Id. Defense counsel can be rendered ineffective by his own actions or omissions or by the conduct of the prosecutor in making harassing or unfair comments (not disapproved by the trial court) which prevent the defense counsel from vigorously battling on his client's behalf. The defense counsel may be the sole barrier between his client and incarceration and, *1361thus, should be able to focus his full attention to defending his client and not himself. Certainly, a defense counsel has a difficult enough time defending his client-his resources are generally less than those of the state-and his burden grows heavier if he must defend his own honor as well as his client's innocence. Here, as the evidence was presented during the course of the trial, the defense counsel had to be aware of his own demeanor, the phrasing of each question, and the fact that Re was suspect if he vigorously cross-examined a State's witness. There is no question that the defense counsel was placed at a severe disadvantage.8
We also note that it is the duty of the prosecutor to cross-examine defense witnesses for the same purpose as defense counsel-ultimately, to discredit, if appropriate, a defense witness. The same is true of defense counsel in civil cases. Criminal defense counsel are no different than civil defense counsel with respect to the search for "truth" in that, in a civil case, when the plaintiff fails to present evidence on 2 material element, it is defense counsel's duty to ask for a judgment in his client's favor. Civil defense counsel has no obligation to volunteer evidence to prove the plaintiff's case, and neither does defense counsel when the prosecutor fails to present evidence of defendant's guilt with respect to all elements of a crime.
The only purpose for the prosecutor's comments on the respective roles of defense and prosecution is to prejudice the jurors into viewing the prosecutor as a "good guy" and the defense counsel as a "bad guy." We think this is an unfair tactic which not only negates the defendant's presumption of innocence, but also runs afoul of Ind.Prof.Conduct Rule 8.4, which requires fairness to opposing party and counsel, and prohibits an attorney from alluding to matters that the lawyer does not reasonably believe are relevant or will not be supported by the facts in issue. Here, the issue before the jury was whether the evidence was sufficient to convict the defendant of the crimes beyond a reasonable doubt. It is not the jurors' responsibility to make a finding as to the role of the prosecutor and defense counsel or to determine the character of the defense counsel. This information is certainly not relevant to the case.
A defendant is entitled to a fair trial and an impartial jury. Hall, supra. The import of the prosecutor's comments was to portray the defense counsel as not a decent, honorable person, but a shyster. It has been stated that "[t]he jury's estimate 6f the truthfulness and reliability of a given witness may well be determinative of guilt or innocence, and it is upon such subtle factors as possible interest of the witness in testifying falsely that a defendant's life or liberty may depend." Birkla v. State (1975), Ind., 323 N.E.2d 645, 648, cert. denied (1975) 423 U.S. 853, 96 S.Ct. 99, 46 L.Ed.2d 77, quoting Napue v. IIlinois (1959), 360 U.S. 264, 79 S.Ct. 1173, 3 L.Ed.2d 1217. Likewise, the jurors' estimates of the truthfulness of a witness or analysis of the evidence could be affected by the manner in which they perceive the role of defense counsel-'"not with an open mind and resolution to give the defendant the benefit of reasonable doubt but rather with the seeds of suspicion firmly planted and anxiously awaiting germination." Robinson, supra, 260 Ind. at 520, 297 N.E.2d at 411.
Under the facts of this case, there may have been good reason for the prosecutor to use the Wade opinion to attack the defense counsel. His remarks are especially significant in that the prosecutor must have been aware that certain testimony of his witnesses might differ (and did) from other pre-trial statements they had made about the case. The prosecutor should have anticipated defense counsel's strategy would be to attempt to discredit and impeach such witnesses. Thus, the prosecutor's attempt to portray the State's role as the one presenting the truth and the defense role as the one attempting to obscure the truth could have been an attempt to *1362influence the jury to receive evidence in a light more favorable to the State. As defense counsel cross-examined each witness, the jurors may have, consciously or subconsciously, evaluated the evidence elicited by the defense counsel as tainted or suspect.
Here, there was no evidence placing Bar-donner at the scene of the burglary.9 Al though there is no question that Bardonner had possession of the property, there was an issue as to whether he knew the property was stolen before or after his arrest. This issue involves an element of the crime of theft-Bardonner's criminal intent or knowledge. Bardonner testified that he purchased the items from John Miller, but was prohibited from testifying that Miller told him the property was stolen only after he was arrested and placed in a jail cell with Miller. See Issue II. The evidence was in conflict on this point. Several witnesses testified that Bardonner told them he stole the items or that he knew the items to be stolen. However, certain State's witnesses' trial testimony was inconsistent with testimony given in pre-trial statements.10 Thus, the credibility of the witnesses against him was an issue.
Under the circumstances and with reliance on the holdings of our supreme court in Holl and Robinson, supra, we cannot say that the prosecutor's comments-attacking the integrity of defense counsel by indicating that defense counsel would do anything to hide the truth, including impeaching testimony of truthful witnesses-did not affect the jurors' verdict.
In summary, the prosecutor's remarks were clearly improper. Relying on Hall and Robinson-where improper comments occurred during voir dire-we find that, under the facts of this case, Bardonner was denied effective counsel by the State, placed in grave peril and, thereby, denied a fair trial.
We therefore reverse and remand for new trial.
IL Denial of Opportunity to Present Evidence Another Person Committed the Burglary and Theft
Although we reverse Bardonner's conviction on Issue I, we address this issue because it may arise again on retrial. Bar-donner claims the trial court erred by denying him the opportunity to present evidence that John Miller, with whom he had shared a jail cell, had committed and confessed to the crimes with which he was charged. Miller could not be located to appear at trial, and the Court granted the State's Motion in Limine prohibiting 1) the introduction of John Miller's alleged confession to the crimes; 2) testimony of Officer Barlow, to whom Miller allegedly gave the confession; and 3) Bardonner from testifying that Miller confessed to him. When the court excluded the evidence, Bardonner made an offer to prove at the commencement of his case-in-chief in the form of a statement by his counsel, along with a copy of the alleged confession, and the testimony of Officer Barlow. Bardonner contends that the court improperly deprived him of the opportunity to present this evidence on his own behalf, which was found to be reversible error in Poore v. State (1986), Ind., 501 N.E.2d 1058. (Defendant was denied the right to present evidence in his own behalf where trial court improperly *1363limited direct examination of a defense witness who allegedly would have testified as to the credibility of an accomplice whose testimony constituted the majority of the evidence against defendant.) The State contends this evidence is nothing more than immadmissible hearsay.
Recently, our supreme court in Thomas v. State (1991), Ind., 580 N.E.2d 224, adopted Fed.R.E'vid. 804(b)(8), which provides:
(b) Hearsay Exceptions. The following are not excluded by the hearsay rule if the declarant is unavailable as a witness:
* * * * * a
(8) Statement Against Interest, A statement which was at the time of its making so far contrary to the declarant's pecuniary or proprietary interest, or so far tended to subject the declarant to civil or eriminal liability, or to render invalid a claim by the declarant against another, that a reasonable person in the declarant's position would not have made the statement unless believing it to be true. A statement tending to expose the declarant to criminal liability and offered to exculpate the accused is not admissible unless corroborating circumstances clearly indicate the trustworthiness of the statement.
(Emphasis added). Our supreme court found the federal rule to be fair in that:
"[the defendant is given the opportunity to introduce all evidence in his favor. Simultaneously, the trial judge retains discretion to keep from the trier of fact those statements that do not actually present sufficient assurances that the statement was, in fact, made. The trier of fact retains the traditional role of assessing the believability of each statement and deciphering the truth."
Id. at 227. This rule is consistent with Chambers v. Mississippi (1973), 410 U.S. 284, 93 S.Ct. 1038, 35 L.Ed.2d 297, where the Supreme Court reversed the conviction of a defendant who was not permitted to introduce evidence that another person had confessed to the crime, and the confession was given under circumstances that indicated it was trustworthy and reliable. The Court rejected a "blanket" rule against the admission of declarations against penal interest. Before Chombers, Indiana had followed the rule that admissions against penal interest were not admissible. After Chambers-while not explicitly adopting the federal rule-our courts have followed Chambers' rationale in deciding such cases. See Huffman v. State (1989), Ind., 543 N.E.2d 360, cert. denied (1990), - U.S. -, 110 S.Ct. 3257, 111 L.Ed.2d 767 (overruled on other grounds by Street v. State (1991), Ind., 567 N.E.2d 102); Taggart v. State (1978), 269 Ind. 667, 382 N.E.2d 916.
With the rule in mind, we have reviewed the transcription of Miller's tape-recorded confession (R. 586) and the testimony of Officer Barlow and Bardonner. Bardon-ner, if permitted, would have testified that, when they were jailed together, Miller told him that he committed the burglary. Barlow would have testified that, 1) as a part of the plea agreement for an unrelated crime, Miller gave a "clean up" statement for other crimes he had committed; 2) Miller was given a limited immunity from prosecution for any crimes which did not involve bodily injury; and 3) the statement was not made under oath or in the presence of any member of the prosecutor's staff-thus, it was not subject to cross-examination. Furthermore, we have reviewed Miller's statement in which he admits he burglarized one home and gives a description of how to get to the residence. However, we agree with the State that Miller's confession is not sufficiently particularized so that one could conclude the house burglarized was the Zimmerman's. After reviewing the evidence as presented to the court in this trial, we find no error in the court's refusal to permit Bardonner to testify to Miller's alleged confession. Miller's statement neither exposed him to criminal liability for the burglary, nor was it accompanied by corroborating circumstances clearly indicating its trustworthiness.
Reversed and remanded for proceedings consistent with this opinion.
RUCKER, J., concurs.
*1364CHEZEM, J., dissents with separate opinion.
. Ind.Code 35-43-4-2.
. In United States v. Wade (1967), 388 U.S. 218, 87 S.Ct. 1926, 18 LEd.2d 1149, the majority of the court held that a post-indictment lineup was a critical stage of prosecution at which a defendant had the right to counsel. Justice White, joined by Justices Harlan and Stewart, concurred in part with the majority, but dissented on whether a defendant had a right to counsel at a lineup. The point of Justice White's dissent was that he did not think it was wise or necessary to extend the adversary system to having defense counsel present at pretrial identifications. The passage the prosecutor read expresses the opinion of three Justices as to how the adversary system works.
. In Robinson v. State (1973), 260 Ind. 517, 297 N.E.2d 409, the prosecutor interrogated prospective jurors, ostensibly to determine their feelings regarding the death penalty. The prosecutor stated he wanted to determine the circumstances under which they would vote for the death penalty and then asked jurors questions based on hypothetical situations. One of the situations was unlike the circumstances of the case; the other question was: "If a father killed his twenty year old daughter because she resisted his sexual advances, could you vote for the death penalty then?" Id. at 519, 297 N.E.2d at 411. The facts assumed by the question resembled the circumstances of the case where a father was accused of killing his daughter; however, there was no evidence presented at trial as to the motive of the father-except that there had been friction between father and daughter, and there was innuendo which created a suspicion that the friction may have been incest oriented.
The defendant apparently moved to discharge the panel and the motion was denied by the trial court. On appeal, the Robinson court found the interrogation improper and highly prejudicial and would have been reversible error if properly preserved. The court stated that to preserve the error the defendant should have "moved for a mistrial at the end of the state's case in chief because it was within the context of the evidence that the propriety of the interrogation and the probability of harm therefrom had to be made." Id. at 522, 297 N.E.2d at 412.
. We also observe that the defense counsel's motion for a mistrial at the beginning of trial was not the proper motion. Voir dire is not a part of the trial; the trial does not begin until the jury is impaneled and the cause is submitted. Nix v. State (1960), 240 Ind. 392, 166 N.E.2d 326. The motion should have been a motion to strike or discharge the jury panel or challenge the array. See, e.g., Utterback v. State (1974), 261 Ind. 685, 310 N.E.2d 552.
. Because Bardonner's defense counsel did not request the court to admonish the jury, there is a question as to whether he has waived the error. A claim that prosecutor misconduct has prejudiced a defendant usually requires that a contemporaneous objection be made to preserve the error for review; however, sometimes the conduct of the prosecutor has been held to be so detrimental to the cause of justice that it can amount to fundamental error even without a contemporaneous objection. See, e.g., Hossman v. State (1985), Ind.App., 473 N.E.2d 1059; Johnson v. State (1983), Ind.App., 453 N.E.2d 365. Fundamental error is that, which-if not corrected-would deny a defendant fundamental due process. Smith v. State (1984), Ind., 459 N.E.2d 355.
. But cf. Underwood v. State (1989), Ind., 535 N.E.2d 118, where defendant claimed prosecutor's many comments during the trial were attempts to discredit his attorney in front of the jury. Our supreme court held the remarks were no different than those in many jury trials *1360where counsel spar for position and attempt to best their opponent.
. When a defense counsel vigorously pursues cross-examination to bring out discrepancies in the State's case, is he not pursuing the truth-which, in a criminal case, is whether the defendant committed the crime beyond a reasonable doubt?
. We go on record here stating that criminal defense attorneys and public defenders perform a valuable and highly respected service to the judicial process.
. The truck driver who observed an individual at the Zimmerman home the day of the burglary could not identify Bardonner. The car which Bardonner borrowed from his roommate was similar to the one described by the truck driver, but not positively identified. Although Bardon-ner's mother lived near the Zimmerman home, his mother testified it was not possible to see the Zimmerman home from her residence; thus, negating an inference that Bardonner was able to stake out the target home and observe when it was empty.
. Chris Williams, Mike Leach and Brad Beasy testified in person and Jeremy Leach testified via deposition. All of these witnesses were roommates in the same apartment at the time of the robbery. All had access to the car belonging to another roommate, Tony Schuyler, and which was described as similar to the car observed at the Zimmerman home on the day of the burglary. In statements to the police, they each stated Bardonner told them he stole the property. At trial, they changed their story saying only that he told them he knew the property to be stolen. While such testimony, in either version, is very damaging to Bardonner, the inconsistency in their statements was important to defense to demonstrate that they were not credible.

=== CASE 9740985 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:46:47.306118+00 ===

CHEZEM, Judge,
dissenting.
I respectfully dissent. Defendant failed to properly preserve the error. When the prosecutor read a dissenting opinion from the United States Supreme Court during voir dire, Defendant moved for a mistrial. The majority opinion correctly notes that this motion during voir dire was not the proper motion because voir dire is not part of a trial. The trial does not begin until the jury is impaneled and the cause is submitted. Niz v. State (1960), 240 Ind. 392, 166 N.E.2d 326. Defendant should have moved to strike, discharge the jury panel, or challenge the array. See, eg., Utterback v. State (1974), 261 Ind. 685, 310 N.E.2d 552, and Didio v. State (1984), Ind., 471 N.E.2d 1117, 1122.
The majority relies upon Robinson v. State (1973), 260 Ind. 517, 297 N.E.2d 409 to allow for the preservation of the error via Defendant's motion for mistrial at the end of the state's case in chief. However, in Robinson the alleged error was an evi-dentiary issue mentioned during voir dire but not presented at trial. Robinson is inapposite, and here, the alleged error does not rest upon the presentation of the state's evidence. Therefore, a motion for mistrial at the end of the state's case fails to preserve the error.
While it is true that the conduct of a prosecutor has sometimes been held to be so detrimental to the cause of justice that it constituted fundamental error, I do not agree that one reading of a United States Supreme Court Justice's dissenting opinion during voir dire rises to that level. The majority opinion relies on the holding in Hall v. State (1986), Ind., 497 N.E.2d 916, in determining that defendant was placed in a "dying condition" or "grave peril" by the prosecutor's reading and that his reading affected the jury's verdict. However, I read Hall as being applicable only to repeated statements being made during voir dire regarding the elements of proof and not applicable to the reading of decisions. Furthermore, in Evans v. State (1986), Ind., 497 N.E.2d 919, 922, our Supreme Court has indicated that the quantity of improper remarks may be as important as the content in producing a prejudicial effect. "The prejudicial effect of an isolated remark is aggravated by repeated instances of misconduct and the cumulative impact may require reversal." Id. (citing Russell v. State (1982), Ind., 438 N.E.2d 741.) The language of Hall and Evans does not indicate that the prosecutor's one reading would rise to the level of reversible error.
Finally, I cannot agree with the majority's distinction that the reading of this Supreme Court's dissenting opinion during voir dire is more prejudicial than its reading at closing argument. Our Supreme Court stated in Hubbard v. State (1974), 262 Ind. 176, 313 N.E.2d 346, 350, that "it is well settled in Indiana that reading from decisions to the jury is proper." [Citations omitted.] Neither Hwbbord, nor the cases to which it cites, distinguish between closing argument and voir dire, and I do not believe that is an oversight. Likewise, a party has more opportunity to correct any prejudicial effect of an improper statement during voir dire than during closing argument. A potentially prejudiced party may question a juror about his thoughts toward a remark. Counsel may strike any prejudiced jurors. He may request an admonishment, or he may request a specific jury instruction which directs the jury to disregard the statements of counsel as evidence in a case. Here, Defendant did not question the jury panel on their impressions of the prosecutor's reading. He did not request an admonishment, nor does the record indicate that he requested any special jury instructions. I make the same inference as the Court did in Evans, supra,: counsel's failure to take curative measures indicates that the damage was not as severe as appellant now suggests.
The prosecutor's reading reflects poor judgment and form, and this dissent should not be read as giving full support for the reading of the Wade opinion. The reading of the dissenting opinion in Wade is borderline harmful, and a prosecutor should not be this eloge to the line. The Wade dissent by Justice White does not completely re*1365flect the law, and I agree with the majority opinion that the reading had no redeeming value. However, the reading did not rise to the level of reversible or fundamental error.
For the foregoing reasons, I would affirm Defendant's conviction.

=== CASE 2225719 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:53.903131+00 ===

587 N.E.2d 177 (1992)
Eleanor ZAPFFE and Denise Zapffe, Appellants-Plaintiffs below,
v.
James SRBENY, James Bischoff, James Tellstrom, Frances McCarthy and F.A. Miller, Appellees-Defendants below.
No. 75A03-9108-CV-233.
Court of Appeals of Indiana, Third District.
March 5, 1992.
Rehearing Denied April 29, 1992.
*178 Robert J. Palmer, John J. Connaughton, May, Oberfell & Lorber, South Bend, for appellants.
Arnold A. Coons, Jr., Portage, for appellees.
STATON, Judge.
Eleanor and Denise Zapffe appeal the trial court ruling in their action for permanent injunction and damages. The Zapffes sought an injunction to prevent the defendants (collectively referred to as "Srbeny") from encroaching on the Zapffes' riparian rights as owners of land adjoining Bass Lake in Starke County, Indiana.[1] Although the trial court enjoined Srbeny from installing his pier in any manner so as to encroach upon the Zapffes' riparian tract, the court did not expressly rule with respect to Srbeny's mooring devices, consisting primarily of augers and weighted boat stations which are located in the lake beyond the pier. The Zapffes allege that this determination was in error, and now raise the following issues for our review.
I. Whether the trial court erroneously declined to render final judgment with respect to Srbeny's mooring devices.
II. Whether the trial court judgment was contrary to law.
We affirm.
In its ruling, the trial court concluded:
It appears to this Court that the State of Indiana, through its Department of Natural Resources, should have the first determination of how the public uses a fresh water lake, including the location of boat moorings, and a Court should make no judgments affecting same without the State being a party. This is different than a dispute between two riparian land owners.
Record, pp. 192-93. The court cited the following statute in support of its ruling:
(a) The natural resources and the natural scenic beauty of Indiana are a public right, and the public of Indiana has a vested right in the preservation, protection, and enjoyment of all the public freshwater lakes of Indiana in their present state, and the use of such waters for recreational purposes.
(b) The state has full power and control of all of the public freshwater lakes in Indiana both meandered and unmeandered; it holds and controls all of such lakes in trust for the use of all of its citizens for recreational purposes.
(c) No person owning lands bordering a public freshwater lake has the exclusive *179 right to the use of waters of any such lake or any part thereof.
IND. CODE 13-2-11.1-2 (1988).
The Zapffes assert that the trial court, in effect, dismissed a portion of their claim on the ground that they failed to exhaust their administrative remedies by way of an action involving the Department of Natural Resources ("DNR"). Srbeny contends that the trial court merely found against the Zapffes with respect to the boat moorings.
In support of their argument, the Zapffes cite Guthrie v. McIntyre (1990), Ind. App., 563 N.E.2d 651, where landowners sought damages and an injunction preventing the diversion of water by an upstream riparian owner. Because the upstream landowner had secured approval from the DNR, the trial court declined to make a decision on damages, concluding that the plaintiffs had not exhausted their administrative remedies before the DNR. Our court of appeals reversed, holding that there is no provision under the auspices of the DNR for aggrieved property owners to bring an action for enjoinder or damages; therefore, there were no administrative remedies available to the plaintiffs. Id. at 652.
We believe that Guthrie is distinguishable from the case before this court. In Guthrie, the DNR had already intervened in the work performed on the riparian tract; no such administrative intervention is implicated in this case. Indeed, the trial court in Guthrie expressly relied on the plaintiffs' failure to exhaust their administrative remedies, while the court in this case made no such conclusion. The Zapffes, however, emphasize the trial court's statement that "a Court should make no judgments" affecting the rights of the DNR, indicating that it would refrain from deciding the issue relating to the boat moorings. Record, pp. 192-93. If the trial court had gone no further, we might agree with the Zapffes. However, the trial court did go further by defining the Zapffes' riparian tract as an extension of their east boundary line "to a distance of fifty (50) feet out from the meander line of Bass Lake into the waters of Bass Lake." Record, p. 193. The boat moorings in question vary in distance from the meander line of Bass Lake, but no mooring is closer than about 100 to 120 feet from shore. Thus, the moorings are positioned outside the riparian tract. Because the trial court established the dimensions of this property in no uncertain terms, the Zapffes cannot say that this issue was not adjudicated to finality. See Hammond Pure Ice & Coal Co. v. Heitman (1943), 221 Ind. 352, 47 N.E.2d 309, reh'g denied (in action for specific performance to compel purchase of bonds, judgment of specific performance on certain bonds and for damages on other bonds amounted to an adjudication against the plaintiff on the specific performance claim as to the other bonds). For this reason, we must agree with Srbeny that the issue has been decided against the Zapffes, who therefore appeal a negative judgment.
When reviewing an appeal from a negative judgment we must determine whether the judgment is contrary to law. McClure Oil Corp. v. Murray Equipment, Inc. (1987), Ind. App., 515 N.E.2d 546, reh'g denied. A judgment is contrary to law when the evidence is without conflict and leads to but one conclusion which is contrary to that reached by the trial court. Ashland Pipeline Co. v. Indiana Bell Telephone Co., Inc. (1987), Ind. App., 505 N.E.2d 483, trans. denied. Therefore, we will review the trial court's demarcation of the riparian tract under this standard.
This court discussed the extent of a riparian landowner's property in Bath v. Courts (1984), Ind. App., 459 N.E.2d 72. In Bath, riparian landowners built a pier that encroached upon the extended property line of neighboring landowners. In response, the neighboring riparian owners built a pier within two feet of the first pier, interfering with its use. In that case, we recognized that the onshore boundaries of a riparian tract extend into the lake in a line perpendicular to the shore, where the shoreline approximates a straight line. Id. at 74-75. This rationale is a logical extension of the doctrine of accretion; that is, an increase in land caused by earth, sand, or *180 sediment deposits. Id. at 74 (citing Longabaugh v. Johnson (1975), 163 Ind. App. 108, 110, 321 N.E.2d 865, 867, trans. denied). Thus, if Bass Lake were to naturally recede, title to the new land would vest in the riparian owners by the extension of their shore boundaries. See Bath, supra, at 74-75; IC 13-2-11.1-4. Nonetheless, we did not determine the precise extent of the riparian landowner's boundaries in Bath because state law governed the rights of the respective parties to install a pier.
Indiana law allows a riparian owner to build "piers, wharves, docks or harbors in aid of navigation and commerce" on the riparian owner's premises or "upon the submerged lands beneath the waters thereof... ." IC 13-2-4-5. Because of the competing interests of riparian landowners and the public's right to the enjoyment of the waters in Indiana's freshwater lakes, we concluded in Bath that riparian owners may build a pier within the extension of their shore boundaries only so far out as not to interfere with the use of the lake by others. Id. at 76. However, because the parties in this case stipulated, and the trial court so found, that Srbeny had no riparian rights, the Bath case is of limited assistance in resolving this dispute. Thus, we now address the question left open in Bath: How far into a lake do the boundaries of a riparian tract extend?
One point is well-settled and acknowledged by the parties: the boundaries of riparian property do not extend to the middle of the lake. Id. at 75; Stoner v. Rice (1889), 121 Ind. 51, 22 N.E. 968. The Zapffes contend that their boundary lines extend to where the normal water level of Bass Lake reaches a depth of five feet. Alternatively, they contend that a boundary line extending 200 feet from shore is suggested by statute. Srbeny submits that the Bath decision proscribes the extension of a riparian tract beyond the finite point where such an extension would interfere with the use of the lake by others, see Bath, supra, at 76, though Srbeny does not suggest the location of the "finite point."
The Zapffes posit that the extension of their tract to the five foot level of Bass Lake is necessary "in order to safely navigate some boats which might belong to Zapffes' guests[.]" Appellants' Brief, p. 20. This statement is mere speculation, as the Zapffes point to no evidence in the record that such boats are in fact used by their guests, or that such boats require a depth of five feet in order to safely navigate. Matters outside the record cannot be considered by the court on appeal. Shigley v. Whitlock (1974), 160 Ind. App. 78, 310 N.E.2d 93. We must decide the case on the record before us, and cannot speculate as to the actual facts of a case. Norling v. Bailey (1951), 121 Ind. App. 457, 98 N.E.2d 513, reh'g denied 121 Ind. App. 457, 99 N.E.2d 439. This claim is especially dubious in light of the stipulated fact that the Zapffes do not maintain a pier in Bass Lake. Record, p. 137, Stipulated Fact No. 13.
Alternatively, the Zapffes rely on IC XX-X-X-XX for the proposal that their riparian tract should extend 200 feet from shore. This statute reads in pertinent part:
No person shall operate any motorboat so as to approach or pass within two hundred (200) feet of the shoreline of any lake or channel thereof at a place or point where such lake or channel is five hundred (500) feet or more in width, except for the purpose of trolling or for the purpose of approaching or leaving a dock, pier or wharf or the shore of such lake or channel. No person shall operate any motorboat so as to approach or pass within two hundred (200) feet of the shoreline of any lake or channel thereof at a rate of speed greater than ten (10) miles per hour[.]
IC XX-X-X-XX. From this statute, the Zapffes conclude that their riparian tract would allow them to build a pier two hundred feet long because, in their words, "it is illegal to operate a motorboat within 200 feet of shore." Appellants' Brief, p. 21. This argument is untenable. By the very language of the statute, it is not illegal to operate a motorboat within 200 feet of the shoreline for trolling or to approach a dock, pier, or the shore. Thus, the pier envisioned by the Zapffes would in fact interfere *181 with the operation of motorboats under the statute. Moreover, such a pier would clearly interfere with the public's right to use the waters of Bass Lake for other recreational purposes, in accordance with IC 13-2-11.1-2.
Instead of a rigid application using a measure of depth or length to determine riparian boundaries, the better view would be to apply a "reasonableness" test to accommodate the diverse characteristics of Indiana's numerous freshwater lakes. See, e.g., Heston v. Ousler (1979), 119 N.H. 58, 398 A.2d 536 (exercise of riparian rights is governed by a rule of reasonableness); Hefferline v. Langkow (1976), 15 Wash. App. 896, 552 P.2d 1079 (riparian owners may exercise such rights as access, swimming, fishing, bathing, and boating, subject to a rule of reasonableness). Clearly, the installation of a pier by a riparian owner is a reasonable use under IC 13-2-4-5, so long as it does not interfere with the use of the lake by others. One of the primary reasons for extending a pier any substantial distance into a lake is to permit boat-owners to moor and launch their boats in areas of navigable water. Thus, any extension of a pier beyond the point required for the mooring and launching of boats might be considered unreasonable.
The reasonableness determination will additionally depend on factors such as the normal water level of the lake, the number of riparian owners on any one tract, the purpose of the pier, and the statutory consideration of the effect on others who use the waters of Bass Lake. See IC 13-2-11.1-2. This determination should be decided on the basis of the facts and circumstances of each particular case so that a court can treat each affected riparian owner equitably.
In the present case, the court had the benefit of evidence indicating that, while the Zapffes had not installed a pier on their tract, neighboring property owners had installed piers in close proximity to the Zapffes' lot, which piers extended no more than approximately fifty feet into Bass Lake. Srbeny's pier, located just to the east of the Zapffes' tract, is also about fifty feet in length. Exhibits admitted at trial indicated that boats were moored at such piers when Bass Lake was at its normal water level, and that the Zapffes' neighbors used the piers for other recreational activities. Therefore, we conclude that the extension of the Zapffes' riparian tract to a length of fifty feet from the meander line of Bass Lake comports with the concept of reasonable use we adopt today. Accordingly, the trial court's decision so establishing the boundary of the riparian tract was not contrary to law.
Because the trial court did not err by fixing the boundary of the Zapffes' riparian tract, we conclude that Srbeny's mooring devices (the closest of which is approximately fifty feet outside of the tract) do not encroach upon the Zapffes' riparian rights.
The Zapffes next make the argument that a non-riparian owner such as Srbeny is prohibited from maintaining a pier or boat moorings in the lake bed under IC 13-2-4-5 and IC 13-2-11.1-2. This argument must fail for the reason that the Zapffes do not have standing to enforce these statutes. As Srbeny correctly observes, title 13 of the Indiana Code does not confer upon individual litigants a right of action for violations of its chapters. The state has full power and control of all the public freshwater lakes in Indiana. IC 13-2-11.1-2. Sections 12 and 13 of chapter 11.1 empower the state, through the DNR, to seek an injunction or damages for violations of chapter 11.1. We express no opinion on whether Srbeny's boat moorings encroach upon public rights in the waters of Bass Lake, as that question is not before this court.
The trial court is affirmed.
GARRARD and MILLER, JJ., concur.
NOTES
[1]  As this court recently noted, riparian rights are traditionally associated with owners of land abutting a river or stream, while those with shoreline on a lake or pond acquire littoral rights, though the term "riparian" is widely used to refer to both classes of ownership. Hutner v. Kellogg (1990), Ind. App., 563 N.E.2d 1338, 1339 n. 1.

=== CASE 2225720 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:53.934417+00 ===

587 N.E.2d 54 (1992)
224 Ill. App. 3d 605
167 Ill. Dec. 172
In re MARRIAGE OF Julie A. PERINO, Petitioner-Appellee, and
Sylvanio L. Perino, Respondent-Appellant.
No. 3-91-0321.
Appellate Court of Illinois, Third District.
February 4, 1992.
Rolfe F. Ehrmann, Ehrmann, Gehlbach & Beckman, Dixon, for Sylvanio L. Perino.
Lon M. Richey, Nelson, Kilgus, Richey & Hauptman, Morrison, for Julie A. Perino.
*55 Justice HAASE delivered the opinion of the Court.
The respondent, Sylvanio L. Perino, appeals the distribution of property following his divorce from the petitioner, Julie A. Perino. We affirm.
The record shows that Julie filed for divorce on March 22, 1990. A hearing was later held on the issues of child support and distribution of marital property. At the hearing, Julie testified that she married Sylvanio in 1980. Around that time, Sylvanio stopped attending college and began farming. They initially owned no land or farm machinery.
Julie further stated that while she was married, she worked as an Eagle's check-out clerk. Her approximate wages were as follows: $17,500 in 1987; $15,000 in 1988; $18,000 in 1989; and $21,000 in 1990. The cash value of her pension was $2,137.62.
Julie said that during the course of their marriage, the parties had two children. One was age 7 and the other was age 8. Julie was 33 years old at the time of the hearing.
Lastly, Julie testified that Sylvanio and his brother presently ran two farming operations, Perino Brothers Farms and Rock River Farms. Sylvanio made most of the decisions for the businesses. Julie said he had excellent knowledge of agricultural finance and marketing.
Larry Meyers testified that as a credit manager for Whiteside FS, he made decisions about financing farm operations and collecting debts. During the past three years, his employer and another bank had financed Sylvanio's businesses. He had relied on a financial statement included in the pre-trial memorandum in extending credit to Sylvanio. That statement indicated that the net worth of Perino Brothers Farms on a modified cost basis was $110,005, and the net worth on a market value basis was $232,414. He testified that market value was supposed to represent the price the farmer thought he would get if he sold the business.
Meyers stated that the values in the statement were slightly inflated. He said this was partly due to the low price of corn, which was between $2.35 and $2.40 a bushel. If the price rose to $2.60 a bushel, the listed value of the grain inventory would be accurate.
Meyers noted that the net worth of the operation had shown little increase in the past three years. He attributed this to the fact that the operation's assets consisted mostly of machinery, which constantly depreciated. The machinery would be difficult to sell because it was large and specialized.
Meyers said Sylvanio and his brother were competent farmers who sometimes marketed their crops well. This year, however, they had lost $25,000 in the grain market and had not yet sold their corn crop. They presently owed his employer $214,000.
Sylvanio testified that in 1990 his pay was $1,600 a month. In the last three years, his net personal income had averaged in the middle to high teens. He also sustained an $83,000 business loss in 1990.
Sylvanio said that through his businesses he had farmed about 3,500 acres in 1990. All of the land had been leased to his businesses. The assets of his businesses consisted mainly of grain and machinery. The machinery had to be replaced frequently because of the amount of acreage he farmed. Additionally, it rapidly depreciated in value.
Sylvanio stated that Rock River Farms had been created to take advantage of federal agricultural programs. Perino Brothers Farms was the more active operation. On December 14, 1990, Sylvanio had prepared a balance sheet for Perino Brothers Farms, which he later delivered to the First of America Bank. He admitted that the balance sheet showed the approximate financial state of the business. The balance sheet indicated that the market value of the assets was $819,427, and the market value of the liabilities was $587,013.
Sylvanio testified, however, that $83,000 of the machinery listed as an asset was actually leased. The balance sheet also listed a $59,500 liability on the leased machinery. *56 Sylvanio had an option to purchase the equipment at the end of the lease term. He said he was not likely to do so because of the large amount of acreage he farmed.
Sylvanio further stated that the listed value of $385,500 for crops and feed was incorrect. Given market conditions and the present state of the grain, it was actually worth $350,000.
The balance sheet also indicated that the business had loaned $15,000 to Sylvanio's brother. Sylvanio did not know what the purpose of the loan was.
Sylvanio stated that if he attempted to liquidate all or part of his operation, there would be a tax impact which was not reflected on the balance sheet. He estimated that if he sold the operation, he and his brother would have to pay $137,500 in taxes. Taking that into account, he calculated the liquidated value of the business to be $35,914. Of that amount, he would be entitled to $17,957. Additionally, the operation was highly leveraged, so he would not be able to sell the assets without the approval of his creditors.
Sylvanio said that two financial institutions had recently rejected his request for an operating loan. He was unsure as to when he would eventually obtain the loan.
The trial court found that Sylvanio's average net income was $17,000 a year. It therefore ordered him to pay $355 per month in child support. Julie was awarded the household goods, valued at $3,885; the Cougar automobile, valued at $5,500; and her pension plan, valued at $1,463. She also was ordered to assume $11,546 in debts.
Sylvanio received the assets of the farming businesses, valued at $783,927, as well as the liabilities, valued at $587,013. He also assumed a $500 bank debt. In order to equalize the distribution of marital property, Sylvanio was ordered to pay Julie $49,629.50. Of that sum, $9,629.50 was payable in 60 days. The rest was to be paid at an amortized rate over the next seven years. The interest on the unpaid amount was 9% per year.
On appeal, Sylvanio argues that the trial court erred in distributing the marital estate. He contends that the court's decision unfairly imposed on him all the business risks. He further argues that the decision will force him to sell all or part of his businesses.
The trial court's decision on the distribution of property will not be reversed unless the court clearly abused its discretion. (In re Marriage of Thornqvist (1979), 79 Ill.App.3d 791, 35 Ill. Dec. 342, 399 N.E.2d 176.) We agree with Sylvanio that the court's decision imposed most of the business risks on him. However, Sylvanio will also receive most of the benefits generated by the businesses. Since Sylvanio made most of the business decisions and it is often inadvisable to break up an ongoing business (see In re Marriage of Rapacz (1985), 135 Ill.App.3d 1045, 90 Ill. Dec. 622, 482 N.E.2d 441), we find that the court properly ordered him to assume the business risks.
Moreover, after Sylvanio pays his debt to Julie, he will retain 75% of the market value of Perino Brothers Farms. Since there will still be substantial equity in the business, we do not believe Sylvanio will be forced to liquidate it. Accordingly, we find no merit to his arguments.
Sylvanio further argues he can only meet the trial court's order by selling assets. He contends that the trial court failed to consider the tax consequences of such a sale. He also argues that if the tax consequences of a complete liquidation are considered, the value of the business was only $35,914.
Section 503(d)(11) of the Illinois Marriage and Dissolution of Marriage Act (Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 40, par. 503(d)(11)) states that in dividing marital property, the trial court shall consider the tax consequences upon the parties. However, the consequences that must be considered are those that immediately flow from the court's decision. (In re Marriage of Emken (1981), 86 Ill. 2d 164, 56 Ill. Dec. 45, 427 N.E.2d 125.) Remote consequences or the result of voluntary actions should not be *57 considered. In re Marriage of Hawkins (1987), 160 Ill.App.3d 71, 111 Ill. Dec. 897, 513 N.E.2d 143; Emken, 86 Ill.2d at 167, 56 Ill. Dec. at 47, 427 N.E.2d at 127.
We note that the business had sufficient equity to make a $15,000 loan to Sylvanio's brother. Consequently, we are not convinced that Sylvanio will have to sell any assets in order to meet the court's order. Even if he has to, the taxes could be paid out of the large share of the business he was awarded. In regard to Sylvanio's argument about the tax consequences of a complete liquidation, we have previously found that the trial court's decision will not force Sylvanio to liquidate the entire business. Consequently, any such tax consequences are purely hypothetical and the result of voluntary action. They are therefore not a proper factor for consideration.
Sylvanio next argues that the court erred in incorporating the value of the machinery in the operation's assets because its value was reflected in the child support order. He cites In re Marriage of Zells (1991), 143 Ill. 2d 251, 157 Ill. Dec. 480, 572 N.E.2d 944, in support of his argument.
In Zells, the court said that the value of professional goodwill is properly reflected in the maintenance and support awards. Accordingly, it found that it was not a divisible marital asset. In the instant case, by contrast, the machinery was business property acquired in the course of the marriage. Such property is subject to division as part of the marital estate. (Ill.Rev.Stat. 1989, ch. 40, par. 503(a)(d).) Since we believe Zells should be limited to cases involving professional goodwill, we find that the court properly considered the value of the machinery in dividing the estate.
Sylvanio lastly argues that the court erred in considering the $83,000 in leased machinery to be an asset of his business. He contends that only the machinery he owned should have been considered an asset.
The record reflects that Sylvanio listed the machinery as an asset and a liability on the balance sheet he presented to the First of America Bank. Additionally, he testified that he had an option to purchase the equipment at the end of the lease term. Given that option and the presence of the equipment as a net asset on the balance sheet, we find that the court did not err in considering it to be marital property.
The judgment of the circuit court of Whiteside County is affirmed.
Affirmed.
BARRY, P.J., and SLATER, J., concur.

=== CASE 2225725 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:54.016018+00 ===

343 Mich. 507 (1955)
72 N.W.2d 282
PEOPLE
v.
ASTA.
Docket No. 75, Calendar No. 45,726.
Supreme Court of Michigan.
Decided October 11, 1955.
Thomas M. Kavanagh, Attorney General, Edmund E. Shepherd, Solicitor General, and T. Carl Holbrook, Assistant Attorney General, for plaintiff.
Frank H. Finney, for defendants.
REID, J.
Defendants (appellants) Dominic J. Asta and Frank Navarro were arrested in the city of Detroit *509 on June 26, 1951.[*] On June 28 they were arraigned on a warrant charging them with violation of the State cigarette tax act. On July 25, 1951, an examination was conducted before a judge of the recorder's court and defendants were bound over for trial. Defendants filed a written motion to quash the warrant and information for the reasons:
1. That section 3 of the statute is an unconstitutional delegation of the legislature's taxing power to an administrative body;
2. That the immediate effect clause of the act is invalid, and that the statute was therefore not in effect at the time of the offense alleged;
3. That sufficient evidence was not shown at the examination to bind the defendants over for trial;
4. That there was no valid arrest and seizure;
5. That the statute violates the interstate commerce clause of the Federal Constitution;
6. That the statute is unconstitutional in that the license fee sought to be imposed lacked uniformity;
7. That the section of the statute here sought to be enforced is unconstitutional in that it violates the equal protection clause of the Federal Constitution.
The court denied this motion to quash. Defendants made no motion to suppress the evidence seized by the officers on the occasion of the arrest.
Defendants were tried in recorder's court on January 21, 1952, on a charge of violation of the State cigarette tax act, being PA 1947, No 265 (CL 1948, § 205.501 et seq., as amended by PA 1949, No 312, and by PA 1951, No 78 [Stat Ann 1950 Rev and Stat Ann 1951 Cum Supp § 7.411 (1) et seq.]). The defendants were represented by separate attorneys.
A witness, Andrew Berge, an employee of the Detroit police department, was called in behalf of the people and testified that on June 26, 1951, he, in *510 company with Francis Gildersleeve, another Detroit police officer, observed the defendants at the rear of a store building located at 341 South Schaefer, in the city of Detroit, and State of Michigan, and that seeing 2 trucks, their rear ends backed together, they conducted an investigation. He testified further that there was a space between the trucks of approximately 1 foot, and that the defendants, with one James Rich, were engaged in transferring from a truck driven by James Rich cases of cigarettes into a truck being used by the defendants. Further, that he arrested them, the defendants, and that during the course of his interrogation of the defendants, it was admitted to him that the cigarettes were tax free. He further testified that he called his precinct station and that detectives were dispatched to the scene of the arrest and that the cigarettes were confiscated. He testified, further, that the consignee noted on the bill of lading was one "Joe Spezia," but that subsequently, the defendant, Dominic Asta, admitted to him that Joe Spezia and Dominic Asta were one and the same person.
Francis A. Gildersleeve, a Detroit police officer, a witness for the people, gave testimony substantially the same as that of officer Andrew Berge. This witness, however, testified that the defendants were not arrested and detained by him and officer Berge for violation of the Michigan State cigarette tax act and that he knew of no violation of the law being committed at the time the arrest was made.
Witness Marion W. Boyd testified as a witness for the people and stated that he was an employee of the Hancock Trucking Company, and that on June 26, 1951, he hauled from Lima, Ohio, a trailer load of cigarettes in a trailer number 465, and that said truck was delivered by him to the Detroit, Michigan, terminal on the morning of June 26, 1951.
*511 Mr. Burke Sheen was a witness for the people. His testimony was to the effect that he was an employee of the Hancock company on June 26, 1951, that he worked as a dispatcher, and that he was present in Hancock's Detroit, Michigan terminal when trailer number 465 was there parked. He testified, further, that he had dispatched the driver, people's witness Rich, at the telephoned request of some unidentified person to the scene of the subsequent arrest at Raupp road and Schaefer road, in the city of Detroit. He testified, further, that the employees of his company are required to secure the signature of a consignee before relinquishing possession to a consignee.
Mr. James Rich, a truck driver and employee of Hancock Trucking, testified for the people and stated that on June 26, 1951, he was dispatched to Raupp road and Schaefer road, in the city of Detroit, with a trailer load of cigarettes; that he met the defendants in the rear of 341 South Schaefer road, Detroit, Michigan; that they identified themselves as being the proper consignee named in the bill of lading; that he was in the process of transferring the cases of cigarettes from his trailer to the truck being operated by the defendants; that the police officers intervened and that after talking with him that the officers called the defendants from their truck and questioned them.
He testified, further, that he was required to secure the signature of a consignee before relinquishing possession, and that neither the bill of lading nor receipt, in this transaction, had been signed. On cross-examination, this witness admitted that the defendants had not signed the receipt, showing delivery; that had they refused to sign he, the witness, would have been under an obligation to return the merchandise to his employer, the common carrier. He testified, further, that he and the defendants had *512 transferred only 26 cases and that there remained, at the time of the intervention of the police officers, 192 cases in the trailer.
Mr. Roy Struble was called by the people and testified that he was an employee of the Michigan department of revenue, and that neither of the defendants had secured a license of any type. He further testified that he knew of no license required of the defendants other than that of "unclassified acquirers," that the license fee of unclassified acquirers might be any sum ranging from $1 to $150, and that the setting of such license fee was discretionary with the commissioner of revenue. At this point, it was stipulated by Mr. Nathan J. Kaufman, assistant prosecutor for Wayne county, that different applicants for unclassified acquirers' licenses under the cigarette tax act had been required to pay different license fees.
Mr. George K. Constan was called as a witness for the people and testified that he was the owner of a restaurant located at 341 South Schaefer road, Detroit, and that in back of his restaurant there was a vacant field, and he further stated that he did not order a large consignment of cigarettes to be delivered to him at that address.
Mr. Harry Reimars was called as a witness for the people and testified that he was an employee of the interstate commerce commission, that he had charge of the records of the bureau of motor carriers, and that having checked said records he could find no record of the issuance of a permit for interstate commerce to either of the defendants, or one Joe Spezia. He further testified that the Hancock Transportation Company was a licensed common carrier under the interstate commerce commission.
Detective Knutson was called as a witness for the people and testified that he was a detective on the police department of the city of Detroit, that he had *513 gone to Raupp road and Schaefer road, in the city of Detroit and State of Michigan, June 26, 1951, having been called to that address by officer Berge and officer Gildersleeve; that the defendants had been held there until he arrived.
A motion for a directed verdict of not guilty was denied by the court at the conclusion of the proofs submitted by the people. This motion was predicated upon defendants' claim that the arrest, search and seizure were unlawful, and that the cigarette tax act and any proceedings based on it were unconstitutional and void. The defendants did not testify and no witnesses were called in their behalf.
The prosecutor waived the allegations of "acquiring and transportation," of the cigarettes in question.
The court instructed the jury to deliberate, as a question of fact, whether or not the defendants had "possession" of the cigarettes.
The jury returned a verdict of guilty as to each defendant.
The court on February 6, 1952, sentenced the defendant, Dominic Asta, to a term of 9 months to 5 years in the State prison for southern Michigan, and sentenced the defendant, Frank Navarro, to a term of 6 months to 5 years in the State prison for southern Michigan.
Motion for new trial was made on behalf of the defendants setting forth as grounds for a new trial practically the same grounds which are set forth in the application for leave to appeal, which is as follows:
1. The trial court erred in overruling defendants' motion of a directed verdict of not guilty when the testimony of the arresting officers clearly showed an illegal arrest, search and seizure.
2. The trial court erred in refusing to rule on the constitutionality of the Michigan cigarette tax act *514 after stipulation that the act was not uniform as applied to unclassified acquirers. (See CL 1948, § 205.503, as amended by PA 1951, No 78 [Stat Ann 1951 Cum Supp § 7.411(3)], which contains the words, "The fees for licenses shall be as follows: * * * An unclassified acquirer's license, a sum determined by the department, but not to exceed $150.00.")
3. The trial court erred in submitting to the jury the question of possession by the defendants when the testimony of the agents of the common carrier clearly showed possession to be in said common carrier.
The motion for a new trial was heard and finally denied on June 22, 1952, by the Honorable O.Z. Ide, judge of the recorder's court of the city of Detroit.
The foregoing facts disclose sufficient grounds to justify the ruling of the court denying defendants' motion for a directed verdict of not guilty, on alleged grounds of illegal arrest, search and seizure. The officers were justified at the time in making the arrest. They were unfamiliar with the provisions of the cigarette tax act. Before they made the arrest they telephoned to their superiors at the police headquarters, stating the facts at the time, and were directed by their superiors to make the arrest for violation of the cigarette tax act. The facts justified the officers in believing defendants guilty of a felony.
The cigarette tax act in question is not void for any reasons alleged by defendants, namely, lack of uniformity of the act, unlawful delegation of taxing power to an administrative body, unlawful interference with interstate commerce carrier, and ineffectual attempt of the legislature to give immediate effect to a tax statute under guise of police power when the act in fact did not deal with public health, safety or morals.
The power giving the department authority to fix *515 a lesser sum than the $150 to unclassified acquirers of cigarettes seems to have been meant to include authority to exercise discretion dependent upon the importance of their acquisition. It is not open to defendants to question this statutory provision which is not in any case applicable to them. Defendants do not claim that they applied for a license as unclassified acquirers.
The provision in the State Constitution (1908), art 10, § 4 is as follows:
"The legislature may be law impose specific taxes, which shall be uniform upon the classes upon which they operate."
This provision requires uniformity as to classes and is applicable to specific taxes. The tax in question is specific. See C.F. Smith Co. v. Filzgerald, 270 Mich. 659 (syllabus 11). See, also, Cunningham Drug Stores, Inc., v. Commissioner of Revenue, 319 Mich. 467, 469; People v. Asta, 337 Mich. 590, 595.
The act in question was properly given immediate effect under the Constitution (1908), art 5, § 21, the portion of the Constitution in question being as follows:
"No act shall take effect or be in force until the expiration of 90 days from the end of the session at which the same is passed, except that the legislature may give immediate effect to acts making appropriations and acts immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health or safety by a 2/3 vote of the members elected to each house."
It may fairly be said that the imposition of the specific tax in question and amendment to the act in question have to do with the public peace, health and safety.
The shipment of cigarettes had arrived at its destination and no interstate commerce was thereafter to be considered as involved, as to cigarettes already *516 delivered. No reversible error was committed by the trial court. The judgment appealed from is affirmed in the case of each defendant.
CARR, C.J., and BUTZEL, SMITH, SHARPE, DETHMERS, and KELLY, JJ., concurred with REID, J.
BOYLES, J., concurred in the result.
NOTES
[*]  For action by the defendant attempting to compel the vacation of order of confiscation, see Asta v. Department of Revenue, 338 Mich. 505.  REPORTER.

=== CASE 9740986 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:46:50.271004+00 ===

GARRARD, Judge.
The facts most favorable to the judgment disclose that the events in issue began at approximately 2:30 a.m. on January 19, 1990. St. Joseph County police officers observed a speeding automobile. When the police officers stopped the automobile, they observed the defendant, Marlo Stanek (Sta-nek), the driver of the car, switch places with the back seat passenger. It was determined that Stanek's driving privileges had been suspended for life. He was arrested. In a two count information the State charged him with Operating a Motor Vehicle While Privileges are Forfeited for *738Life, a Class C felony.1 As a second count, the state charged Stanek under the Habitual Offender statute.2 A jury convicted Stanek on both counts.
Issues.
Stanek raises seven issues:
1. Did the trial court err in denying Stanek's motion for continuance to permit the completion of post conviction challenges to his prior convictions?
2. Was the imposition of a twenty-four year term of incarceration on Sta-nek for his conviction as an habitual traffic violator enhanced as an habitual offender cruel and unusual punishment disproportionate to the nature of the offense?
8. Did the trial court err in finding that the enhanced penalty as an habitual offender was not suspendible?
4. Did the trial court err in refusing Stanek's offer into evidence of his driving record, State's Exhibit 1, for use in final argument for jury nullification?
5. Did the trial court err in publishing portions of Stanek's driving record, State's Exhibit 1 and 1.1A, over objections that they were irrelevant and at variance from the charge?
6. Did the trial court err in permitting the State to introduce evidence concerning an advisement of guilty plea consequences made to Stanek in a different matter and prior to the case specified in the charge herein?
7. Was there sufficient evidence of substantial probative value from which the jury could find Stanek guilty beyond a reasonable doubt?
Discussion
I. Motion for Continuance.
Stanek's pre-trial motions for a continuance were denied. The basis of his motions was to await the completion of his post conviction challenges of his previous guilty pleas from the two prior unrelated felony convictions that were the predicate offenses for the Habitual Offender charge. It is within the sound discretion of the trial court to grant or deny a continuance. Sta-nek must demonstrate a clear abuse of that discretion in order to receive a reversal. Flinn v. State (1990), Ind., 563 N.E.2d 536, 543. A showing of prejudice is necessary to demonstrate an abuse of discretion. (Citation omitted). Id.
Stanek argues that when the court in Lock v. State (1975), 264 Ind. 25, 338 N.E.2d 262, 264 wrote that "if appellant's [prior convictions] rest upon invalid pleas of guilt, he should be afforded the opportunity to so demonstrate ...," it created a rule whereby he should have been granted a continuance in order to await the outcome of the post-conviction relief challenge to his prior felony convictions. We disagree. In Lock, the defendant's petition for permission to file a belated motion for a new trial and motion to correct errors had been denied. No such loss of opportunity has been visited upon Stanek by the court not granting a continuance in the case at bar. We agree with the trial court that if the challenges prove successful, the predicate felonies would no longer be available to support the habitual offender conviction and the enhanced sentence should be vacated.3 Record at 28 and 267. The trial court merely refused to await the results of Sta-nek's appeal and proceeded upon the criminal charges at hand. We find no abuse of discretion in the court's action.
II. Cruel and Unusual Punishment.
Stanek argues that the imposition of a twenty-four year sentence is cruel and unusual punishment disproportionate to the nature of his offense of Operating a Motor Vehicle While Privileges are Forfeited for Life. He contends the sentence violates Indiana and United States constitutional
*739STANEK v. STATE Ind. 789 Cite as 587 N.E.2d 736 (Ind.App. 3 Dist. 1992) guarantees.A Stanek acknowledges that we are not required under the U.S. constitution to conduct an extensive proportionality review. Taylor v. State (1987), Ind., 511 N.E.2d 1036, 1039. Our state constitution, however, mandates that sentences be proportioned to the nature of the offense. Id. Our analysis of proportionality in the habitual offender context has two parts. We judge the "nature" and gravity of the present felony and then we examine the "nature" of the prior felonies. Id. Stanek's present felony was a Class C felony. IC 9-80-10-17, formerly IC 9-12-3-2. There are substantial antecedent events that must occur before one has his driving privileges revoked for life. The presumptive sentence for Class C felonies is four years, with not more than four years added or two years subtracted for aggravating or mitigating circumstances, respectively." Stanek might readily have been sentenced to eight years on this offense due to his criminal history. The legislature, in assigning Class C felony status to this crime, surely viewed these circumstances as fairly egregious in nature. See Mills v. State (1987), Ind., 512 N.E.2d 846, 849 ("As the principal felony becomes more egregious, satisfying the proportionality requirement of the Indiana Constitution requires less of the prior convictions.") Next we examine the "nature" of the earlier crimes. Taylor, supro, 511 N.E.2d at 1089. Stanek's previous felonies reflect a person who, when not incarcerated, continues to commit the crime of operating a motor vehicle while his privileges are suspended. The two predicate felonies both involve Stanek's driving while suspended. The first, a Class D felony, resulted from his pleading guilty to Operating a Motor Vehicle While Suspended as an Habitual Violator of Traffie Laws on October 7, 1987. The second, a Class C felony, resulted from a guilty plea to a charge of Operat-4. The Eighth Amendment of the United States Constitution declares: "Excessive bail shall not be required, nor excessive fines imposed, nor cruel and unusual punishment inflicted." Article 1, Section 16 of the Indiana Constitution ing a Motor Vehicle as an Habitual Violator of Traffic Laws After Having Forfeited for Life His Privilege to Operate a Motor Vehicle on November 1, 1988. Additionally, the presentence report, among other driving related infractions, discloses three earlier "driving while suspended" events. Record at 82. We see a pattern of criminal activity unbroken by short-term incarceration. Stanek's twenty-four-year "sentence is not disproportionate because of his inability to control his criminal habit." Id. III. Suspension of Enhanced Sentence. [5] Stanek contends that the trial judge erred in holding that he lacked the authority to suspend all or part of the enhanced portion of his twenty-four-year sentence. When Stanek's sentence was enhanced under the Habitual Offender statute, the penalty was for the last felony he committed. The enhancement was for that Class C felony and no other. See State v. Williams (1982), Ind., 480 N.E.2d 756, 758. Indiana's statute provides the trial court with discretion to suspend a sentence on Class C felonies only if more than "seven (7) years have elapsed between the date the person was discharged from probation, imprisonment, or parole, whichever is later, for a prior unrelated felony conviction and the date the person committed the Class C felony for which the person is being sentenced." - ILC. 85-50-2-2(b)(2). - Under these circumstances the trial court "may suspend only that part of the sentence that is in excess of the minimum sentence." I.C. 35-50-2-2(b). Less than seven years had elapsed between Stanek's prior unrelated felony incarceration; therefore, the trial court had no authority to suspend any portion of his enhanced sentence. IV. Driving Record Evidence for Use in Final Argument for Jury Nullifica tion. [6] During the trial upon the Habitual Offender count, Stanek moved to introduce goes further and additionally declares: "All penalties shall be proportioned to the nature of the offense." 5. IC 35-50-2-6.
*740740 Ind. into evidence a certified copy of his driving record. Portions of the record had been previously published to the jury by the State in the trial upon Count I, the Class C felony charge. In response to the State's relevance and materiality objections, defense counsel argued that the evidence was necessary so that the jury could carry out its function under Article 1, Section 19 of the Indiana Constitution.© The trial court ruled that the evidence was immaterial and irrelevant. See Record at 603-607. Stanek asserts that he was attempting to show the jury that his driving record was not bad and his conduct did not deserve an enhanced sentence under the Habitual Offender statute. He contends that the evidence was material and relevant because the jury should have the right to determine that legal issue. The admissibility of evidence falls within the trial court's sound discretion. We will reverse only upon a showing that the trial court abused its discretion. Best v. State (1982), Ind.App., 489 N.E.2d 1861, 1365. To be material, Stanek's driving record had to be offered to prove a matter in issue and, to be relevant, it must be material and have probative value. If the driving record were to be of probative value it had to have "any tendency to make the existence of any fact that [was] of consequence to the determination of the action (i.e., any material fact) more or less probable than it would be without the evidence." Henson v. State (1989), Ind., 585 N.E.2d 1189, 1191. [Internal citations omitted.] The matter at issue in the Habitual Offender phase of the trial was whether Stanek's sentencing status should be that of a habitual offender. Mers v. State (1986), Ind., 496 N.E.2d 75, 81. Stanek took exception with the trial court's statement that "[the law does not recognize that a jury can ignore the law and operate to nullify." Record at 604. Because the jurors are left to determine the law, it does not mean that "they have the right to make, repeal, disregard, or 6. - "In all criminal cases whatever, the jury shall have the right to determine the law and the 587 NORTH EASTERN REPORTER, 2d SERIES ignore the law as it exists." See Johnson v. State (1988), Ind., 518 N.E.2d 1078, 1076. In the habitual offender phase of a trial the jury involves itself with the ultimate issue of fact "whether based on these three felonies, [Stanek's]l sentencing status should be that of a habitual offender." Mers, 496 N.E.2d at 79. Once it determines this ultimate issue of fact, it properly does not concern itself with the application of the law to that fact. We therefore find that as offered, Sta-nek's driving record was irrelevant and immaterial in the habitual offender phase of his trial. There was no abuse of discretion by the trial court in not allowing Stanek to admit it into evidence. V. Driving Record as Evidence in State's Case in Chief: Irrelevant and at Variance with Charge. [71 The State had the burden to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that Stanek operated a motor vehicle while knowing his driving privileges had been forfeited for life. See I.C. 9-80-10-17. Stanek argues that for the State to meet its burden, it must assert the original Class D felony conviction that gave rise to his life suspension rather than being able to assert, as it did in the information, the later Class C felony of Operating a Motor Vehicle While Privileges are Forfeited for Life. Stanek was convicted of this Class C felony on November 1, 1988 and it predated the similar charge in the case at bar. We agree with the trial court. The Class C felony of Operating While Privileges are Forfeited for Life has, as a necessary element, that a person has a suspension for life. The life suspension was not necessarily generated by the Class C felony, but the forfeiture is a continuing process. "It continues as long as the forfeiture is in effect." Record at: 420. A valid Class C felony conviction of Operating While Privileges are Forfeited for Life is relevant and probative evidence of the existence of the material fact, i.e., life forfeiture of driving privileges. facts." Ind. Const., Art. 1, § 19.
*741Stanek's variance argument is grounded upon our accepting his contentions that the State was forced to assert the original Class D felony that gave rise to the life forfeiture of his driving privileges. In light of the above discussion, we see no variance in the charges alleged and their grounds and what the State was to prove at trial.
Stanek took exception with the admission of Exhibit 1.1A. His objection was based upon variance grounds. The exhibit disclosed that Stanek's driving privileges had been suspended as of 11/20/87, the date of the Class D felony referred to above. The testimony of the deputy prosecutor was to the effect that he had informed Stanek that his driving privileges were suspended for life. We note, however, that upon cross-examination of the deputy prosecutor, it was counsel for Sta-nek who elicited from the witness that he had given Stanek advisements as to the consequences of a plea agreement in 1987. State's exhibit 2, admitted without objection, was a certified copy of the docket sheet from Stanek's prior Class C felony (Cause number 00555). This contained information about the December 6, 1988 suspension and its antecedent events. These two items of evidence have the same probative effect as the information in Exhibit 1.1A. There is, therefore, no reversible error. See Fozzard v. State (1988), Ind., 518 N.E.2d 789, 792.
VI. Deputy Prosecutor's Testimony That He Advised Stanek of Life Forfeiture.
The admissibility of evidence on relevance grounds is left to the sound discretion of the trial court. See Best, supra. The testimony that Stanek had been advised of the life forfeiture of his driving privileges was relevant to show Stanek's knowledge of the forfeiture. We find no abuse of discretion.
VIL. Sufficiency of the Evidence. The review standard on claims of insufficient evidence limits our inquiry. "[Wle neither weigh the evidence nor resolve questions of credibility, but look only to the evidence and reasonable inferences therefrom which support the verdiet." (Citation omitted). Landers v. State (1984), Ind., 464 N.E.2d 912, 916.
The St. Joseph County police officer testified that he witnessed Stanek driving a speeding automobile he had stopped. The deputy prosecutor testified that he advised Stanek that his driving privileges were forfeited for life. Certified court documents demonstrated that Stanek had been previously convicted for driving while his privileges had been forfeited for life. We find it reasonable for a jury to find Stanek guilty of Operating Motor Vehicle While Privileges are Forfeited for Life under I.C. 9-30-10-17.
Affirmed.
HOFFMAN, P.J., concurs.
SULLIVAN, J., concurs in part and dissents in part and files separate opinion.
. This charge was brought under IC 9-12-3-2. That section has since been repealed by P.L. 2-1991, SEC. 109. The new section is now IC 9-30-10-17, as added by P.L. 2-1991, SEC. 18.
. IC 35-50-2-8.
. Stanek's post-conviction relief had been denied at the trial court level. Record at 662.

=== CASE 9740987 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:46:50.275242+00 ===

SULLIVAN, Judge,
concurring in part and dissenting in part.
The majority affirms an enhanced twenty-four-year sentence imposed for conviction of a Class C felony, Operating a Motor Vehicle While Privileges are Forfeited for Life. The twenty-year enhancement was given pursuant to I.C. 35-50-2-8, the habitual offender provision.
I concur as to Parts I, IV, V, VI and VII of the majority decision. I dissent as to Parts II and III and address myself to those matters in reverse order.
TII
Suspendibility of Habitual Offender Emhancement
Under subsection (e) of I.C. 35-50-2-8 (West Supp.1991), the enhancement for a habitual offender status determination may never be less than five years to be added to the underlying sentence, i.e., subtraction of up to twenty-five years from the fixed enhancement term of thirty years if a period of ten years has elapsed between discharge from the last prior unrelated felony and the date of commission of the underlying felo*742ny. This being so, subsection (f)1 of the provision must necessarily contemplate reduction of the enhanced portion of a sentence below the levels enumerated in the schedules of subsection (e). Were it otherwise, subsection (f) would be redundant. In my view, therefore, subsection (£) permits suspension of the enhanced portion of a sentence, so long as the enhanced portion is not reduced to less than a five year executed term of incarceration.
I reach this conclusion in light of, and not in disregard of, Marsillett v. State (1986) Ind., 495 N.E.2d 699. In Marsillett, our Supreme Court consolidated into thirteen issues some approximately thirty-nine matters. One of those issues involved Marsillett's contention that the record did not reflect whether the trial court considered as within its discretion that a portion of the thirty-year enhancement might be suspended. Our Supreme Court merely held that suspension of a portion was not authorized under then subsection (c), now subsection (e). The decision did not hold that suspension was impermissible under subsection (f).
II
Enhanced Sentence as Disproportionate to Offense
In Mills v. State (1987) Ind., 512 N.E.2d 846, the Court affirmed a thirty-two-year enhanced sentence but noted that "(als the principal felony becomes more egregious, satisfying the proportionality requirement of the Indiana Constitution requires less of the prior convictions." 512 N.E.2d at 849. In Mills, the underlying felony was theft of a vehicle and the prior convictions all involved unauthorized use or theft of vehicles. The Court found significance in the fact that the thefts were more egregious than the theft of gasoline in Hensley v. State (1986), Ind., 497 N.E.2d 1053, or the theft of $50 worth of spark plugs in Taylor v. State (1987) Ind., 511 N.E.2d 1036.
Conversely, in Clark v. State (1990) Ind., 561 N.E.2d 759, the defendant's drunk driving conviction was enhanced by thirty years pursuant to I.C. 35-50-2-8 because of a prior burglary and a prior theft conviction. The majority there concluded that "where there is no injury to person or property, [a thirty-year enhancement] is entirely out of proportion to the gravity of the offense." 561 N.E.2d at 766.
Similarly, in Best v. State (1991) Ind., 566 N.E.2d 1027, the defendant was convicted of two felonies, one of which involved driving under the influence. That conviction was enhanced by twenty years under IC. 35-50-2-8. The prior felonies were theft, burglary, theft, and driving while an habitual traffic offender. In reducing the sentence from twenty-seven to seventeen years, our Supreme Court noted that the underlying felony "is not particularly aggravated ... [and] [tlhe incident caused little damage to property or person." 566 N.E.2d at 1032.
Best's prior criminal record, however, was substantially more serious than that of the defendant in Clark v. State, supra. Best had some eighteen prior convictions, several of which involved offenses against property and endangerment to public safety. The Court therefore found it appropriate for the underlying felony to be enhanced to some degree but not by the twenty years ordered by the trial court. The decision then directed the enhancement be reduced from twenty to ten years. That holding was made notwithstanding a dissent which posited that drunken drivers pose a serious hazard to life and public safety. The same cannot be said with regard to operators such as Stanek, who are not physically or mentally disabled or incapacitated other than by the absence of formalized state authorization to drive a motor vehicle.
*743STANEK v. STATE Ind. 743 Cite as 587 N.E.2d 736 (Ind.App. 3 Dist. 1992) Here, none of the offenses involved hanced sentence of not more than twelve equate with those present in Mills, Hens years. ley, or Taylor, or even with those in Clark or Best, We should not affirm a more severe sentence with respect to Stanek. In light of the cases cited, and particularly Best, I would affirm the conviction but would remand for imposition of an en- © & KEY NUMBER SYSTEM
. I.C. 35-50-2-8(F) reads as follows:
"(f) Notwithstanding the court's authority to reduce the additional fixed term of thirty (30) years imprisonment under subsection (e), if a person is found to be an habitual offender under this section, the court shall sentence the person to an additional fixed term of at least five (5) years imprisonment to be added to the term of imprisonment imposed under section 3, 4, 5, 6, or 7 of this chapter."

=== CASE 2225727 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:54.051404+00 ===

72 N.W.2d 501 (1955)
Betty L. DUWE, Appellee,
v.
Morris F. DUWE, Appellant.
No. 48795.
Supreme Court of Iowa.
October 18, 1955.
*502 Robert E. Coon, McGregor, for appellant.
Ray G. Honn, Garnavillo, and Alex Holmes, Strawberry Point, for appellee.
SMITH, Justice.
Plaintiff is 31 and defendant 39 years old. The parties were married November 1, 1948. Two children, a daughter and son, have been born to them and plaintiff has one child, a nine year old son, by a former marriage. Plaintiff charges cruel and inhuman treatment endangering her life and that defendant has, since marriage, become addicted to habitual drunkenness.
Defendant denies generally, and affirmatively pleads condonation by continued voluntary maintenance of marital relations until about July 8, 1954.
Decree of divorce was entered on the ground of cruel and inhuman treatment and defendant appeals. The decree included adjudication of property and custodial rights, not complained of on the appeal.
Defendant argues: (1) insufficient proof of the alleged cruel treatment; (2) lack of corroborative evidence; (3) condonation; and (4) erroneous admission of expert opinion testimony, based on hypothetical questions, as to the sufficiency of the claimed cruel treatment to endanger plaintiff's life.
I. The first occasion of inhuman treatment mentioned in the Record stands admitted. It occurred the night of November 11, 1950. Plaintiff testifies: "I was sound asleep. * * * My husband came up * * * grabbed me by the hair and yanked me out of my bed and proceeded to beat me. * * * He put his finger in my ear and he hit me and as a result of that I have lost part of my hearing. * * * I put up with that beating, I think, for about three hours."
*503 Her husband finally went to sleep and she picked up her daughter (then less than two years old) and escaped to a house across the street where the town marshal lived.
Defendant was later arrested, jailed, fined and served with notice of a divorce suit. There is ample corroboration by the marshal, sheriff, doctor and plaintiff's father. The doctor says: "She was bleeding from one ear, and her eyes were bruised, she had * * * a swelling on top of her head * * * and she was in shock and pain." Defendant admits his conduct on that occasion but testifies to the condonation which terminated that immediate litigation: "I was sorry, I made apologies, we decided upon a reconciliation. We resumed normal marital relations. * * * My wife forgave me."
Thus ended the first chapter. But that condonation did not entirely release him. "Condonation is a conditional, rather than an absolute, remission of the offense, the implied condition being * * * that the guilty party shall not in the future commit any matrimonial offense." 17 Am.Jur., Divorce and Separation, §§ 197, 213; Robbins v. Robbins, 234 Iowa 650, 655, 12 N.W. 2d 564; Zuerrer v. Zuerrer, 238 Iowa 402, 407, 27 N.W.2d 260; Craig v. Craig, 129 Iowa 192, 105 N.W. 446, 2 L.R.A.,N.S., 669. The law implies in such case the Biblical admonition: "Behold, thou art made whole; sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee."
II. The scars left on the innocent parties in such cases are not the only remaining effects of the condoned offense. Of course the condonation does not excuse or authorize future misconduct. But such future acts not only may create new grounds of divorce, they may also revive the condoned offense and re-establish it as an active ground. The offending party is thus left more susceptible to liability for any future misconduct.
While such future events in order to constitute new grounds for divorce, must be of such extreme character as to endanger the life of the innocent party, they need not be so in order to nullify the condonation and revive the original ground.
It has been pertinently suggested if that were required, the doctrine of revival would not be important, since the party offended against might as well rely alone upon the new grounds. 17 Am.Jur., Divorce and Separation, § 213, page 259, citing Langdon v. Langdon, 25 Vt. 678, 60 Am. Dec. 296.
We have definitely and consistently held subsequent conjugal unkindness may avoid condonation and revive the condoned grounds even though the later conduct be less than extreme cruelty and insufficient of itself to constitute ground of divorce. Hickman v. Hickman, 188 Iowa 697, 699, 176 N.W. 698, 14 A.L.R. 929; Robbins v. Robbins, supra, 234 Iowa at page 655, 12 N.W.2d 564; Zuerrer v. Zuerrer, supra, 238 Iowa at pages 407, 408, 27 N.W.2d 260. See 27 C.J.S., Divorce, § 62 c 2; 17 Am.Jur., Divorce and Separation, § 213, page 259, notes 1-3.
III. It logically follows the testimony of the subsequent offense in order to operate as a revivor of the original ground that has been condoned, need not have the same degree of corroboration as is required for testimony of original grounds.
Our corroboration statute, section 598.7, Code 1954, I.C.A., merely provides: "No divorce shall be granted on the testimony of the plaintiff alone." We have held that where repeated acts of cruelty have been testified to by plaintiff not every incident needs to be corroborated. Lamp v. Lamp, 245 Iowa 52, 59, 60 N.W.2d 844; Littleton v. Littleton, 233 Iowa 1020, 10 N.W.2d 57; Courtney v. Courtney, 214 Iowa 721, 724, 243 N.W. 510. Nor is it necessary that the corroborating evidence be sufficient to sustain a decree. Klepper v. Klepper, 234 Iowa 1138, 1142, 15 N.W. 2d 213; Leonard v. Leonard, 174 Iowa 734, 738, 156 N.W. 803; Ernest v. Ernest, 243 Iowa 1249, 1256, 55 N.W.2d 192.
It has been said the main reason for the statutory requirement is to prevent collusion. *504 Davis v. Davis, 228 Iowa 764, 768, 292 N.W. 804; Brannen v. Brannen, 237 Iowa 188, 192, 193, 21 N.W.2d 459; Hopping v. Hopping, 233 Iowa 993, 10 N.W.2d 87, 152 A.L.R. 436. The plaintiff's testimony is not rendered inadmissible, and may be considered when no collusion appears. Lamp v. Lamp, supra.
Defendant in opening brief concedes: "There was no dispute regarding the assault on plaintiff in November, 1950. There is no question as to plaintiff's corroboration of this factbut there was no need since defendant readily admitted same." He proceeds however to contend strenuously that plaintiff has "failed to corroborate any of the alleged and inhuman treatment such as to endanger her life." Manifestly, in this sentence, he refers to the subsequent offenses testified to by plaintiff.
The argument assumes that the innocent condoning party relinquishes a present, clear, provable, right and assumes the usually difficult burden of corroborating the testimony of future misconduct before it can be considered as a revivor of the original ground. Such cannot be the law. Marital misconduct usually occurs in privacy. Witnesses are not present as a rule and corroboration is frequently impossible.
IV. Our review of the Record will have special reference to its adequacy to revive the November, 1950, ground and to erase the defense of condonation that terminated the case at that time.
There is, of course, flat contradiction concerning most of the later transactions, both as to their actual occurrence and as to their seriousness. We need not nor do we try to appraise them as individual grounds of divorce; rather we consider the sufficiency of the Record as a whole to sustain the decree.
Some of the conduct complained of might be classed as mere violation of those amenities which should accompany the marital relation"conjugal unkindness," not usually considered as endangering life, its seriousness depending somewhat on its frequency and persistence.
It is proper to say that in weighing the contradictory testimony involving veracity, we take into account the superior opportunity possessed by the trial judge who heard and saw the witnesses.
According to plaintiff, defendant's "repentance" was shortlived. On or about December 1, 1950, he nailed to the bedroom floor near the bed a night stand on which he kept his ash tray, so plaintiff could not move it to make the bed or keep it under the window where she thought it "looked good." Defendant admits this conduct and that it was a "kid trick."
Plaintiff testifies that in April, 1952, defendant got mad and slapped her son (by her former marriage) and when she interceded slapped her several times. When she picked up a cup and threatened to defend herself he knocked it from her hand and left, did not come back for supper, nor speak to her that night when he came home. She says he struck her over the head with a carton of cigarettes the next day, packed his suitcases, announced he was going to leave and said: "I have half a notion to beat hell out of you."
Later, she says, he came back, kicked in the screen at the back door, and kicked her "on the end of my tail bone." "For days I couldn't hardly sit or do any heavy work."
Later that year, according to plaintiff, shortly before Christmas, defendant bent her backward over the kitchen sink, and threatened to kill her. When she pleaded for mercy he said, "Why should I have mercy on the likes of you?" She says he had a butcher knife in his hand, called her "all kinds of names" and finally ground a bowl of American fried potatoes in her face. She says she had a black eye on Christmas caused by her husband in an argument over her son.
Plaintiff testifies that her husband came home from the Amvets Club in the spring of 1953, intoxicated, and wakened her by throwing hot-rum drink in her face, "burned my eyes and nose."
*505 Plaintiff also testifies to incidents in the fall of 1953 when defendant brought out a gun after he had been squirrel hunting and said "I have had all I can take from you, I have a notion to shoot you." She says that on one occasion he threatened to "shoot the house full of holes." Defendant admits having guns in the house but denies having made any threats to shoot. She asserts and he denies that he ever threatened to do away with himself and the children.
In October, 1953, they took their sick daughter to Dubuque for medical examination and diagnosis. The doctor arranged for the child to go to Finley Hospital (in Dubuque) the next morning at 8 o'clock. On defendant's suggestion they decided to go back home to Garnavillo for the night.
She says that on the way home he bought liquor at Guttenberg. She urged him "not to drink too much so we can get down to Finley Hospital in time tomorrow morning * * *. He got mad and started running my family down saying * * * I was the cause of his downfall * * *. You are going to have to get up awfully early tomorrow morning if you are catching the bus; I am not taking you."
Her uncle LeRoy Bandow was called over "to help them reach understanding around midnight." Mr. Bandow testifies: "Morris, in my mind, was drinking and the discussion was purely regarding taking Barbara, their daughter, to the hospital at Dubuque; Morris says `Both of you shut up before I knock the hell out of both of you.' Before I left I promised to take Betty and the children to Dubuque to hospital which I did the next morning; Morris had refused to take the child to the hospital."
The uncle also testifies to some trouble the next morning over money: "She went back to the house. * * * When she came to come out the door, he grabbed her at the door-way, her buttons came off her coat, they had quite an argument * * *.
"Morris followed us to Dubuque in about two hours and plaintiff and defendant engaged in argument in hospital."
The coat incident is explained by plaintiff. She had asked defendant for money for the trip to the hospital. He wrote a check for $50 and she complained that was not enough to admit the child to the hospital and to cover her own personal expenses while staying down there. She testifies he said, "I don't give a damn if you starve to death." Finally he tore up the check and she said "I will borrow it from my uncle." When she was leaving "he grabbed my coat and threw me down with such a force that it tore all my buttons off my coat."
The uncle's testimony corroborates plaintiff's to some extent; and defendant as a witness admits purchasing liquor on the return from Dubuque, drinking it later on and that he had hold of plaintiff's coat the next morning when the buttons came off. He admits the controversy about money for the Dubuque trip but says there was no argument and that he "had been drinking whiskey and was perhaps intoxicated to a certain extent * * *; I wasn't dead drunk or incoherent."
He explains his refusal to take his wife and child back to Dubuque: "I had other plans at this time to go to Des Moines to investigate a job possibility * * * we were trying to figure out how I could get them down there (to Dubuque) and get to Des Moinesall at the same time." He does not say why that was not considered the day before at Dubuque when arrangements were made to return the next day; nor does he explain his conduct in following them to Dubuque the next morning instead of starting to Des Moines.
We pass over testimony of other incidents not too important standing alone, and come to June, 1954, when according to plaintiff affairs began to reach a climax. Plaintiff had visited her sister in Nebraska and had written a letter home thanking defendant for a birthday gift and making what turned out to be an unfortunate comment as to gifts from her brother-in-law to her sister. Defendant became angry, called her long-distance and said "I don't give a damn whether I ever see you again." She hung up on him.
*506 She says "I could tell he had been drinking * * * he was using abusive language * * *. And he called back there three times and finally my brother-in-law took the phone and told him not to call any more."
After she came home defendant accused her of "having associations" with her brother-in-law and told her "The next time that man ever touches you, I am going to knock hell out of both of you." She threatened to go to her parents' home. He said "I don't give a damn where you go but you are not taking the children." When she started to leave with the baby he grabbed her by the hair and dragged her and the baby back into the house. When she tried to phone he jerked the phone from the wall and she tried to knock him out with the receiver.
After this fight she was at her parents' home ten days. She says her husband "promised to get a job, stop drinking, go to church, have family life" and she went back to him until July 6, 1954.
On July 5 she says he became angry over her prolonged absence on a trivial errand (to get a kitten for the baby). He became moody and the next morning left home until past noon. She judged he had been drinking. Again in the afternoon he was away for an hour, came home, lay "half-dozing." Plaintiff's own son came in complaining of heat and defendant jumped up and called him "a little son-of-a-bitch" which plaintiff resented: "It made me sick."
She says he grabbed her by the hair and pushed her around and ordered the boy "You get to hell out of there." In the exchange that followed he reminded her: "By your death your property goes to me." In the scuffle a little later he raised his fist and she said "Go ahead and beat me up if it's going to give you any pleasure." She says he replied, "I'm not going to beat you up, I'm going to kill you." Finally, she testifies, "I walked out of the house and went over to the church and prayed. And that is the last time I have seen Morris until today."
She testified further that on all "these occasions" he was under the influence of liquor and was a habitual drunkard "the last six months or so" of their married life.
Defendant's own testimony as to the fight when his wife started to leave with the baby preceding the fight over the telephone, admits a scuffle over the baby but denies pushing her into the railing or side of the door. He testifies he and plaintiff had marital relations "up to and including July 6." Plaintiff says she was unwilling but if she refused defendant "became moody and sulky" and "would get drunk and abusive."
V. "But cohabitation is not necessarily a condonation of cruel treatment, and this is especially so as to the wife. As the weaker vessel, and as the victim * * *, she is often to be deemed as under some degree of duress." Hickman v. Hickman, supra, 188 Iowa at page 699, 176 N.W. 698; Schneckloth v. Schneckloth, 209 Iowa 496, 501, 228 N.W. 290; 17 Am.Jur., Divorce and Separation, § 210; 27 C.J.S., Divorce, § 61a; Massie v. Massie, 202 Iowa 1311, 1317, 210 N.W. 431.
VI. Defendant complains of erroneous admission of expert opinion testimony bearing on the sufficiency of the claimed inhuman treatment to endanger life. There is of course no way to know to what extent the trial court considered it. Suffice it to say we have reached our conclusion without giving it any consideration. We know of no reason, however, why such testimony might not be resorted to in a proper case. We disregard it here because of some doubt regarding the accuracy of the hypothetical question.
VII. It is true the mistreatment here was endured a long time before the suit was brought. But we are not prepared to fix the exact time limit of such endurance. Continuance of cohabitation during a series of wrongs consisting of cruelty in the hope of better treatment should not be *507 treated as condonation. "Hope springs eternal in the human breast" and reluctance to seek legal relief should be commended rather than penalized. See 27 C.J.S., Divorce, § 61a, p. 614, note 39; 17 Am.Jur., Divorce and Separation, § 210, page 257, notes 3, 4.
There is much more we might say but this opinion is already too long. Judicial ability to condense is altogether too rare.
The decree is affirmed.
All Justices concur.
Affirmed.

=== CASE 2225737 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:54.220685+00 ===

270 Wis. 630 (1955)
THOMAS and another, Appellants,
vs.
VILLAGE OF CLEAR LAKE, Respondent.[*]
Supreme Court of Wisconsin.
September 14, 1955.
October 11, 1955.
*633 For the appellants there was a brief by Doar & Knowles of New Richmond, and oral argument by John Doar.
For the respondent there was a brief and oral argument by E. Nelton of Balsam Lake.
STEINLE, J.
The plaintiffs seek a permanent injunction and damages. An injunction had previously issued. It was not challenged by appeal. If the previous injunction is a permanent one, then manifestly it was in force when the present injunction was sought.
This court has heretofore held that a permanent injunction may be issued where a nuisance of the type as here, is found to exist. Briggson v. Viroqua (1953), 264 Wis. 47, 58 N. W. (2d) 546. In its judgment in the original action directing an abatement of the nuisance, the language employed by the court is substantially the same as that in Briggson v. Viroqua, supra, whereby it was intended to permanently restrain the nuisance. We are obliged to conclude that the injunction issued in the first action was of a permanent nature and that it was in force and effect when the present injunction was applied for.
In the present application the plaintiffs seek restraint of the discharge of the water from the sewerage-disposal plant upon their land unless the water is discharged by means of a tiled drainage ditch. Relief of that kind was neither sought *634 nor granted in the first action. They maintained that since the relief sought is different than that which was heretofore granted, the court was not justified in granting the summary judgment. Notwithstanding that the injunctional relief sought is of a different nature than was granted originally, the plaintiffs are not entitled thereto. In the issuance of an injunction to abate a nuisance, the court is not permitted to designate the means whereby the nuisance is to be abated. In Behnisch v. Cedarburg Dairy Co. (1923), 180 Wis. 34, 192 N. W. 447, the application was to enjoin a dairy company from maintaining a nuisance by depositing skim milk and refuse in a creek which flowed through plaintiffs' land. The judgment directed the dairy company not only to discontinue the practice which had resulted in the nuisance, but also required it to fix its septic tanks to comply with the rules of the public board of health and laws of the state, and to connect up the sewer leading from the septic tanks with the public sewerage system then in process of construction. This court held that it was not within the province of the trial court to have directed the method by which the dairy company was to proceed in abating the nuisance. At page 38 the court said:
"We find no warrant for a judgment of this kind. If the defendant is maintaining a nuisance as the court found, the judgment should require it to abate the nuisance and to refrain from doing the things which resulted in the creation of the nuisance. The means whereby this end is to be attained are in general to be chosen by the defendant. It may abate the nuisance either by ceasing to deposit waste material in the creek, by so treating it that it no longer causes a nuisance, or in any other way that it sees fit. It is not for the court to choose the method by which the defendant shall proceed."
In the instant case the court was without power to direct that the village be obliged to tile the ditch. It could not issue a valid order directing that as an alternative to discharging water from the disposal plant across the plaintiffs' premises *635 resulting in a nuisance, the village be obliged to tile the ditch. As in Behnisch v. Cedarburg Dairy Co., supra, the court was limited to the extent of requiring that the village abate the nuisance.
Had the trial court been called upon only to determine the application for the injunction, then clearly its dismissal of the complaint would have been justified.
However, in addition to the application for an injunctional order, the plaintiffs in the present action seek damages of $5,000. Notwithstanding its dismissal of the complaint, the court reserved to the plaintiffs the right in a separate action to establish damages which may have been incurred by them as a result of the nuisance with respect to the period beginning January 1, 1951, and ending August 24, 1953.
We are aware of no rule that prevents the court from determining in this action the damages claimed in the complaint. Summary judgment may be granted only when there is no substantial issue of fact to be determined. Parish v. Awschu Properties, Inc. (1945), 247 Wis. 166, 19 N. W. (2d) 276. Since determination of damages presents an issue of fact, the motion for summary judgment should have been denied.
Apparently the court was concerned as to whether judgment for permanent damages could be granted in view of the existing injunction. In Briggson v. Viroqua, supra, where the plaintiffs had sought the abatement of the nuisance and the recovery of damages for injury to their land as the result of the nuisance, we held that they were not required to proceed under the statutes relating to eminent domain, ch. 32, sec. 32.04, Stats., but that they could bring an action for the permanent abatement of such nuisance and for the recovery of permanent damages. See also Kamke v. Clark (1955), 268 Wis. 465, 67 N. W. (2d) 841, 68 N. W. (2d) 727. In Briggson v. Viroqua, supra, we also held that if substantial redress can he afforded by an award of permanent *636 damages, and if the issuance of a permanent injunction would subject the defendant to disproportionate hardship, the injunction may be denied by the court, although the wrongful acts are undisputable.
In the present situation the plaintiffs are not precluded from having a determination of permanent damages in this action. Should damages of that nature be assessed, then a continuance of the permanent injunction will be subject to the equitable considerations which the court may determine exist.
By the Court.Judgment reversed, with directions that it be vacated and that further proceedings be held according to law.
NOTES
[*]  Motion for rehearing denied, without costs, on December 6, 1955.

=== CASE 9740988 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:46:54.073581+00 ===

KRAHULIK, Justice.
Defendant-Appellant, Clayton Bane, was convicted by a jury of murder and received a sentence of 60 years. Additionally, he received one year for contempt of court to be served consecutively with the 60 year sentence. He raises seven issues in this direct appeal. They are:
1. Whether the trial court's instruction on voluntary manslaughter was erroneous;
2. Whether verdicts of guilty of murder and not guilty of voluntary manslaughter are inconsistent;
8. Whether the court erred in failing to give the defendant's instruction regarding a presumption of innocence;
4. Whether the State conducted a prejudicial voir dire;
5. Whether the court erred in admitting a statement the defendant made while in police custody;
6. Whether error occurred when the State filed a motion to revoke the defendant's probation, thereby publicizing his convictions, after a motion in limine had been granted; and,
7. Whether the evidence was sufficient to sustain the conviction.
On July 4, 1990, 44-year-old Bane shot and killed his 17-year-old wife, Laura. Before marrying Laura, Bane had been married to Debbie Bane, Laura's mother. On Independence Day, Laura, along with some of her friends, had gone to her mother's house by the Ohio River to watch a fireworks display. At some point during the evening, Clayton Bane, along with his nephew, Roy Wolfe, Jr., also drove to the riverfront to watch the display. Laura and Debbie Bane approached Bane insisting that he and Wolfe leave the property. An argument ensued between Laura, standing next to the passenger window, and Bane who was seated in the driver's seat of the car. Wolfe, who was seated in the passenger seat, joined in the argument intermittently. Clayton Bane pulled out a .22 semiautomatic pistol, shot past Wolfe striking Laura in the chest several times and drove away. This shooting resulted in Laura's death.
I. Jury Instructions
Bane was charged with both murder and voluntary manslaughter. The jury received the following instruction regarding these charges:
Murder I.C. 35-42-1-1. A person who knowingly kills another human being commits Murder, a felony.
Thus under Indiana law, in order to find the Defendant, Clayton Bane, guilty of the crime of Murder in Count I, you the jury must find proof beyond a reasonable doubt of each of the following elements: (1) The Defendant; Clayton Bane; (2) knowingly; (8) killed; (4) Laura Bane.
If you find that any of these elements have not been proven beyond a reasonable doubt, you should find the Defendant not guilty of Murder in Count I.
If you find that the State has proven each of these elements beyond a reasonable doubt, you should find the Defendant guilty of Murder in Count I.
You are instructed that the offense of Voluntary Manslaughter by Means of a Deadly Weapon in Count II, is defined by Indiana statute including the elements *100contained therein insofar as they are applicable, as follows:
Voluntary Manslaughter. I.C. 35 42-1-3-A person who knowingly kills another human being while acting under sudden heat commits Voluntary Manslaughter, a class B felony.
However, the offense is a class A felony if it is committed by means of a deadly weapon. The existence of sudden heat is a mitigating factor that reduces what otherwise would be Murder to Voluntary Manslaughter.
Thus under Indiana law, in order to find the Defendant, Clayton Bane, guilty of the offense of Voluntary Manslaughter by Means of a Deadly Weapon in Count II, you the jury must find proof beyond a reasonable doubt of each of the following elements: (1) The Defendant, Clayton Bane; (2) knowingly; (8) killed while acting under sudden heat; (4) Laura Bane; (5) by means of a deadly weapon.
If you find that any of these elements have not been proven beyond a reasonable doubt, you should find the Defendant not guilty of the offense of Voluntary Manslaughter by Means of a Deadly Weapon, a class A felony, in Count II.
If you find that the State has proven each of these elements beyond a reasonable doubt, you should find the Defendant guilty of Voluntary Manslaughter by Means of a Deadly Weapon, a class A felony, in Count II.
* * L * * *
The term "sudden heat" means an excited mind. -It is a condition that may be created by strong emotion such as anger, rage, sudden resentment or jealousy. It may be strong enough to obscure the reason of an ordinary person and prevent deliberation and meditation. It can render a person incapable of rational thought.
Bane argues that this instruction is both misleading and a misstatement of the law. He contends that the voluntary manslaughter instruction necessitates the State's proving beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant killed while acting under sudden heat. If the State fails to prove sudden heat beyond a reasonable doubt, it is impossible for Bane to be sentenced on a lesser offense. The instruction, Bane argues, misleads the jury regarding the quantum of evidence necessary to reduce murder to voluntary manslaughter.
Ind.Code § 35-42-1-3 defines voluntary manslaughter as the knowing or intentional killing of another human being while acting under sudden heat. Subsection (b) notes that the existence of sudden heat is a mitigating factor that reduces what would otherwise be murder to voluntary manslaughter. See also Palmer v. State (1991), Ind., 573 N.E.2d 880, 1261 (on Petition for Rehearing of Post-Conviction Relief); Finch v. State (1987), Ind., 510 N.E.2d 673, 675. Sudden heat is an eviden-tiary predicate which allows the mitigation of a murder charge to voluntary manslaughter.
The instruction in this case improperly suggested to the jury that sudden heat is an element which must be proven beyond a reasonable doubt by the State. The statute defining voluntary manslaughter clearly, however, determines that sudden heat is not an element of the crime of voluntary manslaughter; rather it is a mitigator. As such, once the issue of sudden heat has been injected into the case, the burden is on the State to negate its existence. See, Reinbold v. State (1990), Ind., 555 N.E.2d 463. It is then for the jury to decide whether the evidence presented constituted sudden heat sufficient to warrant a conviction for voluntary manslaughter.
Once the evidentiary predicate of sudden heat has been introduced in a murder case, the defendant is entitled to a correct instruction on the lesser offense of voluntary manslaughter, as well as an instruction on murder which places the burden on the prosecution to negate the presence of sudden heat to the satisfaction of the jury. Palmer v. State (1990), Ind, 563 N.E.2d 601 (DeBruler, J., dissenting). "An instruction which does not place this burden on the prosecution is erroneous, detrimental to the substantial right of the de*101fendant and, where properly objected to and such objection is accompanied by a proper instruction, is cause for a new trial on the murder charge." Id. at 605.
In this case, Bane did not object to the court's instruction given on voluntary manslaughter, nor did he tender a proper instruction. Consequently, Bane's argument has been waived. Ind.Trial Rule 51(C). Bane, however, contends that the giving of the instruction constituted fundamental error. The instruction at one point suggested to the jury that sudden heat was an element of the crime of voluntary manslaughter. At another point, it cited the voluntary manslaughter statute and informed the jury that the sudden heat was a mitigating factor. Although inartfully drafted and, in fact, technically erroneous, the instruction does not constitute fundamental error because it did not deprive the defendant of his due process rights.1
II. Inconsistent Verdicts
Bane also contends that it was inconsistent for the jury to have found him guilty of murder, but not guilty of voluntary manslaughter. Bain argues that the jury should have been instructed that, if they found him not guilty of murder, they must also find him not guilty of voluntary manslaughter. Such is simply not the case. Murder is the knowing or intentional killing of another person. Voluntary manslaughter is the knowing or intentional killing of another person while acting under the condition of sudden heat. Sudden heat is a mitigating factor that reduces what otherwise would be murder to a lesser degree felony. By returning a verdict of guilty of murder and not guilty of voluntary manslaughter, the jury has simply concluded that the condition of sudden heat was not sufficiently present to warrant mitigation. The verdicts are not contradictory.
III. Presumption Instruction
Bane also argues that error occurred when the trial court failed to give his tendered instruction regarding his presumption of innocence and the reasonable deductions to be made from the evidence in light of that presumption. In Flowers v. State (1985), Ind., 481 N.E.2d 100, 103, this Court said that when reviewing the denial of a tendered instruction, three factors must be considered: (1) Whether the instruction correctly states the law; (2) whether the evidence supports the instruction; and (8) whether other instructions have adequately covered the substance of the tendered instruction. See also Davis v. State (1976), 265 Ind. 476, 355 N.E.2d 836. The Court in Flowers found that the tendered instruction was correct and that the evidence supported giving the instruction. However, the Court also found that the substance of the instruction was in fact covered by the other instructions given. Such was the case here. The jury received instructions on presumption of innocence, the jury's approach to the evidence, and reasonable doubt and, consequently, no error occurred in refusing Bane's tendered instruction on these same rules of law.
IV. Voir Dire
Bane next contends that the State conducted a highly inflammatory and extremely prejudicial voir dire in violation of Bane's constitutional rights. During voir dire, the prosecution posed a number of hypotheticals to potential jurors outlining many of the more sensational facts of the case. In one example, the prosecution asks a potential juror what her feelings would be regarding a 17-year-old girl who witnesses her 40-year-old stepfather abuse her mother, and who also is herself the victim of this man's physical and sexual abuse, and yet goes on to later marry the man.
*102Bane cites Robinson v. State (1978), 260 Ind. 517, 519, 297 N.E.2d 409, 411, as support for his argument that such voir dire violated his constitutional rights. In Robinson, the prosecutor in a murder case posed several questions to the jury to determine under what cireumstances they would vote for the death penalty. One question assumed certain facts that were similar to the circumstances of the case, but were not facts that were presented during trial in any significant degree. The Robinson Court found that the questions propounded by the prosecutor were designed solely to inflame the prejudices of the jury rather than uncover what prejudices could keep them from rendering a fair verdict. The Court said:
Viewing the evidence in a light most favorable to the state, the most that we can acknowledge is that it supported a suspicion that the friction between the defendant and the victim was incest oriented. There was no evidence presented from which the jury could have drawn such an inference beyond a reasonable doubt.
260 Ind. at 519-20, 297 N.E.2d at 411.
In the more recent case of Barnes v. State (1982), Ind., 435 N.E.2d 235, prospective jurors were asked whether they would be bothered in any way by a suggestion that the defendant and some of the witnesses might be homosexual. In Barnes, the Court noted that:
It is not improper to inquire of prospective jurors if their own personal feelings could be influenced by such facts being presented so that the parties might know that an impartial and unprejudiced jury is trying their cause. There was no error here.
Id. at 238. As in Barnes, we believe that no error occurred in this case. The facts posed by the prosecutor, although sensational, were presented during the course of trial. The questions asked by the prosecutor were designed to determine whether prospective jurors would be prejudiced against the victim based on what a juror might view as the victim's poor judgment. The prosecution had valid reason for attempting to ascertain whether any jurors believed that the victim's action in marrying Bane despite a history of physical and sexual abuse committed upon her by him caused her to "deserve everything that happens to her." Trial Record at 789. The State's inquiry into whether some of the more provocative and unusual aspects of the case would unfairly influence the jury was not improper.
V. Admissibility of Statement to Police
Bane next objects to the admission of a statement that he made to police while in custody. Bane contends that while in police custody, during interrogation, he made an unequivocal request for an attorney. An attorney was not provided promptly, and the police continued to question him. The statement he gave to police during this questioning was admitted during trial. Relevant portions of the interrogation follow:
Det. Whitlow: O.K. I believe the Officer's name you talked to upstairs was Officer Mike Crump. When you came in Officer Crump advised you of your rights, is that correct?
Clayton: Not (inaudible) I think he did.
Det. Whitlow: O.K. Well, I what I'm going to do is I'm going to advise you of your rights again.
Clayton: O.K.
Det. Whitlow: O.K. Just for the record.
You have the right to remain silent, and anything you say can be used against you in court. You have the right to talk to a lawyer for advice before we ask you any questions and you have the right to have him with you during questioning, and if you can not afford a lawyer one will be appointed uh for you before any questioning if you wish. And if you decide to answer any questions now without having a lawyer present you still have the right to stop at any time and you also have the right to stop at any time until you talk to a lawyer. O.K., Clayton are you do you understand what all that means?
Clayton: Yes, I do.
*103Det. Whitlow: O.K. Uh we talked briefly earlier and you said you understood your rights and you would be willing to give me a statement uh concerning your activities yesterday, is that correct?
Clayton: Yeah.
Det. Whitlow: O.K. That yesterday being July the Fourth nineteen ninety. Uh at this time you [sic] willing to give me a statement without having a attorney present concerning your activities yesterday?
Clayton: Well F'll tell you what I did you know.
Det. Whitlow: O.K.
Clayton: I run around went drinkin.
Det. Whitlow: O.K. Well let's let's [sic] if you're willing to do that let's uh it's my understanding you don't want to sign the rights form now is that right?
Clayton: Not 'til you know?
Det. Whitlow: O.K.
Clayton: When I talk to my lawyer I'll
Det. Whitlow: O.K. But you don't want a lawyer at this time, is that correct?
Clayton: I will get a lawyer.
Det. Whitlow: O.K. But you don't want one now is what I'm saying. O.K.?
Clayton: I'd like to have one but you know I it would be hard to get hold of one right now.
Det. Whitlow: Well what I am asking you Clayton is do you wish to give me a statement at this time without having a lawyer present?
Clayton: Well I can I can [sic] tell you what I did.
Det. Whitlow: O.K. that's what, that's what [sic] I'm asking.
Trial record at 2021-25.
Under the Sixth and Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution, the defendant has the right to the presence and advice of counsel during custodial interrogation. Miranda v. Arizona (1966), 384 U.S. 436, 86 S.Ct. 1602, 16 L.Ed.2d 694. Once the right to counsel has been asserted by the defendant, the suspect cannot be subject to further interrogation until counsel has been made available unless the suspect himself initiates further communication and, thereby, knowingly and intelligently waives the right previously invoked. See Edwards v. Arizona (1981), 451 U.S. 477, 101 S.Ct. 1880, 68 L.Ed.2d 378.
The defendant analogizes his situation to those found in Sleek v. State (1986), Ind., 499 N.E.2d 751, and Smith v. Illinois (1984), 469 U.S. 91, 105 S.Ct. 490, 83 L.Ed.2d 488. Unlike this case, however, in both Sleek and Smith, the defendants made a clear request for counsel,. In Sleek, the defendant was advised orally of his Miranda rights. He responded that "well, [I] feel like I ought to have an attorney around." Several minutes passed without verbal response to detectives continued questions regarding the facts of the case before the defendant finally nodded his head and signed a waiver form. In Smith, the defendant was informed, "you have a right to consult with a lawyer and to have a lawyer present with you when you are being questioned. Do you understand that?" The defendant responded, "uh, yeah. I'd like to do that." Id. at 93, 105 S.Ct. at 491, 83 L.Ed.2d at 492. The Supreme Court held that the defendant's statement, "yeah, I'd like to do that," represented a clear and unequivocal request for counsel. They note that lower courts were able to "construe Smith's request for counsel as 'ambiguous' only by looking to continued police questioning." Id. at 97, 105 S.Ct. at 494, 83 L.Ed.2d at 495. "Where nothing about the request for counsel or the circumstances leading up to the request would render it ambiguous, all questioning must cease." Id. at 98, 105 S.Ct. at 494, 83 L.Ed.2d at 495.
The Smith holding informs us that we must consider each of Bane's statements separately, in light of preceding statements, but without considering subsequent ones. When conducting this analysis, we can find no clear and unequivocal request for an attorney. At several points, Bane suggests that he would like to have a lawyer eventually, but in the meantime is will ing to give a statement to the police.
*104We believe the facts of this case are more analogous to those found in our recent decision in Pasco v. State (1990), Ind., 563 N.E.2d 587. In Pasco, an officer repeated Miranda warnings to the defendants before the following exchange occurred:
P: I don't know what to do ... I don't know if I should stop or if I should get a lawyer.
W: Well, that's completely up to you Cephis. P:; I don't know what the hell to do, I mean. This is the first time with the law or anything ... I want to help you.
W: Okay.
P: That's the kind of guy I am. I ... I try to help anybody that needs help.
Id. at 591. We found the situation in Pas-co also distinguishable from those facts discussed in Sleek and Smith. The fact that Pasco had been read his Miranda rights on numerous occasions, accompanied by the fact that the officer continued questioning designed to ascertain Pasco's true wishes with respect to obtaining counsel reflected that Pasco knew his rights, understood them, and voluntarily chose to forego his right to counsel and give a statement immediately,. The defendant's statement in Pasco was held to be properly admitted. We hold that the statement in this case was properly admitted.
VI. Motion to Revoke
Bane next alleges that error occurred when, immediately after Bane had been granted a motion in limine to suppress his prior convictions, the State filed a "motion to revoke probation" against Bane. Like all motions, the "motion to revoke" was public record. Also, the fact that the prosecutor intended to file the motion was reported in the local press. Bane argues that such a maneuver was an evidentiary harpoon designed to prejudice the jury against him. As the State points out, no law exists which would operate to prevent the filing of such a petition. This filing in no way injured Bane.
VII. Sufficiency of the Evidence
Finally, Bane argues that the evidence is insufficient to sustain his conviction. Bane contends that the only evidence against him was that offered by Roy Wolfe, Jr., a possible suspect in the crime. This, however, is simply not the case. Over the course of a two-week trial, approximately 37 witnesses were presented, many by the State, who testified to a variety of facts, including Bane's purchase of a gun proximate to the time of the shooting, threats made by Bane to kill Laura prior to the commission of the crime, and boasts made by Bane after commission of the crime that he did, in fact, kill Laura. Had Roy Wolfe, Jr., never testified, the evidence would have been sufficient to sustain Bane's conviction. Additionally, as Bane himself recognizes, the testimony of Wolfe alone, as an accomplice to the crime, is sufficient to support a conviction. See Stewart v. State (1982), Ind., 442 N.E.2d 1026. There is sufficient evidence here to sustain the convictions.
CONCLUSION
Bane presents no error upon which reversal of his conviction can be predicated. The judgment of the trial court is affirmed.
SHEPARD, C.J., and GIVAN, J., concur.
DeBRULER, J., dissents with opinion in which DICKSON, J., concurs.
. It should be noted that the instruction given on voluntary manslaughter was a virtual reproduction of the instruction found in the Indiana Pattern Instructions. The Indiana Pattern Instructions have been created to provide a guide to judges and counsel. They have not, however, been endorsed by this Court as correct instructions in every circumstance. Often the error in the wording of the voluntary manslaughter instruction is cured by other instructions given simultaneously to a jury. This was not the case here.

=== CASE 9740990 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:46:55.174874+00 ===

JUSTICE STEIGMANN delivered the opinion of the court: Plaintiff, the Town of Cunningham, appeals from an order of the circuit court, affirming a decision of the Property Tax Appeal Board (PTAB) concerning the assessed valuation of a shopping mall in Urbana, Illinois. The issue presented on appeal is whether a taxing authority should consider the contract sale price and rent when determining the assessed valuation of the property when the rent does not reflect market rates because of the unique financing nature of the transactions. We affirm. I. Facts In 1964, Carson Pirie Scott & Company (Carsons) developed the Lincoln Square shopping center in Urbana with one of its stores serving as the anchor store. In 1987, Carsons sold the mall and leased back the space occupied by its store from the buyer. Although it initially listed the property for $6 million with a lease-back provision for $200,000 to $250,000 per year for 10 to 15 years, Carsons eventually sold the mall for $9.3 million with a $615,000-per-year lease back for 15 years. Under this arrangement, Carsons received more cash up front, even though it would pay more rent in the following 15 years. By selling the property for more than the market price, Carsons in effect received extra cash somewhat akin to a loan. Carsons would repay this “loan” by paying a higher rent in the years to come. Most important for Carsons, it received this surplus cash without incurring debt on its balance sheets. Later that year, the Town of Cunningham assessor determined the value of the mall for property taxes at $3,100,000 based on an appraised market value of $9.3 million, the sale price. Carsons filed a complaint with the Champaign County Board of Review (Board of Review), which affirmed the assessment. During this appeal, the property was assessed in 1988 at a value of $3,044,200, based on the $9.3 million sale price adjusted for market changes in the year since the sale. The Board of Review, however, set the assessed value at $2,677,180, based on a fair market value of $8,600,000. Carsons then appealed both decisions to the PTAB. At the PTAB hearing, the Town of Cunningham, which had intervened in the proceedings, conceded that the 1987 sale price of $9.3 million, upon which the original assessment was based, exceeded the fair market value of the property. Both parties also agreed that the rent of $650,000 exceeded the true market rate to accommodate for the increased sale price. Though both parties submitted appraisals based on all three methods of property appraisal (market comparison, income potential, and cost reconstruction), both parties agreed that the income approach best reflected the true market value of a shopping mall. Two differences separated the parties in their appraised values. First, simply as a matter of estimation, they arrived at substantially different appraised market values for 1987 under the income approach. Carsons’ appraiser valued the mall at $5,830,000, while the township’s appraiser valued the mall at $7,633,000 based on a comparison of the income that comparable properties produced. The second difference focuses on the township appraiser’s consideration of the excess rent. While Carsons’ appraiser ignored the excess rent because it did not reflect market rates, the township’s appraiser considered the excess rent as additional income generated by the mall. Based on his appraisal of $7,633,000, the township’s appraiser calculated that Carsons paid $191,500 in excess rent over the market rate. Capitalizing this figure at a rate of 20%, the appraiser finally valued the mall at $8.59 million for 1987. This compared with Carsons’ appraiser’s assessed value of $5.83 million at a capitalization rate of 11%. Both appraisers agreed that the value of the property increased about 5% in 1988. After hearing this evidence, the PTAB found for Carsons and revalued the assessment according to Carsons’ appraisal. On administrative review, the circuit court remanded the case to the PTAB with directions that it consider the effect of the Illinois Supreme Court’s recent decision in Kankakee County Board of Review v. Property Tax Appeal Board (1989), 131 Ill. 2d 1, 544 N.E.2d 762, filed after the PTAB had rendered its decision. On remand, the PTAB reaffirmed its prior decision and distinguished Kankakee County from the present case because Kankakee County involved government rent subsidies for apartment buildings. The circuit court affirmed and the Town of Cunningham appeals. II. Standard Of Review  Defendants argue that we must accept the PTAB’s findings as prima facie correct and that we can reverse only if the PTAB’s conclusions are against the manifest weight of the evidence. In support, they cite Lake County Board of Review v. Property Tax Appeal Board (1989), 192 Ill. App. 3d 605, 548 N.E.2d 1129, and Gas Research Institute v. Department of Revenue (1987), 154 Ill. App. 3d 430, 507 N.E.2d 141. However, unlike those cases, this appeal does not require us to determine the correct value of the mall property. Instead, it requires us to address the appropriate factors that the PTAB should consider when it determines that value. Accordingly, we address this legal question without giving any deference to the PTAB’s conclusions on the matter. Kankakee County, 131 Ill. 2d at 14-15, 544 N.E.2d at 768; Lake County, 192 Ill. App. 3d at 613-14, 548 N.E.2d at 1134-35; Gas Research, 154 Ill. App. 3d at 433, 507 N.E.2d at 143. III. Contract Rent And Price Used To Determine Market Rent And Price For Tax Assessments  The Revenue Act of 1939 requires that the taxing authority assess real estate taxes at one-third the fair cash value of the subject property. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 120, par. 501(1).) The Illinois Supreme Court has held that “fair cash value” means “ ‘what the property would bring at a voluntary sale where the owner is ready, willing and able to sell but not compelled to do so, and the buyer is ready, willing and able to buy but not forced so to do ***.’” (Springfield Marine Bank v. Property Tax Appeal Board (1970), 44 Ill. 2d 428, 430, 256 N.E.2d 334, 336, quoting People ex rel. McGaughey v. Wilson (1937), 367 Ill. 494, 496, 12 N.E.2d 5, 6.) The appraisals presented to the PTAB focused on determining the fair market value of the subject property through the three methods of valuation, focusing specifically on the income approach because that approach best reflected what the market would bear for commercial property.  The present case requires us to address whether the assessment should consider the actual contract sale price and the contract rent when they do not reflect the market values because of the particular nature of the financing in the sales contract. In Springfield Marine Bank, the supreme court held that “[i]n determining the value of the property, rental income may of course be a relevant factor. [Citation.] However, it cannot be the controlling factor, particularly where it is admittedly misleading as to the fair cash value of the property involved.” (Springfield Marine Bank, 44 Ill. 2d at 430-31, 256 N.E.2d at 336.) The court further held that the actual rent did not reflect market value because the parties had fixed the rent in 1952 and the property had substantially increased in value since then. (Springfield Marine Bank, 44 Ill. 2d at 431, 256 N.E.2d at 336.) Accordingly, the court held that the assessment should not consider the actual rent. Springfield Marine Bank, 44 Ill. 2d at 431, 256 N.E.2d at 336. PTAB has misconstrued the Springfield Marine Bank holding by viewing it as standing for the proposition that contract rent is irrelevant when determining the market value of property. For instance, in two independent but factually similar cases before PTAB, the owner of a government-subsidized apartment building received more than the market rate for similar nonsubsidized apartments. (See Kankakee County, 131 Ill. 2d at 7-8, 544 N.E.2d at 764-65; Lake County Board of Review v. Property Tax Appeal Board (1988), 172 Ill. App. 3d 851, 853, 527 N.E.2d 84, 85.) Although the rent the tenants paid fell below market rates, government subsidies inflated the actual rent above market rates. PTAB ruled in those cases that Springfield Marine Bank dictated that the market rate for comparable, nonsubsidized apartments should determine the tax assessment rather than the actual, contract rent. See Kankakee County, 131 111. 2d at 15-16, 544 N.E.2d at 768-69; Lake County, 172 111. App. 3d at 856-57, 527 N.E.2d at 87. Both the Second District Appellate Court and, later, the Illinois Supreme Court disagreed, and the supreme court wrote the following: “Springfield Marine does not stand for the proposition that contract rent is irrelevant where it is different from market rent. Rather, that case simply held that, when property is subject to an unfavorable lease, the contract rent or actual rental income must be disregarded in determining the property’s fair market value when the actual rental income does not reflect the property’s capacity for earning income. *** When actual rental income does not reflect the income-earning capacity of property, it may be disregarded, and the taxing authority may look to rents obtainable for comparable property in the open market. Where actual income truly reflects the income-earning capacity of the property, however, it may not be ignored simply because it does not coincide with rents obtainable on the open market.” (Kankakee County, 131 Ill. 2d at 15-16, 544 N.E.2d at 768.) Plaintiff, the Town of Cunningham, contends that Kankakee County applies to the present case in that, even though the rent paid by Car-sons does not reflect the market rent, the tax assessment should consider it. It argues that the PTAB erred as a matter of law when it wrote that “it is fair to conclude from a reading of Kankakee County that consideration of actual rents is only applicable to subsidized housing cases.” At first blush plaintiff’s argument is not without appeal. Nevertheless, on further study, we conclude that although the decision in Kankakee County is firmly based in the context of government subsidized housing, that decision discusses basic legal principles of property valuation that direct us to affirm the decision of the circuit court and PTAB. In Kankakee County, the court held that the assessor should have considered the effect the government subsidy contract had on the income-earning capacity of a particular piece of property. (Kankakee County, 131 Ill. 2d at 19, 544 N.E.2d at 770.) However, the supreme court noted that “the standard for determining the fair market value of property is the price at which ready, willing and able buyers and sellers would agree.” Kankakee County, 131 Ill. 2d at 16, 544 N.E.2d at 768, citing with approval Springfield Marine, 44 Ill. 2d at 431, 256 N.E.2d at 334.  In this case, both parties agree that the actual rent paid by Carsons exceeded the market rental value of the property. The source of this surplus rent, however, is not the real property itself, or the specific use of the property in the community. (See Kankakee County, 131 Ill. 2d at 18-19, 544 N.E.2d at 770 (restricting consideration of the property’s use to subsidized housing).) The surplus rent paid by Carsons represented the cost of receiving a cash infusion of $3.3 million in excess of the market value of the property from the buyer. However, property taxes should be based on the income-generating capacity of the bricks and mortar of the property, not any financing arrangements of the particular seller, which became the lessee and the new owner. (See Springfield Marine, 44 Ill. 2d at 431, 256 N.E.2d at 336 (“[I]t is the capacity for earning income, rather than the income actually derived, which reflects ‘fair cash value’ for taxation purposes”).) Therefore, the PTAB correctly held that the appraisal of the mall property should not have included the actual rent paid by Carsons because that rent substantially reflected neither the actual income potential nor the true market rent. We agree with the PTAB’s conclusion that “unlike the subsidized housing situation in Kankakee County, the additional income over economic or market rent is not due to the earning capacity of the real estate, but rather is due to the particular nature of the contract between the parties.” We can explain our conclusion in another way: assume that Car-sons had not needed the extra $3.3 million but decided as a financial strategy to be a lessee rather than an owner. Accordingly, we can assume that Carsons would have sold the property at or about its initial listed price of $6 million, in which case we would not be addressing the issue of surplus rent. The difference between this hypothetical situation and reality is the financial condition and strategies of Carsons, not any factor relating to the property itself. We reject the notion that an assessed valuation can be in any way dependent upon the microeconomics of the financing arrangements of the parties to the sale of the property or of a particular occupant of a property. Accordingly, we affirm. Affirmed. McCullough, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9740991 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:46:55.178877+00 ===

JUSTICE LUND, specially concurring: I specially concur only to warn those who consider this opinion to not miss the forest because of the trees. Some pretty fancy financing was going on with Carson Pirie Scott & Company in fiscal years 1986 and 1987. There was a plan to concentrate on retailing. The 1987 annual report discusses liquidation of the catering and food business, while adding the Minnesota-based Donaldson’s department stores. County Seat specialty stores were also being added. Financing was a major concern. The increase in sale price from $6 million to $9,300,000 resulted in an increase of almost $400,000 in annual rent payments for 15 years. If the annual $400,000 was paid at the rate of $33,333 per month, the monthly payment would come very close to liquidating a 15-year $3,300,000 note carrying a 9% interest rate. The tax effects of such transactions are complicated, but are necessary corporate considerations. These considerations have little to do with the fair market value of, and the reasonable rental return from, real estate investments.

=== CASE 2225745 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:54.392017+00 ===

587 N.E.2d 501 (1992)
225 Ill. App.3d 54
167 Ill.Dec. 232
The PEOPLE of the State of Illinois, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
John PEREZ, Defendant-Appellant.
No. 1-89-1268.
Appellate Court of Illinois, First District, First Division.
January 21, 1992.
*502 Michael J. Pelletier, Deputy Defender, Office of the State Appellate Defender, Chicago (James Chadd, Asst. Appellate Defender, of counsel), for defendant-appellant.
Jack O'Malley, Cook County State's Atty., Chicago (Renee Goldfarb, Steven Klaczynski, William P. Pistorius, Asst. State's Attys., of counsel), for plaintiff-appellee.
Presiding Justice BUCKLEY delivered the opinion of the court:
After a jury trial, defendant John Perez was found guilty of murder (Ill.Rev.Stat. 1987, ch. 38, par. 9-1-(a)(1)) and sentenced to a 25-year term of imprisonment. Defendant contends on appeal that the circuit *503 erred in denying his motion to suppress statements on the grounds they were the fruit of an illegal arrest and involuntary. Defendant further contends that he was denied a fair trial when the State improperly introduced testimony that a key witness made a prior consistent statement and then argued later in closing that this witness was more credible because he consistently told the same story. We affirm.
Prior to trial, a hearing was held regarding defendant's motion to suppress statements; the following evidence was produced:
Chicago police detective Robert O'Leary testified that on September 25, 1987, while investigating the homicide of the victim, Gerald Gains, he spoke with Garfield Birmingham. Birmingham told O'Leary that he sold drugs for a living from his apartment at 6241 North Kenmore, apartment # 214 in Chicago and that the victim, who had worked for him, was fired for using drugs. Birmingham further stated that he hired defendant and a man named Peter as bodyguards for his drug transactions. Defendant and Peter told Birmingham that they had a 9-millimeter chrome automatic handgun which they would point at customers while hiding during drug transactions. Birmingham gave O'Leary defendant's address.
Detective Lawrence Thezan testified that he worked the evening shift of September 25, 1987, and that he also spoke with Birmingham. Birmingham told Thezan that defendant was in the building where the victim was shot and that defendant knew about the incident. Birmingham informed Thezan where defendant lived and that a 9-millimeter chrome handgun was in the apartment where they sold drugs. At the time of this conversation, Thezan was aware that the bullet which killed the victim came from a large caliber, semi-automatic pistol. Based on this information, Thezan and his partner, Detective Wojtowicz, went to defendant's house. The detectives spoke with numerous individuals at the side of the building; a few of these individuals went into the building and retrieved defendant. The detectives identified themselves, told defendant why they were there and asked him if he would go to Area Six headquarters with them. Defendant agreed to go; he was not handcuffed.
At the station, now about 8 or 9 p.m., defendant was taken to an interview room on the second floor. There, the detectives explained to defendant what they knew, and asked him if he had any information about the murder. Defendant told the detectives that he was at apartment # 214 at 6241 North Kenmore with Peter on September 24, 1987. Defendant stated that Peter owned a 9-millimeter hand gun. Around 7 p.m. that evening, a Jamaican man known only as Earl-16 came to the apartment and asked if they had any beer. They did not, so Earl-16 and Peter gave defendant some money to purchase beer. The victim arrived and spoke with Earl-16. Defendant then left to go to the store.
Detective Thezan asked defendant if he knew where they could find Peter and Earl-16. Defendant said he knew that Peter was Jamaican but did not know where he lived or his phone number; if defendant ever needed to meet with Peter, he would see him in Jamaican bars. Defendant stated that he had no information on Earl-16.
After the detectives returned from their unsuccessful attempt to locate Peter and Earl-16, they again talked with defendant, who related that Peter kept the 9-millimeter gun in the toilet tank. Again, after defendant provided them with this information, the detectives left the station and went to the apartment to verify this lead. They were unable to locate the gun at the apartment but did find some papers with the victim's name on them. During the time the officers were away, defendant remained in the police station.
Detective O'Leary testified that he arrived at work around 8:30 a.m. on September 26 and spoke with the midnight shift. At 9:30 a.m., O'Leary and his partner, Detective Kajari, went and spoke with defendant. Defendant told them that a man named "Cratches" came over to the apartment and asked for a couple of beers. Cratches then told defendant and Peter that Earl-16 had shot someone, perhaps *504 Gaines. Defendant told the detectives that he could point out Earl-16's apartment. The detectives and defendant then proceeded to where Earl-16 lived. The detectives exited the vehicle to see the apartment manager who told them that a Jamaican named Herliz Vanzie lived in the building. The detectives went to his apartment but nobody was there. During this time, defendant remained unhandcuffed and alone in the back seat of the squad car.
On the way back to Area Six headquarters, the three stopped and got something to eat. At headquarters, the detectives checked their records on Herliz Vanzie and learned that he had the nickname of Earl. They again left the station and unsuccessfully tried to locate Earl-16. During this time, defendant remained in an interview room.
Detectives Thezan and Wojtowicz continued the investigation when their shift began around 4:30 p.m. on September 26. At this time, defendant was still at the police station, but according to Thezan was not in custody, was free to go at any time and did not ask to leave.
The detectives continued their search for Earl-16 during the night. Later that evening, Earl-16 was located and interviewed in a separate interview room. Thezan explained that defendant did not want to be seen by any individual being brought into the station. Earl-16 told the detectives about his presence in apartment # 214 and that Cratches was a friend of his. He gave the detectives information as to where Cratches could be located, but the information proved unuseful. Thezan then went and got some hamburgers for defendant. Later that night, Detectives Thezan and Wojtowicz again talked to Birmingham who came to Area Six. He said that he had been stabbed while looking for Peter. Birmingham was assisting the detectives in their search for Peter.
Detective O'Leary testified that when he started work on September 27 at 8:30 a.m., Cratches (Duane Sammons) was already there. Cratches was interviewed and stated that at Earl-16's request, he had gone over to apartment # 214 to get a couple of beers. Defendant and Peter were in the apartment. He got two beers and then returned to the apartment where Earl-16 was located. Following this interview, Detectives O'Leary and Thezan again tried to find Peter but were unsuccessful. Defendant remained in an interview room during this time.
When the detectives returned to the station, defendant told them that they might be able to find the gun under the refrigerator or in a vent on the stove at the apartment. No gun was found. The detectives brought food back for defendant, Earl-16 and Cratches, who were all in separate rooms. O'Leary stated that they did not let Earl-16 and Cratches know defendant was there in an attempt to protect defendant because he was the one that gave the detectives their names and other information regarding their possible involvement in the murder.
After eating, the detectives interviewed Earl-16 and Cratches again. Cratches stated that Earl-16 left Cratches' girl friend's apartment and went over to the apartment to get two beers. Cratches next went to the apartment and defendant opened the door pointing a 9-millimeter chrome handgun at him. Cratches told defendant to put the gun down. Defendant replied, "You guys are always ripping us off." Cratches responded that he is Jamaican and defendant put the gun down to his side. Cratches denied telling defendant anything about the shooting because he did not learn of it until the next day.
During Earl-16's interview, Earl-16 said that he went over to apartment # 214 to get a couple of beers; defendant, Peter and a female were in the apartment. They did not have any beer so he and Peter gave defendant some money. During this time, the victim came over and began arguing with defendant and Peter about some furniture of his that he wanted. Defendant told him that he would have to talk to Birmingham because it was his apartment. Defendant eventually left the apartment followed first by the woman and then a short while later by the victim. A few minutes after the victim had left, defendant came back *505 and went into the kitchen. He then left with his coat over his hand. Earl-16 left and went to Cratches' girl friend's apartment and told Cratches to go back and get the beer.
After these interviews, Detectives O'Leary and Thezan discussed discrepancies between the stories given by defendant, Earl-16 and Cratches. They then went back into the interview room with defendant and explained to him that they had been talking to witnesses who have been giving consistent stories which were inconsistent with his story. They told defendant what the discrepancies were and read defendant his rights. Defendant acknowledged that he understood those rights and wished to waive them. It was now 7:30 p.m., about 48 hours after the police first contacted defendant. Defendant then proceeded in the presence of the two detectives to make certain admissions with regard to the murder. After making the oral admission, defendant was placed under arrest and handcuffed for the first time. The detectives contacted Assistant State's Attorney Judith Mondello of Felony Review who came and took a statement from defendant. Defendant, O'Leary and Mondello all signed the bottom of each page of the written statement.
Detectives Thezan and O'Leary testified that no one at anytime threatened, pushed, shoved, struck, kicked, strangled or abused defendant in any way. Defendant was never promised anything in return for his statements, was never refused food, drink or bathroom facilities, was never locked in an interview room and remained free to leave the entire time. According to the detectives, defendant was cooperating with the police. Defendant would give the detectives information which they would attempt to confirm. Both testified that Earl-16 and Cratches were brought to the station based on information defendant provided.
Defendant testified on his own behalf. He stated that he was sitting at home on September 25, 1987, when three police officers arrived without a warrant. The officers grabbed him, patted him down and put him in the back of a police car. The officers drove a short distance, stopped the car, told defendant to get out, handcuffed him, placed him back in the car and drove to the station where he was locked in an interview room. According to defendant, while in the interview room, the officers gave him no food and would not let him use the bathroom. When he asked to use one, he could hear the officers laughing outside the door. Defendant was forced to use a garbage can as a toilet.
Defendant testified that on September 26, around 1 p.m., he left the interview room with Detectives Kajari and O'Leary to go looking for an individual he had told them about. Defendant testified he could point out a building where he had seen that individual exit. When they arrived at the building, defendant went inside with the detectives but was not handcuffed. They went in and talked to a lady manager. The three then went upstairs. One detective told the defendant to stand with him by the stairwell out of view of the door while the other detective went to the door and knocked. No one answered.
On the way back to the station, defendant told the detectives he was hungry and so they stopped at a gas station. Defendant testified that he went in alone and bought cigarettes, a Snickers bar and a 7-Up with his own money. Defendant stated, "I didn't try to run from them and nothing, I try to assist them." After they left the gas station, they went to another police station where the detectives did some research. Defendant stated: "I try to relax, try to assist them with whatever I could help them." They left this police station around 3 or 4 p.m. and returned to Area Six headquarters. Defendant testified that he was again placed in a locked interview room. Sometime later that evening a uniformed police officer brought him a Big Mac and a 7-Up. Defendant also stated he ate again early the next morning.
On the morning of the 27th, defendant was transferred to another room where he was handcuffed to the wall. The detective kept telling him they knew he committed the murder. Defendant denied this and *506 alleged that Detective Kajari started beating him. When the assistant State's Attorney came, O'Leary told her what to write down. She wrote it on a yellow piece of paper. Defendant claimed he never told the assistant State's Attorney what to write. O'Leary told defendant he had to sign the statement, but he would not. Defendant stated that he never received his Miranda rights. After he refused to sign, the assistant State's Attorney ran out of the room. A detective then told defendant that if he signed the statement they would let him go. When the assistant State's Attorney came back in, she also told defendant that he could go home if he signed the statement. Defendant testified that he signed the statement only because he had been beaten and denied food and access to the bathroom during the preceding 48 hours.
During cross-examination, defendant stated that he did not sign the statement. Defendant claimed that the police must have photocopied his signature and tried to "prefabricate" it so it would look like he signed the statement. Defendant later stated that he did sign the bottom of all three pages. Defendant testified that, even though the statement said he was given food, drink, cigarettes and allowed to use the bathroom, this was not true and he only signed it because he was forced.
Defendant testified that in the early morning on September 27, Detective Kajari came in and beat him for approximately 15 to 30 minutes. Kajari then left but came back about 40 minutes later and beat him again for approximately 20 to 30 minutes. Defendant said these beatings occurred throughout the day and up until the assistant State's Attorney came. Defendant said that during one session he was hit in the left eye.
Defendant said he told the assistant State's Attorney that he did not commit the murder, but she wrote what Detective O'Leary told her to write. Defendant said that he told the police that he heard Cratches tell Peter that Earl-16 did the shooting. This is why he was helping the police find Earl-16. Defendant said he was at the apartment because Birmingham took him there instead of dropping him off at his sister's house.
The State called three witnesses in rebuttal. Carlos Martinez, a paramedic for the Cook County Department of Corrections, testified that he conducted the intake procedures for the defendant on September 28, 1987. Martinez took defendant's medical history and did a visual inspection of defendant from the waist up. Defendant told Martinez that he received a "blunt trauma" on September 26 or 27. Defendant stated that he had no complaints or physical problems and that he was in good health. Defendant never told Martinez that he was beaten by police or that he had any pain in his lower back. Martinez noted that defendant had some swelling on his right eye but did not note any bruises to defendant's upper torso.
Dr. Aaron Hamb, a physician at Cermak Health Services of the Cook County Department of Corrections, testified that defendant complained of pain to the coccyx (tail bone) area during a March 1988 examination. Defendant related to Hamb that Chicago police officers had pulled a chair out from beneath him and that this incident caused his pain. At the examination, Hamb looked through defendant's records and found no record of the type of incident defendant claimed. An X-ray was taken, and the radiologist reported that defendant's tail bone had a possible injury.
Assistant State's Attorney Judith Mondello testified that she worked for Felony Review on September 27, 1988. On that date, she went to Area Six at 9:45 p.m. and first spoke with Detectives Thezan and O'Leary. Mondello then reviewed all the available police reports and interviewed the witnesses. She then went into the interview room where defendant was sitting. She introduced herself as a lawyer working for the police and then immediately advised defendant of his rights. Defendant indicated that he understood each of those rights and that he was willing to give a statement. Accordingly, Mondello sat with him and drafted one. She denied writing *507 the statement based on what O'Leary told her.
Mondello testified that the statement was taken on a form used by the State's Attorney's office. At the top of this form are defendant's pre-printed rights and then a space for the statement. Mondello stated that she did not use a yellow pad to take down defendant's statement. Mondello stated that defendant read aloud the rights written on the form and then she read his statement to him. Defendant's signature appears at the top of the handwritten statement, under the pre-printed rights section and also at the bottom of each page of the statement. After reading the statement to defendant, she told him that if there was anything he wanted changed he should tell her.
Mondello testified that defendant never indicated that he was beaten or was denied the use of bathroom facilities. She never left the room between the time she took the statement and when defendant signed it. She did not notice any bruises or discoloring of defendant's face. Defendant told her that he received food while at the station and that he indeed shot the victim. At the close of the evidence, the court denied defendant's motion.
The trial began on March 14, 1989. Duane Sammons, nicknamed Cratches, testified that on September 24, 1987, cocaine was being sold from apartment #214 at 6241 North Kenmore. Sammons stated that the victim had lived in that apartment in the past. He identified defendant and stated that defendant was living there on September 24, 1987. Around 7 p.m. that evening, Sammons was at his girl friend's house on Kenmore when Earl-16 came over. Earl-16 told Sammons to go down to Birmingham's apartment to get some beer. When Sammons got to the apartment, defendant answered the door pointing a chrome gun at him. Sammons told defendant to put the gun down and defendant put it to his side. Sammons told defendant that Earl-16 sent him for some beers. Peter, who was also in the apartment, gave Sammons some beers. Defendant was clutching the gun the whole time. Sammons denied ever telling defendant that Earl-16 shot the victim and testified that he did not learn of the shooting until the next day.
Following the testimony of several occurrence witnesses, Mondello read defendant's statement to the jury. In his statement, defendant said that he was at apartment # 214 on September 24, 1987, when Earl-16 came over that evening. Defendant agreed to buy beer for him and he accepted money from Earl-16 and Peter. Just before defendant left, the victim arrived at the apartment and followed defendant into the hallway. The victim started to insult defendant. Defendant went back into the apartment and got a gun from Peter. Defendant went into the hallway and pointed the gun at the victim; the victim ran. Defendant chased him into the stairwell and up the stairs. Defendant grabbed the back of the victim's shirt and he fell. Defendant pointed the gun at his head and shot him once. Defendant took the gun back to the apartment and went to buy beer. Defendant returned with the beer. Earl-16 was gone; Cratches came by later and picked up some beer. Defendant and Peter then went to another apartment in the building where they waited until the police left. Defendant and Peter then went to stay at a friend's house. Defendant said the victim never had a gun. Defendant also stated he was well treated by the police and was not threatened or made any promises. He stated he was given food, cigarettes and drinks and was allowed to use the bathroom. Mondello testified that defendant was not handcuffed and never complained of any injuries.
Defendant testified at trial that on September 24, 1987, he was on the south side of Chicago. Garfield Birmingham offered him a ride home but took defendant to the north side of Chicago instead. They arrived at apartment # 214 at around 2 p.m. Defendant sat around the apartment until Birmingham returned. Later that evening, defendant went to the store to purchase beer. When he returned, only Peter was present. Defendant left the apartment around 8 p.m. and went home. Defendant denied shooting anyone.
*508 Defendant also testified about his treatment by the police. While his testimony is similar to his previous testimony, several inconsistencies can be noted. At trial, defendant stated that Thezan told Mondello what to write down but at the hearing he said that O'Leary told her what to write. Second, defendant stated at the hearing he was struck in the right eye while at trial he said he was struck in the left. Third, at trial defendant stated that O'Leary was the one who beat him yet at the hearing stated that it was Kajari who beat him.
In rebuttal, Carlos Martinez and Dr. Aaron Hamb testified as they did before. Officers Kajari, O'Leary and Thezan testified about defendant's treatment and that there were no garbage cans in the interview room.
Following closing arguments, defendant was found guilty of murder and sentenced to 25 years imprisonment. Defendant brings this appeal.
Defendant first contends that his admissions to the police should have been suppressed because they were the fruit of an illegal arrest. Defendant asserts that the existence of an arrest is demonstrated by the length of his stay and by the facts that the police placed him in an interrogation room, left him there for long durations, questioned defendant on numerous occasions, and never told him that he was not under arrest or free to leave at any time. Defendant notes that no probable cause existed to support his detention. The State responds that the length of defendant's stay and the other circumstances to which defendant cites reflect that he was an informant cooperating with the police in a potentially dangerous murder investigation.
When determining whether an arrest has been made, courts focus on the intent of the police officers and the understanding of the individual being questioned at the time he is detained. (People v. Wipfler (1977), 68 Ill.2d 158, 11 Ill.Dec. 262, 368 N.E.2d 870; People v. Johnson (1989), 187 Ill.App.3d 756, 135 Ill.Dec. 896, 544 N.E.2d 392.) In assessing the officer's intent, the court will consider whether there was any formal declaration of arrest and whether other routine procedures associated with an arrest were present, such as searching, booking, handcuffing, fingerprinting and photographing. (Johnson, 187 Ill.App.3d at 769, 135 Ill.Dec. at 904, 544 N.E.2d at 400.) In assessing the understanding of the individual being questioned, the court is not concerned with what the particular individual thought; rather, the court is concerned with whether a reasonable person, innocent of any crime, would have concluded he was not free to leave in similar circumstances. (Johnson, 187 Ill.App.3d at 769, 135 Ill.Dec. at 904, 544 N.E.2d at 400.) A reviewing court will not overturn a trial court's denial of a motion to quash arrest unless it is manifestly erroneous. Johnson, 187 Ill.App.3d at 770, 135 Ill.Dec. at 904, 544 N.E.2d at 400.
In this case, we believe the circuit court's denial of defendant's motion to suppress was not manifestly erroneous. Defendant's entire case rests on his testimony that he was kept against his will. This testimony was contradicted by all the State's witnesses. More importantly, a review of defendant's testimony reveals that he was not the most credible witness. During cross-examination, defendant's testimony became convoluted and conflicting. At the end of cross-examination at the suppression hearing and at trial, no re-direct was attempted. Defendant's lack of credibility must have weighed heavily against him with the judge and jury.
Aside from defendant's lack of credibility, evidence exists to support the State's assertion on appeal that the police treated defendant as an informant who was cooperating with the police in a potentially dangerous investigation and who remained at police headquarters for those 48 hours for his protection. The evidence further supports that defendant believed himself to be acting in such a capacity.
Garfield Birmingham, who was cooperating with the police, gave information which led the police to defendant's residence. There, the officers asked defendant to accompany them to Area Six headquarters. Defendant agreed. During the next 48 *509 hours, the evidence showed that defendant voluntarily assisted the police. He was never handcuffed, searched, booked, finger-printed and never received his Miranda rights prior to interviews or subjected to other procedures indicative of arrest.
Defendant, on numerous occasions, gave police information which they attempted to verify. This information included key investigatory facts such as the location of the murder weapon and the whereabouts of individuals potentially involved. On one occasion, defendant accompanied the officers to the residence of Earl-16. Earl-16 did in fact live in that building but was not home at the time. Defendant's own testimony reflects that he went upstairs with the two detectives and waited to the side with one of them while the other detective knocked on the door. On the return trip to headquarters, defendant testified he was allowed to purchase food at a gas station outside the presence of the police. Defendant testified at the hearing that he did not run away from the police because he was trying to "assist" them. We find that the above evidence is more reflective of a defendant cooperating with the police than one who is the subject of a murder investigation.
Defendant in his brief puts great emphasis on his 48-hour stay at police headquarters. Defendant cites numerous cases where lengthy stays and continual questioning have been found improper in the absence of probable cause. (See Dunaway v. New York (1979), 442 U.S. 200, 99 S.Ct. 2248, 60 L.Ed.2d 824; People v. Townes (1982), 91 Ill.2d 32, 61 Ill.Dec. 614, 435 N.E.2d 103, cert. denied (1982), 459 U.S. 878, 103 S.Ct. 174, 74 L.Ed.2d 143; People v. Travis (1984), 122 Ill.App.3d 671, 78 Ill. Dec. 535, 462 N.E.2d 654; People v. Fitzpatrick (1982), 107 Ill.App.3d 876, 63 Ill. Dec. 484, 438 N.E.2d 222; People v. Sturdivant (1981), 99 Ill.App.3d 370, 54 Ill.Dec. 829, 425 N.E.2d 1046.) These cases are distinguishable; unlike the present case, no testimony existed in those cases to reflect a defendant who was cooperating with the police in an ongoing and dangerous murder investigation.
Based on the evidence presented, the circuit court was entitled to find that over the course of 48 hours defendant provided information to the police which led to the discovery of other individuals. The detectives testified that defendant did not want these other individuals to know of his cooperation. The police, therefore, kept him secluded from these persons while the investigation continued. Only when these individuals gave versions of the night's events which conflicted with defendant's did defendant come under police scrutiny as a suspect. Defendant was then read his rights, elected to waive those rights, and thereafter made the confession in question.
For these reasons, we believe it was not manifestly erroneous for the circuit court to hold that defendant was not subjected to an illegal arrest.
Defendant next contends that his statements should have been suppressed on the grounds that they were involuntary. The State responds that the evidence demonstrates that defendant's statements were voluntary.
The State bears the burden of establishing by a preponderance of the evidence that a confessions is voluntary. (People v. Caballero (1984), 102 Ill.2d 23, 33, 79 Ill.Dec. 625, 629, 464 N.E.2d 223, 227, cert. denied (1984), 469 U.S. 963, 105 S.Ct. 362, 83 L.Ed.2d 298; People v. Mackey (1990), 207 Ill.App.3d 839, 859, 152 Ill. Dec. 762, 775, 566 N.E.2d 449, 462.) In making this determination, courts utilize the test of whether, considering the totality of the circumstances, the confession is found to have been made freely and voluntarily and without compulsion (Mackey, 207 Ill.App.3d at 859-60, 152 Ill.Dec. at 775, 566 N.E.2d at 462, citing People v. Prude (1977), 66 Ill.2d 470, 6 Ill.Dec. 689, 363 N.E.2d 371, cert denied (1977), 434 U.S. 930, 98 S.Ct. 418, 54 L.Ed.2d 291), or whether defendant's will was overborne at the time he confessed so as not to be the product of rational intellect and free will. (Mackey, 207 Ill.App.3d at 860, 152 Ill.Dec. at 775, 566 N.E.2d at 462, citing Townsend v. Sain (1963), 372 U.S. 293, 83 S.Ct. 745, 9 L.Ed.2d 770; People v. O'Leary (1970), 45 *510 Ill.2d 122, 257 N.E.2d 112.) A reviewing court will not disturb the trial court's determination in this regard unless it is against the manifest weight of the evidence (Caballero, 102 Ill.2d at 33, 79 Ill.Dec. at 629-30, 464 N.E.2d at 227-28; People v. Payton (1984), 122 Ill.App.3d 1030, 1033, 78 Ill.Dec. 424, 426, 462 N.E.2d 543, 545), and the court may consider the evidence heard by the trial court at the suppression hearing and at trial when evaluating the voluntariness of the confession. Caballero, 102 Ill.2d at 35-36, 79 Ill.Dec. at 631, 464 N.E.2d at 229.
In this case, the evidence demonstrates that defendant's statements were voluntary. At a minimum, under the applicable standard of review, the circuit court's determination is not against the manifest weight of the evidence.
According to the police, defendant was not given food the night he was brought in because it was already 8 p.m. and defendant made no request for food. The next day, after visiting Earl-16's residence, defendant testified that, at around noon or 1 p.m., he was allowed to purchase a candy bar and a 7-Up. Later that evening, he was given a Big-Mac and a 7-Up. The next day, September 27, defendant was again given food. Consistent with this evidence is defendant's own statement, read at trial, that he was provided food.
As for defendant's allegation of physical abuse and denial of washroom facilities, defendant's testimony is contradicted by that given by the various police officers, Assistant State's Attorney Mondello and Carlos Martinez. Defendant's own statement alleged that he was never beaten and was indeed provided washroom facilities. No evidence exits that defendant was denied the opportunity to sleep. Moreover, the physical injuries to which Carlos Martinez and Dr. Aaron Hamb testified do not necessarily support defendant's claimed version of his treatment. Martinez specifically asked defendant if he had any physical complaints or problems; defendant responded negatively. Martinez also failed to observe any physical signs of mistreatment which would support defendant's claim of frequent and harsh beatings.
The question of the voluntariness of defendant's statements became one of balancing the credibility of the various witnesses. Defendant's testimony was contradicted by numerous State witnesses and lacked clear, objective support. Moreover, defendant's credibility was called into issue in light of the numerous inconsistencies between his trial testimony and that given at the hearing. Given this court's inability to substitute its judgment for that of the circuit court, and the manifest weight of the evidence supporting the court's finding of voluntariness, we reject defendant's claim that his admissions were involuntary.
Turning now to defendant's final contention, defendant claims that he was denied a fair trial when the State argued in closing argument that Duane Sammons, or Cratches, consistently told the same story to the police and, therefore, was a more credible witness.
We dispose of this contention on the grounds of waiver. Defendant neither objected to the State's comments during closing argument nor specifically mentioned this error in his post-trial motion. The alleged error is, therefore, waived. (People v. Enoch (1988), 122 Ill.2d 176, 119 Ill.Dec. 265, 522 N.E.2d 1124, cert. denied (1988), 488 U.S. 917, 109 S.Ct. 274, 102 L.Ed.2d 263.) Moreover, the plain error exception does not require this court to consider the issue. The evidence in this case is not closely balanced, and the alleged error is not of such magnitude as to deprive defendant a fair trial. For these reasons, we deem defendant's argument waived.
For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the circuit court of Cook County is affirmed.
AFFIRMED.
CAMPBELL and O'CONNOR, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 2225747 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:54.425864+00 ===

587 N.E.2d 686 (1992)
In the matter of the Estate of Jacob Ray Brown. Appeal of Kermit Dale Brown, Appellant-Defendant.
No. 20A03-9106-CV-172.
Court of Appeals of Indiana, Third District.
February 27, 1992.
*687 Lee F. Mellinger, Mellinger & Bowers, Elkhart, for appellant.
James L. McCaslin, Nancy A. McCaslin, McCaslin, Smith & LaFountain, Elkhart, for appellee.
HOFFMAN, Judge.
Appellant-defendant Kermit Dale Brown appeals the trial court's decision granting final distribution of Jacob Ray Brown's estate and denying probate of a new will of Jacob Ray Brown submitted by appellant.
Appellant raises three questions for review:
(1) whether the trial court erred in failing to have a hearing before rendering judgment;
(2) whether the trial court erred in assuming jurisdiction over the estate of Jacob Ray Brown; and
(3) whether the trial court erred in characterizing appellant's submission of a later will as a will contest.
The facts relevant to this appeal reveal that Jacob Ray Brown died on December 1, 1989. On January 5, 1990, Nelvin Harmsen filed a petition to probate the will of Jacob Ray Brown in the Elkhart Superior Court No. 2. The court admitted the will to probate and appointed Nelvin Harmsen personal representative of the estate.
The court clerk published notice of the estate in the local newspaper on January 12 and 19, 1990. The clerk also mailed notice of the opening of the estate to Kenneth Ray Brown, Kevin Earl Defebaugh, Kathy Thompson, and appellant, Kermit Dale Brown, on January 18, 1990.
The personal representative filed an inventory of the estate on March 22, 1990. On May 1, 1990, the personal representative filed a petition with the court to sell real estate. A hearing was held on May 25, 1990 on the petition to sell real estate. Appellant was in attendance at the hearing. The petition was granted.
On August 24, 1990, the court approved the inheritance tax accounting, and on October 18, 1990, the sale of the real estate was approved. The personal representative filed the final account on October 2, *688 1990. A hearing on the final account was set for December 7, 1990. On November 8, 1990, the clerk mailed notice of the final account hearing and had the notice published in the local newspaper.
The cause was continued to December 14, 1990, due to a failure to notify appellant of the hearing. A hearing was held on the 14th and the final account approved and distribution ordered. However, the court was notified on December 28, 1990, that appellant was not sent notice of the hearing. The court, therefore, rescheduled a hearing on the final account for January 14, 1991. Appellant was notified of the hearing.
On January 14, 1991, appellant was in attendance at the hearing. He filed an objection to the final account. The court acknowledged that appellant had submitted a later will of Jacob Ray Brown to the court. Kenneth Ray Brown, an heir in the probated will, filed an objection to the later will. The personal representative filed a motion to dismiss petition to contest the will, a motion for summary judgment, and tendered the final decree to the court. The court took the matter under advisement. The next day the court entered the following order:
"The Court, having reviewed the objection and motion to dismiss the tendered will, further examining the will and letter in support thereof, finds that pursuant to Indiana law, to-wit: I.C. XX-X-X-XX, that the tendered will is not timely submitted for probate. The Court, therefore, grants the petition to deny probate of the tendered will. Final Account submitted and approved. Distribution ordered. Decree entered. Copy to all interested parties and Mr. McCaslin. Notice ordered. Petition for Compensation for Attorney filed and approved. Order to Compensate Attorney entered."
Although the petition filed by the personal representative on January 14, 1991 was designated "Motion to Dismiss Oral Petition to Contest Will and Motion for Summary Judgment," the petition was not asking for summary judgment as provided in Ind.Trial Rule 56. The petition asked the court to deny the probate of the later will offered by appellant. A hearing was provided on this matter on January 14, 1991, at the same time the court heard argument on the final account. The trial court acknowledged appellant's submission of the later will, acknowledged the objection filed to this later will by another heir, and heard the personal representative's argument as to why this later will should not be admitted to probate. The court took this issue and the issue of final distribution of the estate under advisement. The court then issued its order the next day. No error is presented here.
Appellant also claims that the court erred in granting approval of the final account without setting a hearing on appellant's objection to the final account. It was not necessary for the trial court to set a hearing on appellant's objection since the trial court admitted appellant's written objection at the hearing, asked appellant if he wished to add anything to this written objection, and heard the personal representative's reply to this objection. Therefore, appellant was given an opportunity to argue his objection to the final account at the hearing.
Furthermore, appellant's objection to the final account appears not to be a problem with the actual accounting of the estate, but with the judgment that was rendered against him for $28,167.01 at a guardianship hearing for Jacob Ray Brown in 1989. The trial court in 1989 ordered appellant to pay the guardian of Jacob Ray Brown's estate $28,167.01 for funds wrongfully taken from the estate and for attorney's fees the guardian incurred in litigation. This judgment was subtracted from appellant's portion of his inheritance in the final account.[1] Appellant attacks this judgment amount in his objection to the final accounting. However, this judgment is not subject to collateral attack. Appellant did *689 not avail himself of the appeals process after the judgment was rendered and, therefore, has waived any objection to the judgment amount. The personal representative of the estate was entitled to offset appellant's judgment against appellant's inheritance. IND. CODE § 29-1-17-6 (1991 Supp.)
For appellant's second issue, he questions the jurisdiction and venue of the Elkhart Superior Court No. 2. He alleges that the proceedings should have been held in Grant County, the county in which Jacob Ray Brown died.
Subject-matter jurisdiction cannot be waived and may be raised at any time. State ex rel. Dean et al. v. Tipton Circuit Ct. (1962), 242 Ind. 642, 181 N.E.2d 230. In this case, the Elkhart Superior Court had subject-matter jurisdiction over probate proceedings. IND. CODE § 33-5-13.1-1 (1991 Supp.) grants the Elkhart Superior Court the same subject-matter jurisdiction over probate proceedings as the Elkhart Circuit Court. IND. CODE § 33-4-4-3 (1991 Supp.). Therefore, since the trial court had jurisdiction of the class of cases to which this case belongs, the court properly had subject-matter jurisdiction of this case.
As for venue, IND. CODE § 29-1-7-1 (1988 Ed.) provides in relevant part:
"(a) The venue for the probate of a will and for the administration of an estate shall be:
(1) In the county in this state where the decedent had his domicile at the time of his death.
* * * * * *
(c) If it appears to the court at any time before the decree of final distribution in any proceedings that the proceeding was commenced in the wrong county or that it would be for the best interests of the estate, the court, in its discretion, may order the proceeding with all papers, files and a certified copy of all orders therein transferred to another court having probate jurisdiction, which other court shall thereupon proceed to complete the administration proceedings as if originally commenced therein."
Although subsection (a) makes it appear that venue is mandatory, subsection (c) implies that venue is waivable since a trial court has the discretion to transfer a case before final distribution. In this case, there is no evidence that appellant made any objection to venue prior to appeal. As the court in Tipton, supra, 242 Ind. at 653, 181 N.E.2d at 235-236 stated:
"In regard to jurisdiction of the particular case [venue], this Court has stated that timely and specific objection must be made to the lack of jurisdiction over the particular case where the court has jurisdiction of the general class of cases (i.e., subject matter), otherwise the objection is waived. [Citation omitted.]"
Therefore, although no statute in the Indiana Probate Code specifically discusses waiver of venue, it is only logical that the failure of a party to raise the issue before final distribution waives the issue from review. See 1 Henry's Indiana Probate Law and Practice, 8th Ed., § 301, at p. 86 & § 311, at p. 141 (1989).
Furthermore, there was sufficient evidence that Jacob Ray Brown's domicile was Elkhart County. Appellant makes the argument that residence is synonymous with domicile, State Election Bd. v. Bayh (1988), Ind., 521 N.E.2d 1313, 1317; therefore, since his father was residing in a nursing home in Grant County at his death, his father's domicile is in Grant County. While it is true that residence may be synonymous with domicile, the Bayh case holds that there are many factors that must be taken into consideration in making such a determination. For instance, a change of domicile requires:
"an actual moving with an intent to go to a given place and remain there. `It must be an intention coupled with acts evidencing that intention to make the new domicile a home in fact... . [T]here must be the intention to abandon the old domicile; the intention to acquire a new one; and residence in the new place in order to accomplish a change of domicile.' [Citation omitted.]"
*690 Id. at 1317. The individual facts of the case must be considered and physical presence in a place is only one consideration. Id. at 1318.
Jacob Ray Brown became a patient in the Veteran's Hospital in Grant County in 1981. He never became well enough to leave the hospital and eventually died in 1989. This alone is not sufficient evidence that Jacob Ray Brown had the intent to abandon his domicile in Elkhart County and establish his domicile in Grant County. In fact, Jacob Ray Brown had real estate and bank accounts in Elkhart County. A guardianship had been established in 1988 for him in Elkhart County. Additionally, appellant, who is now contesting domicile, attempted to probate a later will of Jacob Ray Brown in Elkhart County. Furthermore, this later will, executed in 1988, stated that the Jacob Ray Brown's residence was Elkhart County. Elkhart County was the domicile of Jacob Ray Brown.
Lastly, appellant avers that the trial court erred in considering his attempt to probate the later will a will contest. Indiana's statute governing will contests states:
"Any interested person may contest the validity of any will in the court having jurisdiction over the probate of the will within five (5) months after the date of the order admitting the will to probate by filing in the court the person's allegations in writing verified by affidavit, setting forth:
(1) the unsoundness of mind of the testator;
(2) the undue execution of the will;
(3) that the will was executed under duress or was obtained by fraud; or
(4) any other valid objection to the will's validity or the probate of the will.
The executor and all other persons beneficially interested in the will shall be made defendants to the action."
IND. CODE § 29-1-7-17 (1991 Supp.). It is subsection four of the statute that the parties are debating. Appellant claims that probating the later will over one year after the previous will was probated does not contest the previous will's validity. He asks this Court to adopt the reasoning in In Re Elliott's Estate (1945), 22 Wash.2d 334, 156 P.2d 427. The Elliott court was presented with a similar situation in which eight months after the first will was admitted to probate, a second will was offered for probate. The Washington probate statutes provided that a will contest had to be brought within six months of the probate of a will. A will contest could be brought for any "cause affecting the validity of the will." The Elliott court determined that the submitting of a later will for probate was not a will contest since it did not qualify as a challenge to the validity of the previous will.
"Furthermore, it is now our considered opinion that the term `validity,' as used in that clause in Rem Rev Stat § 1385, reading `or for any other cause affecting the validity of such will,' has reference only to the genuineness or legal sufficiency of the will under attack, raising the question whether the will is legally sufficient in form, contents, and compliance with the statutory requirements as to execution; it does not relate to the operative effect of the will or the period of its operation. In other words, the former will may, as in this instance, meet all the formal and statutory requirements necessary to make it a valid will when executed, but yet may cease to have any operative effect simply because it has been supplanted by a later will."
Id. at 357-358, 156 P.2d at 438. The Elliott court felt to hold otherwise would defeat the intentions of the testator.
Appellant points to other cases supporting this view.
Matter of Estate of Hansen (1979), 122 Ariz. 422, 595 P.2d 214;
80 Am Jur 2d Wills § 1053 (1975);
Annot., 107 ALR 255 (1937), supp. 157 ALR 1353 (1945).
However, Indiana does not submit to this view. A proceeding to substitute an unprobated will for one already probated is a will contest and must be brought within the statutory time period allotted for will contests.
*691 Bartlett et al. v. Manor et al. (1897), 146 Ind. 621, 45 N.E. 1060;
Burns v. Travis (1888), 117 Ind. 44, 18 N.E. 45;
In re Plummer, etc. v. Kaag, Admr., etc. et al. (1966), 141 Ind. App. 142, 219 N.E.2d 917;
2A Henry's Probate Law & Practice 7th Ed., § 1 at p. 732 (1979).
Although this rule has been repeated in dicta several times, the Bartlett court substantively decided the issue. According to the facts, James Bartlett executed two wills during his lifetime. The will drafted in 1861 revoked the will drafted in 1855. Upon his death, his wife, Mary, probated the 1855 will. Later, the 1861 will was discovered and the appellants, heirs of James Bartlett, attempted to probate this will after the time period allotted by statute for will contests had elapsed. The court explained that the appellants' action was in effect an action to "overthrow" the former will and establish the later will. Both were essential elements of appellants' cause of action and neither could have been held merely an incident to the other. The substitution of a later will, therefore, is a contest of the former will and must be brought within the statutory time period for will contests.
This right to contest probate is a statutory right; if the right is not exercised within the allotted time period, the right is lost. Therefore, the five-month time limitation is a statute of repose extinguishing the right, rather than a statute of limitation affecting the remedy.
Id. at 627, 45 N.E. at 1062;
2A Henry's Probate Law & Practice 7th Ed., § 3, at p. 741 (1979).
In conclusion, the Bartlett court stated:
"As long as the bar stands against the contest, we have a barrier against establishing a will to substitute for it. Substitution includes as much the overthrow of one as the proof that another existed. The relief sought includes both, and neither demand can stand without the other. Since contest is forbidden, and the will of 1855, with its probate, must stand, substitution becomes impossible."
Id. at 626, 45 N.E. at 1061. This the court so held despite the evidence of fraudulent concealment of the 1861 will that was presented to the court.
There was no evidence of fraudulent concealment of the later will in this case. Appellant explained to the court that due to his wife's illness he had been unable to offer the will for probate; although as appellee notes, appellant had been present in court for proceedings regarding the former will. Whatever the reason for appellant's delay in offering the later will to probate, it is a will contest that had to be brought within the five-month period allotted for will contests. IND. CODE 29-1-7-17. Appellant is attempting to substitute this later will for the former will. In doing so, appellant is attempting to revoke the former will which would render it invalid. This is a will contest that had to brought within the five months. Id. Therefore, the trial court correctly denied appellant's offer to probate the later will.
Since appellant is asking this Court to change the law on will contests in this state, his appeal will not be considered frivolous. Therefore, appellee's request for damages pursuant to Ind. Appellate Rule 15(G) is denied.
Affirmed.
STATON and BAKER, JJ., concur.
NOTES
[1]  There is an unexplained discrepancy between the trial court's award of $28,167.01 to the guardian of the Jacob Ray Brown's estate in 1989 and the subtraction of this judgment in the amount of $28,012.56 from appellant's share of the inheritance in the final account.

=== CASE 2225751 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:54.519265+00 ===

412 Mass. 147 (1992)
587 N.E.2d 767
COMMONWEALTH
vs.
THOMAS ROSA, JR.
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Suffolk.
December 5, 1991.
March 9, 1992.
Present: LIACOS, C.J., WILKINS, ABRAMS, NOLAN, & GREANEY, JJ.
Brownlow M. Speer, Committee for Public Counsel Services (Gordon A. Oppenheim, Committee for Public Counsel Services, with him), for the defendant.
Mark D. Zanini, Assistant District Attorney, for the Commonwealth.
ABRAMS, J.
Convicted of murder in the first degree, kidnapping, and aggravated rape, the defendant, Thomas Rosa, Jr., appeals. On appeal, he alleges that the prosecutor's summation was improper. Rosa asserts that the prosecutor made substantive use of testimony admitted solely to impeach the credibility of the defendant's wife. The defendant concludes *148 that the prosecutor's summation requires reversal. We agree. We comment briefly on some issues likely to recur at a retrial.
1. Procedural background. Rosa was first tried on these charges in late September and early October of 1986 in Superior Court for Suffolk County. At trial, one of the Commonwealth's witnesses was the defendant's wife, Olga Gomez (Gomez). She waived her spousal privilege not to testify at her husband's trial. The jury was unable to reach a verdict, and a mistrial was declared.
The defendant was tried a second time in November, 1986. At this trial, the Commonwealth again called Gomez to testify. She asserted her spousal privilege and declined to testify. The prosecutor sought, and was allowed by the judge, to introduce the transcript of Gomez's testimony at the first trial. A police detective then testified to a prior conversation with Gomez, in which, according to the detective, Gomez made statements inconsistent with her testimony.
2. Facts. A. The crime. The body of Gwendolyn Taylor, a nurse's aide, was found on the morning of Saturday, December 7, 1985, in a car in the parking lot of an automobile body shop on Norfolk Street in the Dorchester section of Boston. Taylor had been strangled with a sweater, and she was nude.
Police suspicion focused on Rosa as a result of reports by witnesses who saw the victim moments before her disappearance in the early morning hours of December 7, 1985. Taylor was expected home shortly after midnight at the apartment she shared with her boyfriend and two others. She had been accompanied to a corner close to the apartment by her boyfriend, who was spending that night at his aunt's nearby. Shortly thereafter, four witnesses saw Taylor in the company of a man, later identified by two witnesses as the defendant.[1]*149 Witnesses saw the two walking in the area near Taylor's apartment building. At one point, the two entered the vestibule of the apartment building. Witnesses variously recounted that Taylor's wrist was "locked" with the defendant's and that the defendant had his arm around Taylor.
As Taylor and the defendant moved about in the street below, Taylor's roommate, Charita Offley, watched from the apartment's window. Also watching from the window were Offley's sister, Donita, and Donita's boyfriend, Kevin Neil. At one point, Taylor, who seemed "scared" and "hysterical," saw the three in the window and asked them to give her $100. When they replied that they did not have the money, Taylor complained that she could not believe that they were "doing this to [her]." Offley recounted that, when she saw the victim and the defendant in the vestibule of the apartment building, the defendant held "a shiny object to [Taylor's] shoulder."
Neil went to his car to pursue Taylor and the defendant. However, he lost sight of them when they disappeared down an alley. This was the last time Taylor was seen alive. Police were called to the scene. Despite a lengthy search, they were unable to locate the victim. Taylor's body was found at about 9:40 A.M.
Chemical analysis of body fluids found in and on the victim were consistent with the defendant's blood type. Similarly, chemical analysis of stains on the defendant's jacket, seized later and identified by both Offley sisters as the one worn by the defendant on the night in question, revealed skin cells consistent with the victim's blood type.
B. The investigation. After Offley and her downstairs neighbor, Sharon Areh, had selected Rosa's photograph from an array, police detective Sergeant Charles Horsley met with the defendant and brought him to the police station. Fully apprised of his Miranda rights, Rosa made a statement. He told Horsley that he had been at home from about 11 P.M. on *150 Friday, December 6, until 10 A.M. on Monday, December 9. Rosa also told Horsley that, on the night in question, he had worn the same clothes he then had on, including a grey, full-length men's overcoat and grey, pinstriped pants. Horsley then placed the defendant under arrest.
That afternoon, Horsley went to an apartment on Colonial Avenue in Dorchester, where he spoke with Olga Gomez, the defendant's wife. According to Horsley's testimony, Gomez at that time told him that the defendant had been in and out of the apartment on the night of December 6 and 7. Horsley testified, however, that Gomez told him that Rosa left the apartment at 11:30 P.M. and returned sometime "[b]efore daybreak." Horsley apparently was also prepared to testify that Gomez told him that Rosa was her boyfriend.
Horsley obtained a search warrant for the Colonial Avenue apartment. When he returned to execute the warrant, he seized a jacket and a pair of blue jeans. Both Offley sisters later identified the jacket as the one they saw the defendant wearing on the evening in question, and it also matched Areh's description of the jacket. Donita Offley also told police that the defendant wore blue jeans that night.
3. The first trial testimony: Olga Gomez. Before December, 1985, when the case was scheduled for a probable cause hearing in District Court, and again before September, 1986, when the case was first tried in Superior Court, the police attempted to summons Gomez to court. These repeated attempts were unsuccessful, and, on September 29, 1986, the first judge issued a capias (arrest warrant) for Gomez. Pursuant to the warrant. Horsley and Detective Thomas Trailer established a stakeout at the home of the defendant's mother, where the detectives suspected Gomez was staying.
On October 1, 1986, at about 10 A.M., the two detectives saw Gomez leaving the residence in a taxi cab. With her were Gomez's cousin, Ms. Morales, Gomez's three year old son, Jonathan, and her one month old son, Emanuel. Gomez was on her way to the Dana Farber Institute, where both of her sons had medical appointments. Three year old Jonathan had recently had an operation for brain cancer and required *151 constant care. At the time, Jonathan was being fed through a tube inserted directly into his stomach. The tube required regular cleaning to prevent blockage.
The detectives stopped the taxi and Horsley informed Gomez that they had a warrant to bring her to court. Gomez explained the situation, and the police went with her to the hospital. Horsley explained to Gomez that, if she did not arrive at the courthouse by 4 P.M., there would be a bail hearing. According to Gomez, he also told her that she might be held at the courthouse overnight. The party arrived at the hospital at around 10:30 A.M. Horsley spoke with the children's doctor, and the doctor also spoke by telephone to the assistant district attorney handling the case. The doctor explained the seriousness of Jonathan's condition. At that time, arrangements were made for Jonathan to be admitted to the hospital in the event that Gomez was held overnight.[2] Both the police and the district attorney's office were aware of these arrangements.
Gomez left the hospital with the detectives at about 2:30 P.M. Accompanying Gomez were her son, Jonathan, and a pediatric social worker, Joanne Shanahan. Ms. Morales took Gomez's son Emanuel home with her. The party arrived at the Suffolk Superior courthouse at about 3 P.M. Gomez was taken to an office. Her husband's trial was underway in a courtroom nearby. Gomez waited in one room, while her son and Shanahan waited in another. Gomez spoke briefly with Horsley and at some length with Richard Sinnott, an investigator for the district attorney's office. In the course of the conversation, Sinnott read to Gomez the text of Detective Horsley's report of their conversation of December 9, 1985, in Gomez's apartment. After reading Gomez the report, Sinnott asked her whether she wanted to testify. According to Sinnott, Gomez said that she did. Sinnott had not explained the spousal privilege to Gomez.
*152 Gomez was called into the courtroom at about 3:50 P.M. By that time, Gomez's son Jonathan had been admitted by telephone to the hospital and had left the courthouse for the hospital in the care of Shanahan. After Gomez was sworn, defense counsel requested a voir dire to determine whether she wanted to invoke the spousal privilege. A voir dire was held. The assistant district attorney asked Gomez, "[A]re you going to testify in this case?" After some hesitation,[3] Gomez answered, "Yes."
The court allowed defense counsel leave to cross-examine Gomez. Over the prosecutor's objection, defense counsel was permitted briefly to explain the spousal privilege to Gomez.[4] Defense counsel then asked Gomez whether she would testify. Gomez first explained that she did not "want to" testify and, then, when pressed by the court, declared that she would not.[5] At this point, the prosecutor announced his intention *153 to introduce evidence that Gomez was not married to the defendant.[6]
The prosecutor explained that he intended to present testimony that Gomez, "by her own admissions," was not married to Rosa. The prosecutor further indicated that Gomez's claim of the spousal privilege was "going to involve her incriminating herself in a welfare fraud." The record reflects that the Commonwealth had evidence that, prior to the first trial, Gomez had represented to welfare officials that she was not married. The prosecutor therefore asked the court to appoint counsel for Gomez. The court did not do so.
The judge determined that consideration of the matter should be delayed until the next day when counsel could be appointed for Gomez. The prosecutor then asked the court to order Gomez held in custody overnight pursuant to the capias. The judge agreed. Defense counsel then raised the issue of bail. The judge ignored defense counsel, saying: "I'm holding her on the capias until tomorrow morning." Defense counsel twice asked to be heard, and the judge twice refused. Court officers took Gomez to a cell, where she remained for a few minutes. The judge then asked a court officer to bring *154 the jury back into the courtroom so that they could be excused for the evening.
Defense counsel then alerted the court that the defendant did not want his wife held overnight. Defense counsel further represented that the defendant wanted his wife to testify, a proposal to which defense counsel noted his strong objection. The judge reiterated his desire to postpone the matter until the next day. Defense counsel replied, "[N]o. [The defendant] doesn't want [Gomez] held. She has a child." The judge pointed out that, in his understanding, Gomez's son Jonathan was "taken care of ... for the evening." Defense counsel rejoined that the defendant nonetheless did not want his wife held and would prefer that she testify than be held overnight.
The court ordered Gomez brought back to the courtroom to discuss the matter with her husband. Defense counsel, not for the first time, noted his objection to the proceedings. Gomez and Rosa conferred, and Gomez then took the stand. The judge asked Gomez whether she was "willing" to testify in this case, to which she replied, "Yes." The judge then said: "And you understand, as I explained to you earlier, you have a privilege not to testify. But you wish to waive that privilege and testify, is that what you are saying to this court?" Again, "[Y]es" was Gomez's reply. The judge called for the jury. The judge then questioned Gomez about her ability to speak English. Gomez replied that she could "speak good." The judge then asked Gomez: "[Y]ou speak all right and you understand?" Gomez replied: "[A] little bit." The judge concluded: "[A]ll right. Well, let's see what happens."
Gomez took the stand. Her testimony was often confused, and, in places, self-contradictory. In answer to many questions, Gomez testified to a lack of memory. In an attempt to refresh her memory, the prosecution showed Gomez Detective Horsley's report of their December 9, 1985, conversation. With the aid of an interpreter, Gomez read the report. She did not remember telling Horsley, as Horsley later testified she did, that her husband had left the apartment at *155 11:30 P.M. on December 6, 1985. She also did not remember telling Horsley that her husband returned home "sometime before daybreak" on December 7, 1985, as Horsley testified she did. Gomez testified, instead, that Rosa left their apartment at 11 P.M. on the night in question but that "he came back right away." She testified that, on the night in question, the defendant was wearing a "grey jacket, coat and jeans."[7] Gomez admitted having shown Horsley a beige jacket, but denied telling him that it was the one her husband had worn on the night in question, as Horsley later testified. Finally, on cross-examination, Gomez testified that on December 9, 1985, Horsley had asked her yes-or-no questions, some of which she did not understand.[8] The first trial ended in a mistrial.
4. The second trial. At the second trial before a different judge, the Commonwealth called Gomez to the stand. She asserted her marital privilege not to testify against her husband. The judge ruled that the marriage was valid and that Gomez "voluntarily claimed the privilege." Gomez thus did not testify at the second trial. The Commonwealth then sought to introduce the transcript record of Gomez's testimony at the first trial as prior recorded testimony. Defense counsel objected, arguing that Gomez's waiver of the spousal privilege at the first trial had not been voluntary. A further voir dire was held, after which the judge ruled that Gomez's prior recorded testimony could be read to the jury as substantive evidence. After this testimony was admitted, the judge permitted Detective Horsley to recount his conversation with Gomez on December 9, 1985. According to Horsley, Gomez at that time made statements inconsistent with her recorded testimony. The judge limited the use of Horsley's testimony to impeaching Gomez's prior recorded testimony. Defense counsel objected to the introduction of Horsley's *156 impeachment testimony and moved to strike both it and Gomez's testimony from the record. Defense counsel argued that there was a substantial danger that the jury would consider Horsley's testimony "as substantive evidence." The judge denied the motion.
5. The prosecutor's closing argument. When the Commonwealth, pursuant to G.L.c. 233, § 23 (1990 ed.), introduces evidence of prior inconsistent statements of its own witness, the evidence is admissible only to impeach the credibility of the witness; it has no substantive value as evidence of the defendant's guilt. Commonwealth v. Thompson, 362 Mass. 382, 385-386 (1972), citing, inter alia, Commonwealth v. Turner, 224 Mass. 229, 237 (1916). Such statements are "inadmissible hearsay when offered to establish the truth of the matters asserted." Commonwealth v. Daye, 393 Mass. 55, 66 (1984), citing Commonwealth v. Bookman, 386 Mass. 657, 665 (1982). Commonwealth v. Thompson, supra at 386. Salonen v. Paanenen, 320 Mass. 568, 575 (1947). See P.J. Liacos, Massachusetts Evidence 141 (5th ed. 1981).
A prosecutor may not present to the jury evidence admitted for a limited purpose as if it were substantive evidence. See Commonwealth v. Bassett, 21 Mass. App. Ct. 713, 716 (1986) (closing argument "improper" where prosecutor used prior criminal convictions to establish defendant's propensity for violence); Commonwealth v. Felton, 16 Mass. App. Ct. 63, 66 (1983) (same). Cf. Commonwealth v. McDuffie, 16 Mass. App. Ct. 1016, 1018 (1983) (prosecutor's closing argument wrongly invited jury to consider rape incident report as substantive evidence rather than mere corroboration). "In analyzing a [defendant's] claim of improper argument, the prosecutor's remarks must be viewed in light of the `entire argument, as well as in light of the judge's instruction to the jury and the evidence at trial.'" Commonwealth v. Lamrini, 392 Mass. 427, 432 (1984), quoting Commonwealth v. Bourgeois, 391 Mass. 869, 885 (1984). Commonwealth v. Pontes, 402 Mass. 311, 316 (1988).
*157 We conclude that, in this case, the prosecutor[9] ignored the limited purpose for which Horsley's testimony was admitted to impeach the credibility of Gomez. Because the prosecutor repeatedly juxtaposed Gomez's reported statements to Horsley against the defendant's statements to the police, the jury were invited to use Horsley's testimony as evidence of the defendant's consciousness of guilt. Moreover, the prosecutor himself used Gomez's statements, as recounted on the stand by Horsley, to show that the defendant had the opportunity to commit the crime.
In his closing argument, the prosecutor made extensive use of Horsley's testimony about his conversation with Olga Gomez in her home on December 9, 1985. In responding to defense counsel's closing argument in which defense counsel contended that the case turned on identification, the assistant district attorney asserted that the case was also one "of time opportunity because we know that although Thomas Rosa told the police he was home from eleven o'clock that Friday night [December 6, 1985] and never left until the following Monday morning, we know that his wife told Sergeant Horsley something different, that he came home around eleven [P.M. on Friday, December 6] and left at about twelve-thirty [A.M. on Saturday, December 7] and didn't come back until daybreak." "So," the prosecutor concluded for the jury, "you've got the geographical opportunity all within three-tenths of a mile with each other and you've got the missing [period] of time, from twelve-thirty [A.M.]to daybreak, both geography and time, the opportunity which supports the identification."
In this portion of his summation, the prosecutor improperly used Horsley's account of Gomez's statement to him for two substantive purposes. First, he invoked Horsley's account of Gomez's statement to cast doubt on the defendant's proffered alibi. Second, he used it to support the eyewitness identification of Rosa as the man last seen with Taylor. Each of these is a substantive purpose unrelated to impeachment of *158 Gomez, and each is therefore impermissible. See Daye, supra at 66, and cases cited.
Later in his argument, the prosecutor returned to Horsley's testimony about his conversation with Gomez. The prosecutor noted that, when he was arrested, the defendant claimed to have been at home during the entire period of the incident.[10] The prosecutor proceeded to use a number of the details of Gomez's statement, as testified to by Horsley, to cast doubt on the defendant's alibi.[11] The prosecutor's use of Horsley's account of Gomez's statement to rebut the defendant's allegedly false alibi is clearly an impermissible substantive use of Horsley's testimony. The prosecutor's closing argument urged the jury to consider, as substantive evidence, Horsley's testimony admitted for the limited purpose of impeaching Gomez's prior recorded testimony. "We cannot say that the evidence and the prosecutor's [use of it in his] argument did not have the effect the Commonwealth intended it to have." Commonwealth v. Reed, 397 Mass. 440, 443 (1986).
*159 The Commonwealth maintains that the prosecutor only discussed Horsley's testimony near the end of his argument, in the course of attacking the defendant's alibi as corroborated by his wife's statement. This argument fails to persuade for three reasons. First, in responding to defense counsel's assertion that the case turned on identification testimony, the prosecutor explained that the case was also one "of time opportunity." His only support for this position was Horsley's report of Gomez's statement. Second, in attacking the alibi, the prosecutor did not contrast Gomez's prior statement to Horsley against her recorded testimony. Instead, as the Commonwealth itself notes, the prosecutor juxtaposed Gomez's prior statement to Horsley against the defendant's statement to the police. Third, as we read the record, the bulk of the prosecutor's substantive use of the impeachment occurred at the climax of his argument. Rather than minimizing the prejudice, as the Commonwealth contends, the record appears to show that the substantive impact of the improper argument was heightened by its dramatic position in the peroration.
At the conclusion of the prosecutor's summation, defense counsel timely objected.[12] Defense counsel requested a curative instruction, and the judge gave such an instruction.[13] Also in the charge, the judge repeated the instruction, first given before closing arguments, that closing arguments are not evidence. The instructions made no reference to the content of either closing argument.
The Commonwealth argues that the judge's careful instructions on the limited use of prior inconsistent statements cured any prejudice resulting from the prosecutor's improper *160 argument. This contention is unpersuasive. By giving thorough limiting instructions, the judge did her best to ensure that the jury understood the limited purpose of impeachment testimony. Generally, "[w]e presume, as we must, that a jury understands and follows limiting instructions." Commonwealth v. Jackson, 384 Mass. 572, 579 (1981), citing Commonwealth v. Leno, 374 Mass. 716, 719 (1978). Commonwealth v. Helfant, 398 Mass. 214, 228 (1986). The substantive emphasis that the prosecutor placed on Horsley's testimony, however, especially in light of its apparent importance to the Commonwealth's case, weakens this presumption. "[We cannot] conclude that the instructions of the judge, which limited the statement to impeachment purposes, sufficiently protected the defendants from such a highly prejudicial statement." Commonwealth v. Ferrara, 368 Mass. 182, 194 (1975).
The Commonwealth asserts that, even if the judge's instruction did not cure the error, there was no prejudice to the defendant because the evidence against him was overwhelming. We cannot so conclude in this case. The first trial ended in a mistrial, as the jury was unable to reach a verdict. Thus, to a jury, the case against the defendant was not overwhelming. We therefore cannot "say `with fair assurance,' that the jury did not attach substantial significance to evidence" that the defendant's whereabouts were unaccounted for during the critical period. Commonwealth v. Reed, 397 Mass. 440, 443 (1986), quoting Commonwealth v. Schulze, 389 Mass. 735, 741 (1983). See Kotteakos v. United States, 328 U.S. 750 (1946). A new trial is required.
6. Issues likely to recur at a retrial. The defendant asks that we rule that Gomez's prior recorded testimony not be admitted in the event that she does not testify at a new trial. The Commonwealth is correct in arguing that, generally, a "defendant has no standing to contest an alleged infringement of the privilege as it applies to testimony of his spouse." P.J. Liacos, Massachusetts Evidence 178 (5th ed. 1985 Supp.). Commonwealth v. Szczuka, 391 Mass. 666, 677 (1984). Commonwealth v. Paszko, 391 Mass. 164, 190 *161 (1984). Commonwealth v. Stokes, 374 Mass. 583, 595 (1978). This is because "[t]he privilege is that of the spouse called and not of the defendant." Commonwealth v. Spencer, 212 Mass. 438, 451 (1912). A "defendant has no standing to contest an alleged infringement of a privilege he could not have exercised." Paszko, supra at 190. That principle, however, does not end our inquiry.[14]
Gomez's treatment at the first trial raises a serious question of fairness. Gomez was at the courthouse by 3 P.M. and was called to testify before 4 P.M., but no lawyer was appointed to represent her, and there was no hearing to set bail.[15] Even after the prosecutor alerted the judge that Gomez's invocation of the privilege might incriminate her in a welfare fraud case and urged the judge to appoint counsel for her, the judge did not do so. Although there was ample time to attend to these matters, Gomez was ordered held overnight without representation, without a hearing, and without any consideration of bail.[16] See section 3, supra at 153.
These facts raise the question whether Gomez's decision to waive the spousal privilege and testify at her husband's first trial was voluntary. If her decision was not voluntary, then Gomez's prior recorded testimony should not be admitted at the retrial.[17] Therefore, prior to the retrial, the judge should determine whether Gomez voluntarily chose to waive her *162 spousal privilege and testify at her husband's first trial. If, after hearing, the judge determines that Gomez's decision to testify was involuntary, then the use of her testimony offends fundamental fairness. Cf. LaFrance v. Bohlinger, 499 F.2d 29 (1st Cir.), cert. denied sub nom. LaFrance v. Meachum and Meachum v. LaFrance, 419 U.S. 1080 (1974) (due process forbids use of defense witness's coerced statement to police to impeach defense witness). Vargas v. Brown, 512 F. Supp. 271 (D.R.I. 1981) (same).
If after hearing, however, the judge concludes that Gomez's waiver of the spousal privilege at the first trial was voluntary, portions of her testimony may be admitted substantively at the retrial. We have reviewed Gomez's prior recorded testimony to assess its relevance.[18] Most of her testimony at her husband's first trial was confused and self-contradictory. She repeatedly testified to failures of memory, and attempts to refresh her memory were unsuccessful. However, in her prior recorded testimony, Gomez said that her husband was wearing blue jeans on the night of the crime. Gomez also testified that, in response to Horsley's request to see the jacket her husband wore that night, she produced a tan jacket later identified as the one worn by the victim's abductor. Gomez also modified that statement by explaining that she had told Horsley "maybe [Rosa] was wearing that jacket." She testified that she "took that coat [out of the closet], but [Rosa] didn't wear it because it was too big for him."[19]
*163 Apart from these two items, there is nothing in Gomez's prior recorded testimony that properly aids the prosecution. A fair reading of Gomez's testimony reveals that most of it is either too confused to be understood or contrary to the prosecutor's theory of the case.[20] At a retrial, the primary reason for introducing most of Gomez's confusing (and, in places, exculpatory) testimony would be to provide a foundation for admission of Horsley's impeachment testimony. The Commonwealth, of course, may not introduce Gomez's prior recorded testimony solely for the purpose of impeaching it. See Commonwealth v. Benoit, 32 Mass. App. Ct. 111, 114-117 (1992).
We therefore conclude that the only portions of Gomez's prior recorded testimony that may be offered as substantive evidence are her statements about her husband's blue jeans and tan jacket, including her explanation with regard to the jacket. All other portions of Gomez's prior recorded testimony are excluded. The admission of Horsley's testimony to impeach Gomez's prior recorded testimony similarly is limited to questions relating to the blue jeans and tan jacket.[21]
The judgments are reversed and the verdicts set aside. The case is remanded to the Superior Court for both a determination of the voluntariness of Gomez's waiver of the spousal privilege and a new trial.[22]
So ordered.
NOTES
[1]  On the morning of December 7, 1985, Taylor's roommate, Charita Offley, picked the defendant's photograph from an array and stated with certainty that he was the man she saw with Taylor. She also made a "positive" in-court identification. A neighbor, Sharon Areh, who lived in a first-floor apartment in the same building as Offley and the victim and witnessed many of the events in question, also made photographic and in-court identifications of the defendant. On appeal, the defendant does not challenge the identifications.
[2]  Richard Sinnott, an investigator for the district attorney's office testified on voir dire that he "probably" told the attending physician over the telephone that Gomez might be held overnight.
[3]  The relevant portion of the transcript reads:
THE PROSECUTOR: "And, Olga Gomez, are you going to testify in this case?"
THE PROSECUTOR:    "And, Olga Gomez, are you going to testify
in this case?"
THE WITNESS:       (No response)
THE JUDGE:         "Did you hear the question?"
THE WITNESS:       "Yes."
THE JUDGE:         "We're waiting for your answer."
THE WITNESS:       "Yes."
DEFENSE COUNSEL:   "May the record indicate that the witness
put her head down for twenty seconds; is
crying at the present time. . . ."
[4]  According to both her own testimony and defense counsel's representations to the court in the course of the second trial, Gomez had discussed the spousal privilege with her husband's defense counsel prior to the first trial.
[5]  The transcript of the voir dire recounts the following exchange during the cross-examination of Gomez.
DEFENSE COUNSEL:   "Do you know that all you have to say is, `I
don't want to testify' and you can leave the
court room."
THE JUDGE:         "You, Miss Gomez, you've indicated, when
[the prosecutor] asked you: Were you willing
to testify in this case. And you said you
were. Right?"
THE WITNESS:       "Mm-hmm."
THE JUDGE:         "Now, let me ask you. First, let me say this
to you, that you have a privilege that you
can exercise here. If you, in fact, are
married to Mr. [Rosa] and you are his wife,
you have a privilege not to testify against
him; but you can waive that privilege. You
can give that privilege up, as you seem[ed]
to indicate when [the prosecutor] asked you:
Will you testify in this case."
"Are you going to testify in this case?"
THE WITNESS:       "I don't want to."
THE JUDGE:         "You may not want to, but are you going to?"
THE WITNESS:       "No."
THE JUDGE:         "You're not going to?"
THE WITNESS:       "No."
THE JUDGE:         "All right."
[6]  It is undisputed that, at this time, the prosecution had been presented by defense counsel with a marriage license evidencing that Thomas Rosa, Jr., and Olga Gomez were married on May 26, 1984.
[7]  Rosa told the police that, on the night in question, he had been wearing a grey topcoat and grey pants.
[8]  Horsley later testified that Gomez had no difficulty speaking English and that he had no difficulty understanding her.
[9]  Appellate counsel was not trial counsel.
[10]  As he did not testify, the defendant did not repeat this claim at trial.
[11]  The prosecutor said: "Sergeant Horsley goes and talk[s] to Olga Gomes, the wife.... And she says he came home from the track at about eleven, eleven-thirty, stayed for about an hour, an hour and a half, which puts it to twelve, twelve-thirty, left and didn't come back until daybreak. Does that fit, ladies and gentlemen, with the timeframe? We've got him at the 130 Talbot hallway at about one o'clock. She's got him leaving his house ... at twelve-thirty. It fits. It clicks. He lives one-tenth of a mile from where [Taylor lived]. The one tenth of a mile is right where [Taylor's boyfriend] walked her home. So at twelve-thirty, even though he's telling the police that he was home from eleven o'clock on, the wife tells Sergeant Horsley he left at twelve-thirty. Doesn't the time frame work perfectly, putting it at [Taylor's home] at one o'clock? And again, after they walked down that alleyway and after he's taking her to her grave in that cemetery, doesn't it fit that the wife is telling Sergeant Horsley he didn't get back until daybreak? That's when he raped her and killed her. But he wants the police to believe he never left that apartment that night, was there until the following Monday morning. But his wife told the police that, in fact, he went out and didn't come back until daybreak. And they said to Olga Gomez, `What was he wearing?' Olga Gomez is the one, ladies and gentlemen, his wife is the one that told Sergeant Horsley where the brown jacket was and that's the one he was wearing ..." (emphasis added).
[12]  Having requested a curative instruction at the end of the prosecutor's closing argument, defense counsel did not waive the right to appeal by failing to object during the course of the argument. Commonwealth v. Haas, 373 Mass. 545, 559 (1977), and cases cited.
[13]  Before allowing Horsley to testify about Gomez's prior statement, the judge properly instructed the jury as to the limited use of prior inconsistent statements. The judge repeated the instruction once during Horsley's testimony. Finally, as requested by defense counsel, the judge included a thorough instruction in the charge to the jury.
[14]  A defendant, of course, may object on evidentiary grounds. See infra.
[15]  Moments before announcing that he was "holding [Gomez] on the capias until" the next day, the judge explained that "[t]he best thing ... to do is to put it over until tomorrow morning, get counsel appointed, and ... have a full hearing on this matter."
[16]  If, after hearing, the judge had concluded that Gomez was a material witness, he could have held her by following the procedures set out in G.L.c. 276, §§ 45-51 (1990 ed.). Among other things, the statute would have required the judge to appoint counsel, hold a hearing, and then order "such surety as the court deems necessary for [the witness's] appearance." G.L.c. 276, § 47 (1990 ed.). The judge took none of these steps.
[17]  Although the judge at the second trial allowed the prosecutor to read Gomez's prior recorded testimony to the jury, she did not specifically find that Gomez's waiver of the privilege at the first trial was voluntary.
[18]  At trial, the defendant objected to the admission of his wife's prior recorded testimony on the ground of relevance, and we consider the admissibility of the prior recorded testimony on that basis.
[19]  Gomez testified that, on the night of the crime, the defendant left their apartment twice. Her testimony as to the time at which he left and returned is so confused as to be virtually incomprehensible. To the extent that any probative evidence emerged from her testimony, Gomez appears to say that her husband first left the apartment at 7 P.M. to go to the dog racing track. He returned sometime around 10 P.M. According to Gomez, her husband left the apartment shortly thereafter and returned "around eleven, eleven thirty."
[20]  For example, on the question of time opportunity, Gomez's prior recorded testimony places the defendant in his apartment at 11:30 P.M. (or immediately thereafter) on the night of the crime. See note 11, supra.
[21]  If Gomez testifies at the retrial, the prosecution may of course impeach her. Similarly, should the defendant introduce portions of the prior recorded testimony, the Commonwealth may impeach those portions.
[22]  The evidentiary rulings complained of were within the discretion of the judge. While not artfully phrased, the question put to the expert was well within his knowledge and required no special expertise. Next, the cross-examination of the lone defense witness did not implicate either the defendant's failure to call witnesses or his failure to testify. The character witness could be asked whether he had any information about the defendant's whereabouts at the time of the crime.

=== CASE 9740992 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:46:59.842364+00 ===

SATHRE, Justice.
■ This is a will contest in which the validity of an instrument purporting to be the last will and testament of Henry Burris deceased is involved. The proponent of the will Mártha B. Whelan is the daughter of the testátor and is the sole beneficiary under the 'terms of the will and nominated ‘as executrix thereof. The contestants are seVén sons of the testator and the children of' two deceased sons. The will was ad-Mittedfo probate in' the 'county court of Grand Forks 'County, North Dakota, upon petition by the proponent Martha B. Whel-an who was also appointed executrix of the will..
. The contestants .filed objections to the admission-of the will to probate on the following groundsi,
1. That it is signed by the testator using ■a matk. ’ ■
*8862. ■ That its provisions were induced by undue influence exercised on the testator by the proponent; and ; .,.
3. That the terms of the will are unnatural. ’
The county court made its order admitting the will to probate and appointing the proponent as executrix- thereof.
The contestants appealed from the order of the county court to the district court of Grand Forks County. . The case was tried to the court and a jury. The jury returned a verdict that the will was invalid, and that it was not the will of the testator Henry Burris and judgment was entered upon the -verdict. Thereafter the proponent made a motion-for .judgment notwithstanding the verdict which was thereafter granted by the' district court. The contestants appealed from the order of the district court granting proponent’s motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict and from the order vacating the judgment entered upon the verdict.
It is contended by the contestants, first that the will was not subscribed and executed as provided by law, that the testator signed by mark instead of subscribing his name thereto. Second that the will was the result of undue influence, exercised upon him by his daughter Martha the proponent of the will and. sole beneficia-ry thereof.
The record shows that testator was one of the early settlers in Walsh County having arrived in t}ie vicinity of the town of Conway in 1882. He was engaged in farming and lived on his farm or in a home in Conway until 1948. During that time he had acquired five quarter sections of land and had accumulated a considerable amount of personal property consisting of cash, bonds, and stocks. ■
His wife died in 1933 and from that time until'1948-he lived more or less alone. A son, Will Burris, who was unmarried, spent considerable time with his father during that time. In 1-948 the testator had a stroke which resulted in paralysis of his leff side, and from that time on he was unable to take care of himself.
Martha B. Whelan daughter of the testator and the proponent of the will had left home before the death of her mother in 1933 and was employed for some time in a bank at Grafton, North Dakota. Thereafter she left the state and went to the state of'New York where she was married and established her home. - A son of- the testator, Charlie Burris, also lived in New York. Upon hearing of His father’s illness he came back to visit him. Money for transportation by plane was sent to the daughter Martha' B. Whelan and- she together with the wife of Charlie- Burris went by plane to the home of her father at Conway, North Dakota. Martha B. Whe-lan arrived in Conway in November 1948. Arrangements were then made that she was to-take care of her .father at his home in Conway and that she was to receive $35 per week for her-services. .
She stayed with' her father at Conway and took care of him until' September 1949 when they moved to the City of' Grand Forks where they lived until her father’s death June 25, 1951. They rented a house known in the record as the Fladeland house. They lived in the Fladeland house until some time in the summer of 1950 when they moved to a house at 719 Maple Avenue. . -They continued to live at the -Maple Avenue house for some time after which they moved to a-house owned by one Jane Malone located at'1629-6th Avenue North, Grand -Forks, 'North Dakota. While the ■testator and''his daughter Martha were ■living in Grand Forks, Martha’s husband and son Joe were also living with them. The will of the-testator which is the subject of this contest was executed on November 22nd, 1950 at the house located at Maple Avenue. It was prepared by W. T. DePuy a lawyer at Grafton, North Dakota. Mr. DePuy testifying for the proponent, .stated that shortly before November. 22nd, 1950 he received a telephone call, evidently from Martha B. Whelan, stating that her father wanted to see him. He happened to see Martha Whelan personally on -November *88721st the day before the execution of the will at which time he was told by her that her father wanted to see him. He drove to Grand Forks in the afternoon of November 22, 1950. He stopped at the Ryan hotel and made some ■ telephone calls after which he drove to the house on Maple Avenue North. After arriving at the Maple Avenue house he called Dr. Leigh of Grand Forks requesting him to come to the home of the testator. He had previously called C. F. Peterson of Grand Forks, a lawyer, requesting him to come to the home of the testator. G. F. Peterson and one Charles H. Fee arrived at the Maple Avenue house shortly after the arrival of Mr. DePuy and Dr. Leigh arrived a few minutes later. These four men DePuy, Peterson, Fee and Dr. Leigh then went into the bedroom of the testator, Henry Burris and Mr. Peterson closed the bedroom door. They visited with the testator for a few minutes and then -Mr. DePuy asked him what he wished him to do. He replied that he wished,to .make a will and wanted Mr. DePuy to prepare it for him. Mr. DePuy had with him a blank legal form and a scratch pad. He made notations on his scratch pad of the instructions and directions given by the testator. Thereafter he prepared the will in his hándwritirig in accordance with the instructions given by the testator. The testator gave the legal descriptions of the real property owned by him and he also gave the names of all of his children and of his grandchildren, ■ The will provided first, for the payment of all of his funeral expenses and all of his debts. It next provided for a bequest of $50 to St. Marks Church, Conway, North Dakota for the repose of the souls of himself and deceased relatives. The will then provided as follows:
“I give, devise, and bequeath to my daughter, Martha B. Whelan, all of the residue of my property, both real and personal, of ' every name, nature and description and wherever situated to have and to hold the same to said Martha B. Whelan forever. I further direct that included in my estate shall be included the indebtedness of my sons to me in the following amounts to-wit:”
Then follow the names of the sons and the amount that each one owed him. The will provided further: . .,
“I delibérately omit to provide for' my sons, Thomas Burris, Henry J. Burris, Frances Albert Burris, William, Burris, Wallace J. Burris, and Leo Burris and for my grandchildren Mildred McCann, Gertrude Narlock, Loren Burris, Gerald Burris and Henry Burris.”
Then follows the nomination and appointment of Martha. B. Whelan to be the executrix of the last will and testament, “revoking all former wills I made, she to serve without bond.”
■ After the will was prepared Mr. DePuy read it to the testator and the testator declared to the witnesses that it was his last will and requested them to sign the same as witnesses thereto. At the time that the 'will was prepared the testator was sitting up in bed propped up by pillows behind his back. When the will was prepared and had been read to- the testator, Mr. DePuy placed the scratch pad in front of him and he attempted to sign his name thereon, but his left side was paralyzed and because of extreme tremor in his right hand he was unable to write his name legibly. The will was then placed in front of him and he drew a mark diagonally with a pen; the position of the will .was then changed and he drew another line diagonally resulting in a cross. Mr. DePuy then signed his name as witness to the mark of the testator. All four of the men, that is DePuy, Fee, Peterson and Dr. Leigh signed the will as' witnesses at the request of the testator in his presence arid iri the presence of each other. The testimony of Charles Fee and C.’ F. Peterson, testifying as witnesses for the proponent,; was to the-- same effect as the testimony given by -Mr. DePuy. ■ They stated that the will was read to the testator by Mr. DePuy arid- that he declared that it was his-last will- and testament'.and requested them to sign as witnesses thereto *888and that they sjgned.it in his presence and in. the presence of the othe.r-witnesses.. Dr; Leigh testified that he was a medical doctor residing at Grand Forks and that he had resided there for several years. He stated that he knew thé' testato'r Henry Burris in his life time and that he took care of him-on several occasions-before entering the navy;' that he was present in the bedroom where the-, will" of the testator was executed and that he signed his name as witness thereto; that he was in the room and-saw Mr. Burris sign the instrument-by mark. He was asked whether or not, the testator at the time he placed his mark-on that instrument, was mentally competent to which Dr. Leigh replied tliat in his opinion he was mentally competent. Dr. Leigh stated further that at the time the will was executed the left side o"f the testator was completely paralyzed and that he was unable to use his left-hand; that he had a very-severe tremor of his right-hand.; .that he had an object in. his 'hand which he thought was a pipe but that it--was.,difficult for him to- get it to" his mouth. His tremqr was - very severe and he was unable to control his hand with any accuracy.- On cross examination Dr. Leigh stated that he had called on Henry Burris, the testator, twice on November 22nd the day of the execution of .the -will. We quote from his testimony:
“Q. So you saw Henry Burris twice on the 22nd day pf November? A. Yes.
“Q. And -you , didn’t see . Henry-. Burris then again until March first, • 1951? A. That is right.,
“Q. So when you saw Henry Burris on that day, what’ was his physical condition as far as his health was concerned ? He was not a sick man ? A. ‘ Sickness is relative, of course.’ He was sick with old age.
“Q. And as far-as your observation there his condition was that — he was 91 -years old at that time, he was an old man? A. . Yes, he was that.”
The proponent then rested.
Section -56-0302, NDRC 1943 provides how wills must be executed and attested. It reads as follows:
“Every will, other than an olo-graphic will and a nuncupative will, must bé executed and attested as follows :
“1. - It must be. subscribed at the end thereof by the testator himself, or some person, in his presence, and by his direction, must subscribe his name thereto;
“2. It must be subscribed in the' presence of the attesting witnesses, or' be acknowledged by the testator to them to have been made by him or by his authority;
“3. The testator, at the time of subscribing or acknowledging the same, must declare to the attesting witnesses, that the -instrument is his will;
“4. There must be two attesting witnesses, each of whom must sign his name as a witness at the end of the will, at the testator’s request, and in his presence;
“5a A witness to a written will must write, with his name, his place of residence ; and
“6. A person who subscribes a. testator’s name' by his direction must write his own name as a witness-to' the will. A violation of this subsection does not affect the validity of the will.”
Subdivision 4 of Section 1-0149, NDRC 1943 provides:
“ ‘Signature’ or ‘subscription’ shall include ‘mark’ when the person cannot write, his name being written near- it and written by a person who writes his own name as a witness.”
Section 730¾, Compiled Laws of 1913 (now Section 1-0149) was considered by this court in the case of In re McKee’s, Estate, 72 N.D. 86, 4 N.W.2d 652, 656. Im that case it said:
*889"It seems to us that when that. portion of Section 7309 with which'' we are here concerned was enacted, its purpose was to safeguard signatures hy mark. It made a signature hy mark thus witnessed prima facie ■of the same worth as a signature by writing. But it did not exclude other proof of a signature' by mark alone. 'So, where a will or other writing is offered and the signature thereto, is by •mark, witnessed as provided in the statute, no further proof is required that the mark is the maker’s signature unless.that fact is challenged.”
We think therefore that the signature by Henry Burris, by mark was sufficient to comply with the requirements of the statute. We are also of the opinion that in other respects , the -execution of the will complied with the formal requirements of Section 56-0302 quoted herein. No question was raised by the contestants as tó the testamentary capacity of the testator;
The only issue submitted to the jury by the trial court was therefore whether or riot the will of Henry Burris was the result of undue influence exerted upon him by Martha B. Whelan, the sole beneficiary thereunder. The jury found that the will was invalid and the result of such undue influence. Proponent made a motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict. The motion was granted and the trial court held, as a matter of law that the evidence was insufficient to establish undue influence by the proponent and judgment holding the will valid was entered accordingly. The only question for' determination is therefore whether the evidence was sufficient to raise an issue of fact for submission to the jury on the question of undue influence. The general rule is that the elements necessary to be established to warrant the rejection of a will on the ground of undue influence are:
1. That the testator was subject to such influence;
"2. That the opportunity to exercise it existed; ' ' ■
3;, That there was a disposition .to exercise it, and ,
4. That the result appears to be .the effect of such influence.
The proponent having established a prima facie case the burden was on the contestants to establish by a preponderance of the evidence each'of , the four elements stated above. Suspicion or supposition of undue influence is not sufficient to require the submission of the question to a jury or to sustain a verdict. In re Estate of Bayer, 119 Neb. 191, 227 N.W. 928; In re Estate of Bainbridge, 151 Neb. 142, 36 N.W.2d 625.
.. In order .to determine the questions thus raised it will be necessary to..review the testimony of the witnesses, somewhat in detail. Thp record is voluminous, the trial in district court having consumed tyelve days. More than , twenty witnesses testified in .the case and a large number of exhibits of different types and character were introduced in evidence.
The proponent, Martha B. Whelan was called by contestants for cross examination under the statute.'- She stated that when she came to take care of her father in September 1948 her father had'five-quarter sections-of land,--some bonds;- mortgages and'cash; that he álso had a housé in the totvn of Conway which was his only home. She stated that "she lived with her father at Conway and took care of him there, until the fall of 1949; that while living at Conway one Mrs. Stringem was employed to assist her in taking care of her father, and she also employed a Mrs.- Siridal Brown. In September 1949 she moved with her father to the city of Grand Forks and rented a' house known in the record as the Fladeland house paying rent at $125 per month. They lived there until July 1950 when they moved to a house at 719 Maple Avenue 'where the will of Henry Burris was prepared and executed November 22, 1950.’ In the fall of 1949 her father gave *890her a deed to the home at Conway. She stated that her brothers Leo and Will.would come to the Fladeland house and when they came there were trouble and arguments. ' ■
Jane Malone, a witness for the contestants testified in substance as follows: She was a .registered nurse and was employed by Martha B. Whelan to take care of the testator after he was moved to Grand Forks; that she started her employment September 1, 1950 and continued in the employment until the death of the testator on June 25, 1951. She would come to the home of the testator upon telephone calls from Mrs. Whelan, — usually between 9 and- 9:30 in the morning. When she first went there she stayed a whole week, and after that her employment averaged four or five days a week. Shé stated that the testator’s condition was good for á man of his age, but his eyesight was poor and his hearing was impaired. When she arrived in the morning ‘ she gave him his breakfast and otherwise took care of him, as he was unable to leave the bed. Mrs. Whelan (Martha) was away the first week that Miss Malone was employed, which would be the first week in September 1950. After the return of Mrs. Martha Whelan the witness heard many conversations- between Mr. and Mrs. Whelan .and their son Jr., and the conversations had to , do with the property or estate of Henry Burris the testator. The first .of these conversations took place in the Fladeland house. Sometimes the conversations were had in the presence of the testator and sometimes just between themselves. The. witness was asked: “Will you state to the- court and jury what this conversation was? A. Well, she said her father had given so much money to her brothers and she had not received any .money, only her salary and she thought she should have a right to whatever money her father had, and property.”
With reference to a subsequent conversation between Martha Whelan and Miss Malone, Martha said she had not received any money from her father, and she had been living away from here and she thought it was time she received some money.
Miss Malone testified further:
“Q. Did you hear her (Martha Whelan) state or talk to her father on several occasions during the time that they were at the Maple house? A. Yes. (Objected to as repetition. She has said that. She has answered.)
“Q. Will you state to the court and jury- what you heard Martha Whelan tell her father ? A. She told him that he should have an attorney come and make a-will and provide for her.
“Q. . Did you hear her make any statement as to what the will should contain, what should be in the will? A.' Yes,
“Q. Tell the court and jury in your own words what you heard Martha Whelan say to her father ?
“Mr. Bangs. If you could fix the time more definite I would appreciate it.
“Mr. Stokes. Within a period of three weeks. There were several conversations during that period of three weeks.
“Mr. Bangs. Is that what Mrs. Whelan said?
“Mr. Stokes. Yes.
“Mr. Bangs. How long before? Can’t we get it fixed?
“Mr. Stokes. Q. Did you hear any conversation like, that the day before or the day on which the will was made ? A. I won’t say .that, the day before.
“Q. You say you heard it the day before? A. Yes.
“Q. And would you state what you heard Martha Whelan say to her father the day before ? That would be the 21st day of November. A. Well, she told him that the men were coming there, named them, and said there is *891going to be a will made providing for her. ■
“Q. ' Did you overhear Henry Burris say anything during the conversation? A. • Well, I don’t remember.
“Q. This conversation . took place on the 21st. Did you hear any conversation on any day prior to the 21st? A. 'Yes. • ;
"Q. With repect to the will between Martha Whelan and Henry Burris? Yes.
“Q. And would you state to -the court and jury as near as — can you give any particular date or approximate date prior to the 21st on which you heard this further conversation? A. There was some ■ conversation every day for at least two weeks before the 22nd.
“Q. Will you state to the court as nearly as you can in substance what that conversation was ? A. Practically the same, there must be a will made ' providing for her.
“Q. Now did you ever at any time . hear Martha Whelan, make any state- . ment to her father about her brothers? A. Yes. ■
“Q. And where were those statements made, at what house? A. At all the houses they ever lived in that I was with them.
“Q. And so that you. heard her make statements to her father concern-, ing her brothers while they were living at the Fladeland house in September and October? A. Yes.
“Q. Is there any particular date or any particular time you can set as to any particular conversation of this nature occurred? A. I could not set any date.
“Q. Was the statement that she made to her father about her brothers different on different occasions or was it generally of the same nature every time'you heard ¾ ? ‘' A. Generally of the same nature;
“Q.- .Would you state to the court and jury what you heard Martha Whe-lan tell her father or to her father about her brothers ? A, Well, she said they didn’t care anything about him and they didn’t, come to see him, and they had got all the money they could from him and that they didn’t care about it. That was about it.
"Q. Did she say’ anything to her father at any time about these guardianship proceedings? A. Oh, yes, she told him about .it.
“Q. And did she say ’ anything to her father in connection with those as to what the boys were trying to do or trying not to do? A. She did say that they were trying to put him in an old people’s home or guest homei
Miss ’ Malone testified -further that- ■ she came to 'the' Maple street house on the morning of November 22, 1950 at about 9 or 9:30 in the morning; that she'gave the testator his breakfast, and she also ■ gave him an eggnog with whiskey or brandy in it, and that Martha Whelan said that the eggnog would make her father- feel better, better able to make the will.
Louis Leff testifying for the contestants stated that he had been county judge of Walsh County from 1941 to-1953; that he was acquainted with Henry Burris the testator and had known him- for twenty years or more; that between June 1st and June 13th, 1950 he called on Mr. Burris- the testator in connection with certain -guardian proceedings in his court commenced for the purpose of appointing a guardian for said Henry Burris; that he made another call on the testator on or about June 29, 1950 at Grand Forks; Martha B. Whelan, the proponent of the will was present in the room with Mr. Burris and the witness when he called; that he discussed with Henry-Burris his business affairs; 'that every timé he asked Mr. Burris a question Martha, his daughter, would answer for him. We quote from his testimony:
*892“The Court: State what you saw or what Mrs. Whelan said; A. Mrs. Whelan .said that the guardianship or trusteeship was hot necessary, because she was — she had power of attorney .from him and she was taking care of his'property arid business, and he was very, very well satisfied. That is’wh'at she said, and that is what he said. '■ '
“Miss Whitesides: Q.. = Can, .you think of anything else that she said or he said? Á1 She also stated that she had never received any money or property from her father, and that the sons of Mr. Burris, or her brothers, had already received .their shares from advances and it was about high time she was ■ receiving something herself.
' “Q. ' Can you think of anything else, Mr. Leif, that was said or Mr. Burris said? A. I suggested to Mr. Burris and I told Mr. Burris that he should go to .a hospital, that , his expenses would be cheaper than being .taken care of in a private home as he had then, if he kept on the present rate .of' expenditures that in spite of his .property holdings he .would end up a pauper, and be a county welfare case.”
Harry Burris testifying for contestants stated that he was a son of the testator, and a brother of Martha B. Whelan; that he lived in Lethbridge, Alberta, Canada, having moved to Canada in 1944. He came back to North Dakota in the fall of 1950, which would be his third trip to visit his father- since- he moved to Lethbridge. He arrived at the home of his brother Leo November 16, 1950. On November 18th following he went to Grand Forks and called on Iris father Henry Burris. He said his- father was old and weak, he was hard of hearing and his eyesight was poor. His sister Martha Whelan was not. at home that day. He and his father talked about his father’s business and his father said: “Well, I guess I will have to change my will; some of them are not satisfied”. He, Harry, replied: “I said that he already made a will, let us talk about old times.” He next saw him the following day, Sunday in the afternoon and stayed until about ten that evening. He stated that he had several, conversations with -his sister Martha that afternoon about their father’s affairs. He was asked by counsel “remember some of the things you said and some of the thirigs Mrs.' Whelan said?
“A. Well, I said several times, I said it more than once, to let us get guardians .appointed for Dad’s estate. And after that, I told her, pointed out to her, I said fehat she would not have to worry about the money, she would get her money and the bills would be paid.' And I don’t know of anything more I can say. That was just a repetition of a lot of that stuff. We talked all the afternoon.”
He did not return to Canada until December 12, 1950, and during his stay he visited his father several times.
Mrs. Rose Burris, wife of testator's son:Tom testified that she married Tom in 1921; that their home was in Kolin, Montana and that they had lived there since 1921;' that she had known her father-in-law, the testator, since 1920; prior to 1939 they lived at Conway, North Dakota.; she and her husband had visited her father-in-law, Henry Burris once every year since they moved to Montana; in 1948 the testator came - to Montana and visited with them a month, and she brought him back to Conway. She and her husband took him to Canada where he celebrated his 89th or 90th birthday. She and her husband came to Grand Forks for testator’s funeral. During the time they were at Grand Forks for testator’s funeral she had a conversation with Martha B. Whelan concerning testator’s property. We quote from her testimony.
“Q. During the time that you were here for Mr. Burris’ funeral, did you have any discussion with Martha Whelan concerning Mr. - Burris’ property?. A. Yes.
*893“Q. Where did you have that dis-. cussion? A. In front of the undertaking- parlor, Norman’s.
“Q. Where? A. In Grand Forks.
“Q. And who was'present"at that time? A.. Just her and I.
“Miss Whitesides: ■ Q. Mrs. Burris, did you have a ■ conversation with Mrs. Whelan? A. Yes. ;
“Miss Whitesides: Q. Mrs. Burris, state it as nearly in the words of Mrs.' Whelan or yourself as possible. A.' She said she didn’t like the way the boys were treating her, and that Harry had come down here from Canada and talked about her. And I said I didn’t blame the. boys, because I knew how Grandpa always felt about his property and how careful he was and it was taking too much money to keep him in Grand Forks. And -she said DePuy had told her that him and her were doing just exactly as the boys would have done.”
The witness stated further that she and her husband came to Conway in 1949, and they came to Grand Forks in March 1950 and visited her father-in-law the testator.
Mr. Ted McCann testified for contestants that he married a niece of the testator in 1941 and knew him since that time. He knew that testator moved to Grand Forks in the fall of 1949, that he and his wife visited testator in March ■ 1950. Martha Whelan and her husband were there at that time. He visited the testator and had a conversation with him at that time. We quote from his testimony.
“Miss Whitesides: Q. Did you have a conversation with Mr. Burris at the time you were at the Fladeland house in March 1950 ? A. Yes.
“Q. And will you state Mr. Burris’s exact words as near as you can remember? A. The conversation him and I had?
“Q. Yes. A. Well, when I went in there he said ‘You know, :Ted, I should be declared incompetent. I am •. not capable of taking care of my affairs.’ And he talked for a little while and he said ‘Would you look after my affairs?’ And I-said .‘No I would rather not.’ And he stopped and he said, ‘I don’t blame you’. Then he ■asked me if I knew anyoneT thought he could get'and. I told him-I. thought he might be able to get John'Kennedy, as he was a relation of his, that he might be able to .look, after his affairs. ■Then he-asked me-if I would see John Kennedy, and I said, Yes, I would. Then as I left the house, or left the ■room,'I went in and told Mrs. Whelan that he wanted-me to see John Kennedy, and I didn’t care much about seeing him, and. she said she would send him a post card. . Add I didn’t talk to John Kennedy at all aboút it.”
Mrs. Lorene McCann wife of Ted Mc-Cann testified that she was with' her husband at the visit ,to the testator in March 1950, that she was in the kitchen and that she heard the conversation between the testator' and her husband, and that Martha Whelan was back and forth between testator’s bedroom and the kitchen.
. Will Burris, a son of testator testified in substance as follows: He was born on his father’s farm at Conway; that his father lived on his farm near Conway or in Conway until he moved to Grand Forks in the fall of 1949. He said his father’s health was poor, he was blind in one eye and his hearing was impaired. He could not get around and had to be lifted every place, and he was moved to Grand Forks in the fall of 1949 where his daughter Martha and her husband and her son lived with him. While testator was at Conway $1,000 of his money was placed in the bank subject to check by Will Burris and his brother Leo for the purpose, of. paying the expenses of taking care of their father. The money was put in the bank in the fall of 1948 and it. was-all spent by March 1949. At, or about the time that they were moving testator to Grand Forks some discussion was had between Will and Leo Burris and Martha Whelan as to signing of the checks *894on the said $1,000 but Mrs.-Martha Whelan did not agree that Will' and Leo "should sign * them. '
Will Burris testified that when Leo and he called on their father in March 1950 at Grand Forks, Mrs. Martha Whelan was present; Will and. Leo went into- their father’s bedroom and that, “he was kind of sleeping”. They woke him up and asked him “how he was” and about the first thing he said,'-“Leo, I -want-you-and 'Will to look after my -farm -up there” _and Mrs. Whelan said “you are not looking after the farm, we are looking after that -farm”. Leo asked his father, “Do you know your taxes are not paid this-year’’? “Do you know the money is gone for the crop?” and he said they figured it at $3,500. Leo then asked Mrs. Whelan (Martha) “Didn’t my father have some bonds” and Leo: said “I believe it was around $3000.00 worth of bonds. Where are they?” Mrs. Whelan said they are sold, she had to sell them. Well, Leo told Mrs. Whelan, he said “My father had about $2100.00 work of A. T. & T. stock, where is that”. “She said that is sold too”.. He quoted Mrs. Whelan as saying that she should have money; she did not know where it was coming from, and' that she should get more than the boys. ‘ In his 'conversation with his father, the testator, he' quoted him as having said that Martha Whelan was driving him crazy asking for money. Will’s argument with Mrs! Whélan ended by his statement that he would never come back to the house' as long as the Whelans were there.
John Kennedy, residing at Minto, North Dakota, testifying for contestants stated he had known Henry Burris, the testator a long- time, that he was testator’s nephew; and had visited with him on numerous' occasions at Conway. He visited with the testator at the Fladeland house in Grand Forks in April 1950, he was shown defendants’ exhibit C, previously admitted in evidence, which was a codicil executed • by testator; he was present and saw the exhibit signed by the testator,' ánd the testator said he wanted the witness, Kennedy, his son Harry and Marta Whelan to be executors.- Mr. DePuy, Martha Whelan and the witness were in the rdom with testator at that time.
Mr. -Kennedy testified further that on or about the month of October, 1949, at Conway, North Dakota, the testator Henry Burris, said that “he had his business affairs straightened up, ánd that for- sentimental reasons it might be that they would wish to keep the homestead, the Burris farm, in the name of the Btirrises, and he had stipulated that Will Burris, be given the privilege of purchasing the farm if he so desired.” We quote from the testimony:
■ “Q. Did he say'anything else at that time that you remember? A. Yes, he said that the balance of ■ it would be equally distributed'. Could • I" make a correction of that, Mr. Bangs?
“Mr. Bangs: Surely. A. When I made reference to the balance, the price stipulated was supposed to apply on Will’s share.”
Mr. Kennedy testified further that he had a conversation with the testator at the Fladeland house, in Grand Forks in the latter part of October 1949 as follows,:
“Q. Will you state to the court and ■jury as nearly in the words of Henry Burris, what he said at that time ? A. Mr. Burris said to me at that time, he said ‘John, I am awfully pleased you called, because there is something I wish' to discuss with you’. He said ‘They are after me here to change my will’. And I told him, I said,. T thought you had that all taken cape of’. And he said, T thought I did too, but it don’t seem to please them here.’ I said, ‘My advice to you, Uncle Henry, would be not to do it, because, ‘I said, we can’t please people while we are living and why be concerned after we are dead.’ And he answered — he thought for a moment and he answered, he said, ‘John, you know.I can’t get along without Martha.’ ”
He stated further that he told Martha Whelan, the proponent that Henry Burris, *895made reference to changing, a will, and that he, Kennedy, told him not to do so and said to Martha: “I would advise you to do the same because any changes this late d$te no doubt would be contested”. That Martha said: “I don’t care whether they do Or not providing the boys don’t gét anything out of it.”
Mrs. Martha Whelan was called in rebuttal to testify in her own behalf. Her testimony was in direct' conflict with'the testimony of the witnesses for contestants with reference to the statements attributed to her regarding the making of her father’s will. She denied .categorically the testimony of the nurse, Jane Malone, to the effect that she had made any statement with reference to her father .changing his will, or listening at the bedroom door when the will was being executed. She denied Miss Malone’s testimony that her father was gi.ven an eggnog with whiskey and brandy -in the morning of the day that the will was executed. She specifically denied that she had made the statements attributed to her by the other witnesses for the contestants as to her unfriendly attitude toward her brothers, or that she had urged or importuned her father to make her the sole beneficiary under his will.
On cross examination she testified that her father had given her all his personal property, and that while she lived with her father at Conway she purchased a car. We quote from his testimony:
“Q. But it was your father’s car? A. Yes. He bought it for the use up in Conway, we needed it. We couldn’t get meat or anything.
“Q. You have sold that car? A. His personal things were mine.
“Q. Have you anything in writing to show that these personal things were yours? A. Yes. There was an article all his personal property was given to me.
“Q. Have you that article with you ? A. I don’t have it with me, no.
“Q. That- is. back in Brooklyn, New York?. -A. ¡ If it is, jfwill be.here with the things, I don’t know, whether Mr. Du Puy .has it.
“Q. The car was your father’s but it was in your name? A. It had to be that way, yes, to be safer.
“Q.' And you disposed of that car, even though fit was ■ your father’s car ? A. He had given it to me.
“Q. And when did he give it to you ? A. He gave me all his personal property.
“Q. When was that? A. Up in Conway.
“Q. . In Conway? A. Yes.
“Q. That would be before November 19, 1949? A. Yes, sir.”
She further admitted that two days before the execution of the will she induced her father to change his life insurance policy so as to make her the sole beneficiary thereunder.
■ The testator in the case at bar was an aged man being ninety years old at the time of execution of the will. In the fall of 1948 he had a stroke which resulted in complete paralysis of his left side and inability to use his left hand. He had a severe tremor of his right hand which made it difficult for him to. use it. His hearing was impaired and his eyesight was poor and one. eye was blind. The stroke made him physically helpless and he required ássistance when it became necessary' for him to move about in his room. . His daughter Martha B. Whe-lan, the proponent, lived in the state of New York, having left home some twenty years before her father had the stroke. By arrangement with her brother she came to Conway in the fall of 1948 for the purpose of taking care of her father and for which she was to be paid at the rate of $35 per week. On November 7th, 1949 the testator executed three instruments, contestant’s exhibits 1-2, 0-2, and P-2. Exhibit 1-2 was a power of attorney to the proponent Mar*896tha B. WHelan; The power oí ‘attorney is in''the usual form ‘ and- authorized -her to transact-all of the business of the testator to the same effect and in the-same manner as he could have performed the same himself. Under her power of attorney Martha B. Whelan took full charge of her father’s business. She collected his income from his farming operations, cashed all -checks, issued all checks in payment .of expenses in connection with his business and other, expenses as well as expenses in connection with the care and nursing of the testator. She cashed áll of his bonds; issued checks ■on all of his bank balance and sold his A. T. & T. stock. She-.claimed, of course that she did all of this in order to defray expenses in ■connection with her father’s business and in providing him the care necessary for his comfort. Exhibit P-2 is a certified copy of a quit claim deed from testator- to Martha B. Whelan. The property conveyed is the Rome of the testator located in Conway, Walsh County.. Exhibit 0-2 is a written instrument executed by the testator I-Ienry Burris, wherein he agrees to pay his daughter Martha B. Whelan at the rate of $55 per week for taking care of him and nursing him, and it provides it'shall-’be retroactive .to November 2nd, 1948 the day-that Martha B. Whelan arrived in- Conway, North Dakota.
. There, were also introduced;and admitted in evidence contestants’ Exhibits C, and B.
Exhibit C is dated March 29, 1950. It is a codicil executed by the testator Henry Burris to his will dated the 21st day of October, 1947. It provides that,
“Whereas since my son,-Charles A; Burris, is now deceased: Now, Therefore, I hereby revoke all and any devises and bequests in said will made to ■said Charles A. Burris and direct that his heirs shall receive nothing from my estate.
“I further direct and do hereby appoint my daughter Martha Whelan, my friend John Kennedy, to be executors •of my last will and testament; to serve without bond.
■ “In- all other respects I confirm my said- will. In testimony whereof, I have hereunto subscribed my name the 29th day of March 1950.”
. The instrument was signed and attested by two witnesses on the 29th day of March 1950.' '
Exhibit B is dated July -7th, 1950. It was executed by-the testator as a codicil to his will,i dated the 21st day of October 1947. It provides that, •
“Whereas it is my desire that my daughter, Martha Burris Whelan, shall receive the sum of Five Thousand Dollars from my estate in addition to all devises and bequests to her in said will and codicil provided.
“Now, Therefore, I give and bequeath to my daughter, Martha Burris Whelan, the sum of Five Thousand Dollars. ($5000.00); the same to be a special bequest having preference over any and all other bequests and devises in said will and codicil made.
' “In all othet respects, I confirm my said will dated Oct. 21, 1947 and the codicil thereto dated March 29, 1950.”
It was signed by mark duly witnessed and attested by two witnesses on the 7th day of July 1950.
We think the evidence is sufficient to raise an inference of susceptibility to undue influence on the part of the testator. He was ninety years old when the will was drawn. Two years previous he had become wholly unable to take care of his physical needs. His statement to Ted McCann in March 1950 that he, the testator, was not capable of taking care of his affairs and that he should be declared incompetent and his request to McCann to look after his affairs; his request to his sons Leo and Will to look after his farm, his remark to his son Will Burris, in March 1950 that his daughter Martha was driving him crazy asking for money would indicate that he was under a severe mental strain which would render him subject to undue influ*897ence. There was abundant opportunity for his daughter Martha to exert it. He was under her constant care and supervision. He had given her a deed to his home in Conway. He had given her a power of attorney to do all his business. He had signed a written agreement a year after she came to Conway, increasing her salary from $35 per week to $55 and making it retroactive to the time of .her arrival in the fall of 1948. In March 1950 and July 1950 he executed codicils to his will of October 21, 1947, each of which codicils was favorable to the proponent Martha Whelan. Testator’s ill health, his age and sen-ile condition, his residence in Martha’s home and the confidential relation- existing between them are independent facts permitting an inference that testator was susceptible to undue influence and that Martha Whelan exercised it. We quote from 2 Page on Wills, Lifetime Edition Section 825;
“The fact that testator and beneficiary are members of one household, or that testator lives with the beneficiary to whom he makes such gift, is said not to raise a presumption of undue influence.
“While it is said that such evidence does not of itself tend to prove undue influence, it is said that such fact is admissible in evidence. A presumption or inference of undue influence is said to arise where testator is aged and feeble, leaves the bulk of his property to the children with whom he lives to the exclusion of others for whom .he has always manifested affection, or where testator actually reposes trust and confidence in the person with whom he lives.”
The two codicils to proponent’s will of October 21, 1947 are evidence to the' effect that said will was inconsistent with' the will of November 22, 1950. The will of October 21, 1947 was executed at a time when testator was free to act by his own volition without the exercise by others of undue influence. The rule in such cases is stated as follows in 57 Am.Jur., Will, Section 409, page 292:
“It is ,held in-most jurisdictions in which .the question has arisen tha.t fom mer wills of the testator, executed at a time when undue influence is not charged or does not appear to have been present, which contain- provisions inconsistent with those of the will in contest, may be , admitted in behalf of the contestant in support pf a charge of undue influence. Although it is recognized that the disparity, between the earlier will and the will in contest may well depend upon the length of time that elapsed between the execution of the two instruments, changes in conditions, and changes in the attitude of the testator’s children or other natural objects of his bounty, the view is that the inconsistency .between the wills is one of the circumstances which should be placed before the jury to be accepted by them for what it is worth in the light of all the facts and circumstances in evidence.”
Miss Malone testified that Mrs. Whelan told her father the day before the will was made that he should have an attorney come and make a will and provide for her, and that the ■ men were coming there, naming them, and that there was to be a will made providing for her. These were incidents so near in point of time to the date of execution of the will that they could have influenced the mind' of the testator. Miss Malone further testified that Martha Whe-lan had some conversation of this nature with her father every day for at least two weeks before-the date of the execution of the Will. While Mrs. Whelan'denied’that ■such conversations were had with her father, nevertheless the conflicting testimony raised questions of fact as to undue influence which could be submitted to the jury;
In Demmert v. Schnell, 4 Redf., N.Y., 409, 413, it is stated:
“The rule to be deduced from the decisions on the subject is this: that where a person enfeebled by old age or illness makes a will in favor of another person upon whom he is dependent, *898and that will is at variance with a former will made, or intentions formed when his ■ faculties were in' their full vigor, and is opposed to the dictates of nature and justice, the presumption is that such a will is the result of undue influence,'unless that presumption is satisfactorily rebutted by other evidence in the case.”
The question of undue influence was considered by the Supreme Court of Oregon in the case In re Lobb’s Will, 177 Or. 162, 160 P.2d 295, 304. We quote from the opinion:
“This court has held that undue influence, to be sufficient to cause a will to be set aside, must have been such as to have overcome the free volition or conscious judgment of the testator, and to have become the efficient cause without which the will would not have been made. In re Holman’s Will, 42 Or. 345, 70 P. 908; In re Diggins’ Estate, 76 Or. 341, 149 P. 73. The fact that a confidential relationship existed between testator and beneficiary is not, in itself, sufficient to vitiate a will, in the absence of evidence indicating that the beneficiary exercised undue influence. In re Turner’s Will, 51 Or. 1, 93 P. 461. However, where a confidential relationship is shown to have existed, and the will is inconsistent .with the claims ,pf duty and affection, slight evidence that the beneficiary abused the testator’s confidence is sufficient to invalidate it. In re De Haas’ Will, 135 Or. 392, 296 P. 42.”
It appears from the record that prior to the fall of 1948 when the proponent Martha Whelan came to Conway to take care of her father she had been absent from the state for more than twenty years. There is no evidence in the record of any intimate relationship between her and her father during such absence. The evidence would indicate that from the time she arrived in Conway she assumed a rather dominant attitude towards her father and in' the management of his business affairs, and this attitude seems to have existed up to the time of the execution of the will.
With reference to her brothers there is nothing in the record'to indicate that the relationship between them and their father was anything but friendly and congenial. The relationship between them appeared to be the normal attitude of mutual friendliness and devotion between a father and his children. There is no evidence' in the record of any disagreement at anytime between the testator and the sons who are the contestants in this action.
It is true that a person has the right to change his mind with respect to the disposition of his property, by will or otherwise; however, where as in this case, the will disinherits all of his sons without any apparent reason and designates as his sole beneficiary his daughter with whom he had lived for two years prior to the making of the will, and during which time he had been under her constant domination such as is evident in the instant case, the situation requires strict scrutiny by the courts. In re Olson’s Estate, 227 Minn. 289, 35 N.W.2d 439, 445, the Supreme Court of Minnesota quoted with approval the following from Swenarton v. Hancock, 9 Abb.N.C. 326, 362:
“ ‘Every testator has, of course, the right to change radically, and even arbitrarily, the manner of disposing of his property; and, in the absence of fraud or imposition, courts will sustain his action in this respect. But when it has been found that an unnatural change has been made in a sick mail’s will, and one apparently contrary to his previous fixed and determined 'purpose, it is the duty of the courts to scrutinize closely the circumstances, with a view of ascertaining whether the act was free, voluntary and intelligent, or whether it was a substitution of the volition and interest of another, who by some irresistible influence secured the change.’ ”
After a careful consideration of the lengthy record and all of the facts and circumstances in the case, the advanced age *899and senile condition of the testator, his physical ailments which undoubtedly affected the independent exercise of his judgment; the fact that he was under the constant care and supervision of Martha.Whe-lan for .two years immediately prior to the execution of the will, and her opportunity to exert pressure upon him to make her the sole beneficiary of his will; the fact that on Thursday preceding the date of the , execution of the will she induced him to change a life insurance policy so as' to make her the beneficiary thereunder; that he disinherited his eight sons and the children of a deceased son, and further provided that any and all advances made to his sons in his lifetime should’ be' repaid to his estate which would thus become the property of Martha B. Whelan, the sole beneficiary under the will, — we have concluded that there was an issue of fact as to whether at the time of the execution of the will the testator was a free agent or was acting un-' der influence that had been exerted upon him by his daughter Martha B. Whelan the proponent of the will. The jury found that the purported will was not the will of Henry Burris. We are of the opinion that the evidence is sufficient to support the verdict and that it should not be disturbed.
The judgment is reversed and the case remanded to the district court with directions to reinstate the verdict and the judgment entered thereon.
BURKE, C. J., and MORRIS, GRIM-SON and JOHNSON, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9741009 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:47:30.122309+00 ===

JUSTICE TRAPP delivered the opinion of the court: Plaintiff appeals from the order of the circuit court granting summary judgment to the defendant, city of Lexington, in an action for the wrongful death of John Homan. The trial court entered a finding pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 304(a) (103 Ill. 2d R. 304(a)). The action pends in the trial court as to another defendant. The cause of action upon appeal alleges that the city was engaged in an “intrinsically” dangerous or ultrahazardous activity when it procured an independent contractor, Charles Lowery, to take down a tree situated on city property. A second count against the city alleging liability under a theory of respondeat superior was dismissed by plaintiff. Initially, the city challenged this count of the complaint by a motion to dismiss on the ground that under the circumstances the felling of the tree was not an ultrahazardous activity. The trial court denied the motion, and its order made a finding that the cutting of the tree constituted an ultrahazardous activity. Subsequently the city moved for summary judgment by alleging that the decedent’s activities just prior to his death amounted to participation in an ultrahazardous activity and that plaintiff was barred from recovery on the basis of such participation. No authority was cited in support of the motion. The trial court granted the motion for summary judgment upon the authority of a pending circuit court case in McLean County. The order granting summary judgment included the following findings: “1. That plaintiff’s decedent was at the scene of the incident to get the wood from the tree being cut down and just prior to his being struck by the falling tree he was voluntarily assisting defendant Lowery in the tree felling and removal operation. 2. That absolute liability by means of the inherently dangerous doctrine has not been applied by the Illinois case law to a volunteer participating in an ultrahazardous activity who was doing so for his own independent benefit and purpose. See Kroutil et al. v. Wisegarber et al., McLean County case number 83 — L—117.” The city filed a motion for reconsideration of the order but that motion was denied. No cross-appeal has been filed. Depositions filed with the motion for summary judgment disclose that Charles Lowery entered into a contract with the city to cut down several trees and to trim some 40 trees. Lowery had performed such services for the city over the course of 12 years and had been engaged in the cutting of trees for 31 years. In general terms, a city employee would instruct Lowery when trees needed to be trimmed or taken down, but the city would have no further association with the work until completed by Lowery. The tree concerned had been topped two days before the injury to Homan, leaving a trunk about 26 feet tall. Homan had observed the work and obtained permission to take wood which had been cut for his personal use. On the day of the injury Homan came to the tree site with Michael Cotter to obtain more wood. This meeting was not prearranged, but Homan came when he saw that work was being done. Lowery’s two children, Michael and Dorothy, were assisting him. When the notching of the tree was completed, a rope was tied to the trunk to control the direction of the fall. The street had been blocked off. The rope was affixed to Lowery’s car to pull the trunk over, but Homan offered his truck, and it was used to pull or control the trunk. Upon the event, only part of the trunk split and fell and one-half remained standing. As Lowery cut the fallen portion into sections Homan and Cotter removed them for firewood. At that point, Lowery told Homan to stand back while he went to the tree to cut the base of the standing trunk with his chain saw. At this time he did not observe either Homan or Cotter, but next saw them when the tree was falling toward Homan. Lowery testified that the last time he warned them Homan and Cotter were standing in the street. Lowery’s daughter, Dorothy, testified that as her father was sawing the tree trunk Homan and Cotter were picking up firewood. She testified that on two occasions she called to Homan to move back but that he continued picking up firewood until the tree trunk began to fall. Cotter testified that within the last minute prior to the sawing of the tree he and Homan were throwing logs from the street onto the yard. Plaintiff argues that the trial court erred in holding that recovery was barred solely because decedent was “participating” in the allegedly ultrahazardous activity. From the depositions in evidence, it is clear that the decedent had no employment by the city or by its independent contractor in the removal of the tree. He was not a volunteer in the sense that his objective was to assist in the work to be done. His sole purpose was to acquire all of the firewood that he could, and any benefit to the defendant or its independent contractor was simply coincidental to that personal objective. Section 2 — 1005(c) of the Code of Civil Procedure (111. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 110, par. 2 — 1005(c)) authorizes the granting of summary judgment if the matters of record “show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law.” In ruling upon a motion for summary judgment the trial court must consider the pleadings and evidentiary matter of record in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party and accept as true the reasonable inferences from such facts which favor that latter party. Mount Prospect State Bank v. Forestry Recycling Sawmill (1980), 93 Ill. App. 3d 448, 417 N.E.2d 621.  The body of case authority discloses that upon appellate review the propriety of granting summary judgment is measured in two ways. If the material evidentiary facts presented to the trial court are disputed or conflicting it is improper to grant summary judgment. In a second aspect, in instances where the facts are undisputed, if reasonable minds might draw different reasonable inferences from such facts the trial court must deny summary judgment and direct that the resolution of the inferences be made by trial. (Plastics & Equipment Sales Co. v. DeSoto, Inc. (1980), 91 Ill. App. 3d 1011, 415 N.E.2d 492; Moran v. Aken (1981), 93 Ill. App. 3d 774, 417 N.E.2d 846.) Here, there exists some factual dispute as to where decedent was after the warning to stand away from the tree trunk and as to what he was doing after such warning and before he was struck. In such context we find that issues of fact exist.  Again, the trial court found that decedent was “participating” in taking down the tree. The trial court has not defined that term as a legal concept or otherwise. We deem the court’s conclusion that decedent was “participating” to be an inference drawn by the trial court from the facts presented in record. Our review of the same record discloses that other reasonable inferences may also be drawn from such facts. In the light of this analysis we conclude that the trial court erred in granting summary judgment to the city. Smothers v. Butler (1979), 78 Ill. App. 3d 1018, 398 N.E.2d 12; Moran v. Alcen (1981), 93 Ill. App. 3d 774, 417 N.E.2d 846. In its brief the city urges that we determine that the trial court erred in holding that under the facts before the court the cutting of the tree trunk was an ultrahazardous activity and that this court considers such error as “additional grounds” for affirming the judgment. The city’s brief argues that it had filed a motion seeking reconsideration of that finding by the trial court and that the denial of reconsideration in effect imposed absolute liability. The city did not, however, file a cross-appeal seeking review of such issue as is provided in Supreme Court Rule 303(a)(3) (103 Ill. 2d R. 303(a)(3)).  The rule is uniformly interpreted by our reviewing courts to require that in the absence of a cross-appeal, the reviewing court is not authorized to examine or modify a portion of the order of the trial court. (De Phillips v. Mortgage Associates, Inc. (1972), 8 Ill. App. 3d 759, 291 N.E.2d 329.) In such circumstances the reviewing court is confined to the errors raised by the appellant. National Football League Properties, Inc. v. Dallas Cap & Emblem Manufacturing, Inc. (1975), 26 Ill. App. 3d 820, 327 N.E.2d 247. The judgment of the trial court is reversed and the case is remanded for further proceedings not inconsistent with the views expressed. Reversed and remanded with directions. MORTHLAND, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9740993 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:46:59.848714+00 ===

On Petition for Rehearing
SATHRE, Judge.
The proponent has petitioned for a rehearing. She asserts that she made a motion.in the district court for judgment notwithstanding the verdict or in the alternative for a new trial. .The motion for judgment-notwithstanding the verdict was granted. That left undetermined the'motion for a new trial. Under the rules’ announced in several decisions of thi.s court the right of the proponent to move for a new trial in the district court still remains. Nelson v. Grondahl, 13 N.D. 363, 100 N.W. 1093; La Bree v. Dakota Tractor & Equipment Co., 69 N.D. 561, 288 N.W. 476; Smith v. Knutson, 76 N.D. 375, 36 N.W.2d 323. Accordingly leave is. granted proponent to renew her motion for a new trial, such motion to be made within thirty days from the date of filing remittitur herein. If such motion is not made, judgment is directed to be entered for contestants in accordance with the original opinion herein.
Rehearing denied.
BURKE, C. j., and MORRIS, GRIM-SON and JOHNSON, JJ.

=== CASE 2225767 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:54.867741+00 ===

412 Mass. 20 (1992)
587 N.E.2d 211
NICHOLAS B.[1]
vs.
SCHOOL COMMITTEE OF WORCESTER.
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Worcester.
November 6, 1991.
February 24, 1992.
Present: LIACOS, C.J., WILKINS, ABRAMS, NOLAN, & LYNCH, JJ.
Russell S. Chernin for the plaintiff.
Mary Joann Reedy (Jon R. Maddox with her) for the defendant.
*21 WILKINS, J.
The plaintiff, whom we have given the pseudonym Nicholas B., appeals from a summary judgment that dismissed his challenge to disciplinary action that the defendant school committee took against him. We transferred his appeal to this court on our own motion.
On October 5, 1989, after hearing evidence in executive session, the school committee found that Nicholas had assaulted a fellow high school student "in violation of the policies, rules and codes of the Worcester Public Schools" and then voted "to expel [Nicholas] for the rest of the school year with a proviso that the case be reevaluated at the end of the school year."
There was evidence before the school committee that, on September 5, 1989, shortly after school was let out, Nicholas committed a battery on a fellow student on a public street near, but not on, school property. The battery was a product of planning by Nicholas and some friends that had occurred earlier that day on school property. The incident was also a continuation of a confrontation that had occurred on school grounds that day between Nicholas's group and a group of which the victim was a member.
Nicholas challenges (1) the school committee's authority to expel him from school for conduct that did not occur on school grounds or at a school event, (2) the motion judge's failure to permit a de novo determination of the facts, and (3) the motion judge's denial of his claim under the State Civil Rights Act (G.L.c. 12, §§ 11I and 11H [1990 ed.]). We reject all these contentions for reasons that are similar to those stated by the motion judge in his memorandum of decision granting summary judgment to the school committee.
1. We reject Nicholas's claim that, because it imposed discipline for conduct not described in its disciplinary rules, the school committee's conduct was arbitrary or capricious. On the facts of this case, the committee was not limited by the provisions of its rules in imposing discipline. School committees have wide discretion in school discipline matters. Leonard v. School Comm. of Attleboro, 349 Mass. 704, 708-709 (1965). A court will not reverse a school committee's decision *22 unless the committee acted arbitrarily or capriciously. Id. at 711.
Nicholas first argues that his conduct did not fall within any prohibition of the school committee's disciplinary rules. Specifically, he contends that the assault for which the committee disciplined him did not occur on school grounds or at a school event off school grounds and that the prohibitions of the school committee's disciplinary rules apply only to conduct on school grounds or at a school event. We shall not pause to consider whether the disciplinary rules apply by their terms to a battery committed by one student on another student on a street near a school immediately after school has ended for the day, especially where the battery is the continuation of improper conduct that occurred on school grounds. We simply reject the premise of Nicholas's argument that, by artless rulemaking, the school committee has foreclosed itself from disciplining a student for violent conduct against another student in the circumstances of this case.[2]
The misconduct here was unquestionably improper, and Nicholas knew it. He needed no advisory rule to tell him that his conduct was seriously wrong and contrary to school policy. Based on facts that the school committee was warranted in finding, it had ample authority to discipline Nicholas.
Nicholas's claim that the school committee exceeded its authority under its rules by expelling him, rather than simply suspending him from school, also lacks merit. The school committee, for the reasons just given, did not tie its hands in this respect by a statement that bodily injury to a student in violation of its rules was grounds for suspension. In any event, the school committee in effect only suspended *23 Nicholas for the 1989-1990 school year. According to the parties' briefs, he was readmitted in June, 1990, to a summer session. Therefore, by the time summary judgment was entered in October, 1990, the question was moot whether the school committee could not expel Nicholas but could only suspend him.
2. We reject Nicholas's claim that he is entitled to an independent judicial determination of the facts and that, therefore, by affidavit in the Superior Court, he put in contention anew material facts concerning the battery that, on the evidence before it, the school committee had been warranted in finding against him. In deciding whether the discipline imposed was lawful, no de novo judicial fact-finding is required. See School Comm. of Brockton v. Teachers' Retirement Bd., 393 Mass. 256, 262-263 (1984). Judicial review is on the record before the school committee to determine whether the committee acted arbitrarily or capriciously.
Although Nicholas disagrees with the school committee's factual conclusion that he committed a battery on another student, in his brief here he does not challenge as legally unsound the process in which the school committee established what the factual record before it was.[3] That process would have been greatly aided, however, if the school committee had recorded electronically (or otherwise) the testimony given in its executive session. In future disciplinary proceedings, on timely request, a school administration should maintain such a record and might be well advised to do so on its own motion.
3. The motion judge did not err when he allowed the school committee's motion for summary judgment with respect *24 to Nicholas's claim of a violation of G.L.c. 12, § 11I. We reject any suggestion that, by enacting the State Civil Rights Act, the Legislature intended a de novo review of the factual determinations of a school committee in an action challenging school discipline. The Supreme Court of the United States reached a parallel conclusion in Wood v. Strickland, 420 U.S. 308, 326 (1975), overruled on other grounds, Harlow v. Fitzgerald, 457 U.S. 800 (1982), in an action brought under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 (1988). Nicholas has failed, on the record before the school committee, to establish a violation of rights protected by the State Civil Rights Act.
Moreover, on the uncontroverted material facts, Nicholas has failed to put in contention the requirement of § 11I that the alleged interference with his rights must have occurred by threats, intimidation, or coercion. The school committee's allegedly unlawful action here was direct and immediate. Even if that action had been unlawful, it contained no threat, intimidation, or coercion. See Longval v. Commissioner of Correction, 404 Mass. 325, 333-334 (1989); Pheasant Ridge Assoc. Ltd. Partnership v. Burlington, 399 Mass. 771, 781 (1987).
Judgment affirmed.
NOTES
[1]  By his mother.
[2]  Federal courts concerned with challenges to school discipline have not required that a school department have a specific regulation prohibiting the conduct for which discipline was imposed. See Richards v. Thurston, 424 F.2d 1281, 1282 (1st Cir.1970) ("we would not wish to see school officials unable to take appropriate action in facing a problem of discipline or distraction simply because there was no preexisting rule on the books"); Hasson v. Boothby, 318 F. Supp. 1183, 1187-1188 (D. Mass. 1970).
[3]  In support of its motion for summary judgment, the school committee submitted the handwritten notes of its clerk; a typed, expanded summary made from her notes; minutes of the committee's executive session and subsequent open meeting; affidavits from the victim, from the chairman of the school committee and other school officials, from a student eyewitness to the battery who also presented an admission to the battery by Nicholas, and from a school administrator who acted as interpreter for Nicholas's mother, who does not speak English.