=== CASE 2224300 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:18.807902+00 ===

483 N.W.2d 511 (1992)
Paul W. ZIMMER, Appellant,
v.
CARLTON COUNTY CO-OP POWER ASSOCIATION, Respondent.
No. C9-91-1627.
Court of Appeals of Minnesota.
April 14, 1992.
Review Denied June 10, 1992.
*512 James B. Peterson, Falsani, Balmer, Berglund & Merritt, Duluth, for appellant.
Daniel T. Carlisle, Kennedy and Nervig, Wadena, for respondent.
Considered and decided by SCHUMACHER, P.J., KALITOWSKI and STONE,[*] JJ.
OPINION
SCHUMACHER, Judge.
Paul W. Zimmer appeals from the trial court's grant of summary judgment in favor of respondent Carlton County Co-op Power Association.
Appellant was injured while working for an independent contractor hired by respondent. Appellant brought a negligence action against respondent, alleging that its failure to supervise the job site, its failure to require adequate safety precautions, and its failure to make sure that its independent contractor was qualified to do the work caused his injuries. The trial court granted summary judgment in favor of respondent. We affirm.
FACTS
On June 17, 1985, appellant suffered electrical burns while he was performing maintenance on respondent's power lines. At the time of the accident, appellant was working as an employee of Northern Equipment Company, an independent contractor hired by respondent to service the oil circuit reclosures (OCRs) on its power lines. Northern Equipment is not a party to this action.
According to the depositions and answers to interrogatories, on the day the accident occurred, appellant was working with his supervisor, Garald Johnson. Appellant climbed a utility pole to disconnect the OCRs from the pole. Appellant began to disconnect the OCRs and as he did so, he fell onto the energized lightning arrester or an energized line and sustained electrical burns. Johnson did not see the accident *513 occur because he was in the van preparing his equipment.
Prior to hiring Northern Equipment to service its OCRs, respondent had its own line crews remove and ship the OCRs to a Wisconsin company for servicing. Respondent's own line workers were required to pass a state examination and complete a self-study program prior to performing their job duties. Respondent also required its employees to be familiar with its procedure and safety manuals and to attend regular safety meetings. Respondent's safety director regularly performed field checks on respondent's employees for safety violations. Respondent did not require Northern Equipment or its employees to be qualified in any way, or to follow any of its safety procedures. At the time appellant was injured, he was not following the safety procedures that respondent required of its own workers.
When respondent entered into a contract with Northern Equipment, it checked Johnson's references but never checked appellant's credentials or his experience. Under the contract, Johnson was required to follow a regular schedule, to report his progress to respondent, and to report his location and substation area to respondent. A representative of respondent would periodically check Northern Equipment's progress.
ISSUES
1. Does a power company owe a duty to an employee of its independent contractor to ensure that the independent contractor is qualified to do the work, hires employees that are qualified, and follows safe procedures?
2. Should power companies be prohibited from hiring independent contractors to service their power lines?
ANALYSIS
On appeal from a grant of summary judgment, the role of this court is to review whether genuine issues of material fact exist and whether the trial court erred in its application of the law. Hunt v. IBM Mid Am. Employees Fed. Credit Union, 384 N.W.2d 853, 855 (Minn.1986). Appellant argues that summary judgment was not appropriate because fact issues existed as to whether respondent was negligent or not.
Before someone can be found negligent it must be established that that person owed a duty to the injured person. Rasmussen v. Prudential Ins. Co., 277 Minn. 266, 269, 152 N.W.2d 359, 362 (1967). Whether one owes a legal duty to another is a question of law to be determined by the court. Keeton, Prosser and Keeton on Torts 5th ed. § 37 p. 236. It was therefore appropriate for the trial court to decide the issue of whether a duty existed, and this court must only determine whether the trial court was correct in concluding that respondent did not owe a duty to appellant.
1. The issue of whether respondent owed appellant a duty is related to the extent to which a power company is responsible for accidents that occur on the job site of its independent contractor. It is well-settled that an employer is liable for harm caused to third parties because of the negligence of its independent contractor. Conover v. Northern State Power, Co., 313 N.W.2d 397, 404 (Minn.1981). This vicarious liability does not apply, however, when the injured party is an employee of the independent contractor. Id.
Acknowledging that respondent cannot be held vicariously liable, appellant contends that respondent should be held personally liable for his injuries. He argues that a power company should be held personally liable for injuries incurred by an employee of its independent contractor as a result of the independent contractor's incompetence or its failure to use safe procedures.
The Conover court delineated two situations in Minnesota case law in which an employer has been held personally negligent and therefore liable for the injuries of its independent contractor's employees:
This personal negligence * * * may consist of a breach of a duty to exercise reasonably careful supervision of a jobsite where employees of the independent contractor are working when the employer *514 retains control or some measure of control over the project. * * * Even where the employer retains no control, he may still owe a duty of care, as a possessor of land, to persons coming on the premises, including the employees of an independent contractor. Ordinarily this duty would be to inspect and warn before turning over the jobsite.
Conover, 313 N.W.2d at 401 (citations omitted).
Neither of these types of personal negligence applies to this case. In order to be held personally liable because of retained control, the employer must retain "the general control and supervision of the work." Thill v. Modern Erecting Co., 272 Minn. 217, 226, 136 N.W.2d 677, 684 (1965). The facts indicate that respondent did not retain general control over or supervise the OCR repair project. It only made periodic investigations into Northern Equipment's progress. Appellant conceded at the summary judgment hearing that respondent did not retain control. In fact, it is essentially appellant's argument that respondent was negligent in not retaining control over the project.
The duty imposed on an employer as a possessor of land is to inspect the premises for latent or hidden dangers and then to warn oncomers of those dangers. See Whirlpool Corp. v. Morse, 222 F. Supp. 645, 652-53 (1963), aff'd 332 F.2d 901 (8th Cir.1964). For example, in Conover the power company was liable for an injury which resulted from a severely rotted utility pole. Conover, 313 N.W.2d at 402. The court determined that the power company knew or should have known about the dangerous condition of the pole and should have warned the independent contractor's employees about it. Id. In contrast, in this case the injury was not caused by a latent or hidden defect in the property but by an inherent and known danger of the property. Respondent had no duty to warn appellant of the dangers involved with power line work.
Because appellant's claim does not correspond to any previously established duty, he is asking this court to expand the law to hold an employer personally liable for injuries caused by its independent contractor's incompetence or failure to follow safe procedures. The only Minnesota case which has addressed this type of claim is Schip v. Pabst Brewing Co., 64 Minn. 22, 66 N.W. 3 (1896). In Schip, the owner of a building hired an independent contractor to tear it down. The owner knew that the work was dangerous and required special skill and that the contractor did not possess the necessary skill. In reviewing a claim against the owner by the contractor's employee, the Schip court said:
There are many cases which hold that the owner of premises cannot, by employing a contractor, relieve himself from the continuing duty which he owes to the public, * * * [b]ut we can find no case which holds that the owner owes any such duty to the servant of the independent contractor.
Id. at 24, 66 N.W. at 5. The Schip court held that the owner was not liable for the injuries of the independent contractor's employee.
Appellant contends that because of the hazardous nature of power line work, the type of duty which the supreme court refused to impose on the employer in Schip should be imposed on power companies. We decline to impose such a duty. An independent contractor of a power company has its own nondelegable duty to its employees to use safe procedures. See Baumgartner v. Holslin, 236 Minn. 325, 327, 52 N.W.2d 763, 765 (1952). If we were to impose a duty on a company to make sure that its independent contractor uses safe procedures, then we would, in effect, impose a duty on the company to make sure that its independent contractor does not negligently injure its employees. Imposing such a duty would be the same as holding the company vicariously liable for its independent contractor's negligence. This is the kind of liability that the supreme court has specifically refused to impose on power companies. See Conover v. Northern States Power Co., 313 N.W.2d 397, 403-4 (Minn.1981).
We also decline to expand the law to impose a duty owed to a power company's independent contractor's employees to ensure *515 that its independent contractor is competent and qualified. As the law exists, power companies do owe this duty to third parties. See Conover, 313 N.W.2d at 404. We see no need to expand it to employees of independent contractors. An employee has control over where and for whom he chooses to work, and if he chooses to work for an independent contractor that is incompetent and unqualified, he, rather than the employer of the independent contractor, should have to bear the burden of that decision. Third parties who are injured by the negligence of an independent contractor do not have such control, and are entitled to compensation from the entity which hired the incompetent or unqualified contractor.
2. Appellant argues that, for policy reasons, power companies should be prohibited from hiring independent contractors to service power lines. Such a rule, if desirable, cannot be instituted by the judiciary. The place for appellant to pursue this request is with the legislature or the agency governing power companies.
DECISION
Summary judgment was appropriate because respondent owed no duty to appellant to use due care in hiring and supervising its independent contractor.
Affirmed.
NOTES
[*]  Retired judge of the district court, acting as judge of the Court of Appeals by appointment pursuant to Minn. Const. art. VI, § 2.

=== CASE 9740631 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:39:02.088946+00 ===

OPINION
KEITH, Chief Justice.
This appeal, on petition for review by the state, presents a Sentencing Guidelines issue relating to the appropriate procedures and standards for deciding whether an offender’s “out-of-state” felony conviction should be designated as a felony in determining the offender’s criminal history score and presumptive sentence for the current Minnesota offense of conviction for which the offender is being sentenced.1 Without purporting to answer all questions relating to the appropriate procedures and standards in this context, we conclude that the sentencing court properly designated the two out-of-state convictions as felonies in computing defendant’s criminal history score. Accordingly, we reverse the decision of the court of appeals affirming the postconviction court’s order reducing defendant’s sentence.
In 1988 defendant, Bobbie Dale Hill, was charged in Minnesota with two separate complaints alleging criminal sexual conduct involving two different victims. One complaint, which charged defendant with two counts under two different subsections of the statute defining criminal sexual conduct in the third degree, was based on evidence that defendant forced a 16-year-old girl, R.L.T., to submit to sexual intercourse. The other complaint was based on evidence of sexual misconduct in the second degree by defendant with his teenage stepdaughter.
Defendant’s attorney and the prosecutor reached an agreement whereby defendant entered a so-called Alford plea (allowing a defendant who refuses to admit his guilt to plead guilty) to one of the counts involving R.L.T. in exchange for the dismissal of the *59other count and the separate charge involving defendant’s stepdaughter.2
In Minnesota in 1983, Hill had also entered an Alford plea on charges of criminal sexual conduct in the second degree for sexually abusing the 12-year-old daughter of a woman with whom he was living. He received a 21-month sentence with execution stayed for 15 years. Defendant clearly had a felony point for this conviction and a custody status point because he was on probation when he committed the 1988 offense.
In 1984, Hill was indicted in federal court for fraudulently obtaining $42,000 of social security disability benefits to which he was not entitled. He pled guilty to two counts based on a false statement Hill made in 1978 and a false statement made in 1982. Defendant was sentenced to two years in prison for the first count and received a consecutive 3-year probationary jail term for the second count. It appears the defendant served 13 months in the federal prison at Sandstone.
At the time of sentencing in 1988, Hill’s attorney and the prosecutor left for judicial resolution the issue of whether Hill’s correct criminal history score was three or four. The presumptive sentence would be 49 (45-53 months) if the score was three, and 65 (60-70 months) if the score was four. They agreed that the trial court would sentence defendant to a minimum presumptive sentence depending on whether the criminal history score was three or four. They also agreed that the sentence would be concurrent with the 1983 sentence for which probation would be revoked. The sentencing court found that Hill had a criminal history score of four: one felony point for the 1983 conviction, a custody status point because he was on probation when he committed the 1988 offense, and two points for the 1984 federal convictions for making false statements to the Social Security Administration. Because the federal convictions were divisible and not indivisible under Minn.Stat. § 609.-035, the single behavioral incident statute, he was given a 60-month prison term.
A year later defendant filed a pro se petition for postconviction relief, arguing that the criminal history score should have been three because the two federal offenses were “indivisible” because they arose out of the same behavioral incident. The district court appointed a state public defender who argued, for the first time, that neither of the federal convictions could be included in the criminal history score because the federal statute under which Hill had been convicted did not correspond to any Minnesota offense.
The postconviction court, saying it disagreed with the Sentencing Guidelines but that the Guidelines tied its hands, concluded that the correct criminal history score was two. The court reduced defendant’s sentence to 41 months, the median presumptive sentence for the offense based on a criminal history score of two.
The court of appeals affirmed in an unpublished decision. It found that the state had the burden of proof at the postconviction hearing with respect to whether the sentencing court properly designated the federal offenses as felonies in computing defendant’s criminal history score. It concluded that the statutory definition of the federal offense does not correspond with any Minnesota offense because the other similar Minnesota offenses require proof of intent to defraud, something the court concluded the federal statute does not require. The court said that it is proper in a case such as this to look beyond the statutory definition and determine if the misconduct underlying the federal conviction would have constituted a felony in Minnesota under the similar but not identical Minnesota statute. Concluding that the record made by the state at the postconviction hearing did not establish that defendant had any intent to defraud when he made the false statements, the court affirmed the postcon-viction court’s determination that the federal offenses not be designated as felonies.
We recognized the burden-of-proof issue but did not decide it in State v. Goff, 418 N.W.2d 169 (Minn.1988). The issue *60there was how a defendant should raise the issue of whether the sentencing court is barred from using a prior conviction in computing a presumptive sentence for a current offense. The defendant in that case did not raise the issue until 2 weeks after sentence was imposed, and one issue therefore was whether the defendant had the burden of proof. We said:
It can be argued that when a defendant challenges a sentence on this ground in a postconviction proceeding he has not only the burden of production but also the ultimate burden of proving the invalidity of the prior conviction. Cf., Mattheson v. Maggio, 714 F.2d 362 (5th Cir.1983) (habeas corpus petitioner has burden of proving convictions used to enhance sentence were uncounseled). Since, however, defendant filed his motion before the time for direct appeal from judgment of conviction had expired that issue is not before us.
418 N.W.2d at 172. Minn.Stat. § 590.04, subd. 3, which deals with postconviction remedy, provides that “[ujnless otherwise ordered by the court” the burden of proof at a postconviction hearing is “upon the petitioner” (i.e., the defendant seeking postconviction relief) to “establish the facts by a fair preponderance of the evidence.” Because of our disposition of this appeal, we need not and do not decide this issue in this case either. Prudent defense attorneys, however, can clearly avoid risking a switching of the burden of proof from the state to the defense by raising, at the time of sentencing, the issue whether or not the prior conviction may be used. On the other hand, prudent prosecutors faced with a postconviction hearing in this context will want to come prepared to assume the ultimate burden of proof.
Although scores of Sentencing Guidelines cases have come before this court since 1980, we have not addressed in any depth the issue of when an out-of-state felony conviction should be designated as a felony in computing a defendant’s criminal history score. Rather, we have only touched on the issue. See Pilger v. State, 337 N.W.2d 695, 698 (Minn.1983) (“generally” the trial court need only determine if the out-of-state conviction was for an offense that “corresponds” to an offense in Minnesota); State v. Marquetti, 322 N.W.2d 316, 319 (Minn.1982) (defendant was convicted in Cuba when he was 16 of burglary based on his stealing a chicken; held, state, which had burden of proof at sentencing hearing, failed to establish that defendant would have been prosecuted as an adult in Minnesota under the same circumstances and therefore sentencing court improperly assigned a felony point to the offense); State v. McAdoo, 330 N.W.2d 104 (Minn.1983) (making it clear it is trial court’s role to resolve any factual dispute bearing on the defendant’s criminal history score).
Minnesota Sentencing Guidelines II.B. says only that the designation of an out-of-state conviction as a felony, gross misdemeanor or misdemeanor is “governed by the offense definitions and sentences provided in Minnesota law.” The comments provide:
II.B.501. Out-of-state convictions include convictions under the laws of any other state, or the federal government, including convictions under the Uniform Code of Military Justice, or convictions under the law of other nations.
II.B.502. The Commission concluded that convictions from other jurisdictions must, in fairness, be considered in the computation of an offender’s criminal history index score. It was recognized, however, that criminal conduct may be characterized differently by the various state and federal criminal jurisdictions. There is no uniform nationwide characterization of the terms “felony,” “gross misdemeanor,” and “misdemeanor.”
II.B.503. It was concluded, therefore, that designation of out-of-state offenses as felonies or lesser offenses, for purposes of the computation of the criminal history index score, must properly be governed by Minnesota law.
II.B.504. Generally, the classification of prior offenses as petty misdemeanors, misdemeanors, gross misdemeanors, or felonies should be determined on the ba*61sis of current offense definitions. An exception to this are offenses in which a monetary threshold determines the offense classification. The monetary threshold at the time the offense was committed determines the offense classification for criminal history purposes, not the current threshold.
II.B.505. It was contemplated that the sentencing court, in its discretion, should make the final determination as to the weight accorded foreign convictions. In so doing, sentencing courts should consider the nature and definition of the foreign offense, as well as the sentence received by the offender.
Although the comments do not so state, obviously if the sentencing court abuses its discretion in deciding whether or not to designate an out-of-state conviction as a felony for purposes of computing the defendant’s criminal history score, then the court’s determination may be reversed.
The defense in this case basically argues that the sentencing court cannot go beyond looking at the definition of an out-of-state conviction and determining if Minnesota has an offense with the same basic definition. The defense bases this on State v. Briton, 265 Minn. 326, 121 N.W.2d 577 (1963). Briton, however, is a pre-Guide-lines case dealing with whether a defendant could be charged under the Habitual Offender Act on the basis of an out-of-state conviction.
While the comments to the Sentencing Guidelines are not particularly helpful, they do suggest that while the main focus should be on the offense definition, the sentencing court should also consider “the nature” of the offense and “the sentence received by the offender.” The comment to which we refer, II.B.505, focuses on the determination of the weight to be given “foreign” convictions, but we see no valid basis for distinguishing “foreign” convictions in the sense of convictions from foreign countries from “foreign” or “out-of-state” convictions in the sense of convictions occurring in other states or in federal court. To restrict the sentencing court to looking at the definition of the out-of-state or foreign offense would in effect be to unjustifiably bar the sentencing court from designating scores of federal felony offenses and scores of felony offenses from other states as felonies for criminal history purposes in Minnesota, something which would be unfair to those defendants whose prior felony convictions are Minnesota offenses rather than foreign or out-of-state offenses.
We are not prepared at this point, however, to say that in every case involving an out-of-state or foreign conviction the parties must engage in a “mini-trial” to determine what the conduct was underlying the foreign or out-of-state conviction. Suffice it to say, the obvious idea behind making Minnesota law the reference point or standard is to insure that all defendants prosecuted in Minnesota — including those whose prior convictions are foreign or out-of-state convictions — have their criminal history scores computed according to the same basic standards. Even without regard to any constitutional problems created, it would simply be unfair to those defendants receiving criminal history points for prior Minnesota convictions if their counterparts with prior foreign or out-of-state convictions of similar offenses for the same basic conduct did not receive criminal history points for those offenses. Further, we think that this case illustrates our belief that in many, perhaps most, cases the determination can be made by the sentencing court without turning the sentencing hearing into a mini-trial relating to the conduct underlying the out-of-state conviction.
Turning to the two federal convictions at issue in this case, it is clear defendant pleaded guilty to two counts of violating 18 U.S.C. § 1001, which provides:
Whoever, in any matter within the jurisdiction of any department or agency of the United States knowingly and willfully falsifies, conceals or covers up by any trick, scheme, or device a material fact, or makes any false, fictitious or fraudulent statements or representations, or makes or uses any false writing or document knowing the same to contain any false, fictitious or fraudulent statement *62or entry, shall be fined not more than $10,000 or imprisoned not more than five years, or both.
One of the two counts was based on a false statement defendant made in 1978, and the other was based on a false statement made in 1982.
It is true that, as stated in II.B.502, “[tjhere is no uniform nationwide characterization of the terms ‘felony/ ‘gross misdemeanor/ and ‘misdemeanor.’ ” However, the offense of violating section 1001 was and is a “felony” under the federal classification which, like the Minnesota classification, classifies an offense as a felony if the offense may be punished by more than 1 year in prison (i.e., a year and a day or longer). The Minnesota definition of “felony” is the common definition of what is a felony offense. Thus, it appears that the federal crime of making a false statement is a felony offense under the Minnesota definition.
Our welfare fraud statute has been interpreted as including the element of intent to defraud, State v. Ibarra, 355 N.W.2d 125, 129 (Minn.1984), whereas the federal false statement statute apparently does not include the element of intent to defraud. See 1 Working Papers of the National Commission on Reform of Federal Criminal Laws 669, n. 27 (1970). However, courts have interpreted the federal false statement statute as including the element of intent to deceive (though not intent to defraud). See, e.g., United States v. Martin, 772 F.2d 1442, 1444-45 (8th Cir.1985) (“intent to deceive is an essential element of * * * the crime of false statement”). Further, “many Federal fraud prosecutions can be— and are — based upon section 1001.” 1 Working Papers, supra at 669. Thus, the fact that the federal false statement statute may not include an element of intent to defraud does not mean that the conduct underlying defendant’s conviction in federal court is not felonious conduct under the welfare fraud statute in Minnesota.
According to the court of appeals’ opinion itself, defendant admitted filing two separate reports with the Social Security Administration, one in 1978 and one in 1982, in order to have the administration determine his initial and continuing eligibility for disability benefits. In those reports defendant said he was not employed when, in fact, he was employed. He obtained $42,000 as a result. That, to us, is welfare fraud in Minnesota: knowingly obtaining or attempting to obtain assistance to which one is not entitled by means of a willfully false statement or by intentional concealment of the material fact or by other fraudulent device. Minn.Stat. § 256.98 (1990); CRIMJIG 24.15 and 24.16. That, also, is theft in Minnesota (see Minn.Stat. § 609.52, subds. 2(3) and 2(4) and CRIMJIG 16.05 to 16.08). While the statutes may not be perfectly “parallel,” they are sufficiently “close” to each other that it would be stretching things to say that the defendant’s conduct was felonious under federal law but not felonious under Minnesota law.
We therefore reverse the decision of the court of appeals and reinstate the original sentence imposed by the sentencing court.
Reversed and original sentence reinstated.
. In this case, defendant’s "out-of-state” convictions are federal convictions.
. See North Carolina v. Alford, 400 U.S. 25, 91 S.Ct. 160, 27 L.Ed.2d 162 (1970).

=== CASE 9740632 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:39:02.094432+00 ===

TOMUANOVICH, Justice
(dissenting).
I respectfully dissent. The majority decision violates the basic principles of due process of law guaranteed by both the Minnesota and United States Constitutions. See Minn.Const. art. I, § 7; U.S. Const. Amend. XIV. The majority argues that regardless of the constitutional implications, it would be unfair to defendants with past Minnesota convictions if defendants with out-of-state convictions were not given “bonus” points for similar conduct. While this apparent attempt to ensure equal protection of the laws to Minnesota convicts is admirable, the majority has failed to consider the due process problems with its approach. In effect, the majority allows unproven facts to establish an element of an offense to justify enhancing Hill’s sentence. Such action cannot be justified under constitutional principles.
The majority claims that Hill’s convictions under the Federal False Statements Statute, 18 U.S.C. § 1001, would constitute welfare fraud and theft under Minnesota *63law. As the majority points out, welfare fraud and theft both require a specific intent to defraud whereas the federal statute requires something less — a specific intent to deceive.1 Thus, a conviction under the federal statute does not necessarily establish an intent to defraud as the majority ultimately seems to believe. The defendant’s federal convictions merely establish that he filed false reports with a governmental agency with the intent to deceive. For the majority to find, beyond a reasonable doubt, that the defendant intended to defraud the government is in fact broadening the crime to which the defendant actually pleaded guilty.
A comparison of the elements of welfare fraud and making false statements will further illustrate this point. The elements of welfare fraud are as follows:
1. Obtaining or attempting to obtain assistance;
2. To which one is not entitled;
3. By means of a false statement or representation; and
4. Defendant knew the statement or representation was false.
See CRIMJIG 24.16 (3rd ed. 1990). The elements of making a false statement are as follows:
1. Defendant knowingly made a false statement or representation to the government;
2. Defendant acted willfully in making the false statement or representation; and
3. The statement was material.
See Devitt, Blackmar & O’Malley, Federal Jury Practice and Instructions, § 37.07 (4th ed. 1990). When comparing the elements, it is quite obvious that welfare fraud contains an additional one which was not proven in the federal case; namely, obtaining or attempting to obtain assistance. Hill probably did obtain assistance to which he was not entitled but “probably” is not good enough. The fact remains that this element was not proven beyond a reasonable doubt. “[T]he due process clause of the fourteenth amendment to the United States Constitution requires the state to prove each element of the crime charged beyond a reasonable doubt.” State v. Merrill, 428 N.W.2d 361, 366 (Minn.1988) (Yetka, J.); see also State v. Brom, 463 N.W.2d 758, 768 (Minn.1990) (Wahl, J. dissenting).
Although State v. Briton was a pre-guidelines case, it pointed out the problems with the approach adopted by the majority. Briton concerned the enhancement of sentences under the Habitual Offender Act. The issue was the defendant’s prior conviction for larceny under an Iowa statute which classified a felony-level offense at more than $20. At that time, Minnesota’s larceny statute had a felony-level threshold of more than $25. Although the evidence was based on a theft of $46.26, this court refused to allow the conviction to count under the Act because the definitions of larceny differed as to value. This court reasoned:
[I]t is conceivable that a defendant in a felony prosecution may fail to contest the value of the property involved, only because in the particular jurisdiction where he is being tried the value charged and the value admitted constitute the same degree of the offense. The difference will not be material unless there is later occasion to determine whether the elements of the crime committed in one state constitute a felony in another state, a remote and unlikely ramification few offenders will have in mind.
Briton, 265 Minn. at 329, 121 N.W.2d at 579. Here, defendant had neither a motive nor an opportunity to contest whether he actually received or attempted to receive any benefits. Yet the majority is willing to find him guilty of doing so. To make such a finding without affording Hill an opportunity to defend himself violates due process.
The majority also believes that the sentencing judge will not have to convene a *64“mini-trial” in every case because the sentencing judge will normally be able to determine if the underlying offense would constitute a crime in Minnesota. But how, by gut reaction? Although the majority would subject the sentencing judge’s determination to an abuse of discretion standard, I believe a sentencing judge should be limited to the facts necessarily proven by a foreign or out-of-state conviction when applying the sentencing guidelines. This would provide the sentencing judge with a workable standard and avoid the problem of requiring a burdensome “mini-trial” in those cases where the sentencing court is unable to decide whether a foreign or out-of-state conviction should be considered for sentencing purposes.
As a final point, it is important to remember that Hill pleaded guilty to the underlying crime and was punished accordingly. This case only concerns how much “bonus” time the defendant should get based on his criminal history score. By pleading guilty, Hill saved the government the time and expense of a trial. In exchange, he was not required to admit any intent to defraud. Now the majority has decided to nullify his half of the bargain without the benefit of proof. This sort of trial by fiat is precisely what the due process clause is designed to prevent. The least the state could do in such a situation is prove that a foreign or an out-of-state conviction would, beyond a reasonable doubt, constitute a crime under Minnesota law.
I respectfully dissent from the majority’s view that a sentencing judge may rely on unproven facts in determining whether a foreign or an out-of-state conviction would be a crime under Minnesota law.
. "Intent to deceive and intent to defraud are not synonymous. Deceive is to cause to believe the false or to mislead. Defraud is to deprive of some right, interest or property by deceit. * * * 18 U.S.C. § 1001 does not require that the government prove a specific intent to defraud.” United States v. Godwin, 566 F.2d 975, 976 (5th Cir.1978) (per curiam).

=== CASE 2224305 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:18.904027+00 ===

751 N.E.2d 606 (2001)
323 Ill. App. 3d 393
256 Ill. Dec. 216
Warren REAGAN, as Special Administrator for the Estate of Michael K. Reagan, Deceased, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
Lloyd SEARCY, Defendant-Appellee (Protestant Memorial Medical Center, Inc., and Diana M. Warner, Defendants).
No. 5-00-0056.
Appellate Court of Illinois, Fifth District.
June 21, 2001.
*607 George R. Ripplinger, George R. Ripplinger and Associates, Belleville, IL, Attorney for Appellant.
Brian A. Babka, Chatham & Babka, Swansea, IL, Attorney for Appellee.
Presiding Justice CHAPMAN delivered the opinion of the court:
Warren Reagan (plaintiff) sought the medical records of Lloyd Searcy (defendant) in an arbitration proceeding concerning underinsured-motorist insurance coverage. The proceedings are entitled In the Matter of the Arbitration Between: Warren and Michael Reagan v. State Farm Insurance Company. Defendant and his medical care providers refused to supply the medical records. Plaintiff then filed a separate petition for a rule to show cause as to why defendant and his care providers should not be held in contempt for their refusals. The trial court granted defendant's motions to dismiss the petition for a rule to show cause.
Plaintiff contends that the medical records should be discoverable in the arbitration proceeding. He bases this contention on several theories, one of which is the holding in Gleason v. St. Elizabeth Medical Center, 135 Ill.App.3d 92, 89 Ill. Dec. 937, 481 N.E.2d 780 (1985). We overrule our decision in Gleason and affirm the dismissal of the petition.
FACTS
On March 27, 1994, defendant and Michael Reagan were involved in a head-on collision. Michael Reagan, a minor, died of injuries sustained in the accident, and he left his parents and three minor siblings surviving. Plaintiff is the administrator of Michael Reagan's estate. An underinsured-motorist claim is currently pending, and it involves the issue of defendant's sobriety at the time of the accident. Defendant's liability insurance company has already paid its policy limit of $20,000 toward *608 settling the claim. The insurance company for Michael Reagan's estate also has paid its policy limit of $100,000 to defendant.
Defendant was deposed for the pending arbitration proceedings. During the deposition, defendant stated that he had shared "a pitcher or so" of beer with a companion prior to the accident. Defendant sustained multiple injuries in the collision and was seen by doctors at Protestant Memorial Hospital. Defendant refused to sign an authorization for the release of those medical records.
On April 21, 1998, a subpoena requesting the medical records for defendant's treatment following the accident was served on Diana M. Warner, the medical records supervisor at Protestant Memorial Medical Center, Inc. On April 24, 1998, Warner refused to honor the subpoena. As indicated earlier, plaintiff's petition for a rule to show cause was denied. Plaintiff has appealed.
ANALYSIS
I.
Generally, a patient's medical records are protected by the physician-patient privilege. This privilege exists to encourage disclosure between a doctor and a patient and to protect the patient from an invasion of privacy. People v. Bates, 169 Ill.App.3d 218, 224, 119 Ill. Dec. 919, 523 N.E.2d 675, 679 (1988). This is a nonconstitutional privilege that is conferred by section 8-802 of the Code of Civil Procedure (735 ILCS 5/8-802 (West 1994)). The statute lists several exceptions that allow the disclosure of the information, despite the existence of the privilege. 735 ILCS 5/8-802(1) through (10) (West 1994). In addition, a patient may lose the privilege by waiving it. Bates, 169 Ill.App.3d at 224, 119 Ill. Dec. 919, 523 N.E.2d at 679. It is important to note at this time that plaintiff's brief cites to the version of the statute that included the changes made by Public Act 89-7, which became effective March 9, 1995 (735 ILCS 5/8-802 (West Supp.1995)). That act was held to be unconstitutional in its entirety, in Best v. Taylor Machine Works, 179 Ill. 2d 367, 228 Ill. Dec. 636, 689 N.E.2d 1057 (1997). We, therefore, cite to the pre 1995 version of the statute, which is still in effect.
Section 8-802 states the general privilege:
"No physician or surgeon shall be permitted to disclose any information he or she may have acquired in attending any patient in a professional character, necessary to enable him or her professionally to serve the patient * * *." 735 ILCS 5/8-802 (West 1994).
The next portion of section 8-802 lists various exceptions to that general rule. The statute provides that such information may be disclosed:
"(3) with the expressed consent of the patient * * * [or] (4) in all actions brought by or against the patient, his or her personal representative, a beneficiary under a policy of insurance, or the executor or administrator of his or her estate wherein the patient's physical or mental condition is an issue[.]" 735 ILCS 5/8-802(3), (4) (West 1994).
There are additional exceptions listed in the statute, but they are inapplicable in this instance.
II.
Plaintiff argues that he should be allowed access to defendant's medical records because exception (4) applies in this situation. Exception (4) allows for the disclosure of such information "in all actions brought by or against the patient, his or her personal representative, a beneficiary *609 under a policy of insurance, or the executor or administrator of his or her estate wherein the patient's physical or mental condition is an issue[.]" 735 ILCS 5/8-802(4) (West 1994). Specifically, plaintiff argues that both the estate itself and the beneficiaries under the insurance policy brought the arbitration proceeding in which defendant's physical condition and mental condition are at issue and that, thus, defendant has waived the privilege. However, a careful reading of the statute reveals that it is only when the patient, the patient's representative, or the patient's beneficiary has brought such an action that the privilege is waived under this exception. In this proceeding, defendant is not the person bringing the action. Thus, this argument fails. To the extent that plaintiff argues that the statute also provides for disclosure in actions brought by or against the patient, we note that the "against the patient" phrase cannot apply in this case because the underinsured-motorist claim was brought against State Farm Insurance Company, not defendant.
Second, plaintiff argues that since defendant earlier brought a claim against the estate of Michael Reagan, he has waived the privilege. Plaintiff is correct that defendant made a claim, and if plaintiff had sought the discovery of defendant's records in that case, they would have been discoverable. But plaintiff did not seek the discovery of the records in that case, and that case has been settled. Only the underinsured-motorist arbitration proceeding is still pending. Plaintiff's theory that the exception is still valid because this underinsured-motorist action is merely a continuation of the claims process surrounding the collision is speculative at best and is unsupported by any authority whatsoever.
III.
Plaintiff argues that this case is analogous to Gleason v. St. Elizabeth Medical Center, in which the court required compliance with a subpoena to obtain the medical information of nonparties, because their privileges had been waived in earlier cases. Gleason v. St. Elizabeth Medical Center, 135 Ill.App.3d 92, 89 Ill. Dec. 937, 481 N.E.2d 780 (1985). In Gleason, each of the nonparties had previously brought claims against the physician that Gleason charged with malpractice. Gleason, 135 Ill.App.3d at 95, 89 Ill. Dec. 937, 481 N.E.2d at 781.
We recognize the holding in Gleason and now overrule it. The problem with Gleason is that it allowed far too much access to a nonparty's medical records. By allowing those records to be eternally available merely because the nonparty/patient had waived the privilege in an earlier court proceeding, this court extended the theory of waiver far beyond what the legislature could have intended in section 8-802. By creating the physician-patient privilege, the legislature statutorily recognized the patient's interest in maintaining confidentiality in the relationship with his or her physician. People v. Bickham, 89 Ill. 2d 1, 6, 59 Ill. Dec. 80, 431 N.E.2d 365, 368 (1982). This privilege is for the benefit of the patient. Bickham, 89 Ill.2d at 6, 59 Ill. Dec. 80, 431 N.E.2d at 368. When a plaintiff waives the privilege by filing a lawsuit, he or she waives it for that lawsuit only. Otherwise, the filing of a suit could be considered a waiver of the plaintiff's medical privilege from that point forward.
Defendant, a nonparty/patient, has not waived the privilege because he previously made a claim against the estate of Michael Reagan. That claim was settled. To the extent that Gleason holds that because a patient waived the privilege in one action *610 the privilege is waived in any future action, we overrule that holding.
IV.
Lastly, plaintiff believes that the medical records should be made available because they may contain relevant evidence of defendant's intoxication. Plaintiff argues that because the records may contain evidence of intoxication, they could reflect on defendant's ability to observe and recall events accurately, which has been held to be a valid reason to provide such records. See Clarke v. Rochford, 79 Ill.App.2d 336, 224 N.E.2d 679 (1967); Miller v. People, 216 Ill. 309, 74 N.E. 743 (1905). However, those cases are distinguishable because they focused on the medical records of a party. Defendant is not a party to the pending arbitration proceeding.
Several cases have dealt with the rights of nonparty patients with respect to the physician-patient privilege. See Parkson v. Central DuPage Hospital, 105 Ill. App. 3d 850, 61 Ill. Dec. 651, 435 N.E.2d 140 (1982); Ekstrom v. Temple, 197 Ill.App.3d 120, 142 Ill. Dec. 910, 553 N.E.2d 424 (1990); House v. SwedishAmerican Hospital, 206 Ill.App.3d 437, 151 Ill. Dec. 467, 564 N.E.2d 922 (1990); Glassman v. St. Joseph Hospital, 259 Ill.App.3d 730, 197 Ill. Dec. 727, 631 N.E.2d 1186 (1994). Most recently, the court in In re D.H. reviewed the case law in this area and found that Illinois law is clear that the medical records of nonparties are protected by the privilege. In re D.H. 319 Ill.App.3d 771, 774, 253 Ill. Dec. 826, 746 N.E.2d 274, 276 (2001). Courts have also recognized that this privilege may act to bar information which is relevant to the issue involved in the case. House, 206 Ill.App.3d at 444, 151 Ill. Dec. 467, 564 N.E.2d at 927. Defendant is only a witness in this case; the fact that his medical records may contain relevant evidence is not enough to overcome the privilege that protects the medical records of a nonparty.
CONCLUSION
This case does not fall into any valid exception to the physician-patient privilege, and we conclude that the privilege was not waived. Therefore, we conclude that defendant's medical records are not available to plaintiff in this proceeding, and we affirm the dismissal of the petition for a rule to show cause why defendant, Protestant Memorial Medical Center, Inc., and Diana M. Warner should not be held in contempt of court.
Affirmed.
RARICK and HOPKINS, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 2224308 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:18.989694+00 ===

193 Mich. App. 284 (1992)
483 N.W.2d 452
PEOPLE
v.
FISHER
Docket No. 111264.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided March 16, 1992, at 9:15 A.M.
Before: DANHOF, C.J., and SULLIVAN and NEFF, JJ.
SULLIVAN, J.
Joyce Fisher disappeared on April 15, 1978. On May 27, 1988, a jury convicted her estranged husband, defendant Jerry Wayne Fisher, of involuntary manslaughter, MCL 750.321; MSA 28.553. No witnesses to Joyce Fisher's death have come forward, and her body has never been found. Defendant appeals his conviction on several grounds. We reverse the conviction because the evidence was insufficient to submit the case to the jury and the trial court erred in denying defendant's motion for a directed verdict at the close of the prosecution's case.
We initially note that the prosecutor failed to file a brief in this appeal and failed to appear for oral argument. We are disturbed by this apparent indifference and abandonment of a case this serious after he elected to proceed with marginal evidence to a fourteen-day trial by jury that generated a great deal of public interest and media coverage.
Defendant claims error in the denial of his motion for a directed verdict, in the admission of evidence of prior and subsequent bad acts, in the admission of hearsay evidence of Joyce's fear of defendant, and in the allowance of improper remarks during the prosecutor's closing argument. We agree that the evidence was insufficient and that the prosecutor overstepped his bounds. Some of the evidence complained of was properly admitted for limited purposes, then improperly argued during the prosecutor's closing argument.
In September 1987, defendant was charged with *286 open murder in connection with the disappearance of his wife more than nine years earlier. In April 1978, defendant and Joyce Fisher were in the process of a divorce following a stormy two-year marriage, marked by Joyce's reports to friends and family of frequent beatings by defendant. Joyce testified at a hearing in connection with the divorce that defendant had threatened to kill her in mid-January 1978, approximately three months before she disappeared. Joyce and their child then moved to Chicago to live with Joyce's parents.
On April 14, 1978, Joyce went to her parents' cottage at Indian Lake for a visit between defendant and their daughter scheduled for April 16. On the morning of April 15, witnesses saw Joyce and defendant having a friendly breakfast at a local drugstore. Later that day, Joyce left with defendant in his car to have a vehicle title transfer notarized. Defendant told investigators that, en route, Joyce discovered that they had the wrong title, so they returned to where Joyce had left her car. No witnesses could either refute or support that claim. Several witnesses testified that Joyce has not been seen or heard from since that time. There was also substantial testimony regarding her reliability, her long- and short-term plans, her devotion to her child, and her close relationship with family and friends. This testimony gave rise to a strong inference that she is dead.
At the close of the prosecution's case, defendant moved for a directed verdict, arguing that the evidence was insufficient to submit the case to the jury on any theory, particularly on a theory of first-degree murder because there was no evidence of premeditation or deliberation. The court denied the motion and instructed the jury with regard to first- and second-degree murder and, over defendant's objection, with regard to voluntary and *287 involuntary manslaughter. The jury found defendant guilty of involuntary manslaughter.
Due process requires that the prosecutor introduce sufficient evidence that could justify a trier of fact in concluding that defendant is guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. People v Hampton, 407 Mich. 354, 368; 285 NW2d 284 (1979). The prosecutor in this case failed to introduce sufficient evidence to support submitting any of the homicide theories to the jury.
The prosecutor offered no evidence of an act that resulted in Joyce Fisher's death. A federal appellate court recently held that "neither the body of the missing person nor evidence of the method used to produce death is required to establish the corpus delicti or to sustain a murder conviction." Virgin Islands v Harris, 938 F2d 401, 415 (CA 3, 1991). In Harris, even though the court expressed its holding broadly, the facts included several admissions by the defendant and physical evidence, including bloodstains. This Court has held that the victim's body is not necessary to establish the corpus delicti of homicide. People v Brasic, 171 Mich. App. 222, 227; 429 NW2d 860 (1988); People v Modelski, 164 Mich. App. 337, 342; 416 NW2d 708 (1987). In each of those cases, the defendant either admitted or confessed to the killing. We have found no reported Michigan decisions involving a missing body where there was no direct admission, no physical evidence, and no witness to some part of the killing or the disposal of the body.
The court in Harris, pp 413-415, ns 12-14, surveyed "missing body" homicide cases. That survey uncovered only one case upholding a conviction without an admission by the defendant or some physical evidence or a witness to some part of the killing or concealment of the body, People v Scott, 176 Cal App 2d 458; 1 Cal Rptr 600 (1959). The California court, relying on two Commonwealth of *288 Nations cases,[1] held that there was sufficient evidence to support the conviction. Much of the case concerned circumstantial evidence of the missing person's death. The court also held that whether the defendant knew that his wife was dead was a question of fact susceptible of proof by circumstantial evidence. Id., p 496. Finding a chain of such evidence in the record, the court affirmed the conviction.
Even if we were to accept that circumstantial proof tending to show that a defendant knows that a missing person is dead is sufficient to support conviction for that death, we find no such evidence in this record. One witness testified vaguely that a year or two after Joyce's disappearance, while defendant was drinking one evening, he said his wife was gone "and nobody can find her" or "nobody is going to find her or something to that effect." Defendant remarried, but not until more than eight years had passed since Joyce disappeared. He lied to his second wife about the circumstances surrounding the end of his first marriage, but not in any way that reasonably can be construed as an admission that he knew Joyce was dead. Defendant told other people in the years following her disappearance either that he was divorced or that his wife was institutionalized. There was no proof of any of the circumstances present in Scott that led that court to conclude: "Every act, every statement of [the defendant] after the disappearance of his wife was consistent only with knowledge that [she] was dead." Id., p 499.
In this case, there was no physical evidence, such as bloodstains or a weapon, linking defendant to Joyce's death. He did not admit that he killed *289 his wife, although the prosecutor offered an equivocal statement. One police officer testified that he suggested a possible sequence of events two days after Joyce's disappearance while questioning defendant. Defendant replied, "It's not like it seems, it didn't happen that way, I didn't mean for it to happen that way." This statement first appeared in a report prepared in April 1987; neither of the officers present included it in the original reports. That testimony, even if reviewed in the light most favorable to the prosecutor, is insufficient to support defendant's conviction.
The prosecutor presented ample evidence of defendant's motive and opportunity to kill his wife. Motive and opportunity, while relevant, are not elements of any crime. See People v Oliphant, 399 Mich. 472, 489; 250 NW2d 443 (1976). Circumstantial evidence and the reasonable inferences that arise from the evidence can constitute satisfactory proof of the elements of a crime. People v Reddick, 187 Mich. App. 547, 551; 468 NW2d 278 (1991). Inferences, however, may not be based on evidence that is uncertain or speculative or that raises merely a conjecture or possibility. People v Orsie, 83 Mich. App. 42, 47; 268 NW2d 278 (1978). The evidence in this case did not rise above the level of conjecture. It was not sufficient to support the conviction.
The prosecutor compounded the error with his grossly improper closing argument. Because insufficient evidence mandates reversal, we need not address the evidentiary issues raised by defendant; some of those evidentiary questions, however, are pertinent to our analysis. Those issues primarily involved evidence of prior and subsequent bad acts of defendant, his previous assaults of his wife and subsequent acts of violence against others. The prior acts of marital violence were admissible to *290 show defendant's motive and the relationship between defendant and his wife. People v Morris, 139 Mich. App. 550, 557; 362 NW2d 830 (1984); 1 Wharton, Criminal Evidence (13th ed, Torcia rev) § 179, pp 335-336. Evidence of prior bad acts is never admissible to show a defendant's character or to show that he acted in conformity with that character. MRE 404(b).
Defendant's supposed violent character and his presumed conformity with that character in the disappearance of his wife was the central theme of the prosecutor's closing argument. He repeatedly referred to defendant's "troubled personality" and "sick mind," compared defendant with a "little child" who never grew up, and concluded that defendant's aggressiveness became murderous. This line of argument culminated in some particularly objectionable (although not objected to) remarks. The prosecutor recounted a particularly brutal prior incident during which defendant allegedly assaulted his wife, and stated that such activity concluded with defendant "endangering her life and finally taking her life." The prosecutor then argued that the jury should "find that as relevant evidence ... as far as the likelihood as [sic] what happened, as far as the facts of what happened on April the 15th." Shortly after that, the prosecutor, after speculating about what might have triggered an attack (including an implication of attempted rape), suggested that defendant, "for whatever reason pushed himself to the edge and as he had done so often in the past, snapped and went into a rage and struck out and assaulted and killed Joy Fisher." Near the end of his concluding remarks, the prosecutor said:
The other thing is, people generally don't die from one blow. And people that commit murder are not medical people. If someone is hit, is there evidence that at that point in time that they are *291 dead? There would have to be further steps taken. It would be inconsistent that someone is going to die accidentally and then be disposed of in some manner so that the body would never be found.
As I indicated before, the body itself through forensic evidence that would be available, the experts looking at a body could tell us a great deal. And I would suggest that Jerry Fisher didn't want to give us that opportunity, because it would show consistent behavior with the past where it wasn't one blow. Well, where it was a well thought out situation of tying someone up or whatever precisely happened.
Defendant has raised other objections to the prosecutor's closing argument, some of which are well-taken. We highlight these excerpts merely to show that there was no evidence in this case. Defendant was convicted on the basis of speculation and innuendo. The prosecutor made up a theory from no evidence whatsoever. At an earlier point in the argument, he acknowledged that it was impossible to determine if Joyce had been shot, stabbed, strangled or struck, yet he went on to argue not only that defendant had hit her, but that he had hit her more than once. A prosecutor may not make a statement of fact to the jury that is unsupported by the evidence in the case. People v Dinsmore, 103 Mich. App. 660, 679; 303 NW2d 857 (1981). The argument here was not only without foundation in the evidence, it was based solely on improper use of the evidence of prior bad acts: defendant had hit his wife before, so he probably hit her on April 15, 1978, this time killing her.
This argument in itself mandates a new trial. More significantly, it demonstrates the lack of evidence to support the prosecutor's case. The trial court should have granted defendant's motion for a directed verdict.
Reversed and remanded for entry of a directed verdict of not guilty. We do not retain jurisdiction.
NOTES
[1]  The King v Horry [1952], NZLR 111; Regina v Onufrejczyk [1955], 1 QB 388.

=== CASE 2224309 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:19.005982+00 ===

751 N.E.2d 164 (2001)
323 Ill. App. 3d 58
256 Ill. Dec. 111
ROYAL INSURANCE COMPANY OF AMERICA, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
INSIGNIA FINANCIAL GROUP, INC., and Stacie Kelley, Indiv. and as Mother and Next Friend of Robert Kelley, a a Minor, Defendants-Appellees and Appellants (Reliance Insurance Company, Plaintiff-Appellant).
No. 1-00-2063.
Appellate Court of Illinois, First District, Second Division.
June 5, 2001.
*166 Robert L. Kiesler, Patti M. Deuel, Kiesler & Berman, Chicago, for Plaintiff-Appellee.
Karen K. Coffin, Nemecek and Cole, Sherman Oaks, CA, Robert J. Zaideman, Zaideman & Esrig, P.C., Chicago, for Defendant-Appellees and Appellants.
Goldberg, Kohn, Bell, Black, Rosenbloom & Mortiz, Ltd., of Chicago (Kenneth S. Ulrich and Lincoln Schroth, of counsel), for Plaintiff-Appellant.
Justice COUSINS delivered the opinion of the court:
This is a dispute over which of two insurance companies has to provide a defense and possible indemnification to Insignia Financial Group, Inc. (Insignia), in connection with an underlying tort case filed in the circuit court of Cook County. The underlying complaint was filed against Insignia and seeks damages for in utero injuries sustained by Robert Kelley when his mother, Stacie Kelley, received an electric shock while she was employed by Insignia. Reliance Insurance Company (Reliance) brought a declaratory judgment action, alleging that it did not have a duty to defend or indemnify Insignia under its employers liability policy. Royal Insurance Company of America (Royal) also sought a declaration that it did not have a duty to defend or indemnify under its general liability policy. Reliance's theory was that Robert suffered a direct injury and that only consequential bodily injuries to a child of an injured employee are permitted under its employers liability insurance. Royal's theory was that Robert suffered a consequential injury, an injury excluded by the general liability policy issued by Royal to Insignia. Royal's motion to consolidate both declaratory actions was granted.
The trial court denied Reliance's motion for judgment on the pleadings, ruling that Reliance had a duty to defend Insignia in the underlying case. The trial court granted Royal's cross-motion for summary judgment. Reliance and Insignia filed notices of appeal.
On appeal, Reliance argues that the trial court erred in determining that an injury to a fetus caused by an electrical shock to the mother which occurred during the course of employment constituted a "consequential" rather than "direct" injury, *167 thereby triggering Reliance's duty to defend a lawsuit against the employer.
On appeal, Insignia contends that the trial court erred in granting Royal's cross-motion for summary judgment because the question of whether Robert's injury was a "direct consequence" of the shock to Stacie is an unresolved question that cannot be determined on the basis of the complaint alone and requires a full evidentiary hearing on the merits.
BACKGROUND
On May 14, 1998, Stacie Kelley, individually and on behalf of her minor son, Robert Kelly, filed a complaint (Kelley complaint) against her employer, Insignia, seeking damages for in utero injuries allegedly suffered by Robert. On November 19, 1999, Robert Kelley filed a first amended complaint against Insignia that essentially contained the same allegations as the original complaint. According to the complaint, Stacie was employed by Insignia as a swimming pool attendant for the Emerald Courts apartments when the injury occurred. Insignia manages the Emerald Court apartments. The complaint further provides:
"8. On August 30, 1995, Stacie was pregnant with Robert. Robert was born on December 1, 1995.
9. On August 30, 1995, Stacie went into the pool house to turn on the lights for the pool. At that time, Stacie grabbed a metal switch to turn on the pool lights.
10. As Stacie flipped the lever for the pool lights, she received an electric shock that traveled from her hand down through her feet.
11. The electric shock traveled through Stacie's uterus and shocked Robert as well. Robert suffered brain damage as a result of the electric shock. Today he suffers from right spastic hemiparesis, developmental delay and seizures."
Insignia tendered Robert's claim to both Royal and Reliance for a defense and possible indemnification. Insignia had purchased a general liability policy from Royal. Royal's general liability policy excludes coverage for bodily injury to a child of an employee as a consequence of bodily injury to the employee arising out of and during the course of employment. Exclusion "e" of the Royal policy states in pertinent part:
"This insurance does not apply to:
* * *
e. Employer's Liability
`Bodily injury' to:
(1) An `employee' of the insured arising out of and in the course of:
(a) Employment by the insured; or
(b) Performing duties related to the conduct of the insured's business; or
(2) The * * * child * * * of that `employee' as a consequence of paragraph (1) above.
This exclusion applies:
(1) Whether the insured may be liable as an employer or in any other capacity; and
(2) To any obligation to share damages with or repay someone else who must pay damages because of the injury." (Emphasis added.)
In addition to the Royal policy, Insignia had purchased a workers compensation and employers liability policy from Reliance. Reliance's policy covers damages for bodily injury to employees and for consequential bodily injury to a child of the injured employee, provided these damages are a direct consequence of bodily injury arising out of and in the course of employment *168 by the employee. The Reliance policy provides in pertinent part:
"We will pay all sums you legally must pay as damages because of bodily injury to your employees, provided the bodily injury is covered by this Employers Liability Insurance.
The damages we will pay, where recovery is permitted by law, includes damages:
1. for which you are liable to a third party by reason of a claim or suit against you by that third party to recover damages claimed against such third party as a result of injury to your employees.
* * *
3. for consequential bodily injury to a spouse, child, parent, brother or sister of the injured employee;
provided that these damages are the direct consequence of bodily injury that arises out of and in the course of the injured employee's employment by you * * *." (Emphasis added.)
On March 12, 1999, Reliance filed a complaint for declaratory relief, seeking a declaration that the Reliance policy did not cover the claims made against Insignia because the Kelley complaint alleged "direct" injuries to Robert. On September 1, 1999, Royal filed a complaint for declaratory relief, alleging that its policy excluded coverage because the Kelley complaint alleged "consequential" injuries to Robert. On November 22, 1999, the court granted Royal's motion to consolidate the two actions for declaratory relief.
Subsequently, Reliance filed its motion for judgment on the pleadings while Royal filed a cross-motion for summary judgment. During arguments on the motions, Reliance argued that its policy with Insignia was inapplicable because it only covered "consequential" injuries and that Robert's injuries were "directly" caused by the electrical shock. Royal conversely contended that its policy only covered "direct" injuries and that Robert's injuries were a "consequence" of the electric shock which injured his mother. Insignia asserted that the determination of whether Reliance or Royal owed coverage could only be decided after an evidentiary hearing on the merits.
Based on the allegations of the Kelley complaint and the language of the insurance policies, the trial court concluded that Robert suffered injuries as a direct consequence of his mother's injury and that the Reliance policy therefore applied. On May 16, 2000, the trial court granted Royal's cross-motion for summary judgment and denied Reliance's motion for judgment on pleadings.
Reliance and Insignia appeal. Royal also filed a motion challenging the jurisdiction of this court to consider the appeals filed by Reliance and Insignia and requesting dismissal of this appeal. Royal's motion raises two issues: (1) Reliance lacks standing to appeal; and (2) Insignia's appeal is untimely. For the following reasons, we deny the motion to dismiss, affirm in part, and reverse in part.
ANALYSIS
I
We initially consider Royal's motion to dismiss. First, Royal asserts that Reliance lacks standing to appeal the trial court's order granting summary judgment in favor of Royal. Although both insurers opposed each other's motions at the trial court level, Royal claims that the interests of Royal and Reliance are not adverse and Reliance was not prejudiced by the summary judgment order. Generally, a defendant does not have standing to appeal a judgment in favor of a codefendant because *169 judgment for or against one of them does nothing but establish their respective rights and liabilities toward the plaintiff. An exception exists, however, in cases where the issues between the codefendants were actively litigated in the action below. Tisoncik v. Szczepankiewicz, 113 Ill. App. 3d 240, 244, 68 Ill. Dec. 874, 446 N.E.2d 1271 (1983). Here, in its cross-motion for summary judgment, not only did Royal argue that its policy excluded coverage, but it further contended that the Kelley complaint alleged a "consequential injury" that was covered by the Reliance policy. Since the co-insurers actively litigated the common issue of whether Robert suffered a consequential injury in the trial court below, Reliance has standing to appeal the judgment in favor of Royal. Tisoncik, 113 Ill.App.3d at 244, 68 Ill. Dec. 874, 446 N.E.2d 1271.
Second, Royal contends that Insignia's appeal was untimely. Jurisdiction is conferred upon the appellate court only through the timely filing of a notice of appeal. Berg v. Allied Security, Inc., 193 Ill. 2d 186, 189, 249 Ill. Dec. 770, 737 N.E.2d 160 (2000). Generally, a notice of appeal must be filed "within 30 days after the entry of the final judgment appealed from." 155 Ill. 2d R. 303(a)(1). If a notice of appeal is filed by a party, "any other party, within 10 days after service upon him or her * * * may join in the appeal * * * by filing a notice of appeal." (Emphasis added.) 155 Ill. 2d R. 303(a)(3). Under Supreme Court Rule 12(c) (145 Ill. 2d R. 12(c)), service by mail is complete four days after mailing. The four-day period is calculated by excluding the day on which the notice is mailed and including the following four days after the notice is mailed. Acosta v. Sharlin, 295 Ill.App.3d 102, 105, 229 Ill. Dec. 623, 692 N.E.2d 396 (1998).
In the instant case, Reliance filed its notice of appeal on June 14, 2000. Insignia alleges that Reliance mailed its notice to Insignia on the same day. Under Rule 12(c) (145 Ill. 2d R. 12(c)) and Acosta, service of Reliance's notice of appeal was not complete until four days after it was mailed, on June 18, 2000. Therefore, pursuant to Rule 303(a)(3) (155 Ill. 2d R. 303(a)(3)), Insignia did not have 10 days from June 14, 2000, but, rather, had 10 days from June 18, 2000 (until June 28, 2000), to file its notice of appeal. Since Insignia filed its notice of appeal on June 27, 2000, its appeal was timely.
II
We now turn to the merits of the instant appeal. This court reviews de novo an order granting a motion for summary judgment (McDaniel v. Ong, 311 Ill. App. 3d 203, 208, 243 Ill. Dec. 729, 724 N.E.2d 38 (1999)) or a trial court's ruling upon a motion to dismiss (Sherrod v. Ramaswamy, 314 Ill.App.3d 357, 360, 247 Ill. Dec. 371, 732 N.E.2d 87 (2000)). When a declaratory judgment action is brought to determine an insurer's duty to defend, the court must look only to the complaint in the underlying action to determine whether the allegations show that the claim falls within or potentially within coverage. Zurich Insurance Co. v. Raymark Industries, Inc., 118 Ill. 2d 23, 52, 112 Ill. Dec. 684, 514 N.E.2d 150 (1987). Thus, only the allegations in the underlying complaint, considered in the context of the relevant policy provisions, should determine whether an insurer owes a duty to defend an action brought against the insured. Bituminous Casualty Corp. v. Fulkerson, 212 Ill.App.3d 556, 562, 156 Ill. Dec. 669, 571 N.E.2d 256 (1991). A trial court may consider evidence beyond the underlying complaint only if such evidence does not tend to determine an issue crucial to the underlying lawsuit. Fidelity *170 & Casualty Co. v. Envirodyne Engineers, Inc., 122 Ill.App.3d 301, 304-05, 77 Ill. Dec. 848, 461 N.E.2d 471 (1983).
In the instant case, the complaint alleges that Stacie received an electric shock that traveled from her hand down through her feet. Further, the "electric shock traveled through Stacie's uterus and shocked Robert as well" and "Robert suffered brain damage as a result of the electric shock." Reliance's policy covers "consequential bodily injury" to a child of an injured employee "provided that these damages are the direct consequence of bodily injury that arises out of and in the course of the injured employee's employment." (Emphasis added.)
Reliance initially relies on the Corpus Juris Secundum (C.J.S.) definition of "consequential" and "direct" damages to argue that Robert's alleged injury must be deemed direct and falls outside the scope of coverage. 25 C.J.S. Damages § 2 (1966). The C.J.S. definition of consequential damages states:
"Consequential damages are such as are not produced without the concurrence of some other event attributable to the same origin or cause; such damage, loss, or injury as does not flow directly and immediately from the act of the party, but only from the consequences or results of such act." 25 C.J.S. Damages § 2 (1966).
C.J.S. also defines direct damages as follows:
"Direct damages are such as result from an act without the intervention of any intermediate controlling or self-efficient cause. Direct damages include all such injurious consequences as proceed from, or have direct causal connection with, such consequences." 25 C.J.S. Damages § 2 (1966).
Under these definitions, Reliance asserts that a direct injury occurs due to a single cause without the intervention of another act. Reliance further claims that a consequential injury involves two causesone is the initial injury to the employee, and the second is the injury to the child which is "attributable to the same origin or cause." According to Reliance, Robert suffered injury because of a single causethe electric shockand his injury should therefore be classified as direct.
Royal, on the other hand, argues that the C.J.S. definition of "consequential damages" does not apply to the term "consequential injury" contained in the Reliance policy. Instead, Royal urges the common, ordinary understanding of the term "consequence" as defined in the dictionary:
"1. Something that is produced by a cause or follows from a form of necessary connection or from a set of conditions; a natural or necessary result * * *.
* * *
3. The act or action of following in succession: sequence." Webster's Third International Dictionary 482 (1986).
Applying the dictionary definition, Royal posits that Robert was allegedly injured as a consequence of the electric shock to his mother. According to Royal, the common definition of the word consequence does not require two separate events. The electric shock that "traveled through Stacie's uterus and shocked Robert as well" was sufficient to cause a consequential injury to Robert.
Reliance also claims that a series of workers' compensation cases are analogous to the instant case. The cases held that the derivative injury doctrine does not bar a child from suing an employer for in utero injuries that occurred during the course of the mother's employment. For *171 example, in Thompson v. Pizza Hut of America, Inc., 767 F. Supp. 916 (N.D.Ill. 1991), a pregnant employee was exposed to carbon monoxide and other harmful fumes for three days while she worked at Pizza Hut. Her son was later born with severe birth defects. The child filed a suit against Pizza Hut, seeking recovery for his personal injuries which were incurred while his mother was acting as an employee in the course of her employment. Thompson, 767 F.Supp. at 917.
Pizza Hut argued that the exclusive remedy provision of the Illinois Workers' Compensation Act (the Act) (820 ILCS 305/1 et seq. (West 1998)) barred the child's actions because his injuries "derived from" injuries suffered by his mother. Thompson, 767 F.Supp. at 918. The exclusive remedy provision of the Act stated:
"`No common law or statutory right to recover damages from the employer * * * for injury or death sustained by any employee while engaged in the line of his duty as such employee, other than the compensation herein provided, is available to * * * any one wholly or partially dependent upon him * * *.'" (Emphasis omitted.) Thompson, 767 F.Supp. at 918, quoting Ill.Rev.Stat. 1991, ch. 48, par. 138.5(a) (now 820 ILCS 30 5/5(a) (West 1998)).
Since the child was bringing a claim based on his own injuries that occurred while in utero, the court found that the child's claim did not "derive from" his mother's injury. The court contrasted claims by family members that stemmed from employee injuries, like suits for loss of consortium, with the child's injury in utero. The court concluded that the child had status to bring a cause of action against Pizza Hut for his own injuries. Thompson, 767 F.Supp. at 918-19.
Similarly, the California Supreme Court reached the same conclusion in another workers' compensation case, Snyder v. Michael's Stores, Inc., 16 Cal. 4th 991, 945 P.2d 781, 68 Cal. Rptr. 2d 476 (1997). In Snyder, the court held that the workers' compensation exclusivity rule did not bar a child's action against her mother's employer for the child's in utero injuries allegedly caused when her mother breathed toxic fumes in the workplace. Snyder, 16 Cal.4th at 1000, 945 P.2d at 786, 68 Cal. Rptr.2d at 481. The court explained that a "derivative injury" by definition would simply not exist in the absence of injury to the employee. Snyder, 16 Cal.4th at 998, 945 P.2d at 785, 68 Cal.Rptr.2d at 480. Since the child did not claim any damages for injury to her mother or allege that her recovery depended on injuries suffered by her mother, the court held that the child had status to independently bring a cause of action against her mother's employer for the child's own injuries. Snyder, 16 Cal.4th at 1000, 945 P.2d at 786, 68 Cal. Rptr.2d at 481. See also Pizza Hut of America, Inc. v. Keefe, 900 P.2d 97 (Colo. 1995) (exclusivity provision of workers' compensation act did not bar parents' action against employer for wrongful death of their child from prenatal injuries allegedly caused by mother's employment).
Reliance contends that the term "derivative injury" used in the workers' compensation cases carries the same meaning as "consequential injury" in its insurance policy. The only case that Reliance cites in support of this contention, Moran v. Nafi Corp., 370 Mich. 536, 122 N.W.2d 800 (1963), is inapposite. In Moran, the Michigan Supreme Court was deciding for the first time whether a wife's loss of consortium action against her husband's employer was barred by the exclusivity provisions of Michigan's workers' compensation act. In its discussion of one of the employer's *172 arguments[1], the court used the terms "consequential" and "derivative" injury interchangeably. However, the court was not even discussing the term "derivative" injury in the context of workers' compensation exclusion. Moreover, the authority cited by Reliance relates to an employer's statutory liability under a workers' compensation scheme and not the construction of the terms of an insurance policy.
Next, we address Insignia's contention that both carriers potentially owe indemnity and thus both carriers have defense obligations. Insignia argues that it is impossible to determine whether Robert suffered a "direct" or "consequential" injury without resorting to a full evidentiary hearing because expert testimony on this issue conflicts. Specifically, Insignia refers to extrinsic evidence in the form of excerpts from deposition testimony by several medical experts concerning the biological cause of Robert's injury. For example, Dr. Fish testified that Robert likely suffered a consequential injury[2] whereas Dr. Giles opined that Robert's brain was directly damaged by electricity. Dr. Swisher, on the other hand, believed that Robert suffered a combination of direct and consequential injuries. In our view, it is unnecessary to go beyond the allegations of the complaint to determine whether Royal or Reliance owes Insignia a duty to defend. Moreover, the examination of expert testimony relating to the physical cause of Robert's injury would impermissibly tend to determine the causation issue of the underlying lawsuit. State Farm Fire & Casualty Co. v. Shelton, 176 Ill. App. 3d 858, 863, 126 Ill. Dec. 286, 531 N.E.2d 913 (1988) (declaratory judgment court must not determine disputed factual issues that are crucial to insured's liability in underlying personal injury suit).
Finally, Royal argues that because Robert was in utero at the time of the shock to his mother, his alleged injury is also clearly a consequence of injury to Stacie. If Stacie had not been shocked, Robert would not have suffered his injuries. Royal also acknowledges that Illinois courts have not addressed the application of the employer's liability exclusion under the circumstances at issue here, nor considered whether harm to a fetus as a result of electric shock to the mother is a consequential injury. Oates v. State, 157 Misc. 2d 618, 597 N.Y.S.2d 550, (1993), a New York court of claims case, is the only decision cited by Royal that is similar to the instant case. In Oates, the New York court of claims examined a general liability insurance policy to determine whether a child's in utero injury allegedly caused by the mother's exposure to lead paint during the course of employment was excluded from coverage. The policy's employment exclusion provision stated that the insurance did not apply to bodily injury to:
"(1) An employee of the insured arising out of and in the course of employment of the insured; or
(2) The * * * child * * * of that employee as a consequence of (1) above." Oates, 157 Misc.2d at 625, 597 N.Y.S.2d at 554.
The court employed the common understanding of the phrase "as a consequence of" by finding that the child's bodily injury *173 resulted as well from her mother's injury. Oates, 157 Misc.2d at 625-26, 597 N.Y.S.2d at 555. Since the mother was subjected to the same poisonous condition as the fetus, the court concluded that the child suffered bodily injury as a consequence of her mother's injury during the course of employment. The court therefore held that the child's claim was excluded from coverage under the general liability policy. Oates, 157 Misc.2d at 626, 597 N.Y.S.2d at 555.
Royal further argues that the allegations in the underlying complaint demonstrate that Robert alleged an injury that was sustained as a result of electrical shock suffered by his mother, and, as recognized by Oates, these circumstances give rise to a consequential injury suffered by the fetus. Therefore, Royal posits, such a claim falls squarely within the scope of the employer's liability exclusion contained in the Royal contract of insurance.
The trial court below inferred from the face of the complaint that an electric shock passing through the mother constitutes an injury to the mother for the purposes of construing the insurance policies. The court did not find the workers' compensation cases cited by Reliance (Thompson, Snyder and Keefe ) to be helpful in this insurance coverage case. Instead, the court found Oates to be most persuasive because it contained essentially the same exclusion provision found in Royal's policy. Basing its decision solely upon the complaint and the language of the two insurance policies, the trial court held that Reliance had a duty to defend while Royal had a duty neither to defend nor indemnify based upon its exclusion.
An insurer's duty to defend is much broader than its duty to indemnify its insured. Crum & Forster Managers Corp. v. Resolution Trust Corp., 156 Ill. 2d 384, 393-94, 189 Ill. Dec. 756, 620 N.E.2d 1073 (1993). "If the facts alleged in the underlying complaint fall within, or potentially within, the policy's coverage provisions, then the insurer has a duty to defend the insured in the underlying action." (Emphasis added.) Crum, 156 Ill.2d at 393, 189 Ill. Dec. 756, 620 N.E.2d 1073. In the instant case, Royal argues that Robert suffered a consequential injury while Reliance contends that the injury was direct. We note that no Illinois case has addressed the application of the employer's liability exclusion under the circumstances at issue here. In our view, Oates is not controlling.
After examining the complaint and the language of the insurance policies, we conclude that the trial court erred in granting summary judgment in favor of Royal because factual issues remain to be determined relative to whether Robert suffered either a direct injury or a consequential injury as a consequence of the injury to his mother. We cannot say that the facts alleged in the underlying complaint preclude coverage under Royal's general liability policy. Accordingly, we reverse the trial court's decision to grant Royal's cross-motion for summary judgment. Further, we affirm the trial court's decision to deny Reliance's motion for judgment on the pleadings and deny Royal's motion to dismiss.
Affirmed in part and reversed in part.
CAHILL, P.J., and McBRIDE, J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  The court rejected the employer's argument that the "derivee's" (wife's) loss of consortium action should be barred because the principal's (husband's) action is barred in tort for reasons of the insufficiency of the elements of the main tort action. Moran, 370 Mich. at 541, 122 N.W.2d at 802.
[2]  Dr. Fish's theory indicates that the electric shock caused the mother to violently jerk backwards. This jerking, in turn, likely caused a clot in the placenta to break off, travel to the fetus' brain and cause a stroke.

=== CASE 2224323 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:19.303025+00 ===

483 N.W.2d 55 (1992)
Robert KRMPOTICH, et al., Denise Dahlgren, et al., Respondents,
v.
The CITY OF DULUTH, Petitioner, Watson Centers, Inc., Intervenor, Petitioner, Appellants.
Nos. C5-90-2036, C7-90-2037 and C8-90-2354.
Supreme Court of Minnesota.
April 10, 1992.
Bruce D. Malkerson, Popham, Haik, Schnobrich & Kaufman, Ltd., Minneapolis, and A. Blake MacDonald, MacDonald, Munger, Downs & Munger, Duluth, for Watson Centers, Inc.
William P. Dinan, Duluth City Atty., Duluth, for City of Duluth.
Harold A. Frederick, Fryberger, Buchanan, Smith & Frederick, P.A., Duluth, for Robert Krmpotich, et al.
Daniel H. Mundt, Mundt & Associates, Duluth, for Denise Dahlgren, et al.
Considered and decided by the court en banc without oral argument.
OPINION
SIMONETT, Justice.
The issue in this case is whether the court of appeals exceeded the scope of its appellate authority in reversing the trial court's declaration that the Watson Development project did not violate the Minnesota Environmental Rights Act. We reverse.
The factual and procedural history is detailed in the decision of the court of appeals. Krmpotich v. City of Duluth, 474 N.W.2d 392 (Minn.App.1991). Briefly, Watson Centers purchased an option to buy approximately 35 acres of property located in the Miller Hill area of Duluth, intending to create a 267,000 square foot strip retail mall and parking lot on the parcel. It applied to the Duluth City Council for a rezoning of a portion of the property from its present residential to commercial classification. The city council ultimately enacted two rezoning ordinances, the latter of which accomplished the commercial rezoning. The Krmpotich group (a citizen group) sued the city, focusing primarily on the substantive and procedural action of *56 the city council.[1] A second citizen group, the Dahlgren group, brought a declaratory judgment action, arguing that the project, if completed in accordance with the council's actions, would violate the Minnesota Environmental Rights Act. Minn.Stat. ch. 116B (1988). This latter issue is the subject of our narrow review.
The trial court decided that the proposed development did not violate MERA. Following the standard set out in Minnesota Public Interest Research Group v. White Bear Rod & Gun Club, 257 N.W.2d 762 (Minn.1977), it first reasoned that the alleged natural resources were not natural resources within the meaning of Minn.Stat. § 116B.02, subd. 4. It based this conclusion on the following facts: the wetlands had been substantially degraded by the activities since 1952 of a cement company on the site, plus the oil and other runoff from nearby roads; Coffee Creek was not a naturally flowing creek; rather, water collected in a ditch and exited the property by a culvert, and the so-called creek existed on the property only because of ditch construction upstream; the trembling aspen on the property were not unique and were easily replaceable; and the rock outcroppings had already been cut away to some extent for the gravity feed and loading of the cement trucks on the property. Thus, the trial court concluded that the development would not materially and adversely affect a protectable natural resource either on or off the site, and that there was no feasible and prudent alternative. The court then balanced the utility of the development against potential environmental damage, determining that the development would actually enhance the environment in many respects through use of mitigation ponds, clean-up of existing waste, and decrease in air and other pollution; further, the development would serve the public interest by creating jobs and increasing property values and regional competition.
The court of appeals reversed the trial court. Krmpotich, 474 N.W.2d at 398-401. It found that the trial court clearly erred in concluding that the wetlands, creek and other alleged resources were not natural resources and that the development would have no consequential effect on these resources. It labelled the trial court's balancing of environmental damage against the utility of the proposed improvements to be "dubious," reasoning that the property, if left in its present condition, could eventually recover to a pristine state, but not if converted into a strip mall. Finally, it held that the trial court erred in finding that the developer met its burden of proof in showing a lack of reasonable alternatives under Minn.Stat. § 116B.04.
This state has demonstrated an acute awareness of the need for identification and preservation of our natural resources, including wetlands. See generally Minn.Stat. § 103A.202 (1990); Minn.Stat. § 116B.09, subd. 2 (1990); Minnesota Public Interest Research Group v. White Bear Rod & Gun Club, 257 N.W.2d 762 (Minn. 1977); County of Freeborn v. Bryson, 297 Minn. 218, 210 N.W.2d 290 (1973). However, the clearly erroneous standard governs the appellate court in reviewing a trial court's findings of fact in a MERA case, that is, findings of fact may be set aside only if, upon review of the evidence as a whole, the appellate court is left with the definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been made. Minnesota Public Interest Research Group, 257 N.W.2d at 782-83.
The trial court in considering an Environmental Rights Act claim must, of course, follow the steps outlined in County of Freeborn v. Bryson, 297 Minn. 218, 210 N.W.2d 290 (1973), and People for Environmental Enlightenment and Responsibility v. Minnesota Environmental Quality Council, 266 N.W.2d 858 (Minn.1978). Here the trial court's detailed findings of fact on the longstanding degraded condition *57 of the 1.85-acre wetland are amply sustainable and are not clearly erroneous; but plaintiffs quite properly take exception to the trial court's conclusion that the wetland was not a natural resource within the meaning of the Environmental Rights Act. We cannot agree with the trial court's conclusion in this regard. The trial court did, however, proceed to conduct the analysis appropriate to consideration of a protected natural resource by considering defendants' affirmative defense, making findings on the suitability of the proposed project to the site, and concluding that defendants had established there was no feasible and prudent alternative. The trial court then determined that the proposed project was consistent with and reasonably required for the promotion of public health, safety and welfare "in light of the State's paramount concern for the protection of its air, water, land and other natural resources * * *." At this last step, where the trial court weighs the equities in a balancing test "analogous to the one traditionally employed by courts of equity," White Bear Rod & Gun Club, 257 N.W.2d at 782, the appropriate standard of review is the abuse of discretion standard. On this record, we cannot say that the trial court abused its discretion.
Consequently, we reverse the court of appeals' conclusion that the trial court erred in holding that the proposed development would not violate the Minnesota Environmental Rights Act.
Reversed.
NOTES
[1]  The court of appeals affirmed that portion of the trial court's decision determining that the City of Duluth's actions in passing ordinances to rezone the subject property and the accompanying resolutions were within its authority and complied with the procedural requirements of the Duluth City Code. Krmpotich, 474 N.W.2d at 396-98. That portion of the decision that the court of appeals designated as Krmpotich II is not before us.

=== CASE 9740635 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:39:11.010003+00 ===

OPINION
HOFFMAN, Senior Judge. .
Defendant-Appellant Lance Reed Dawson (Dawson) appeals the revocation of his probation. We reverse.
Dawson raises one issue which we state as: whether the trial court erred by revoking Dawson's probation based upon an incident that occurred subsequent to his probationary period.
In 1990, Dawson pleaded guilty to burglary, a Class B felony. He was sentenced to six years, all of which were suspended, and he was placed on three years of probation. In September 1992, his probation officer filed with the court a notice of probation violation alleging that Dawson had failed to comply with recommendations of the mental health center and failed to abstain from illicit drugs in that he had failed a drug test in August 1992. A hearing was set for December 14, 1992 but was continued due to the unavailability of the State's witness. The court subsequently re-set the hearing for January 25, 1998. On January 6, 1993, the hearing was again continued upon the State's motion and was re-set for February 22, 1998. On February 5, 19983, Dawson moved the court to continue the hearing. The court granted Dawson's motion but never re-set the hearing date. Seven years later, on June 12, 2000, the State filed an amended notice of probation violation alleging that Dawson's probationary period had been tolled by the filing of the 1992 notice of probation violation. The amended notice also alleged that Dawson had violated his probation by committing new criminal offenses in November 1998 and in May 2000; by not keeping probation informed of his address; by not complying with treatment recommendations and not providing written verification of compliance; and by not abstaining from the use of illicit drugs as alleged in the 1992 violation notice. Following a hearing on October 28, 2000, the trial court revoked Dawson's probation and sentenced him to six years. It is from this decision that Dawson now appeals.
Dawson contends that the trial court improperly revoked his probation based upon the allegation that he committed a new criminal offense in May 2000. He asserts that his probationary period ended in 1998 and that, therefore, he was not on probation when this new offense occurred.
A probation revocation hearing is in the nature of a civil proceeding, and the *814decision to revoke is a matter within the sound discretion of the trial court. C.S. v. State, 735 N.E.2d 273, 276 (Ind.Ct.App.2000), trams. denied. The State must prove the alleged violation only by a preponderance of the evidence. Id; Ind.Code § 35-38-2-8(e). We will affirm a decision to revoke probation if there is substantial evidence of probative value to support the trial court's conclusion that a probationer has violated any condition of probation. Id.
A review of the record in the present case reveals that the court based its revocation upon Dawson's admission to driving after he had been drinking in May 2000. Based upon this Court's decision in Slinkard v. State, 625 N.E.2d 1282 (Ind.Ct.App.1993), we find that the trial court improperly revoked Dawson's probation. In Slinkard, as in the case at bar, the State filed a petition to revoke probation for violations occurring during the probationary period. The hearing was continued a number of times and was finally held on February 19, 1993, after the probationary period had ended one year earlier on February 5, 1992. In the meantime, the State had filed an amended petition alleging violations on March 19, 1992. The trial court revoked Slinkard's probation based upon the alleged violations occurring on March 19, 1992 and found that Slinkard had not violated his probation during the original probationary period. This Court reversed the revocation of Slinkard's probation stating that a trial court "may not revoke probation for events occurring after the original term of probation." Id. at 1284.
In that opinion, we also addressed the tolling issue and cited Ind.Code § 85-88-2-3(c) which provides that "[the issuance of a summons or warrant tolls the period of probation until the final determination of the charge." As we explained in Slhin-kard, the purpose of this code section is to grant a trial court power to revoke probation and order a person returned to jail when it determines that such person violated probation, even though the disposition regarding that violation occurs after the original term of probation has expired. The Court further discussed that because Slinkard was found not to have violated his original term of probation, the filing of the petition during his original term did not toll, or extend, his probationary term through the date of disposition on the petition.
From our reading of Slinkard, we glean that had Slinkard been found to have violated his original term of probation, his term would have been extended by the timely filing of the petition, and any acts constituting a violation during this extension could also have been used against him to revoke his probation. Cf. Mumford v. State, 651 N.E.2d 1176 (Ind.Ct.App.1995), trans. denied (discussing court's use of word "faultless" in regard to Slinkard's conduct during his original probationary term and determining that Mumford was not faultless although court specifically found that he did not violate probation as alleged in counts 1 through 4 of the notice of probation violation where counts 1 through 4 were only counts alleged to have occurred during original two-year probationary period). In summary, the disposition regarding a violation of probation may oceur after the term of probation has expired, but the violation must have occurred within the term of probation. However, if a defendant is found to have violated probation during the original term as alleged in the petition, the time between that petition's filing and its disposition extends the term of probation in which the defendant may commit acts which constitute further violations of his or her terms of probation.
In the instant case, the trial court improperly revoked Dawson's probation *815because it did so based upon a new erimi-nal offense occurring in May 2000, after the expiration of Dawson's term of probation. The court also would have been incorrect had it based its revocation of Dawson's probation on the criminal offenses that occurred in 1998. See Slinkard, supra. Moreover, we note that although the trial court made no finding as to the allegations of the original petition filed in September 1992, our review of the record discloses that the State failed to present any evidence of a violation by Dawson based upon these allegations (Le., a failed drug test and a failure to follow the recommendations of the mental health center). Therefore, pursuant to this court's reasoning in Slinkard, Dawson's probationary term was not tolled because there was no violation during the original term of probation as alleged in the original petition upon which to base an extension of the probationary term.
Additionally, only the allegations concerning a drug test and recommendations of the health center were raised in the original petition to revoke filed in September 1992. The allegation concerning Dawson's failure to keep the probation department informed of his address was not included in that original petition but rather was first raised in the amended petition filed in June 2000. However, the State also failed to present any evidence as to this violation.
Based upon the foregoing, we conclude that the trial court improperly revoked Dawson's probation, and we remand for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
Reversed and remanded.
BAILEY, J., concurs.
DARDEN, J., concurring with opinion.

=== CASE 9740637 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:39:11.266017+00 ===

Cavanagh, J.
Following a jury trial, defendant was convicted of first-degree murder, MCL 750.316; MSA 28.548, and possession of a firearm during the commission of a felony, MCL 750.227b; MSA 28.424(2). Defendant was sentenced to life in prison for the murder conviction and to a consecutive two-year term for the felony-firearm conviction. In this appeal, brought as of right, defendant claims that he was denied a fair trial because of evidentiary error and prosecutorial misconduct and that the evidence of his guilt was insufficient. We affirm.
At trial, Robin Lasenby, a hostile witness, testified that he was outside with Carey Jackson on the *368evening of July 26, 1988, when he noticed two men jump out of a black Omni and run toward a local grocery store. Lasenby was able to identify the defendant as one of the two men because he had seen him around the neighborhood during the past couple of years. It appeared to this witness that the defendant was carrying a dark object in his hand and that the two men were "about to stretch somebody.” A minute later, Lasenby heard three loud sounds that could have been gunfire and he saw the men return and the black car speed away.
A couple of days later, the defendant approached the witness and told him that what he did was really none of the witness’ business. Lasenby responded that what they were discussing would go no further. And, after failing to appear to testify at the preliminary examination, this witness was kept in police custody as a material witness.
Carey Jackson testified next and confirmed that he had been with Robin Lasenby when the shooting occurred. However, contrary to a previous statement he had purportedly given to the police, he could not identify either of the men that had gotten out of the black Omni. When questioned about his earlier signed statement identifying defendant as one of the men, the witness denied that the statement or signature was his. Carey Jackson also had been detained by the police as a material witness.
The police officer who had interviewed Carey Jackson then testified that, in a prior statement, Carey Jackson had identified the defendant as one of the men he had seen that day. According to the police officer, the witness also stated that, after hearing three shots, he saw the defendant with a black pistol in his hand. The trial court instructed the jury that this evidence was being admitted to impeach the earlier testimony of Carey Jackson.
*369The police officer that was in charge of the investigation also testified with regard to a photographic lineup session he had had with Carey Jackson. When defendant objected to this testimony, the trial court ruled that the evidence could be admitted as substantive evidence. The officer was permitted to continue testifying, and he recalled Carey Jackson picking the defendant’s picture out of the photographs displayed.
The prosecution also introduced the testimony of the attorney who had been present with Carey Jackson at the photographic lineup. This witness testified that Carey Jackson said that he thought he recognized two people and that "Number Six was the guy who had the gun.”,
One of the last witnesses for the prosecution was the victim’s friend, Melvin Mann. He testified that he was in a telephone booth outside the grocery store when he heard some shots and saw the defendant run from the back of the Jeep where the victim had been sitting. Mann also testified that there had been bad feelings between the victim and the defendant.
Just before closing arguments, the trial court ruled that the third-party testimony regarding the extrajudicial identification of the defendant was not limited to impeachment and would be admitted as substantive evidence. The trial court noted that if the identification procedure was unfair or caused bias, the court in its discretion could decide not to admit the evidence.
In this appeal, defendant contends that the trial court improperly admitted, over defense objection that the testimony was hearsay, third-party testimony regarding pretrial identification statements. We disagree.
"A statement is not hearsay if . . . [t]he declar*370ant testifies at the trial or hearing and is subject to cross-examination concerning the statement, and the statement is . . . one of identification of a person made after perceiving him.” MRE 801(d)(1) (C). Furthermore, third-party identification testimony by a police officer, including repetition of the statements, is not hearsay, and the admission of such testimony is within the discretion of the trial court. People v Newcomb, 190 Mich App 424, 430; 476 NW2d 749 (1991);1 MRE 801(d)(1).
Although the issue has not been clearly addressed in our case law, we agree with federal court decisions that have held that the rule was intended, in part, to solve the problem of a witness identifying a defendant before trial but then refusing at trial to acknowledge the identification because of fear of reprisal. United States v Jarrad, 754 F2d 1451, 1456 (CA 9, 1985), relying on United States v Elemy, 656 F2d 507 (CA 9, 1981). In this situation, the witness’ prior identification can be introduced into evidence only by a third party who was present at the original identification.
In this case, we find no error in the trial court’s decision to admit the third-party identification testimony. The declarant of the extrajudicial statement testified at trial and was subject to cross-examination. Consequently, under MRE 801(d)(1), the statement is not hearsay. Secondly, the trial court acknowledged that admission of the third-party identification testimony was discretionary, and it apparently exercised this discretion after *371determining that there was nothing unfair or biased about the identification procedure.
Even if we were convinced that this type of testimony should be inadmissible, admission in this case was not prejudicial because two very credible witnesses for the prosecution positively identified the defendant. It is not reasonably possible that in a trial free of the error complained of even one juror might have voted to acquit the defendant. People v Robinson, 386 Mich 551; 194 NW2d 709 (1972).
Defendant next argues that the prosecutor made improper remarks during closing argument that denigrated the defense and injected prejudicial and inflammatory material into the case. This issue, however, has not been preserved for our review because defendant did not object to the statements at trial. Absent an objection during trial, appellate review of improper prosecutorial closing arguments is precluded unless the prejudicial effect was so great that it could not have been cured by an appropriate instruction and failure to consider the issue would result in a miscarriage of justice. People v Crawford, 187 Mich App 344, 354; 467 NW2d 818 (1991).
In this case, although the prosecutor may have used colorful language during her closing argument, her remarks were not improper. Furthermore, any prejudice occasioned by the prosecutor’s remarks could have been cured by an instruction.
Defendant further contends that he was denied a fair trial because the prosecution withheld during discovery evidence that would have contradicted testimony identifying defendant as the person who shot the victim. However, this issue was not properly preserved because it was not raised before and addressed by the trial court. People v *372Strunk, 172 Mich App 208, 210; 431 NW2d 223 (1988).
Defendant’s final argument, that the evidence is insufficient to support a conviction of first-degree murder, is also without merit. This Court reviews the sufficiency of evidence by examining it in the light most favorable to the prosecutor in order to determine whether a rational trier of fact could have found that the essential elements of the crime were proven beyond a reasonable doubt. People v Hampton, 407 Mich 354, 368; 285 NW2d 284 (1979).
Our review of the record persuades us that the evidence was sufficient to sustain the defendant’s conviction of first-degree murder. Multiple witnesses, who knew defendant for years in their neighborhood, identified him as one of two men who arrived at the scene just before the shooting. There was also evidence of hard feelings between the defendant and the victim. At least one witness testified that defendant had been carrying a gun. Four bullet holes were found in the driver’s seat of the Jeep in which the victim was shot. In light of this evidence, we find that a rational trier of fact could have concluded that the evidence supported defendant’s conviction of first-degree murder.
Affirmed.
Murphy, P.J., concurred.
Judge Murphy voted with the majority in People v Michael, 181 Mich App 236; 448 NW2d 786 (1989), but feels bound to follow People v Newcomb, 190 Mich App 424; 476 NW2d 749 (1991), on the basis of Administrative Order No. 1990-6, 436 Mich lxxxiv. Because Newcomb provides that third-party testimony regarding prior identification is not hearsay under MRE 801(dXl) and thus is admissible within the discretion of the trial court, Judge Murphy would agree that there was no abuse of discretion in allowing the testimony under the facts of this case.

=== CASE 9740638 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:39:11.270523+00 ===

Connor, J.
(concurring). I concur in the result reached only because Administrative Order No. 1990-6, 436 Mich lxxxiv, requires this Court to decide this case in accordance with People v Newcomb, 190 Mich App 424, 429-430; 476 NW2d 749 (1991). Were it not for the administrative order, I would reverse defendant’s convictions and remand for a new trial.
*373I believe the statement of facts as contained in the majority opinion should be supplemented by the following material for clarification. Over defense objection, the court allowed police officer Marvin Butler to read a statement given by witness Carey Jackson following the shooting. In the statement, Jackson said he recognized defendant, whom he had known for seven or eight years, as one of the men getting out of the car and running toward the store and that defendant was carrying a pistol in his right hand. The court ruled this testimony admissible under MRE 613(b) as impeachment by extrinsic evidence. After the prosecution called another witness, Chaka Bell, who testified that he was outside the store and heard some shots but could not provide details, the trial court permitted police officer Dennis Richardson to read a statement taken from Bell. In the statement Bell said that he heard three shots and saw a man with a gun running down the street. The court again instructed the jury that the written statements by Bell and Jackson were admitted for impeachment only and were not substantive evidence. Sergeant Bivens was allowed to testify that Carey Jackson picked out two photographs of the men who got out of the car, and that Carey stated that the photograph depicting the defendant was a photograph of the man he saw carrying a gun. Sergeant Bivens’ testimony was admitted under MRE 801(d) on the basis that it came within an exception to the hearsay rule. Attorney James Hall, who was present at the photographic lineup, testified that Carey Jackson identified the defendant as the man with the gun.
As part of her argument to the jury, the prosecutor compared the crime scene to "Dodge City” of the "wild, wild west” and described the defendant as the kind of person who causes everyone to *374scatter when he approaches, and of whom "nobody knows anything.”
The court, at the conclusion of the proofs, instructed the jury that the police officer’s testimony concerning the prior inconsistent statements of the witnesses was for impeachment purposes only and
[t]his evidence was permitted solely for the purpose of testing or judging the believability of the testimony which the witness did make here in court under oath.
At trial, witness Carey Jackson stated that he could not identify the perpetrator of the offense. He did not make an allegedly false identification; rather, he declined to identify anyone. It was not necessary to impeach the witness so that the jury could discount any negative statement he may have made or correct false impressions he may have created. Nor was a proper foundation provided to permit impeachment of witness Chaka Bell. In both instances, the alleged impeachment was merely a subterfuge to place the negative statements before the jury, and the prosecutor compounded the error by suggesting during final argument that the witnesses had recanted out of fear of retaliation. Given the nature of the testimony of four separate and presumably reliable witnesses—three police officers and a lawyer—the prejudicial effect could not be purged by a limiting instruction to the lay persons comprising the jury that the statements could be considered only for impeachment. It would be impossible for a juror to overlook the police officer’s allegation of prior identification in a brutal slaying when the prosecutor suggests the person on trial is the kind of person who causes everyone to scatter when he *375approaches, and of whom "nobody knows anything.”
The majority opinion does not address the impeachment issue, but would affirm the trial court’s decision to admit the third-party identification testimony under MRE 801(d)(1), holding that, because the declarant of the extrajudicial statement testified at trial and was subject to cross-examination, the statement is not hearsay.
There has been a longstanding split in this Court concerning whether MRE 801(d)(1) permits a third-party to testify about an out-of-court identification of a criminal defendant made by another witness. In Newcomb, supra, a panel of this Court decided that such third-party testimony was admissible.1
However, in People v Sanford, 402 Mich 460; 265 NW2d 1 (1978), five of the justices who had just enacted the rule of evidence expressed their opinion that it would not allow admission of third-party testimony of out-of-court identifications. Id. at 487, n 3, 499-500. Two justices thought the rule would allow admission of third-party testimony. Id. at 497. Thus, I conclude that MRE 801(d)(1) does *376not permit third-party testimony concerning out-of-court identifications by other witnesses.2
Because I cannot say with sufficient certainty that without the third-party testimony defendant would have been convicted, I would reverse defendant’s convictions were it not for Administrative Order No. 1990-6.
This court has held such third-party testimony inadmissible twelve times, admissible nine times, and one time it declined to decide because any error would have been harmless. In no published case has a panel of this Court found admission of third-party testimony to require reversal. See Newcomb, supra, p 429, ns 1, 2; People v Iehl, 100 Mich App 277, 281-282; 299 NW2d 46 (1980); People v Prophet, 101 Mich App 618, 623-624; 300 NW2d 652 (1980); People v Casey, 102 Mich App 595, 604-605; 302 NW2d 248 (1980), reversal of lower court decision aff'd on other grounds 411 Mich 179; 305 NW2d 247 (1981); People v Kramer, 108 Mich App 240, 254-255; 310 NW2d 347 (1981); People v Gwinn, 111 Mich App 223, 244-246; 314 NW2d 562 (1981); People v Khabar, 126 Mich App 138; 337 NW2d 9 (1983); People v Percy, 127 Mich App 1, 4-5; 338 NW2d 398 (1983); People v Jones, 144 Mich App 1, 4-5; 373 NW2d 226 (1985); People v Dixon, 161 Mich App 388, 396; 411 NW2d 760 (1987); People v Michael, 181 Mich App 236, 241; 448 NW2d 786 (1989); People v McCurdy, 185 Mich App 503, 505; 462 NW2d 775 (1990).
It is true that the language of the rule parallels FRE 801(dXl)(C) and that federal courts permit the use of third-party testimony under the federal rule. See United States v Anderson, 406 F2d 719 (CA 4, 1969), and United States v Jarrad, 754 F2d 1451 (CA 9, 1985). Although the United States Supreme Court has not yet ruled with regard to the issue, United States v Owens, 484 US 554; 108 S Ct 838; 98 L Ed 2d 951 (1988), should leave little doubt that it would not have a problem with a third-party testifying under the rule. In Owens, the identifying witness could not make an in-court identification and, although he could not remember why he had done so, he testified that he had previously identified the defendant. The Court decided that even though the witness was unavailable under FRE 804(a) because of lack of memory, he was available for cross-examination under FRE 801(d)(1)(C) to testify about the previous identification. However, MRE 801 is a Michigan rule of evidence. While interpretation of its federal counterpart may be instructive in the absence of Michigan authority, the interpretation of the rule given by the Michigan Supreme Court is controlling and should have been followed.

=== CASE 2224330 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:19.47612+00 ===

96 N.Y.2d 815 (2001)
751 N.E.2d 460
727 N.Y.S.2d 381
THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, Respondent,
v.
TRAZZ SAWYER, Appellant.
Court of Appeals of the State of New York.
Argued March 29, 2001.
Decided May 3, 2001.
*816 James A. Baker, Ithaca, for appellant.
George M. Dentes, District Attorney of Tompkins County, Ithaca, for respondent.
Linda Cantoni, Kew Gardens, and Robert M. Carney for New York State District Attorneys Association, amicus curiae.
Before: Chief Judge KAYE and Judges SMITH, LEVINE, CIPARICK, WESLEY, ROSENBLATT and GRAFFEO concur.
OPINION OF THE COURT
MEMORANDUM.
The order of the Appellate Division should be affirmed.
Defendant was convicted of murder in the second degree, criminal possession of a weapon in the third degree and assault in the second degree. On appeal to this Court by permission from a Justice of the Appellate Division, defendant contends that he was not afforded "a reasonable time to exercise his right to appear as a witness" before the Grand Jury in violation of CPL 190.50 (5) (a) because the District Attorney gave him only one and one-half days' notice of the presentment date.
CPL 190.50 (5) (a) does not mandate a specific time period for notice; rather, "reasonable time" must be accorded to allow a defendant an opportunity to consult with counsel and decide whether to testify before a Grand Jury. The concept of reasonableness is flexible and must be applied to the particular facts of a case as known at the time. Because this inquiry involves a mixed question of law and fact, where the determinations by courts with fact-finding authority are supported by the record they are beyond the further review of this Court (see, e.g., People v Harrison, 57 NY2d 470, 477-478).
*817 Here, the record indicates that defendant was represented by counsel when he received oral and written notice of the presentment, and had conferred with his attorney on at least three occasions during the two days that preceded the presentment date. Defense counsel had an opportunity to learn of the relevant facts as he received a copy of the felony complaint together with the statement of an eyewitness to the incident, and he viewed and photographed the crime scene the day before the Grand Jury proceedings. Further, the only explanations offered by defendant in his request for a delay were that he was tired and that he had not received certain discovery materials (to which he was not entitled prior to the Grand Jury presentation). Based on these facts, the courts below concluded that defendant was afforded a meaningful opportunity to consult with counsel and to prepare for his possible testimony before the Grand Jury. On this record, we cannot say the notice provided was unreasonable as a matter of law.
Order affirmed in a memorandum.

=== CASE 2224340 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:19.660602+00 ===

193 Mich. App. 340 (1991)
483 N.W.2d 407
MEEK
v.
MICHIGAN BELL TELEPHONE COMPANY
Docket No. 123240.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided November 26, 1991.
Approved for publication March 25, 1992, at 9:10 A.M.
Kelman, Loria, Downing, Schneider & Simpson (by Alan B. Posner), for the plaintiffs.
Dickinson, Wright, Moon, Van Dusen & Freeman (by Thomas G. Kienbaum and Robert W. Powell) (Laura D. White, Michigan Bell Telephone Company, of Counsel), for the defendants.
Before: JANSEN, P.J., and WAHLS and HOOD, JJ.
PER CURIAM.
Plaintiffs filed the present action against defendants for alleged violations of plaintiff Gloria Meek's civil rights under the Civil Rights Act, MCL 37.2101 et seq.; MSA 3.548(101) et seq. On April 9, 1987, defendants answered plaintiffs' complaint, alleging that the complaint was barred by the applicable statute of limitations. On November 3, 1989, the trial court granted defendants' motion for partial summary disposition *342 on the ground that the statute of limitations barred recovery for alleged conduct predating March 19, 1984; granted defendants' motion for summary disposition in regard to allegations of intentional infliction of emotional distress; and granted defendants' motion in limine, finding that evidence concerning most of the actions predating March 19, 1984, was not admissible. Plaintiffs appeal as of right, alleging that an action regarding the pre-1984 incidents was not time-barred because they fell within the continuing-violation doctrine and that the trial court erred in dismissing the claim of intentional infliction of emotional distress. We affirm in part and reverse in part.
Gloria Meek (hereafter plaintiff) claims that from 1977 through 1984, she was subjected to instances of sexual and religious harassment. Specifically, plaintiff complains that in 1977 a supervisor indicated to her that he did not want a female working for him and gave her a cartoon drawn by other employees that berated women. The cartoon was eventually posted on employee bulletin boards and on employees' desks. In 1978, plaintiff was transferred and placed under the supervision of another supervisor, who told plaintiff that there was no need for her to make a lot of money because she had a working spouse, that she should work inside or at home, and that plaintiff, like all Jews, was rich. This supervisor also commented that because plaintiff was a woman she should show more compassion in disciplining the crews and that she should not fill out an injury report after she broke her nose on the job. Following an uneventful transfer, plaintiff was transferred to another office, where the supervisor told her that she should be home caring for the kids, that she was taking jobs away from men, and that Jews have lots of money and fancy homes. In 1981, *343 following a maternity leave, plaintiff was denied a raise allegedly because of the pregnancy. Plaintiff claims that later in 1981 and in 1982 another supervisor told her that Jewish women do not work, that plaintiff should be at home, that he did not like women in men's positions, and that plaintiff failed his expectations of a Jewish woman. In 1983, another supervisor told plaintiff that he did not want her ideas, but rather those ideas submitted by the guys. After May of 1984, plaintiff was supervised by defendant Schulz. Plaintiff claims that defendant Schulz told her to put her purse away or he would take disciplinary action, to wear pants with pockets so that she could keep a wallet in them like men do, and to wear shoes like the other guys. Defendant Schulz also called plaintiff "chubbly," a combination of chubby and ugly, and described a ring given to her by her husband as a Jewish-American-princess ring. Further, other employees under defendant Schulz' supervision called her a Jewish-American princess and asked who she had slept with in order to get her job. After plaintiff was terminated from employment, she filed suit against defendants Michigan Bell and Schulz.
First, we address plaintiffs' allegation that the trial court erred in granting defendants' motion for partial summary disposition on the basis that an action concerning the conduct occurring before March 19, 1984, was barred by the statute of limitations. An action alleging employment discrimination under the Civil Rights Act must be brought within three years after the cause of action accrued. MCL 600.5805(8); MSA 27A.5805(8), Mair v Consumers Power Co, 419 Mich 74, 77; 348 NW2d 256 (1984). Our Supreme Court in Sumner v Goodyear Tire & Rubber Co, 427 Mich 505; 398 NW2d 368 (1986), recognized an *344 exception to the statute of limitations for continuing violations. The Sumner Court stated that an exception exists where an employee challenges a series of allegedly discriminatory acts so sufficiently related as to constitute a pattern where only one of the acts occurred within the limitation period. Id. at 528. The Sumner Court also set forth the factors to be considered in determining whether a continuing course of discriminatory conduct exists:
The first is subject matter. Do the alleged acts involve the same type of discrimination, tending to connect them in a continuing violation? The second is frequency. Are the alleged acts recurring (e.g., a biweekly paycheck) or more in the nature of an isolated work assignment or employment decision? The third factor, perhaps of most importance, is degree of permanence. Does the act have the degree of permanence which should trigger an employee's awareness of and duty to assert his or her rights, or which should indicate to the employee that the continued existence of the adverse consequences of the act is to be expected without being dependent on a continuing intent to discriminate. [Id. at 538, quoting Berry v LSU Bd of Supervisors, 715 F2d 971, 981 (CA 5, 1983).]
In the present case, we hold that the prior actions of the employees of defendant Michigan Bell constituted a continuing violation sufficient to avoid the statutory limitation period. All the discriminatory events alleged by plaintiff involved the same subject matter: gender and religion. Also, the derogatory remarks made to plaintiff were not isolated to work assignments or employment decisions, but, rather, were recurring with nearly every new supervisor she was employed under. It was these same supervisors who denied plaintiff merit raises and favorable evaluations. Lastly, *345 their acts did not have such a degree of permanence that plaintiff should have asserted her rights earlier. Over approximately nine years, plaintiff had several supervisors. It was reasonable for plaintiff to believe that with each transfer and change in supervision the discriminatory conduct would cease. However, with almost each new supervisor came a new wave of harassment. We believe that the acts of defendant Michigan Bell's employees exhibited a continuous course of discriminatory conduct sufficient to invoke the continuing-violations exception to the statutory limitation period.
We also hold that the conduct of defendant Schulz amounted to a present violation that occurred within the limitation period. The mere existence of continuing harassment is insufficient if none of the relevant conduct occurred within the limitation period. Sumner, p 539. Defendants do not contest the allegedly discriminatory conduct of defendant Schulz, and we believe that the post-March 1984 actions of Schulz were intrinsically connected to the pre-March 1984 violations. Therefore, we hold that plaintiffs' claim alleged a continuing violation and that an action concerning the pre-March 1984 violation is not barred by the statute of limitations.
Considering our holding that the prior incidents constitute a part of a continuing violation and, thus, are not barred by the statute of limitations, we must now consider whether the trial court erred in granting defendants' preliminary motion to suppress the introduction of evidence of any actions predating March 19, 1984.
The decision whether to admit certain evidence is within the trial court's sound discretion and will not be disturbed absent an abuse of discretion. Brunson v E & L Transport Co, 177 Mich App 95, *346 104; 441 NW2d 48 (1989). The trial court held that because there was no connection between the acts themselves and no relationship between the parties involved, evidence of these prior acts had no probative value and had potential for prejudice. Considering that we have found the existence of a continuing violation sufficient to avoid the application of the limitation period, we hold that the trial court abused its discretion by precluding the admission of this testimony.
Finally, we address whether the trial court erred in granting defendants' motion for summary disposition of the claim of intentional infliction of emotional distress. Liability for the separate cause of action of intentional infliction of emotional distress has been found "only where the conduct has been so outrageous in character, and so extreme in degree, as to go beyond all possible bounds of decency, and to be regarded as atrocious, and utterly intolerable in a civilized community." Roberts v Auto-Owners Ins Co, 422 Mich 594, 602-603; 374 NW2d 905 (1985), quoting 1 Restatement Torts, 2d, § 46, comment d, pp 72-73.
Plaintiff's deposition alleged that defendant Schulz told plaintiff to put her purse away, to wear pants with pockets so she could keep a wallet in them like men do, and to wear shoes like the other guys. Defendant Schulz also called defendant chubbly, a combination of chubby and ugly, in front of the crew and described a ring given to her by her husband as a Jewish-American-princess ring. In addition, employees under defendant Schulz' supervision called plaintiff a Jewish-American princess and asked plaintiff who she had slept with to get her job. Accepting these factual allegations as true, we hold that the trial court did not err in concluding that these allegations clearly do *347 not rise to the level of extreme and outrageous conduct to support a claim of intentional infliction of emotional distress. MCR 2.116(C)(8), Scameheorn v Bucks, 167 Mich App 302, 306; 421 NW2d 918 (1988).
Affirmed in part, reversed in part, and remanded to the trial court for proceedings consistent with this opinion.

=== CASE 9740639 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:39:17.468654+00 ===

Riley, J.
In the instant case, we granted leave to appeal to consider the single issue whether the City of East Lansing has the statutory authority to enact and enforce its sign ordinance that eliminates nonconforming billboards and signs over a *212reasonable period of time.1 The trial court granted plaintiffs’ motion for partial summary disposition, reasoning that the city did not have the statutory authority to eliminate existing signs without compensating sign owners. The Court of Appeals affirmed.2
On appeal, the city argues that MCL 117.4i(5); MSA 5.2082(5) gives it the statutory authority to forcibly terminate nonconforming billboards and signs over a reasonable period of time. We agree and reverse.
I
Before the adoption of the current sign code on October 7, 1975, the City of East Lansing regulated signs with respect to size, height, setback, and spacing in a number of the zoning districts pursuant to certain provisions of the zoning code. In most areas of the city, other than residential districts, signs were essentially unregulated except for minimal structural standards so that they would not fall down or blow over.
In the late 1960s, the city undertook a study of sign regulations and traffic ordinances after recognizing that the inordinate number of signs and billboards on the main thoroughfares were contributing to a number of traffic accidents, and were also aesthetically unattractive. In 1973, the city retained the services of Donald E. Cleveland, P.E., who prepared a report for the City of East Lansing Planning Commission recommending detailed standards with respect to height, size, placement, *213sign clearance, and setback of signs.3 Dr. Cleveland suggested these improvements to avoid confusing or misleading traffic, to eliminate vision obstructions necessary for traffic safety, and to otherwise improve the public safety along the city’s major streets.
The city council eventually accepted the recommendation of the planning commission to adopt Dr. Cleveland’s report and, as a first step, enacted ordinance no. 330. This ordinance prohibited the placement of new signs until the city completed the adoption of a comprehensive sign code. Two years later, the current sign code was adopted. In most situations, the new sign code did not require the elimination of existing billboards and signs within the city. The code did, however, require many sign owners to replace their existing signs and billboards that did not meet the height, size, placement, and location requirements of the new sign code within eight years.4
Each of the plaintiffs, and their individual signs, presents a different factual scenario. Adams Outdoor Advertising has three groups of signs located in East Lansing which did not conform with the sign code as of May 1, 1987.5 These are off-premises signs, which , means that they directed attention to a use, business, commodity, service, or activity not conducted, sold, or offered upon the *214premises where the signs were located.6 Little Caesar Enterprises, Inc., owns a freestanding sign located near the front of its building, Baryames Cleaners has two freestanding signs identifying its business, and Denny’s Schwinn owns a freestanding sign and has two wall signs on its building. None of these signs meet the height, size, placement, or location requirements of East Lansing’s sign code.
On or about February 27, 1987, the city notified the plaintiffs that they had to comply with the size, height, placement, and location requirements of the sign code or remove their nonconforming signs by May 1, 1987. Each of the plaintiffs applied for and were denied variances from the City of East Lansing Building Board of Appeals. The plaintiffs then sued defendant, seeking relief from the denial of their request for a variance. After defendant answered the complaints, plaintiffs moved for partial summary disposition on the theory that the city failed to state a valid defense.7 Plaintiffs specifically argued that the amortization provision of the sign code, § 8.39(8), was enacted without statutory authority.8 The City of East Lansing predicated its statutory authority on MCL 117.4i(5); MSA 5.2082(5),9 which empowers home *215rule cities with the authority to regulate billboards.
After evaluating both arguments, the trial court granted plaintiffs’ motion for partial summary disposition. The Court of Appeals affirmed, finding that
the De Mull [v City of Lowell, 368 Mich 242; 118 NW2d 232 (1962)] holding [is] dispositive of the instant case. Defendant’s ordinance, § 8.39(8), called for the elimination of all nonconforming signs. Such action has not been authorized by the Legislature. De Mull, supra, pp 250-252. In addition, defendant did not purchase and condemn the signs thereby abating the use.
Defendant has failed to distinguish De Mull or persuade us that this decision is inapplicable. Therefore, in reviewing the pleadings, we find that the portion of defendant’s answer based upon § 8.39(8) is so clearly untenable as a matter of law, that no factual development could deny plaintiffs right to recovery against this defense. City of Hazel Park [v Potter, 169 Mich App 714, 718; 426 NW2d 789 (1988)]. The trial court properly granted plaintiffs partial summary disposition and dismissed that part of defendant’s answer at issue.[10]
II
We agree with the Court of Appeals that the resolution of this issue requires analysis of this Court’s decision in De Mull, supra. However, we do not agree with the Court of Appeals determination that De Mull requires the decision it reached. Rather, we conclude that De Mull is distinguishable because this Court held that in amending the zoning enabling act11 to provide statutory protec*216tion for nonconforming uses and structures, the Legislature did not intend to allow the elimination of such nonconforming uses or structures by an ordinance prescribing a time limitation.12 We based our holding on an interpretation of the legislative history of 1947 PA 272, MCL 125.583a; MSA 5.2933(1). That section provides in pertinent part:
The lawful use of land or a structure exactly as the land or structure existed at the time of the enactment of the ordinance affecting that land or structure, may be continued, except as otherwise provided in this act, although that use or structure does not conform with the ordinance. [Emphasis added.]
The De Mull Court found significant the fact that the original Senate bill would have allowed for the removal of nonconforming uses and structures over a reasonable period of time. Id. at 252. However, the Senate chose not to authorize amortization as an exception to the statutory protection of nonconforming uses and structures in the zoning enabling act after receiving an opinion from the Attorney General’s office questioning the constitutionality of the amortization provision. Id. at 251-252. Thus, the De Mull Court held that there is no implied power under MCL 125.583a; MSA 5.2933(1) to eliminate over time nonconforming uses and structures.
The question that must be answered, then, is whether the Legislature, in enacting the home rule act, also intended to prevent the enactment of an ordinance that requires nonconforming signs to be made to conform or removed within a specified period of time. We conclude that the Legislature *217did not intend to limit the scope of the defendant’s power to regulate billboards under the home rule act13 to the same extent that a city’s power to zone with respect to nonconforming uses and structures is restricted.
The plaintiffs argue, however, that this Court’s holding in De Mull, that the Legislature did not authorize the amortization of nonconforming uses and structures under the zoning enabling act, controls the scope of a city’s power to regulate signs, regardless of whether the regulation is pursuant to the zoning power or another arm of the police power. It is true that in De Mull we declined to infer a legislative authorization to amortize nonconforming uses and structures. However, our conclusion in De Mull was based on the legislative history of a provision of the zoning enabling act, and therefore cannot be used to restrict the scope of the defendant’s power granted under a provision of a separate act, the home rule act. In De Mull, the statutory protection of nonconforming uses and structures, combined with the legislative history of that provision in the zoning enabling act, caused us to hold that there is no implied power to amortize in the zoning context. However, neither the home rule act, nor any other statute prescribing the power to regulate billboards, includes a similar protection for nonconforming signs, nor is there legislative history indicating that the Legislature chose not to grant the authority to amortize nonconforming signs. Therefore, De Mull did not establish a precedent, for all cases where a city’s exercise of its police power has an effect on property, that amortization is only authorized where expressly stated by the Legislature. Our finding of no legislative authorization to *218amortize in De Mull should not be read to extend beyond the zoning context.
This reading of De Mull, as not restricting a city’s authority to regulate billboards under the home rule act, is also consistent with this Court’s longstanding liberal interpretation of that act. We noted in Gallup v Saginaw, 170 Mich 195, 200; 135 NW 1060 (1912), that the home rule act is
one of general grant of rights and powers, subject only to certain enumerated restrictions, instead of the former method of only granting enumerated rights and powers definitely specified. We must assume the act was passed with that intent and construe it accordingly.[14]
The zoning authority under the home rule act is clearly subject to many restrictions, enumerated by the Legislature in the zoning enabling act. The separate power to regulate billboards is not so restricted. Further, in construing the same section of the home rule act at issue here, MCL 117.4i; MSA 5.2082, we have said that the act is comprehensive, " 'but it leaves many things to be implied from the power conferred.’ ” People v Sell, 310 Mich 305, 312; 17 NW2d 193 (1945) (citation omitted). " 'Considering its purpose, [the act] should be construed liberally and in a home-rule spirit.’ ” Id. at 312-313.
Therefore, while the power to amortize nonconforming signs is not expressly delegated in the *219home rule act, it can be inferred from the broad language of MCL 117.4i(5); MSA 5.2082(5), without limitation by the statutory protection of nonconforming uses under the zoning enabling act and this Court’s decision in De Mull. Contrary to the plaintiffs’ argument, a broad interpretation of the defendant’s power to regulate signs in the home rule act leads to the conclusion that the defendant did not lack the statutory authority to enact its sign ordinance, including the provision eliminating nonconforming signs over time.
CONCLUSION
In the instant case, the trial court granted plaintiffs’ partial motion for summary disposition after finding that the amortization provision of the East Lansing sign code was enacted without legislative authority. At that point, plaintiffs did not raise the remaining issues whether the ordinance eliminating nonconforming signs over time is unconstitutional, as applied to each sign, or whether the enforcement of the sign code against nonconforming signs would be an unconstitutional taking.15 Accordingly, we reverse the decision of the Court of Appeals and remand this case to the trial court to resolve the remaining issues.
Cavanagh, C.J., and Brickley, Boyle, and Mallett, JJ., concurred with Riley, J.
Levin, J.
(separate opinion). The majority holds that the Legislature has empowered the City of *220East Lansing to require that signs and billboards put in place before enactment of the challenged sign code either be removed or modified within a reasonable period of time to conform to the size, height, setback, and placement standards of the sign code, but that, in particular circumstances, a sign owner may have a claim for just compensation. The cases have been remanded for further proceedings.
I agree with that disposition. A home rule city is authorized to require, without payment of compensation, compliance with reasonable sign and billboard regulations. But if enforcement of the regulations would effect a taking, the constitution requires that just compensation be paid.1
It makes little difference to the plaintiffs or the City of East Lansing whether the city must pay just compensation to the owners of signs and billboards put in place before the sign code was enacted because the provision of the home rule act relied on by the city2 does not specifically authorize termination of nonconforming uses by ordinance of time limitation, or whether the city must instead pay because the amortization provision of the sign code effects a taking and is unconstitutional either on its face or as applied to particular plaintiffs.
This action would not have been commenced if the. City of East Lansing were willing to pay compensation. The fundamental issue, then,' is whether, when there is a taking, the city can *221enforce the sign code without paying just compensation by providing a reasonable time for compliance with the new regulations.
Although this case has not been tried, and a factual record has not been developed, it appears that the on-premises sign regulations are, in general, reasonable and do not result in a taking, but that enforcement of the off-premises sign regulations, as applied to billboards and roof signs owned by Adams Outdoor Advertising, may well result in a taking.
Off-premises signs generally constitute the primary, and often the entire, use of the property on which they are located. In contrast, on-premises signs are incidental to the conduct of a business.3
The ordinance calls for the elimination of roof signs, and thus "takes” those signs from Adams Outdoor, at least with a lower-case t, and possibly a capital, constitutional t.
Adams Outdoor and amicus curiae Outdoor Advertising Association of Michigan contend that the size restrictions on billboards substantially affect their commercial value and therefore effect a taking. The facts and the law with regard to the claim of a partial taking can be developed on the remand that the majority has ordered.
I
On October 7, 1975, the City of East Lansing adopted a sign code establishing size, height, placement, and setback standards for all signs and billboards in the city, and prohibiting construction, erection, or maintenance of certain types of signs. *222The code requires that all signs and billboards, including those extant before adoption of the code, conform to the newly promulgated standards and prohibitions no later than October, 1983; this delay in the mandatory effective date is characterized as an amortization provision.4 The deadline was twice extended, first to May 1, 1984, and later to May 1, 1987. The sign code, as amended, thus required removal of signs and billboards not in compliance by May 1, 1987.
Plaintiffs, owners of preexisting nonconforming signs and billboards, applied for variances, which were denied. Plaintiffs then sought relief by filing these actions, consolidated at the circuit court and appellate levels, claiming that the city was without authority to ordain amortization of preexisting nonconforming uses, and that amortization constituted a denial of due process and the taking of property without just compensation.5 The city responded that the amortization provision was a reasonable exercise of the power to regulate signs and billboards delegated by the Legislature to home rule cities, and that elimination by amortization does not constitute a taking.
Plaintiffs moved for partial summary disposition, asserting failure to state a valid defense.6 The circuit court granted the motion on the ground *223that the city was without statutory authority to enact the amortization provision. The Court of Appeals affirmed in an unpublished opinion.7
A
Before adoption of the new sign code, the City of East Lansing regulated sign size, height, setback, and spacing in the zoning code. Outside residential districts, signs were subject to minimal regulation, addressed primarily to structural standards.
In the late 1960s, the city began a comprehensive study of sign regulations and traffic ordinances. This study was apparently prompted by considerations both of traffic safety and aesthetics. In May, 1973, the city planning commission received a report, prepared by a consultant, recom*224mending standards for sign height, size, placement, setback and clearance.8
When the new code was adopted in 1975, sign regulations located in the zoning code were repealed. The new sign regulations were promulgated as a chapter of the building code.9
B
Plaintiff Adams Outdoor owns three groups of signs located in East Lansing that do not conform with the sign code. Each nonconforming sign owned by Adams Outdoor is defined by the code as an "off-premises” sign, "which directs attention to a use, business, commodity, service or activity not conducted, sold or offered upon the premises where the sign is located.”10 Five of the Adams Outdoor signs are roof signs, which are prohibited anywhere in East Lansing.11 Adams Outdoor also maintains seven billboards on West Grand River; these billboards violate provisions of the code limiting total display area12 and establishing standards for height,13 setback,14 and spacing.15
Plaintiff Little Caesar Enterprises, Inc., owns a *225freestanding sign16 located at its place of business, on East Grand River. Plaintiff Baryames Cleaners, Inc., has two freestanding signs at its West Grand River location. Plaintiff Denny’s Schwinn has a freestanding sign located at its place of business on East Grand River, and also has two wall signs attached to the building. All these signs violate one or more of the new standards, but were constructed in apparent compliance with ordinances then in effect.
II
This Court has said that the police power "belongs to subordinate governmental divisions when and as conferred by the State either through its Constitution or constitutionally authorized legislation.”17
The Court of Appeals said that the East Lansing amortization provision "called for the elimination of all nonconforming signs. Such action has not been authorized by the Legislature.” The Court cited De Mull v City of Lowell, 368 Mich 242, 252; 118 NW2d 232 (1962), where this Court said that the Legislature had "withheld permission to destroy [nonconforming uses] by time limitation or otherwise.”
The plaintiff in De Mull challenged the provision of a city zoning ordinance that required termination of the use of his property as a junkyard within a three-year period. The Court, in striking *226down "this ordained 3-year death sentence for nonconforming uses,”18 said that the power delegated to the city in the zoning enabling act did not include authority to enact an amortization provision:
Whatever the law may be in other States, law stemming as it does from specific and variant statutory zoning enactments and judicial construction thereof, the fact remains that the cities of Michigan have not as yet been authorized, by requisite legislative act, to terminate nonconforming uses by ordinance of time limitation.[19] [Emphasis added.]
The Court said that, in amending the zoning enabling act in 194720 to provide for the treatment of nonconforming uses, the Legislature had specifically considered and rejected a grant of authority "for elimination of a nonconforming use by an ordinance of time limitation.”21 The Court said that the Legislature, out of concern about the constitutionality of a provision authorizing amorti*227zation, had solicited the advice of the Attorney General and, in response to his opinion, had "carefully refrain[ed] from enactment of any such authorization . . . .”22
A
The City of East Lansing seeks to distinguish De Mull on the basis that this Court there addressed a delegation of police power by the city or village zoning enabling act,23 while the amortization provision in the East Lansing sign code was enacted pursuant to a delegation of the police power by an amendment of the home rule act granting authority to regulate signs and billboards.24
The city offers various arguments in support of its contention that regulation of signs and billboards by a home rule city, including amortization of preexisting signs and billboards, is not subject to. De Mull. I am of the opinion that the principle set forth in De Mull, respecting the delegation of authority to enact provisions calling for amortization, governs disposition of this case without regard to how the new sign code might be character*228ized. As the 1947 opinion of the Attorney General recognized, a substantial deprivation of private property rights necessarily implicates the takings question. Authority to ordain such a deprivation of property rights must be expressly granted, and is not "implicit” in the billboard language of the amendment of the home rule act.
In adopting the nonconforming use provisions of the city and village zoning enabling act discussed in De Mull, and similar provisions concerning nonconforming uses in other delegations of the zoning power,25 the Legislature recognized in each instance the need for specific delegation of authority respecting nonconforming uses. As set forth in De Mull, the Legislature considered and rejected a further, more expansive grant of authority to terminate nonconforming uses by ordinance of time limitation, and indicated that a specific delegation of authority would be required before a local governmental unit could enact an ordinance amortizing nonconforming uses. Such a specific delegation has not been enacted respecting signs and billboards.
With minor linguistic differences, enactments of the Legislature concerning the treatment of nonconforming uses grant municipalities and other local governmental units authority to provide for continued use of land and improvements as lawfully used before enactment of a zoning limitation.26
Each enactment grants local governmental units the authority to enact ordinances providing for completion, resumption, restoration, reconstruc*229tion, extension, or substitution of nonconforming uses.27 In each enactment, the Legislature has "withheld permission to destroy them, by time limitation or otherwise.”28
Each enactment grants local governmental units the power to acquire private property by purchase or condemnation "for the removal of nonconforming uses.”29 I would read this as underscoring that if a community wishes to "remove” nonconforming uses, the means of doing so is by "purchase or condemnation.”
B
The provision of the home rule act authorizing regulation of signs and billboards was added by 1939 PA 175.30 This provision codified or, minimally, recognized this Court’s decision in Wolverine Sign Works v Bloomfield Hills, 279 Mich 205; 271 NW 823 (1937).
The sign owner in Wolverine Sign Works leased private land and, before February, 1927, had erected billboards. After April, 1927, the city enacted sign ordinances and zoning restrictions. The plaintiff was denied a permit to maintain the billboards. In October, 1933, members of the plaintiff’s painting crew were arrested while working on the billboards. The Court said that the city’s treatment of nonconforming signs "destroys the lease use, a property right, and incidentally *230takes from the owner of the land the right of such rental.”31
The Court held that the authority to regulate billboards pursuant to the police power did not extend to termination of nonconforming signs, and said:
The city may establish zones and prohibit the erection of billboards therein and may, to promote public health, safety and general welfare, within reasonable considerations, regulate the maintenance of billboards but may not arbitrarily strike down the maintenance of erected billboards or vest such power of arbitrary action in municipal officers.[32] [Emphasis added.]
Nothing in the amendatory language, enacted two years33 after Wolverine Sign Works was decided, supports a judicial construction that the Legislature intended to grant home rule cities the authority to terminate nonconforming signs and billboards, which in the words of this Court in Wolverine Sign Works, would "destroy” property rights. Nor does the amendatory language suggest an extraordinary legislative purpose to tolerate amortization in the context of signs and billboards, for the provision speaks only of "licensing, regulating, restricting and limiting the number and locations of billboards within the city.” (Emphasis added.)
C
The city contends that while a zoning code regulates the use of land in relation to other *231land,34 its sign code applies uniformly throughout the city, and distinguishes signs by types, regulates the location of signs, and establishes technical requirements concerning size and height.
A number of provisions of the new sign code are, however, expressly or implicitly tied to zoning districts. Section 8.36(1) links permission to maintain certain off-premises signs to their location on property zoned m and property zoned b-2. The provisions of §§ 8.33 and 8.34 implicitly link sign regulations, by "types of premises,” including commercial, office, and professional center designations, to permitted uses defined in the provisions of the zoning ordinance concerning zones b-1, b-3, and B-4.35
This Court in Krajenke Buick Sales v Hamtramck City Engineer, 322 Mich 250, 252; 33 NW2d 781 (1948), looked behind the defendant city’s claim that the challenged regulation was a building code. The regulation’s distinction between *232"residential areas”, and "business streets”36 made oblique but significant reference to zoning districts.37
The Court found the "building code” to be a zoning ordinance, and invalidated the ordinance for failure of enactment in accord with procedural requirements of the zoning enabling act.
The off-premises sign regulations of the East Lansing sign code governing location and imposing other requirements function as zoning.
D
The sign code has substantial effect on vested property rights of owners and lessees of preexisting nonconforming uses, even where the sign code does not ordain differential treatment of signs or billboards on the basis of zones within the city, as may be the case with respect to roof signs.38 A treatise writer observed:
Where the particular restriction constitutes, or would constitute, a substantial interference with land use, the municipality ordinarily must treat it as a zoning regulation and must follow statutory or charter zoning procedures, even though other *233authority for the particular type of ordinance has been granted.[39] [Emphasis added.]
The restrictions imposed by the amortization provision of the sign code respecting off-premises signs clearly constitute a "substantial interference with land use,” and hence with property rights.
The erection and maintenance of off-premises signs generally constitutes the primary use of land devoted to that use. Billboard operators such as Adams Outdoor generally own or rent land for no purpose other than to erect and maintain billboards; such use is not "incidental” to the ownership or rental of land. Regulations restricting and, in the case of roof signs, ultimately eliminating such use, are not, as the city argues, divorced from the use of land so as to escape constitutional limitations on zoning enactments.
Regulation of signs and billboards has been analyzed as a form of zoning in earlier decisions of this Court and by courts in other states.40 The amortization provision of East Lansing’s sign code, whether or not "zoning,” has an impermissible *234retroactive effect on nonconforming uses,41 and is invalid insofar as enforcement would constitute a taking of property without payment of just compensation.42
III
The city argues that a majority of state courts, when faced with a constitutional challenge to amortization ordinances as a taking of property without compensation, have managed to overcome these objections, approving the uncompensated termination of nonconforming uses.
The courts approving amortization as a reasonable imposition on private property rights have based their conclusions upon policy arguments of dubious merit. Further, the authorities to the contrary, while less numerous, are more persuasive.43
Authorities holding that amortization is consti*235tutionally permissible invariably begin by acknowledging the principle that nonconforming uses are not subject to immediate termination. Zoning enactments have traditionally been prospective in effect, partly in the expectation, it has been said, "that existing nonconforming uses would be of little consequence and . . . would eventually disappear.”44 But, as a commentator observed, "the number of nonconforming uses did not decrease, but rather increased due to indifferent or unsympathetic administration of the zoning ordinances, incorrect granting of variances, and influential political pressures.”45
The impetus for amortization may be communal frustration with how long it has taken nonconforming uses to "eliminate themselves.” The Supreme Court of Missouri explained that some communities have addressed the problem of persistent nonconforming uses by recourse to legislative legerdemain:
[Z]oning zealots have been casting about for other methods or techniques to hasten the elimination of nonconforming uses. In so doing, only infrequent use has been made of the power of eminent domain, primarily because of the expense of compensating damaged property owners, but increasing emphasis has been placed upon the *236"amortization” or "tolerance” technique which conveniently bypasses the troublesome element of compensation.[46]
Courts in states passing favorably on amortization "reason” that, where the private loss to property owners is outweighed by the public benefit of amortizing nonconforming uses, there is no constitutional difficulty if the period of amortization is reasonable. A reasonable amortization period has been said to be one that allows affected property owners adequate time to recover their investment. In this connection, reference is sometimes made to the economic life of the property, such as a "depreciation” period, either in financial accounting or tax accounting terms.47
While a community is surely empowered to exercise police power in furtherance of public health, safety, and general welfare, and "[e]very exercise of the police power is apt to affect adversely the property interest of somebody,”48 the notion that the right or need of the community to exercise its police power may somehow "outweigh” private property interests runs counter to the *237constitutional limitation requiring payment of just compensation for a taking.
The introduction of a temporal component does not alter the analysis. As the court in Hoffmann v Kinealy, 389 SW2d 745, 753 (Mo, 1965), said:
To our knowledge, no one has, as yet, been so brash as to contend that such a pre-existing lawful nonconforming use properly might be terminated immediately. In fact, the contrary is implicit in the amortization technique itself which would validate a taking presently unconstitutional by the simple expedient of postponing such taking for a "reasonable” time. All of this leads us to suggest, as did the three dissenting justices in Harbison v City of Buffalo [4 NY2d 553, 566-567; 176 NYS2d 598; 152 NE2d 42 (1958)], that it would be a strange and novel doctrine indeed which would approve a municipality taking private property for public use without compensation if the property was not too valuable and the taking was not too soon, and prompts us to repeat the caveat of Mr. Justice Holmes in Pennsylvania Coal Co v Mahon, 260 US 393, 416; 43 S Ct 158; 67 L Ed 322; 28 ALR 1321 [1922], that "[w]e are in danger of forgetting that a strong public desire to improve the public condition is not enough to warrant achieving the desire by a shorter cut than the constitutional way of paying for the change.”
The application of "generally accepted accounting principles” in this context is unpersuasive. No reasonable person would seriously suggest that the owner of the Empire State Building could be required, in the exercise of the police power, to remove the building from the land, or even to rebuild it to current specifications, at the conclusion of a thirty- or fifty-year period mandated pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code as representing the useful life of buildings for tax depreciation purposes, without paying just compensation.
*238Proponents of amortization, such as the City of East Lansing, gloss over the difference between on- and off-premises signs and billboards. The city acknowledges the general judicial "reluctance” to permit amortization of nonconforming uses in relation to "primary” uses, but asserts that signs and billboards are "secondary” and thus may be eliminated by amortization. I might agree insofar as freestanding on-premises signs and billboards are at issue. As respects off-premises signs and billboards, I cannot agree.
The city might justify regulating or revising the technical specifications for on-premises signs and billboards to improve traffic safety, in an effort to make the community more aesthetically pleasing, or for other similar public purposes, without incurring the obligation to compensate the owners. Reducing the proliferation of flashing lights and neon displays may further such purposes without impinging upon property rights. As long as signs may still be displayed to inform potential customers of a particular business location, the relatively modest cost of rebuilding or relocating a sign may not be constitutionally objectionable. Such a sign is, I agree, essentially an incidental use of the property, and the primary function of the property, as a place where business is conducted, is virtually unaffected. Such regulation may not, therefore, amount to a taking.
The same apology cannot be made for an amortization provision as applied to off-premises signs. Retroactive application of significant changes in standards for such signs, particularly "regulations” that abolish an off-premises sign altogether, appear to constitute a taking of property without compensation, for, in such cases, the sign is itself the use of property. From the standpoint of the owner of the affected property, maintenance of the *239sign is itself the "business” being conducted on the property. The abolition of roof signs under East Lansing’s sign code thus appears to constitute a taking of private property. The imposition of such a taking in homeopathic doses cannot be sustained, despite the asserted underlying public policy.49
Unless signs and billboards become contraband, neither the state nor local governmental units may confiscate them, or deprive their owners of the right to maintain and display them without payment of just compensation. Decisions of this Court50 and enactments of the Legislature51 clearly attest that signs and billboards are not contraband.
437 Mich 925 (1991).
Adams Outdoor Advertising v East Lansing, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of Appeals, decided April 20, 1990 (Docket Nos. 110816-110818).
Dr. Cleveland based his recommendations on the prevailing sign industry standards and the most recent scientific information concerning vision and reaction time in driving. Cleveland, Traffic Safety Considerations in Roadside Displays, report prepared for the Planning Commission, City of East Lansing, Michigan (May, 1973).
In 1983, this deadline was extended to May 1, 1984, and was later extended to May 1,1987.
Adams Outdoor Advertising has three roof signs located at 111 North Harrison, two roof signs located at 1108 East Grand River, and seven billboards located at 1502 West Grand River. Under East Lansing’s sign code, the roof signs are expressly prohibited, art V, § 8.38(12), and the billboards violate art IV, § 8.36, by exceeding the permissible display area.
Crawford, Local zoning control of billboards — A guide for Michigan attorneys, 1989 Det C L R 1473.
MCR 2.116(C)(9).
The plaintiffs also alleged that enforcement of the sign code was unconstitutional, as applied to each sign, and a taking in violation of US Const, Am V; Const 1963, art 10, § 2. Because the trial court only-considered the issue of statutory authority in granting plaintiffs’ motion for partial summary disposition, we will not consider these issues at this time. On remand, the trial court must evaluate these allegations only in light of the arguments raised by the parties.
MCL 117.4i(5); MSA 5.2082(5):
For licensing, regulating, restricting and limiting the number and locations of billboards within the city.
Adams Outdoor Advertising, n 2 supra, slip op, p 4.
1921 PA 207, MCL 125.581 et seq.; MSA 5.2931 et seq.
Such elimination of nonconforming uses and structures over a specified period of time is commonly referred to as "amortization.” See 82 Am Jur 2d, Zoning and Planning, § 188, p 702.
1909 PA 279, MCL 117.1 et seq.; MSA 5.2071 et seq.
Const 1963, art 7, § 34 compels the same conclusion. It states that "provisions of [the] law concerning counties, townships, cities and villages shall be liberally construed in their favor.” (Emphasis added.) Our construction of MCL 117.4i(5); MSA 5.2082(5) comports with this requirement. We are simply holding that the amortization provision of the East Lansing sign code is a police power ordinance, properly enacted under MCL 117.4i(5); MSA 5.2082(5), that enables cities the authority to regulate signs and billboards in the interest of the health, safety, and welfare of the community and to promote the aesthetic value of the city.
While we do not dispute much of the dissent’s analysis, I cannot agree with the inclusion of the taking argument in this case. Although it has been alleged by the plaintiffs in their pleadings, it was not considered by the trial court in granting plaintiffs’ motion for partial summary disposition. Therefore, we believe that the dissent’s discussion can only be viewed as dicta, interesting dicta, but irrelevant to the outcome of this case.
Absent a taking, there would be less need to be concerned with whether there is legislative authority for a city to promulgate an amortization provision, or whether such a provision is violative of the constitutional requirement that just compensation be paid where there is a taking.
The home rule act was amended to authorize a city charter to provide "[f]or licensing, regulating, restricting and limiting the number and locations of billboards within the city.” MCL 117.4i(5); MSA 5.2082(5).
Plaintiffs Denny’s Schwinn, Baryames Cleaners, Inc., and Little Caesar Enterprises, Inc., would indeed incur some expense in complying with the new on-premises regulations and, at the same time, modernizing their signs.
The new code provides: "Any existing sign on the effective date of this Chapter or any amendment hereto, which does not at that time comply with all of the provisions hereof, including any amendment: ... (8) Shall not be placed, maintained or displayed by any person on or after May 1, 1987.” Article VI, § 8.39.
Const 1963, art 1, § 17, and art 10, § 2, and the United States Constitution, Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments.
MCR 2.116(C)(9).
The city has also asserted at each stage of court proceedings that, because the amortization provision of its sign code was not invalid as a matter of law, summary disposition was improper. The city contended that the reasonableness of the sign code should be assessed with respect to each plaintiff at trial.
Plaintiffs’ complaints address the constitutional issues, but Adams Outdoor’s motion for summary disposition addressed only the issue of statutory authority. Nonetheless, the city’s pleadings, including its brief in opposition to the motion for summary disposition, argue that the amortization provision does not effect a taking, and cite cases decided in other states where the courts found amortization not to be facially unconstitutional.
The trial court order does not advert to the taking issue. The order recites "Plaintiffs’ claim that the Defendant’s Sign Code, Section 8.39(8) was invalid because Michigan law prohibits a Michigan municipality from eliminating by time a lawful, nonconforming use of property!)]”
The order also incorporates by reference the "findings” made following the hearing. Plaintiffs’ counsel specifically noted at the hearing that he was arguing the case only on a statutory basis. In his oral ruling, the trial judge relied primarily on De Mull v City of Lowell, 368 Mich 242, 252; 118 NW2d 232 (1962), but also said:
That decision in Central Advertising never points out that if you have an alternative to amortization, you have no problem. In other words, if the ordinance permits [sic] the signs, and the option of compensation or amortization exists, then it’s fine. But if you only give them amortization, then you have problems. I grant the motion.
Similarly, the Court of Appeals did not expressly reach the taking issue but, following De Mull, observed that "defendant did not purchase and condemn the signs thereby abating the use.”
The city council began implementing the recommendations by enacting, in August, 1973, a moratorium that barred further placement of signs pending adoption of a new sign code. The moratorium remained in effect until the new code was enacted.
The sign ordinance was enacted as Chapter 99 of Title VII, Building Regulations of the Code of the City of East Lansing.
Section 8.21(16).
Section 8.21(24), as amended, defines "[r]oof sign” as "any sign which is attached to a building and any part of which extends more than one (1) foot above either the top line of the building silhouette or any portion of the roof surface.” Section 8.38(12) prohibits construction, erection, or maintenance of any roof sign.
Three of the Adams Outdoor roof signs are located on North Harrison, and two are located on East Grand River.
Section 8.36(2).
Id.
Id., §8.36(4).
id., §8.36(5).
A freestanding sign is "a sign the principal support of which is independent of any building.” Section 8.21(10).
Clements v McCabe, 210 Mich 207, 215; 177 NW 722 (1920). See also City of Livonia v DSS, 423 Mich 466, 492-494; 378 NW2d 402 (1985) (discussing continued vitality of Clements); Detroit Osteopathic Hosp v Southfield, 377 Mich 128, 132; 139 NW2d 728 (1966); Krajenke Buick Sales v Hamtramck City Engineer, 322 Mich 250, 254; 33 NW2d 781 (1948); Kalamazoo v Titus, 208 Mich 252, 265; 175 NW 480 (1919).
Id., p 250.
Id.
1947 PA 272, MCL 125.583a; MSA 5.2933(1).
The zoning enabling act, 1921 PA 207, and the provision of the home rule act "authoriz[ing] cities to include the power to zone in their charters,” 1921 PA 348, were signed within one day of each other. See Korash v Livonia, 388 Mich 737, 741-742; 202 NW2d 803 (1972). Both were enacted in response to this Court’s decision in Clements, n 17 supra, p 216, that the City of Detroit did not have the power to zone.
De Mull, supra, p 251.
The draft enactment had provided in part:
" 'The legislative body in cities and villages may provide for the removal of such nonconforming uses or structures by specifying a reasonable period or periods in which such removal shall be required. In determining such periods consideration shall be given to the type of use and the type, age and other characteristics of the structures.’ ” [Id., p 252.]
Id, p 251.
The Attorney General opined that the proposed provision authorizing amortization, which would have required a municipality to " 'specify[ ] a reasonable period based on type of use and the type, age and other characteristics of structures, would be held invalid, since it contemplates ordinances which would set definite periods of time.’ ” Id, p 252, quoting OAG, 1947-1948, No 146, p 218 (March 7, 1947).
The Court said:
The legislature heeded the foregoing opinion and meaningfully eliminated, from then drafted section 3a, authorization to do that which the defendant city has attempted to ordain. Thus it must be held that [the amortization provision] of the city’s zoning ordinance is invalid for want of legislative warrant. [De Mull, supra, p 252.]
MCL 125.581 et seq.; MSA 5.2931 et seq.
MCL 117.4i(5); MSA 5.2082(5).
MCL 125.216; MSA 5.2961(16) (county zoning), MCL 125.286; MSA 5.2963(16) (township zoning), MCL 125.583a; MSA 5.2933(1) (city or village zoning).
MCL 125.216(1); MSA 5.2961(16)(1) (county zoning), MCL 125.286(1); MSA 5.2963(16)(1) (township zoning), MCL 125.583a(1); MSA 5.2933(1)(1) (city or village zoning).
MCL 125.216(2); MSA 5.2961(16)(2), MCL 125.286(2); MSA 5.2963(16)(2), MCL 125.583a(2); MSA 5.2933(1)(2).
De Mull, supra p 252.
To the extent that East Lansing is subject to both the home rule act and the zoning enabling act, and insofar as the two enactments embody overlapping grants of authority pursuant to the police power, the specific provisions of the zoning enabling act governing nonconforming uses are controlling.
MCL 125.216(3); MSA 5.2961(16)(3), MCL 125.286(3); MSA 5.2963(16)(3), MCL 125.583a(3); MSA 5.2933(1)(3).
MCL 117.4i(5); MSA 5.2082(5).
Wolverine Sign Works, supra, p 207.
Id., p 208 (emphasis added).
See n 30 and accompanying text.
The city acknowledges that zoning and sign codes both regulate setback and height requirements, but asserts that the purposes of the requirements are different in the two types of enactments. The effect, termination of nonconforming uses, is, however, the same under either denomination.
8.36 Signs Permitted — Off-Premises Signs. Off-premises, free standing or wall signs including bill board structures or signs shall be permitted on premises which are not otherwise used or occupied for the uses or purposes described in sections 8.30 through 8.35 of this Chapter subject to the following restrictions:
(1) Off-premises signs shall be permitted only on premises which are zoned b-2 or m and which are located on major streets.
(4) Such signs shall be set back not less than twenty-five (25) feet from the nearest existing or future curb line, or, in the absence of curbs, twenty-five (25) feet from the edge of pavement or the minimum setback for buildings and structures for the zoning district within which the sign is located, whichever is greater .... [Emphasis added.]
These were terms of the rudimentary zoning ordinance in place at the time of enactment of the disputed provision.
The ordinance provided:
"In residential areas and excluding business streets, all structures, whether frame, fireproof or otherwise shall conform to the established front building line of existing adjacent, structures on same side of street or avenue, providing that the provisions of the foregoing subsection shall not be deemed to apply to structures already in existence on any corner lot.” [322 Mich 252.]
Roof signs are apparently prohibited by the code throughout the city, § 8.38(12), and must "not be placed, maintained or displayed by any person on or after May 1, 1987.” Section 8.39(8).
1 Rathkopf, Zoning and Planning, § 1.02[3], pp 1-29.
See, e.g., Dingeman Advertising, Inc v Algoma Twp, 393 Mich 89; 223 NW2d 689 (1974); Superior Twp v Reimel Sign Co, 362 Mich 481; 107 NW2d 808 (1961). See also Columbia v Omni Outdoor Advertising, Inc, 499 US —; 111 S Ct 1344, 1350; 113 L Ed 2d 382 (1991), characterizing the regulation of billboard size, spacing, and location as "surely a common form of zoning . . . .”
The same assumption, or equation between zoning and sign regulation, is made by most of the authorities that hold that amortization does not amount to an unconstitutional taking of property without compensation. New Castle v Rollins Outdoor Advertising, Inc, 475 A2d 355 (Del, 1984); Fayetteville v McIlroy Bank & Trust Co, 278 Ark 500; 647 SW2d 439 (1983); Ackerly Communications, Inc v Seattle, 92 Wash 2d 905; 602 P2d 1177 (1979); Lubbock Poster Co v Lubbock, 569 SW2d 935 (Tex Civ App, 1978), cert den 444 US 833 (1979); Art Neon Co v City and Co of Denver, 488 F2d 118 (CA 10, 1973), cert den 417 US 932 (1974); Nat’l Advertising Co v Monterey Co, 1 Cal 3d 875; 464 P2d 33 (1970); Naegele Outdoor Advertising Co v Minnetonka, 281 Minn 492; 162 NW2d 206 (1968); Grant v Baltimore, 212 Md 301; 129 A2d 363; 172 NW2d 382 (1957).
Bane v Pontiac Twp, 343 Mich 481, 492; 72 NW2d 134 (1955) (township ordinance affecting the location of and sanitary facilities in trailer homes; an enactment requiring termination of preexisting nonconforming uses, and having the effect of a zoning ordinance, could not be applied retroactively against the plaintiffs).
See Detroit Edison Co v City of Wixom, 382 Mich 673, 690 (1969).
Addressing this question nearly thirty years ago, at a time when the authorities were more evenly divided than today, the court in Hoffmann v Kinealy, 389 SW2d 745, 752 (Mo, 1965), observed that
although the holdings in other jurisdictions may, in some instances, be enlightening and persuasive, it is neither our duty nor our inclination to rule a question of first impression in this state simply by counting foreign cases and then falling off the judicial fence on the side on which more cases'can be found.
See also PA Northwestern Distributors, Inc v Zoning Hearing Bd of Moon Twp, 526 Pa 186; 584 A2d 1372 (1991); Lamar Advertising of South Georgia, Inc v Albany, 260 Ga 46; 389 SE2d 216 (1990); Ailes v Decatur Co Area Planning Comm, 448 NE2d 1057 (Ind, 1983); Akron v Chapman, 160 Ohio St 382; 116 NE2d 697 (1953); United Advertising Corp v Borough of Raritan, 11 NJ 144; 93 A2d 362 (1952), holding that amortization provisions are violative of constitutional limitations.
Los Angeles v Gage, 127 Cal App 2d 442, 454; 274 P2d 34 (1954).
Graham, Legislative techniques for the amortization of the nonconforming use: A suggested formula, 12 Wayne L R 435, 437 (1966).
See also Lachapelle v Goffstown, 107 NH 485, 486-487; 225 A2d 624 (1967):
In the beginning zoning "sought to safeguard the future, in the expectation that time will repair the mistakes of the past.” Experience has demonstrated that this expectation and prophecy has not been fulfilled and that something more than time and hope is required to eliminate or restrict nonconforming uses. [Citation omitted.]
Hoffmann v Kinealy, n 43 supra, p 750.
A further factor sometimes taken into account in calculation of a reasonable amortization period is whether the affected property owner, by virtue of the prospective ban on the similar use of property by other owners in the community, receives the benefit of a temporary "monopoly” on the nonconforming use. The implicit assumption of this analysis is that the community has a greater right to deprive persons of the use and enjoyment of their property if the community has taken action that indirectly enhances the value of such property.
This argument, like the balance of the analysis applied by the courts finding that amortization does not effect a taking, overlooks the principle that unless a property right is at the outset insubstantial, neither the state nor local governmental units to which the state delegates police power may deprive persons of the use and enjoyment of their property without paying just compensation. The gratuitous, and assertedly fortuitous effects, if any, of "monopoly” do not alter this principle.
Zahn v Los Angeles Bd of Public Works, 195 Cal 497, 512; 234 P 388 (1925).
While the absence of a factual record prevents determination of the question, Adams Outdoor may also sustain an incremental, but substantial financial loss by virtue of the city’s ordained 300-square-foot limit for off-premises billboards, §8.36(2). This limit does not allow maintenance of 14 by 48 foot "painted bulletin” billboards. Both the smaller "poster” billboard, with dimensions of 12 by 25 feet (i.e., 300 square feet), and the larger painted bulletin are standard sizes and thus commercially recognized statewide and nationally. Nonetheless, if the billboards owned by Adams Outdoor are of the larger size, the amortization provision requires Adams Outdoor to absorb not only the cost of tearing down the old billboards and erecting new ones, but also a substantial, perpetual reduction in the stream of income from its property attributable to the difference in rental value between the two sizes.
See Wolverine Sign Works, supra.
MCL 252.303; MSA 9.391(103) recognizes that "outdoor advertising is a legitimate commercial use of private property, is an integral part of the marketing function and an established segment of the economy of this state.”

=== CASE 9740644 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:39:23.558431+00 ===

JUSTICE FITZGERALD delivered the opinion of the court: Following a jury trial in the Kane County circuit court, the defendant, Tony Dameron, was convicted of first degree murder for killing his three-month-old daughter. The defendant waived his right to a sentencing-phase jury, and the trial court found him eligible for the death penalty. The court then found no mitigating circumstances sufficient to preclude the death penalty and sentenced the defendant to death. That sentence has been stayed pending direct review by this court. Ill. Const. 1970, art. VI, § 4(b); 134 Ill. 2d Rs. 603, 609(a). We affirm the defendant’s conviction, but we reverse his death sentence and remand for a new sentencing hearing. BACKGROUND Rachel Dameron was born on May 23,1995. She lived with her mother, Cynthia Michniewicz, her one-year-old half-brother, Christopher Thornton, and her father, the defendant, in an Aurora apartment. The defendant was unemployed, and he would babysit Christopher and Rachel while Michniewicz worked. On August 29, 1995, the defendant told Michniewicz he planned to attend a sobriety party at a local restaurant. He assured her that he would return around 9 p.m. to watch the children, so she could leave for work. When the defendant failed to arrive, Michniewicz left him a note saying she took the children to the Alejandros’ house. Neighbors Deborah and David Alejandro (Deborah and David) occasionally cared for Christopher and Rachel. The defendant did not attend a sobriety party. Instead, he walked to several Aurora bars where he drank beer and hard liquor from 5 p.m. to 1 a.m. When the defendant came home around 1:30 a.m., he saw Michniewicz’s note and went to the Alejandros’ house to retrieve the children. Deborah gave him Rachel. Christopher was sleeping, so he remained with the Alejandros. At trial, the defendant testified that he brought Rachel to their apartment, took her upstairs to bed, and went downstairs to shoot some heroin. When Rachel began crying, he went back upstairs to attend to her. As the defendant was taking her downstairs for a bottle, he dropped her. The defendant saw Rachel was not breathing; he told her to wake up and smacked her face to revive her. The next thing the defendant remembered was Michniewicz waking him later that morning. Michniewicz returned to the apartment around 6:30 a.m. and found the defendant sleeping in bed. She woke him to ask about the children, and he told her that both children had stayed with the Alejandros overnight. Michniewicz got into bed to sleep for several hours. According to the defendant, he arose and went to the children’s playroom. Inside the closet, he saw Rachel’s lifeless body wrapped in a towel. The defendant put Rachel and the towel into plastic bags and then into a canvas duffel bag. He placed the duffel bag inside the closet and returned to bed. The defendant woke Michniewicz around 9:30 a.m. She asked if she should retrieve the children from the Alejandros; he said he would. Around 10:30 a.m., Michniewicz left to meet a friend from work, and the defendant visited the Alejandros to get Christopher. The defendant soon returned to the Alejandros and told David that Rachel had been kidnapped. David drove the defendant to a pay telephone to call the police. An Aurora police officer was dispatched to the defendant’s apartment around 11:30 a.m. The officer met the defendant, who reported that he had left Rachel in her car seat outside their apartment while he went inside to warm a bottle for her; when he returned, she was gone. Aurora police investigator Randall Place soon arrived at the defendant’s apartment and spoke with the other police officer. Officer Place briefly surveyed the apartment, then asked the defendant to accompany him to the police station. The defendant agreed, locked the apartment, and left with Officer Place. At the police station, the defendant gave Officer Place background information about his relationship with Michniewicz. The defendant gave his keys to the police, who returned to the apartment to search for Rachel. Inside the playroom closet, an officer found the canvas duffle bag. He opened it and found two white plastic bags. The officer felt a damp towel inside the second plastic bag. He looked inside and saw a baby’s arm or leg. Around 2:30 p.m., Officer Place received a call from the defendant’s apartment that Rachel was dead. Officer Place gave Miranda warnings to the defendant and told him that Rachel had been found inside the apartment. When this statement elicited no reaction from the defendant, Officer Place asked the defendant to tell the police what he knew about Rachel. The defendant responded that he had killed Rachel — that he had dropped her on the stairs. An autopsy revealed at least 37 types of injuries to Rachel’s body, including blunt force trauma, skull and spine fractures, various other bone fractures, brain injury, contusions, strangulation marks, and lacerations of the liver and genital area. Rachel also had been exposed to water; her body had been washed. Rachel’s head was deformed and discolored, and her brain was liquified. Blood and brain matter seeped from her right ear. Her vagina was dilated and stretched, and her vaginal and anal areas were torn. Not all of these injuries could be explained by falling down stairs; Rachel’s injuries were not accidental. The forensic pathologist who performed the autopsy surmised that Rachel had been wielded by the legs and swung against a smooth, hard surface more than 10 times. This beating caused her death. On September 18, 1998, the jury convicted the defendant of first degree murder. On September 21, 1998, the trial court found him eligible for the death penalty on two grounds: the defendant murdered a person during an attempted aggravated criminal sexual assault (720 ILCS 5/9 — 1(b)(6)(c) (West 1996)); and the defendant murdered a person under 12 years of age, and the death resulted from “exceptionally brutal or heinous behavior indicative of wanton cruelty” (720 ILCS 5/9 — 1(b)(7) (West 1996)). On October 6, 1998, after a two-week aggravation/mitigation hearing, the court sentenced the defendant to death. This appeal followed. See 134 Ill. 2d R. 603. ANALYSIS The defendant’s appeal raises eight issues. These issues fall into three categories: guilt-phase issues, sentencing-phase issues, and issues attacking the constitutionality of the Illinois death penalty statute. 1. Guilt-Phase Issues The defendant first contends he was denied a fair trial because, on direct examination by the State, Officer Place mentioned the defendant’s post-Miranda-warning request for an attorney. On this legal issue, we review the record de nova. People v. Daniels, 187 Ill. 2d 301, 307 (1999). During direct examination by the State, Officer Place testified that he gave Miranda warnings to the defendant. The State questioned Officer Place about his interview with the defendant: “Q. What did he say to you at that time? A. The second time I said Tony, you need to tell us what you know, and he said I killed her, I was drunk and I was taking her downstairs to fix her a bottle an [szc] I dropped her on the stairs. Q. And in response to that question did you know she was dead what did he say? A. Umm, at that point he said that she was dead, she was dead. Again, no eye contact, just stared straight ahead. Q. Did you ask him whether or not he believed she was dead? A. Umm, that question was asked, and he stated that she — that she in fact was dead. * * * Q. And what did he say after that if anything? A. Umm — Officer Snyder asked him: When you knew Rachel was dead, what did you do with the body? At that point he said: I can’t remember. I just freaked out. I can’t remember. And then in turn I asked him after that: Was the amount of alcohol you drank was that a factor in you dropping Rachel on the stairs? And he stated: No, it wasn’t. It was all me. And then he took a breath, he said: It was all my fault. And then at that point he looked up, he did make eye contact with me, and he stated that he wanted to talk to an attorney, and I didn’t ask him anymore questions.” Defense counsel objected and moved for a mistrial, and the State conceded Officer Place’s statement was improper. The trial court denied the defendant’s mistrial motion. Instead, the court barred the State from making further references to Officer Place’s testimony about the defendant’s request for an attorney or Place’s testimony about the defendant’s eye contact during the interview. The court also offered to give a curative jury instruction. After conferring with the defendant, defense counsel declined this offer, stating any instruction would only highlight the improper testimony and compound any error. In Doyle v. Ohio, 426 U.S. 610, 619, 49 L. Ed. 2d 91, 98, 96 S. Ct. 2240, 2245 (1976), the United States Supreme Court held that the prosecution generally cannot use a defendant’s post-Miranda-warning silence for impeachment purposes without violating due process. People v. Pegram, 124 Ill. 2d 166, 176 (1988). The Doyle rule also applies to a defendant’s post-Miranda-warning request for an attorney. See Wainwright v. Greenfield, 474 U.S. 284, 295 n.13, 88 L. Ed. 2d 623, 632 n.13, 106 S. Ct. 634, 640 n.13 (1986); People v. Lucas, 132 Ill. 2d 399, 432 (1989). A violation of the Doyle rule, however, may constitute harmless error. People v. Miller, 96 Ill. 2d 385, 395 (1983). We have recognized at least five factors for a court to consider in determining whether a Doyle violation was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt: (1) the party who elicited the testimony about the defendant’s silence; (2) the intensity and frequency of the references to the defendant’s silence; (3) the use that the prosecution made of the defendant’s silence; (4) the trial court’s opportunity to grant a mistrial motion or to give a curative jury instruction; and (5) the quantum of other evidence proving the defendant’s guilt. People v. Patterson, 154 Ill. 2d 414, 467-68 (1992); People v. Frieberg, 147 Ill. 2d 326, 354-55 (1992); Lucas, 132 Ill. 2d at 432-33; Miller, 96 Ill. 2d at 396; accord People v. Warren, 217 Ill. App. 3d 778, 783 (1991) (enumerating factors). In Miller, the State on cross-examination asked the defendant why he failed to tell his exculpatory story to the police after his arrest. The defense objected and moved for a mistrial. The trial court sustained the objection, denied the mistrial motion, and instructed the jury to ignore the State’s question “for the time being.” We held that the Doyle violation was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. Miller, 96 Ill. 2d at 396. Although the State asked the question, it was a brief reference to the defendant’s silence which the State never revisited. Miller, 96 Ill. 2d at 396. Further, the court issued a prompt curative instruction, and the record contained sufficient admissible evidence of the defendant’s guilt. Miller, 96 Ill. 2d at 396. In Lucas, the State asked the defendant’s mother about conversations she had with the defendant, and she answered, “The investigators had told me that [the defendant] had asked for a lawyer.” The defense objected and moved for a mistrial. The court sustained the objection, but denied the mistrial motion. The court admonished the defendant’s mother not to make further references to the defendant’s silence, and the court accepted a defense request not to give a curative instruction to avoid drawing the jury’s attention to the testimony. We again held that the Doyle violation was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. Lucas, 132 Ill. 2d at 433. The defendant’s mother volunteered the brief comment, and the State made no further references to the defendant’s request for an attorney. Lucas, 132 Ill. 2d at 432-33. The court sustained a defense objection to the comment, the defense declined the court’s offer to give a curative instruction, and the record contained overwhelming evidence of the defendant’s guilt. Lucas, 132 Ill. 2d at 433. In Patterson, a police officer, on direct examination by the State, testified that the defendant said he understood his Miranda warnings. The police officer stated that he next asked the defendant, “Do you wish to answer questions, at this time?” The assistant State’s Attorney then asked what the defendant replied. When the police officer answered “No,” the defense moved for a mistrial. The trial court found the error was harmless and curable with a jury instruction. The court told the jury to disregard the comment, and the State made no further mention of the defendant’s post-arrest silence. We agreed with the trial court: the Doyle violation was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. Patterson, 154 Ill. 2d at 468. Although the State elicited the police officer’s testimony, the brief statement during a lengthy trial was not egregious, and the curative jury instruction was clear. Patterson, 154 Ill. 2d at 467. The prosecution did not rely on the defendant’s silence, and the admissible evidence was sufficient to prove his guilt. Patterson, 154 Ill. 2d at 467. Here, the State elicited Officer Place’s testimony on the defendant’s request for an attorney, but the statement was so brief and isolated that defense counsel asked the trial court not to highlight the improper testimony by giving a curative jury instruction. The court barred further references to this statement and to Place’s comments about the defendant’s eye contact, and the State never returned to this testimony. Finally, the State presented strong evidence of the defendant’s guilt. The Doyle violation was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. The defendant next contends he was denied a fair trial because the involuntary manslaughter jury instructions told the jury that the State bore the burden to prove him guilty of that offense, but the State urged the jury to find him not guilty of manslaughter. We already have rejected this argument (People v. Oaks, 169 Ill. 2d 409, 463 (1996); Lucas, 132 Ill. 2d at 442-43), and the defendant offers no reason for us to reconsider our earlier holdings. Here, the instructions properly stated the burden of proof and did not prevent the jury from considering evidence which would have allowed an involuntary manslaughter conviction. We affirm his first degree murder conviction. 2. Sentencing-Phase Issues The defendant first contends his sentencing jury waiver was invalid. We review this legal issue de nova. Daniels, 187 Ill. 2d at 307. In June 1997, the defendant filed a pro se “Motion for instruction that the jury is to presume that if sentenced to life, the defendant will spend the remainder of his natural life in prison.” This motion was based upon our holding in People v. Gacho, 122 Ill. 2d 221, 262 (1988). “[A] Gacho instruction is required in a capital sentencing hearing where a sentence of natural life in prison is the only available alternative to the death penalty.” People v. Simms, 192 Ill. 2d 348, 407 (2000); accord People v. Macri, 185 Ill. 2d 1, 73-74 (1998); see Illinois Pattern Jury Instructions, Criminal, No. 7C.05 (3d ed. 1992). Public Act 89 — 203, effective on July 21, 1995, rewrote section 5 — 8—1 (a)(1)(c)(ii) of the Unified Code of Corrections. After this amendment, section 5 — 8— 1(a)(1)(c)(ii) of the Code provided: “(a) *** [A] sentence of imprisonment for a felony shall be a determinate sentence set by the court under this Sectian, according to the following limitations: (1) for first degree murder, * * (c) the court shall sentence the defendant to a term of natural life imprisonment when the death penalty is not imposed if the defendant, (ii) is a person who, at the time of the commission of the murder, had attained the age of 17 or more and is found guilty of murdering an individual under 12 years of age ***.” 730 ILCS 5/5 — 8—1 (a)(1)(c)(ii) (West 1996). This section applied to the defendant. At the time he was sentenced, the defendant could receive only life imprisonment or death. In the hearing on the defendant’s pro se motion, however, defense counsel erroneously stated that this court had held Public Act 89 — 203, and therefore section 5 — 8—1(a)(1)(c)(ii), violated the single subject rule of the Illinois Constitution. Accordingly, the defense believed the defendant was not entitled to a Gacho instruction: “I would have asked for such an instruction, *** but it’s not a mandatory situation now, and so certainly can’t tell the jury if he doesn’t get the death penalty he’s going to get life, because that may not be the case.” The State agreed that this law was unconstitutional and that the defendant was not entitled to a Gacho instruction. The court spoke to the defendant about “well-settled principles” of informing the jury about sentencing alternatives only when a life sentence is the only alternative to the death penalty. Defense counsel withdrew the motion; the defendant assented.1  On several subsequent court dates, the court and the defense discussed whether the defendant would waive a sentencing jury. That question was left unresolved. In August 1998, the court indicated it would limit the defendant’s peremptory challenges from 20 to 14. On August 25, 1998, shortly before the trial date, the defendant waived his right to a sentencing-phase jury.2  “The right to a sentencing jury in a capital case is a statutory, not a constitutional, right.” People v. Erickson, 117 Ill. 2d 271, 289 (1987); see 720 ILCS 5/9 — 1(d) (West 1996). Like a guilt-phase jury waiver, a sentencing-phase jury waiver must be knowing and intelligent. People v. Brown, 169 Ill. 2d 132, 156 (1996); People v. Strickland, 154 Ill. 2d 489, 517 (1992). Whether a defendant’s waiver of a sentencing jury is knowing and intelligent depends upon the facts and circumstances of each case. People v. St. Pierre, 146 Ill. 2d 494, 508 (1992). The defendant contends his decision to waive a sentencing jury was not knowing and intelligent. The defendant claims that he would not have waived a sentencing jury if he had received correct advice from the trial court and, consequently, the Gacho instruction he requested. The State, however, argues that the Gacho-instruction ruling did not affect the defendant’s waiver decision because he waived a jury only after the court limited his peremptory challenges. The State refers us to People v. Maxwell, 148 Ill. 2d 116 (1992). In Maxwell, the trial court ruled that evidence of prior offenses committed by the defendant would be admissible at trial. Defense counsel advised the trial court that the defendant wished to waive a sentencing jury for three reasons: first, defense counsel believed the judge might be more lenient than a sentencing jury; second, defense counsel wanted to avoid death-quahfying the guilt-phase jury; and third, defense counsel wanted to avoid submitting the sentencing decision to a jury aware of the defendant’s criminal record. Defense counsel incorrectly believed uncharged offenses were inadmissible in an aggravation/mitigation hearing; she was unaware that other-crimes evidence was admissible at sentencing. On direct appeal to this court, the defendant contended his jury wáiver was invalid because he received ineffective assistance of counsel. We acknowledged defense counsel’s error, but we held this error was irrelevant to the defendant’s waiver decision. Maxwell, 148 Ill. 2d at 145. The defendant’s jury waiver, whether or not it was premised on a misunderstanding of evidence law, accomplished defense counsel’s strategic goal: preventing the sentencing jury from hearing about the defendant’s criminal record. Maxwell, 148 Ill. 2d at 144-45. We concluded that counsel’s error was not professionally unreasonable and that the defendant suffered no prejudice: “[D]efense counsel would have offered the same recommendation if she had known that the evidence of the defendant’s other crimes would later be admissible at the sentencing hearing.” Maxwell, 148 Ill. 2d at 145; accord People v. Maxwell, 173 Ill. 2d 102, 116 (1996) (post-conviction petition appeal). Maxwell is distinguishable. The legal error in this case, unlike the error in Maxwell, precluded the defendant’s strategic goal. The defendant wanted a sentencing jury instructed that its options were limited to a life sentence or a death sentence. More importantly, unlike the record in Maxwell, the record here contains no independent reasons for the defendant’s sentencing jury waiver. The defendant filed his own Gacho-instruction motion, and defense counsel stated that he would have asked for a Gacho instruction if he thought the defendant was entitled to one. After the defendant received erroneous advice and withdrew his pro se motion, he faced two choices: sentencing by the judge or sentencing by a jury, which would not receive a Gacho instruction limiting its options to life or death. When the court trimmed the defendant’s peremptory challenges, he soon chose to waive a sentencing jury. We reasonably can conclude an incorrect Gacho-instruction ruling irreparably tainted the defendant’s waiver decision. Finally, the legal error here, unlike the error in Maxwell, was not limited to the defense. Every legal professional in this case erroneously advised the defendant that he was not entitled to a Gacho instruction. We have held a sentencing jury waiver may be invalid when a defendant receives erroneous legal advice from the trial court. Brown, 169 Ill. 2d at 162 (“the State’s argument does not address or mitigate the fact that the trial judge misstated the law and misled the defendant into believing that a sentencing jury waiver was required if he wished to waive a jury for trial”); see People v. Henderson, 142 Ill. 2d 258, 335 (1990) (“The record shows that defendant made the waiver decision after talking with his attorney *** and before talking to the judge; so defendant’s waiver decision was not based, even in part, on the judge’s misstatement of law”). Here, defense counsel’s erroneous advice was consistent with that of the trial court. The defendant’s sentencing jury waiver was invalid. Although our resolution of the jury waiver issue is sufficient to reverse the defendant’s death sentence and remand for a new sentencing hearing, we turn to the defendant’s second sentencing contention because of the importance of the issue involved. The defendant also contends he was denied a fair sentencing hearing because the trial judge relied extensively upon evidence outside the record in deciding to impose the death penalty. The defendant specifies two improper sources: a social science book (F. Butterfield, All God’s Children: The Bosket Family and the American Tradition of Violence (1995)) and a transcript of sentencing comments made by the judge’s father in a 1966 murder trial. Initially, we note the State argues the defendant forfeited review of this issue by failing to object at the time the court imposed its sentence. But “[application of the waiver rule *** is less rigid where the basis for the objection is the circuit judge’s conduct.” People v. Davis, 185 Ill. 2d 317, 343 (1998); see People v. Saldivar, 113 Ill. 2d 256, 266 (1986) (“To preserve any error of the court made at that time [sentencing], it was not necessary for [defense] counsel to interrupt the judge and point out that he was considering the wrong factors in aggravation”). Again, we review this legal issue de novo. Daniels, 187 Ill. 2d at 307. “A determination made by the trial judge based upon a private investigation by the court or based upon private knowledge of the court, untested by cross-examination, or any of the rules of evidence constitutes a denial of due process of law.” People v. Wallenberg, 24 Ill. 2d 350, 354 (1962); accord People v. Thunberg, 412 Ill. 565, 567 (1952); People v. McMiller, 410 Ill. 338, 342 (1951). We turn to the trial court’s sentencing comments regarding the social science book: “As I listened to the evidence in this case, particularly the evidence in aggravation and mitigation, which took the better part of two weeks, I could not help but feel that I’ve heard this case before. And I went to my library and retrieved my copy of a book that was published in the year 1995 entitled All God’s Children, the Bosket Family and The American Tradition of Violence. In this case I believe I heard evidence going back three generations in the family of Tony Dameron. The author of the book which I mentioned is an individual by the name of Fox Butterfield, who was, at least at the time this book was published, an editor of the New York Times. This is a nonfiction book. It deals with a family known as the Boskets from about the time of the American Revolution until the publication of this book in 1995. I feel compelled to make some reference to observations which the author makes in the epilogue portion of the book. The items to which I wish to make reference in my initial thinking turned out to be quite lengthy, so I have tried to narrow that down. The significance of this volume to the case at hand is because of the striking resemblance that the family from which the defendant comes bears to the family of a person known by the name of Willie Bosket. And Mr. Butterfield points out the following: ‘In the closing years of the twentieth century, the number of young boys committing murder has reached epidemic proportions. Between 1985 and 1993 homicides by 15- to 19-year-old males in the United States jumped more than 150 percent, almost all of them involving guns. Willie Bosket is no longer an anomaly. Stories like his have become all too familiar as the staple of nightly television news. ‘In the face of this plague of violence, it is easy to despair. The politicians, reading from the public opinion polls, have a ready answer: more prisons, tough three-strikes-and-you’re-out jail sentences, and laws to try juveniles as adults in criminal courts. Some state legislators have boasted that they have “abolished childhood” by providing for children as young as age six to be sent to adult court. By 1995, there were 1.5 million people incarcerated in state and federal prisons and in local jails around the nation. Another 100,000 youths were confined in juvenile institutions. These numbers have tripled in the past two decades.’ In talking about prisons he observes: ‘Prisons have another disadvantage — they are a heavy financial burden. In 1995 the cost of running the nation’s prison system — along with probation and parole departments — is running close to fifty billion dollars a year, up from a mere four billion dollars in 1975. Keeping a juvenile in New York’s division for Youth for a year now costs $75,000; you could send three students to Harvard for the same money. In many states, new laws mandating longer prison terms have forced local governments into prison construction programs that are the fastest rising item in their budget. California has reduced funding for its once excellent state college and university system to help pay for its growing number of prisons. ‘Boiled down to its core, everything criminologists have learned about crime in recent research is that most adolescents who become delinquent, and the overwhelming majority of adults who commit violent crimes, started very young. They were impulsive, aggressive, irritable children who would not obey their parents, bullied their neighbors, and acted out when they got to school. By first and second grade, teachers can usually identify them in class. They find it difficult to learn, and fall behind in school. Because they are accustomed to getting their way by physical force, they see no reason to change. They actually like the way they act, and this makes it increasingly difficult to reverse their antisocial proclivities.’ And the last reference I make to this treatise is as follows: ‘In certain ways the rest of the globe has come to look more like America since the worldwide upsurge in crime in the 1960s. British homes are now more likely to be burgled than American ones. Cars in France are stolen more frequently than in the United States. But in homicide, we retain our longtime lead. In 1991, the most recent year for which figures are available, young men between 15 and 24 in the United States were murdered at the rate of 37.2 per 100,000. That is almost ten times higher than the next closest industrialized country, Italy, and 60 times greater than the homicide rate among the same age group in England. This is not, as some people might suppose, merely a disparity created by the racial composition in our inner cities. When minorities are factored out, America still has a disturbingly disproportionate murder rate. ‘In the" past few years, perhaps guided by the sudden popularity of the term “dissing” in movies and rap music, sociologists and psychologists have begun to recognize the impact of the notion of disrespect. New currículums designed to teach alternate, more peaceful ways to settle conflicts, have appeared in thousands of classrooms across the country. Think of the consequences before you act, is their message. You don’t have to use your fists, or a gun, when someone insults you. Whether these modern-day civics lessons are effective is unclear. They may reduce pushing in the cafeteria line; by themselves, they may not stop shooting on the street corner.’ ” The State characterizes the judge’s comments as a mere prelude to his sentence. The State relies upon People v. Griffith, 158 Ill. 2d 476 (1994). In Griffith, the trial judge, in sentencing the defendant, noted that an inmate convicted of murder and sentenced to natural life imprisonment would return to the general prison population after one year of disciplinary segregation. The court said that only the death penalty would deter an inmate already serving a life sentence from killing fellow inmates and prison officials. We held: “These comments were but one aspect of the judge’s articulation of his rationale for imposition of the death sentence and were not error. In rendering a sentence, a trial judge is presumed to have relied upon only competent and reliable evidence.” Griffith, 158 Ill. 2d at 497. We concluded the defendant did not overcome this presumption because he offered no evidence the judge’s “rhetorical comments” served as an improper basis for the death penalty. Griffith, 158 Ill. 2d at 497. The defendant urges us to consider People v. Rivers, 410 Ill. 410 (1951). In Rivers, two teenage girls were indicted for first degree murder. At the close of the State’s case, the defendants moved for a directed verdict. The trial judge expressed doubt about the State’s case and asked the prosecution to reindict the girls for conspiracy to commit murder. The judge continued the case for two months. When the case resumed, the judge displayed a markedly changed attitude. Without opening the case for additional evidence, he sua sponte interrogated the girls’ fathers about whether the guns the girls used were registered. The judge asserted this case involved “a coldblooded, premeditated killing” and stated, “Murders by youngsters are on the rampage everywhere. Almost daily we read of atrocious killings by juveniles, with some new, shocking angle to the tragedy. Teen-age murderers have been pampered too often, to the point of national alarm and disgust.” The judge added, “Society cannot long endure such appalling conditions. It makes law enforcement extremely difficult. According to the State’s Attorney, *** there are over 400,000 unlicensed, and unregistered guns in Chicago, most of which are exposed to potential murderers and youngsters.” Rivers, 410 Ill. at 415-16. The girls were convicted of murder and sentenced to 14 years’ imprisonment. In addressing defense counsel about arguing a new trial motion, the judge said, “I don’t think you can add to what has been said to me over these weeks [of recess].” Rivers, 410 Ill. at 418. We reversed the convictions and remanded for a new trial. Rivers, 410 Ill. at 419. We observed: “[T]he deliberations of the trial judge are limited to the exhibits offered and admitted in evidence and the record made before him in open court. Any private investigation by the court, either during the trial of the cause or while the motion for new trial is pending, constitutes a denial to the defendant of the constitutional guarantee of due process of law. [Citation.] The defendant in any criminal proceeding has an inherent and constitutional right that all proceedings against him shall be open and notorious, and in his presence, and any inquiiy or any acquisition of information or evidence outside of open court and outside of the presence of the defendant is prejudicial error. *** He has a right to rely upon his constitutional guarantee that nothing shall be considered against him except the competent evidence introduced in open court, in his presence, by the witnesses who confront him.” Rivers, 410 Ill. at 416-17. The record showed “some private investigation” during the two-month recess. Rivers, 410 Ill. at 418. The defendants’ constitutional rights were violated, regardless of whether this investigation had an innocent purpose or yielded benign results. Rivers, 410 Ill. at 419. The comments in this case more closely resemble those in Rivers than those in Griffith. In Griffith, the judge briefly alluded to his knowledge of Illinois’ penal system. Like the judge in Rivers, the judge in the defendant’s case spoke at length about social science statistics and vague generalizations about crime he uncovered through his own investigation. An excerpt from the Butterfield book recited by the judge also conflicts with evidence in this case. According to the judge, Butterfield wrote that unnamed criminologists have learned adults who commit violent crimes begin as bullies: “Because they are accustomed to getting their way by physical force, they see no reason to change. They actually like the way they act, and this makes it increasingly difficult to reverse their antisocial proclivities.” All God’s Children, at 327. Dr. Eric Ostrov, the defendant’s forensic psychology expert, was described by the trial court as “well qualified in his field of expertise.” Dr. Ostrov testified in the aggravation/mitigation hearing that the defendant suffered from two personality disorders: borderline personality disorder and antisocial personality disorder. Dr. Ostrov opined the defendant was not a psychopath, “a person who has no empathy or feelings for another individual, cold, calculating, only out for their ownselves, egotistical, destructive if they need to be.” Instead, ac: cording to Dr. Ostrov, the defendant did care for people and felt genuine remorse about his violence toward Rachel and its consequences for others. In a stipulated affidavit, Dr. Ostrov added the symptoms of both borderline and antisocial personality disorders dissipate around age 40. We next turn to the judge’s referencé to sentencing comments made by his father, a Kane County circuit judge, in a 1966 murder case: “And in thinking about this case, I also recalled in the summer of 1966 my father before me was called upon to pass sentence in a case which bears substantial resemblance to this case. At that time I was a lawyer of about five years’ experience — I’ll take that back, that was before I even became a lawyer. But I remembered how he anguished at home over what he should do. And what he did in that case is of no consequence here today, but what he said in relationship to the circumstances in which he found himself at that time applies to the circumstances which I find myself in at this time. And on July 8th of 1966 in the case of the People of the State of Illinois versus Veronica Crews, case number 66— 904, he said in part as follows: ‘I take it that it goes without saying that when any man or woman is elected to the bench no one forces them to that position, no one makes them accept that position. ‘When one human being accepts that position and signs his oath of office and raises his hands to follow the laws of the constitution of the State of Illinois, he or she alone assumes those burdens, that he or she, the same as I, is the only person responsible for the decisions that he or she gives, the sentences that are handed out. And I am the only person who must live with my own conscience.’ He also stated: T am here to carry out the laws as I find them as fairly and impartially as I know how within the limits of my own capabilities, but I cannot in my experience recall to mind a more horrible death than is witnessed in this case.’ I can say the same thing in this case, particularly when it comes to the manner in which Rachel Renee Dameron died.” By recalling his father’s anguish over imposing a death sentence and by comparing the brutality of the 1966 case to that in the defendant’s case, the judge aligned himself with his father in imposing the death penalty. Again, the judge looked outside the record.3  In the hearing on the defendant’s post-trial motion, the judge said, “[N]othing contained in that [Butterfield] volume or any of the other dozens of volumns [sic] that I have read over the years dealing with matters of criminal jurisprudence *** controlled any portion of my decision in this case.” A judge need not give controlling weight to the improper evidence to trigger our reversal; even giving “very little weight” is improper. People v. Simms, 121 Ill. 2d 259, 274 (1988) (victim impact statements). Here, the judge felt compelled to comment upon the Butterfield book and acknowledged its significance to the defendant’s case. He also noted the substantial resemblance between the defendant’s case and the 1966 case over which his father presided. Additionally, the judge’s comments about and quotations from the Butter-field book, together with his references to his father’s comments, comprise nearly half of his total sentencing comments. The judge’s references to these sources show that he gave some weight to them. In Rivers, we stated: “When a defendant in a criminal case waives trial by jury and submits his rights and liberty to a judge, that judge is in the identical position of the jury and all the recognized rules for the protection of the defendant’s rights apply with equal force. [Citation.] It is axiomatic that any unauthorized information reaching the jury is prejudicial error.” Rivers, 410 Ill. at 419. We reach the same conclusion here. “[T]he trial court may search within reasonable bounds for facts in an inquiry relative to aggravation and mitigation. Here, the trial court’s search passed such bounds and was improper.” Crews, 38 Ill. 2d at 339. Our resolution of this issue alone is sufficient to reverse the defendant’s death sentence and remand for a new sentencing hearing. The trial judge sought alternative avenues of information in his effort to reach the correct result. Unfortunately, that effort led to the error here. Accordingly, in order to remove any suggestion of unfairness, this case should be assigned to a different judge on remand. 3. Constitutionality of the Illinois Death Penalty Statute The defendant challenges the constitutionality of the Illinois death penalty statute. The defendant contends the statute is unconstitutional because it places the mitigating evidence burden of proof on the capital defendant; because it allows the sentencer to weigh a vague aggravating factor, “any other reason”; and because it inevitably will allow an innocent person to be executed. We repeatedly have rejected these arguments, recently in People v. Hall, 194 Ill. 2d 305, 357-59 (2000). Accord People v. Bull, 185 Ill. 2d 179, 220 (1998). We adhere to our earlier decisions. CONCLUSION For the reasons we have discussed, we affirm the defendant’s first degree murder conviction, vacate his death sentence, and remand for a new sentencing hearing. Conviction affirmed; death sentence vacated; cause remanded.  The confusion surrounding the defendant’s Gacho motion resulted from a misreading of our opinion in Johnson v. Edgar, 176 Ill. 2d 499 (1997), which held Public Act 89 — 428 violated the single subject rule of the Illinois Constitution. Public Act 89 — 428 added section 5 — 8—1 (a)(1)(c)(vi) to the code. This provision applied to defendants under age 17, “found guilty of murdering a person under 12 years of age and the murder is committed during the course of aggravated criminal sexual assault, criminal sexual assault, or aggravated kidnaping.” 730 ILCS 5/5 — 8—1(a)(1)(c)(vi) (West 1996). This provision did not apply to the defendant because he was more than 17 years old when Rachel was killed. Ultimately, after the defendant’s sentencing proceedings, we held that Public Act 89 — 203 also violated the single subject rule. People v. Woofers, 188 Ill. 2d 500 (1999).   The defendant received a lengthy waiver admonition from a different judge than the judge who ruled on the jury instruction request, limited the defendant’s peremptory challenges, and ultimately tried the case. The defendant does not contend this admonition was inadequate.   In People v. Crews, 38 Ill. 2d 331 (1967), we reversed the defendant’s conviction and remanded for resentencing because the trial court relied on unreliable information in imposing the death penalty. The trial court subsequently reimposed the death penalty. In a second appeal, we reversed her sentence and imposed a 20- to 35-year sentence because the trial court’s sentence was excessive. People v. Crews, 42 Ill. 2d 60, 66 (1969).

=== CASE 2225235 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:40.998759+00 ===

350 Ill. App. 238 (1953)
112 N.E.2d 514
Richard Seeden, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
Erwin F. Kolarik, Defendant-Appellee.
Gen. No. 10,633.
Illinois Appellate Court.
Opinion filed May 15, 1953.
Released for publication May 29, 1953.
*239 EDWIN A. DVORAK, of Chicago, and EDGAR J. ELLIOTT, of Wheaton, for appellant.
WYATT JACOBS, of Chicago, for appellee; JOSEPH B. LEDERLEITNER, of Chicago, of counsel.
MR. JUSTICE ANDERSON delivered the opinion of the court.
Richard Seeden, plaintiff appellant, filed his suit in the circuit court of Du Page county, Illinois, against *240 Erwin F. Kolarik, defendant appellee, for personal injuries arising out of an automobile accident. The complaint alleged that the defendant, while operating his automobile on a public highway, negligently ran into the plaintiff who was walking on the highway, causing him serious personal injuries, for which he asked damages. The defendant denied these charges and after a jury trial, was found not guilty. The usual motions were presented to the court by the plaintiff after verdict. These motions were denied by the court and judgment was entered on the verdict. This appeal follows.
The plaintiff assigned as error that the verdict was against the manifest weight of the evidence and that the court gave repetitious and other improper instructions for the defendant. The following facts were largely undisputed: that on December 31, 1949, about 5:30 p.m., the plaintiff was walking south on a public highway known as Madison street; that this street, at or near the place of the accident, is a black macadam highway about eighteen feet in width; that the accident occurred about one-fourth mile south of the village limits of Hinsdale, Illinois; that the highway at this point runs through a sparsely settled area; that there are shoulders constructed of grass, gravel, and dirt, wide enough for a car to park on each side of the highway; that at the time of the accident it was dark, was misting rain, and was somewhat foggy; that the highway was wet and black and there were puddles of water on the east edge of the highway and on the shoulder; that immediately prior to and at the time of the collision, the plaintiff was walking south in the northbound traffic lane; that at about the same time the defendant, alone in his car, was driving south in the southbound traffic lane on the same highway; that his headlights were on and his windshield wiper was in operation; that for a short time prior to the collision, *241 he had been following an automobile driven by Gene Rausch, likewise proceeding south in the southbound traffic lane; that Rausch was travelling somewhere between twenty and thirty miles per hour; that the headlights and taillights of his car were burning; that there were no cars approaching from the south; that the defendant's car, in attempting to pass the Rausch car, proceeded around him into the northbound traffic lane and struck the plaintiff, causing him serious injuries; that the left front headlight of the defendant's car was broken and the left side of the hood was dented; that as a result of the accident both legs of the plaintiff were fractured; that he was in the hospital for a long time and at the time of the trial was still partially incapacitated; that his medical and hospital expenses amounted to about $4,200.
The plaintiff, Richard Seeden, testified in addition to the above uncontroverted facts, that prior to and at the time of the collision, he was walking south about eighteen inches from the east edge of the pavement in the northbound traffic lane; that the east shoulder was muddy and had puddles of water on it; that before he was struck he had observed lights from a car coming behind him; that he did not change his course or look around at any time; that he heard the noise of a motor from his rear which sounded as if it was in the southbound lane; that it was a dark night and that lights from the cars did not show very far ahead; that he was well acquainted with the road; that he had no light of any kind on him and was not aware of the lights on the car behind him very long before he was struck; that he walked two or three feet after he observed the lights behind him before he was hit.
The defendant, Erwin F. Kolarik, testified in addition to the uncontroverted questions of fact, that shortly before the accident he was driving south at about twenty-two or twenty-three miles an hour; that he *242 followed the Rausch car for a short distance at about the same rate of speed, and observing that there was no northbound traffic, accelerated his speed and proceeded to go around the Rausch car into the northbound traffic lane; that as he got into this traffic lane, and while his car was about even with the left fender of the Rausch car, he first observed the plaintiff, dressed in a dark suit, dark overcoat, and a gray hat, walking south about three to five feet from the east edge of the pavement, pretty close to the middle of the northbound lane; that he applied his brakes; that the rear end of his car swung around and the left front part of his car collided with the plaintiff; that when he first saw the plaintiff, he was about one and one-half car lengths in front of him or about twenty-five feet away; that he could have seen a car coming from the south with its headlights on about half a mile away; later he testified that he could see about seventy-five feet with his lights; that his lights would probably not show as far as two blocks; that he did not sound his horn before he struck the plaintiff, as he did not have time; that he had no difficulty in seeing the taillights of the Rausch car.
Gene Rausch testified that the defendant was passing him at about the time of the accident; that at the time the defendant started to pass his headlights lit up a man walking in the northbound traffic lane, headed south; that this was the first time Rausch observed the plaintiff; that he thought the plaintiff was walking two or three feet from the edge of the highway; that his, Rausch's, headlights did not indicate the presence of the plaintiff on the highway; that when he first saw the plaintiff, he was about opposite the driver's seat; that he did not hear any horn or any squeal of brakes.
Freda Theidal was riding with Gene Rausch in the front seat of his car. She testified that she could see from the headlights of Rausch's car about 50 or 60 *243 feet ahead; that she could see lights of other vehicles or street lights at a greater distance; that she did not see the plaintiff at any time prior to the accident; that she heard a sudden squealing of brakes; that she observed the lights of defendant's car as it came up behind them; that she observed defendant's car pass them, very closely and quickly; that the night was bad. Her written statement was admitted in evidence, but it does not appear to be materially different from her oral testimony.
Above are the material facts concerning the accident. The above were the only eyewitnesses.
[1-4] We shall first consider whether or not the verdict of the jury was manifestly against the weight of the evidence. The word manifest may mean clear, evident, plain, or obvious. (Norkevich v. Atchison, T. & S.F. Ry. Co., 263 Ill. App. 1.) The jury may well have concluded from the testimony to which they gave credence that the defendant, in driving around the car in question, was exercising that degree of care required by the law in that he was acting as an ordinary prudent person would have acted under like or similar circumstances and hence was not guilty of negligence. The jury, likewise, may have concluded, after weighing the testimony pro and con, that the testimony of the defendant and of Gene Rausch were worthy of belief. The jury may have reasonably believed that the plaintiff was at or near the center of the northbound traffic lane on a dark and foggy night without a light, knowing the danger of his position, and by reason of this, through his contributory negligence, brought on his own injury. Either absence of proof of defendant's negligence or plaintiff's lack of due care would, of course, prevent recovery. The verdict of the jury was based on reasonable and substantial evidence which fairly supported the verdict. The questions of negligence and contributory negligence are *244 pre-eminently questions of fact for the jury to determine, and as the jury's verdict is supported by substantial evidence, even though there be substantial evidence to the contrary, the reviewing court is bound by the verdict of the jury. To hold otherwise the court would be invading the prerogative of the jury. (McMillian v. McLane, 338 Ill. App. 514; Bouslough v. Schumacher, 270 Ill. App. 79.) The jury is in a better position to determine the credibility of the witnesses and the weight to be given their testimony than the reviewing court. They have an opportunity to observe the demeanor of the witnesses while testifying and their manner of testifying, and from this and the testimony, they determine where the truth lies. Many of these circumstances we do not have before us from the printed record. (Norkevich v. Atchison, T. & S.F. Ry. Co., supra; Miller v. Green, 345 Ill. App. 255.)
Alden v. Coultrip, 275 Ill. App. 306, decided by this court and relied on by the plaintiff, involved an appeal from a verdict of a jury in favor of a pedestrian plaintiff who was injured on a state highway when a car approaching from the rear attempted to go around another car. The factual situation in this case is similar to that in the instant case. Most of the opinion discusses the question of whether or not the plaintiff was guilty of contributory negligence as a matter of law. The court held that the fact that the plaintiff was walking on the road at night without a light when she was on the proper side of the road, and the fact that she did not look around to see what the approaching car was doing did not make her guilty of contributory negligence as a matter of law. The court further held that the verdict of the jury was not manifestly against the weight of the evidence and that the question of contributory negligence was one of fact for the jury who heard and observed the witnesses to decide, since they were in a better position to determine the credibility *245 of the witnesses than the reviewing court. The judgment in favor of the plaintiff was affirmed.
Bouslough v. Schumacher, 270 Ill. App. 79, also decided by this court, is a case where the plaintiff's intestate was walking on a highway at night and the defendant's car, approaching from the rear, while passing another automobile, ran into the plaintiff's intestate, causing her death. Plaintiff's intestate was walking in the center of the left half of the paved portion of the highway and the defendant, who was not travelling fast, did everything in his power to avert hitting her. The facts in this case are also similar to those in the instant case. The jury found the defendant not guilty and the court entered judgment on the verdict in bar of action. The Appellate Court held that, while evidence was conflicting, the verdict of the jury was supported by substantial evidence and they affirmed the judgment of the trial court.
[5] The above cases illustrate the rule that reviewing courts, in regard to controverted questions of fact of negligence or contributory negligence, are bound by the jury's verdict, if it is based on substantial evidence, whether that verdict is in favor of the plaintiff or against him.
[6] We believe in the instant case that reasonable and substantial evidence fairly supports the verdict, that it is not palpably against the manifest weight of the evidence.
[7] The defendant next argues as error that the instructions given by the court were repetitious and that some of them did not properly state the law. An examination of the record discloses that the instructions improperly appear in the common-law record. The nineteen instructions shown in the common-law record are all marked by the court as "given." The same instructions appear in the same order in the report of trial proceedings, but are not marked either *246 "given" or "refused." There is nothing appearing in the common-law record or in the report of trial proceedings showing on whose behalf the instructions were given. The defendant contends that we have no right to pass on the alleged errors as to the instructions in the condition in which the record appears. Plaintiff argues that section 74 of the Civil Practice Act [Ill. Rev. Stats. 1951, ch. 110, § 198; Jones Ill. Stats. Ann. 104.074] answers this question and he cites Horvat v. Opas, 315 Ill. App. 229. This case holds that the Civil Practice Act abolishes the distinction between the common-law record and the report of trial proceedings, and that if the instructions appear in the common-law record, they may be considered by the Appellate Court. The court says, however, in the last line of the opinion on page 234:
"It is obvious that the contention of counsel for plaintiff, that the record should show at whose request the instructions were given and that those were all the instructions given or requested, should appear, is sound but since there must be a retrial, this can be obviated."
Regardless of this case the Supreme Court has passed on the question. (City of Chicago v. Callender, 396 Ill. 371.) In this case error was assigned by the appellant that certain instructions were erroneously given and refused by the trial court. The court says on page 381:
"... the alleged errors with reference to the instructions cannot be considered. The instructions are not included in the report of proceedings where they should be. They are incorporated only in the common law record. While the abstract is interspersed with appropriate statements showing that certain instructions were given and certain instructions refused, the record does not justify these statements. The instructions are not certified by the trial judge and made a *247 part of the report of proceedings, and are not properly preserved in the record."
In the above case some of the instructions contained in the common-law record were marked "refused" and some were marked "given." The court further says on page 382:
"... there is nothing whatever in the record to show by whom any or either of these instructions were tendered. In this state of the record objections to the instructions obviously cannot be considered."
In Dorgan v. Graeber, 335 Ill. App. 503, the record and supplemental record do not show by whom the instructions were tendered. The sole error relied upon for reversal was the question of certain instructions. The court discusses the Callender case, above mentioned, and says on page 504:
"... In Gidlof v. Grosser, 335 Ill. App. 124 (abst.) we said:
"`No authority or citation is offered by Gidlof as a basis for our considering his objections to the instructions. We consider it a dangerous practice to infer from a reading of an instruction, without more, that one party or the other offered it. Neufield v. Rodiminski, 41 Ill. App. 144. We shall not consider the points raised on the instructions. Price v. Bailey, 265 Ill. App. 358.' See also Horvat v. Opas, 315 Ill. App. 229.
"In the state of the record objections to the instructions cannot be considered. The judgment of the circuit court of Cook county is affirmed."
In Hall v. Koehler, 349 Ill. App. 398 (abst.), recently decided by this court, the instructions alleged erroneous were contained only in the common-law record. The common-law record did not disclose who offered them and they were not marked "given" or "refused." We refused to consider the alleged error in the instructions, *248 following the Callender and Dorgan cases above mentioned.
[8] For the above reasons the assignment of error as to the instructions will not be considered here.
For the reasons above stated we find that the judgment of the trial court was correct and its judgment is affirmed.
Judgment affirmed.

=== CASE 9741354 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:54:05.798683+00 ===

FOSHEIM, Justice.
This is an action in condemnation commenced by Basin Electric Power Cooperative to obtain a perpetual easement over certain parcels of land in Faulk County, South Dakota, for the construction and operation of an electrical transmission line. The appeal is from a verdict for appellee, Poindexter, assessing damages in the amount of $55,000. We reverse.
Appellee’s land consists of 35 quarters of contiguous pasture land which he operates as a 5600-acre unit. The transmission line would be installed on 5 quarters of that *47unit, or 800 acres. The easement is located near the northeast property line of the unit. It is 200 feet in width and involves a total right-of-way of 48.54 acres.
Appellee, who pilots his own plane, supervises his ranching operation by air. He based his estimated damages to his ranch unit completely on his particular method of operation. Appellee testified that he commences examining the pasture by plane at the boundary line of the 5600 acres and then proceeds throughout the pasture to observe his livestock and other matters that may need attention. He claims that the electrical towers and wires would adversely affect his ability to properly supervise the unit as previously done, and that this includes the entire pasture in diminishing degrees from the power line. He testified that the difficulties that would be engendered by the power line would diminish the value of the 5600 acres by $316,000. He indicated that his before market value of $350.00 per acre applies if the buyer were also a pilot. Ted Jennings, a rancher in the vicinity of appellee’s land, testified for the defense. His opinion, based upon appellee’s testimony, was that the entire 5600-acre unit would be damaged $25.00 to $50.00 an acre by the easement.
The trial court instructed the jury that the just compensation due appellee as the owner of the property is an amount of money representing the difference in the market value of the whole unit before it was condemned, taken, and damaged, and its market value after it was condemned, taken, damaged and put to the use for which it was condemned.
The jury was further instructed that the just compensation due the land owner is that amount reasonably intended to compensate the owner for payment of the fair, market value of the specific land actually occupied by the steel structures, concrete and wires, plus the diminution in value of the balance of the right-of-way taken, together with the consequential damage to (if any), and the depreciation in value of, the remainder of the tract. In considering consequential damage to the remainder of the tract, the jury was instructed that the elements of damage must not be too remote, speculative, or uncertain.
Appellant contends that the instructions erroneously allowed the jury to assess consequential damages upon the entire 5600-acre tract when the only area shown by the evidence to be actually damaged was the five parcels consisting of 800 acres actually traversed by the transmission line. Appellant maintains that any evidence as to the rest of the tract was as a matter of law too remote, conjectural, and speculative to support consequential damages.
The only issue before the jury in a condemnation action is the amount of compensation to be paid for the property taken or damaged. SDCL 21-35-15. The measure of damages in cases involving a partial taking is the difference between the fair market value of the unit before the taking and the fair market value of what remains after the taking. State Highway Commission v. Olson, 81 S.D. 401, 136 N.W.2d 233 (1965); City of Bristol v. Horter, 73 S.D. 398, 43 N.W.2d 543 (1950). In State Highway Commission v. Hayes Estate, 82 S.D 27, 140 N.W.2d 680 (1966), we held that in applying this rule, severance damage to the remaining property is included in an award without being designated as such. The amount allowed for the property actually taken is not segregated from the damage to the remainder:
In estimating the damages to the remainder, or in other words, the depreciation in value of the part not taken, the landowner is entitled to have the jury informed as to all those facts which legitimately bear upon the market value of the ranch before and after the taking and those factors which would ordinarily influence a prospective purchaser in negotiating for the property. The manner in which the ranch was used before the taking and the manner in which it can be used after-wards is of prime importance. Anything which is directly injurious to its particular adaptability or detracts from its use at maximum efficiency affects market value and is competent and a legitimate *48factor in establishing total damages sustained within the contemplation of an award of just compensation.
82 S.D. at 34, 140 N.W.2d at 684.
Great latitude is allowed in the reception of evidence to prove the value of property in condemnation cases, and generally any relevant and material evidence, if competent under general rules of evidence, is admissible to prove market value. If the proffered evidence tends to aid the trier of fact in arriving at a conclusion on the issue of value and damage, it should be received. State Highway Commission v. Hayes Estate, supra.
In Basin Electric Power Cooperative, Inc. v. Cutler, 88 S.D. 214, 217 N.W.2d 798 (1974), the ranch unit in question consisted of 5960 acres. Basin Electric took an easement over a 54.26-acre area. There were to be 15 towers installed on the land. As in this case, the evidence established that the owner supervised the ranch operation and checked on his cattle with the use of an airplane and that the electric towers would present problems in so doing. The jury found that there had been a $5.00 per acre decrease in value for each acre of the entire 5960-acre unit, resulting in a total award of $29,800. In reviewing the award in light of State Highway Commission v. Hayes Estate, supra, we said:
There is nothing wrong with the rule laid down by the Court for determining just compensation for the landowner. The formula of determining the value of the ranch before the easement and the value of the ranch after the easement is well recognized in fee title cases. The problem here is that the rule does not fit the evidence. If the jury is to be allowed to make a determination of severance damage to the entire unit there must be evidence of damage to the entire unit. Severance is not “manna from heaven”; it must be based on actual loss of value.
There are no “bread and butter” items listed by any witness as to the loss for the entire unit. All of the land in the ranch can be used for the exact purpose it is now being used after the easement is placed on the land; and that is a cow-calf operation which according to the experts is also the highest and best use to which this property can be put. Admittedly there is no reduction in the number of cattle that can run on the land; there is no problem of the cattle being cut off from the main ranch, or from their water supply, or from their shelter as we sometimes have in controlled access highway cases.
The expert witnesses named the following factors that would cause damage to this property as a result of the easement. They specifically mentioned weed control, irrigation, trouble of checking the cattle with an airplane, and the fact that the towers would be an eyesore. All of these items just mentioned would refer to damage to the immediate area of the easement.
88 S.D. at 220, 217 N.W.2d at 801 (footnote omitted).
We further noted:
All this does not mean that the landowner has not sustained damage and substantial damage. A 150-foot perpetual easement across property, damages that property for the purposes of use and the sale; and it damages the unit of land cut by the easement. However, the severance damage in highline easement cases is localized damage which should be restricted by the Court to the 160-acre units that are crossed by this easement. Evidence of damage has been shown to these units which justifies severance damage. It has not been proved for the entire ranching unit.
88 S.D. at 221, 217 N.W.2d at 802.
About two years later in Nebraska Electric Generation and Transmission Cooperative, Inc. v. Tinant, 90 S.D. 284, 241 N.W.2d 134 (1976), we had occasion to construe that language:
Appellants argue that Basin Electric Power Cooperative, Inc. v. Cutler, supra, negates the unit rule of severance and substitutes a 160-acre unit rule as it relates to electrical highline easements. We do not so construe that decision. *49While we acknowledged the concept of severance damages therein by quoting from State Highway Commission v. Hayes Estate, 1966, 82 S.D. 27, 140 N.W.2d 680, this court did not declare that “severance damages” which more appropriately should have been identified as “consequential” or “incidental” damages, see State Highway Commission v. Bloom, supra, [77 S.D. 452, 93 N.W.2d 572 (1958)] either may or may not be occasioned by such a taking but only held that “If the jury is to be allowed to make a determination of severance damage to the entire unit there must be evidence of damage to the entire unit.” The evidence presented in that case referred to “damage to the immediate area of the easement.” There was “no evidence of a carry-over to the entire ranch unit.” 217 N.W.2d at 801.
90 S.D. at 290, 241 N.W.2d at 137.
In Nebraska Electric Generation and Transmission Cooperative, Inc. v. Tinant, supra, we reaffirmed that while there is no severance by an electrical highline, in the sense that there is no actual division of a parcel of land, consequential damages may nonetheless flow from such an interference with a farm or ranch unit.
“Generally, the owner is entitled to payment of the fair market value of the land actually occupied by the poles or towers, plus the diminution in value of the balance of the right of way taken, together with the depreciation in value of the remainder of the tract.” “... The elements of damage [to the remainder] must not be remote, speculative or uncertain; they must be direct and proximate, and not such as are merely possible.”
90 S.D. at 291-92, 241 N.W.2d at 138 (citations omitted).
In determining diminution in market value it is proper to take into consideration the expense necessitated by the nature of the easement to restore the remaining land to its most advantageous use, or in adjusting it to the changed conditions brought about by the servitude. State Highway Commission v. Hayes Estate, supra; 27 Am.Jur.2d Eminent Domain § 314 (1966).
In the case of In Re Platte Valley Public Power & Irrigation Dist., 133 Neb. 420, 275 N.W. 593 (1937) (cited with approval in Basin Electric Power Cooperative, Inc. v. Cutler, 88 S.D. at 221-22, 217 N.W.2d at 802), the utility took 78 acres from a 46,000-acre cattle ranch. In considering a per acre consequential damage award that had been spread to the entire unit the Supreme Court of Nebraska said:
If plaintiffs owned and exclusively used contiguous lands extending as far north as the Arctic Circle, reiterated testimony that such vast territory would be depreciated a dollar an acre in value by the works of defendant would be as unreasonable method of estimating consequential damages to lands not taken and not injured in any respect.
. .. The jury were left free to find that all the land not taken was diminished a dollar in value on each acre, if the evidence so proved, though there was no proof that the summer pasture land in the sand-hills was of any less value for ranch purposes after the taking than it was before. There must be a limit to remote, unaffected lands that may be considered in estimating depreciation in their value by condemnation of contiguous lands taken for public purposes.
133 Neb. at 425-426, 275 N.W. at 596.
Public policy considerations for such limits are manifest. Without them, the con-demnor could be required to pay for a portion of an entire large unit in order to obtain an easement over a small part thereof. The taking of private land for public use could thereby be defeated as cost-prohibitive, or those vested with the power of eminent domain would likely tend to route the right-of-way so as to unfairly burden small units.
Since great latitude is allowed in the reception of evidence to prove the value of property in condemnation cases, the testimony of appellee and his expert witnesses, as to consequential damages, was entirely competent. When, however, that evidence *50indicated that the claimed consequential damage was localized, the trial court should have restricted consideration of market value loss to the immediate 160-acre units crossed by the highline. In this case, as in Basin Electric Power Cooperative, Inc. v. Cutler, supra, the facts did not show “bread and butter” carry-over damage to the entire ranch unit.
The judgment is reversed.
DUNN and MORGAN, JJ., concur.
WOLLMAN, C. J., and HENDERSON, J., dissent.

=== CASE 9740645 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:39:23.564715+00 ===

CHIEF JUSTICE HARRISON, specially concurring: I agree with the majority that Dameron’s murder conviction should not be disturbed, but that we should vacate his sentence of death and remand the cause to the circuit court for a new sentencing hearing. I write separately because I would further hold that the State should not be permitted to seek the death penalty on remand. Contrary to my colleagues, I believe that Dameron’s challenge to this state’s death penalty law is meritorious. For the reasons set forth in my partial concurrence and partial dissent in People v. Bull, 185 Ill. 2d 179 (1998), the Illinois death penalty law violates the eighth and fourteenth amendments to the United States Constitution (U.S. Const., amends. VIII, XIV) and article I, section 2, of the Illinois Constitution (Ill. Const. 1970, art. I, § 2). It is therefore void and unenforceable. Because the death penalty law is unconstitutional, Dameron must now be sentenced to a term of imprisonment. 720 ILCS 5/9 — 1(j) (West 1996). At the time Dameron murdered Rachel, Public Act 89 — 203 had just taken effect. Under that statute, a defendant who had attained the age of 17 and been found guilty of murdering an individual under 12 years of age had to be given a term of imprisonment of natural life when the death penalty was not imposed. 730 ILCS 5/5 — 8—l(a)(l)(c)(ii) (West 1996). As the majority points out, however, Public Act 89 — 203 was invalidated by our court in People v. Wooters, 188 Ill. 2d 500 (1999), on the grounds that it violated the single subject clause of the Illinois Constitution. Accordingly, on remand, Dameron must be resentenced under the unamended provisions of the Unified Code of Corrections as they existed prior to the effective date of Public Act 89 — 203. See People v. Coleman, 311 Ill. App. 3d 467, 477 (2000).

=== CASE 2224368 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:20.427892+00 ===

193 Mich. App. 49 (1992)
483 N.W.2d 424
PEOPLE
v.
KAGE
Docket No. 124876.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided February 3, 1992, at 9:50 A.M.
Frank J. Kelley, Attorney General, Gay Secor Hardy, Solicitor General, Richard Thompson, Prosecuting Attorney, Michael J. Modelski, Chief, Appellate Division, and Robert C. Williams, Assistant Prosecuting Attorney, for the people.
Rudzki & Karpinsky, P.C. (by Jaroslaw P. Karpinsky), for the defendant.
Before: MARILYN KELLY, P.J., and WAHLS and FITZGERALD, JJ.
FITZGERALD, J.
Following a jury trial, defendant was convicted of delivery of less than 50 grams of cocaine, MCL 333.7401(2)(a)(iv); MSA 14.15(7401)(2) *51 (a)(iv), and of conspiracy to deliver between 50 and 224 grams of cocaine, MCL 333.7401(2)(a)(iii); MSA 14.15(7401)(2)(a)(iii) and MCL 750.157a; MSA 28.354(1). He was sentenced to imprisonment for five to twenty years. Defendant appeals as of right, raising several issues. Although we find that the errors complained of may not mandate reversal when standing alone, we conclude that the cumulative effect of the errors denied defendant a fair trial and we reverse.
I
For the sake of clarity, we address defendant's issues in an order other than presented in defendant's brief on appeal.
Defendant argues that the trial court abused its discretion in denying his motion for a new trial because a juror made misrepresentations during voir dire with regard to a history of drug problems in her family and she would have been dismissed had she been truthful. We find this argument to be meritorious.
MCR 2.611(A)(1)(b) authorizes motions for a new trial on the basis of jury bias or misconduct. The granting of a new trial on the ground that a juror was biased in favor of or against a particular party is discretionary with the trial court, and this Court reviews such a decision for an abuse of discretion. Hunt v CHAD Enterprises, Inc, 183 Mich App 59, 64; 454 NW2d 188 (1990).
It is proper and appropriate to grant a new trial where testimony or affidavits are presented confirming that matters have been falsely denied or concealed on voir dire if those matters would establish a juror's incompetency or disqualification or would lead a party to challenge the juror and if the testimony or affidavits are not proferred to *52 show misconduct of a juror or jury for the purpose of impeaching the verdict. People v Graham, 84 Mich App 663, 666-667; 270 NW2d 673 (1978).
During voir dire, the trial court asked the jury whether
[a]ny of you [have] ever been involved in a case as a witness of a defendant or a complainant or anything that was in [sic] way similar to the case that we have here involving narcotics, possession or delivery or anything of that sort?
* * *
Undoubtedly, the bottom line is whether or not you have any emotional overlays or anything personal to you that you would carry into it that might cause you to have a problem doing the juror's job?
The trial court received no verbal response to its line of questioning.
Defendant's motion to set aside the verdict contained an affidavit from one of the jurors. The affidavit stated:
On Friday during break, one woman revealed that she had a son who had spent the last three years in an institution as a vegetable from drugs. During deliberations, she said that because I did not have children, I did not know what it was like.
Defense counsel also submitted an affidavit indicating that had he been apprised of the juror's situation, he would have challenged her for cause.
A hearing was held on the motion to set aside the verdict on January 3, 1990. The trial court held:
In this affidavit of the juror, it appears to the Court that she attempts to impeach her own verdict *53 and in doing so sets out allegations that she has committed misconduct in violating the Court's instructions. I don't know what is motivating the lady, but she doesn't say that she wants to withdraw her conclusion, which she gave here in open court that she was satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the respondents were guilty. The motions will be denied.
We disagree with the trial court's decision regarding the purpose of the affidavit as it relates to this issue. The affidavit was not proferred to show misconduct of the jury for the purpose of impeaching its verdict.[1] Rather, the affidavit was proferred to establish that the matter that was concealed on voir dire would have led defense counsel to challenge the juror.
Here, the affidavit of a juror establishes that another juror was prejudiced in favor of the prosecution. Although the identity of the juror was never shown with any degree of certainty, we find the allegations in the affidavit to be compelling. Cf. Hunt, supra at 64. Defendant established that he would have challenged for cause or otherwise sought dismissal of the juror in question had the truth been revealed before trial. See Graham, supra at 668-669. Defendant would have grounds to challenge the juror for cause on the basis of the statements in the affidavit. MCR 2.511(D)(3).
II
Defendant next asserts that the trial court erred *54 in denying his numerous requests for an evidentiary hearing on the issue of entrapment. The motions were made before trial, at the start of trial, and after the prosecution had presented its proofs. We are unable to determine, from the record supplied to us, the trial court's reasons for denying defendant's motions for an evidentiary hearing. In moving for an evidentiary hearing at the close of the prosecution's proofs, defendant indicated that the only evidence that he would produce besides his own testimony would be that of the confidential informant. The trial court, having previously denied defendant's motion for disclosure of the confidential informant, denied the motion for an entrapment hearing upon learning that defendant had nothing other than his own testimony to present.
Following defendant's conviction, the trial court in effect decided the entrapment issue on the basis of the testimony of a police officer and of defendant. The court, accepting defendant's version of the events as true, found no entrapment.
We will address the denial of the motion for an entrapment hearing as well as the denial of the motion for disclosure of the identity of the informant together because the issues are intricately intertwined in this case. The trial court's denial of the motion for an entrapment hearing was in actuality based on its earlier ruling denying defendant's motion for disclosure of the informant's identity. Defendant wished to present testimony of the informant to support his claim of entrapment.
Where disclosure of an informant's identity is essential to a fair determination of a defendant's guilt, the trial court should require disclosure. People v Thomas, 174 Mich App 411, 416; 436 NW2d 687 (1989), quoting Roviaro v United States, 353 US 53, 60-62; 77 S Ct 623; 1 L Ed 2d 639 *55 (1957). In deciding whether to disclose the identity of the informant, the public interest in protecting the flow of information must be balanced against an individual's right to prepare his defense. Roviaro, supra at 60-62. However, if the informant's only activity was to introduce an undercover officer to the defendant, disclosure of the informant is not required. People v Tobey, 60 Mich App 420, 424; 231 NW2d 403 (1975), aff'd 401 Mich 141; 257 NW2d 537 (1977).
According to defendant, the acts of the informant went beyond the introduction of "Walt," the undercover officer, to defendant. Defendant claims that the informant continued to harass him, encouraging him to deal with Walt, and told him that Walt had a gun and had friends who were dangerous. The trial court should have held a hearing in camera and outside defendant's presence to determine if the informant would give any testimony helpful to defendant's claim of entrapment. People v Stander, 73 Mich App 617, 621-622; 251 NW2d 258 (1976).
Further, defendant argues that error requiring reversal occurred when the trial court denied him an opportunity for an evidentiary hearing on the entrapment defense. We are seriously bothered by the trial court's repeated denial of defendant's requests for an evidentiary hearing in this case. Where an accused claims entrapment, the trial court must conduct a separate evidentiary hearing to resolve the issue. People v Juillet, 439 Mich 34, 61; 475 NW2d 786 (1991) (Opinion of BRICKLEY, J.); People v Jamieson, 436 Mich 61, 80; 461 NW2d 884 (1990); People v Garza, 73 Mich App 58, 60; 250 NW2d 520 (1976). Although one panel of this Court has held that failure to conduct an evidentiary hearing on entrapment is not error requiring reversal, People v Cancino, 70 Mich App 90, 95; *56 245 NW2d 414 (1976), the Supreme Court, in lieu of granting leave to appeal, remanded that case to the circuit court for consideration of the evidence on entrapment. 402 Mich 806 (1977). In its order, the Court cited People v D'Angelo, 401 Mich 167; 257 NW2d 655 (1977). In D'Angelo, the Court held:
When the defendant raises the issue of entrapment, whether before or during trial, the appropriate procedure will require the trial court to conduct an evidentiary hearing in the jury's absence, procedurally similar to what the bench and bar of this state have come to know as the "Walker hearing" [People v Walker (On Rehearing), 374 Mich 331; 132 NW2d 87 (1965)] in cases involving statements attributable to the defendant. Both the prosecution and the defendant will be free to present evidence. [401 Mich 177-178.]
The remedy provided by the Court in D'Angelo for the trial court's failure to hold an evidentiary hearing on the issue of entrapment was remand of the case to the trial court for determination of the issue of entrapment on the basis of the evidence adduced at trial. In the present case, following the proofs presented at trial, the court in effect followed the procedure pronounced in D'Angelo. The court determined that defendant's testimony was not worthy of belief and, even if truthful, did not establish entrapment. This decision was made, of course, without benefit of the testimony of the confidential informant. Under the circumstances presented here, where defendant requested an evidentiary hearing before trial, we conclude that the proper procedure would have been for the trial court to conduct a separate evidentiary hearing before trial.
Because we find that the cumulative effect of the errors denied defendant a fair trial, People v *57 Kvam, 160 Mich App 189, 201; 408 NW2d 71 (1987), we will not discuss the remainder of defendant's issues, which are unique to the trial and irrelevant to a retrial of the case.
On remand, the trial court is to conduct both an interview of the confidential informant in camera and an evidentiary hearing concerning the issue of entrapment.
Reversed and remanded for a new trial.
NOTES
[1]  The trial court's decision was correct as it relates to an additional allegation in the affidavit that the jury foreman unduly influenced the jury's decision by stating that the defendant would "probably only do eight months in prison" and that the trial court would "make the jury deliberate for three days before accepting a hung verdict." Such an allegation is an attempt to show misconduct of the jury for the purpose of impeaching a juror's verdict.

=== CASE 2224378 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:20.590301+00 ===

751 N.E.2d 23 (2001)
322 Ill. App.3d 815
255 Ill.Dec. 929
In re MARRIAGE OF Stacy J. HUGHES, Petitioner-Appellee, and
Ronald C. Hughes, Respondent-Appellant.
No. 2-00-0069.
Appellate Court of Illinois, Second District.
April 25, 2001.
As Modified Upon Denial of Rehearing June 5, 2001.
*24 Alan W. Cargerman, Fearer, Nye, Ahlberg & Chadwick, Oregon, for Ronald C. Hughes.
Kelly P. Ward, Ward & Ward, Dixon, for Stacy J. Hughes.
MODIFIED UPON DENIAL OF REHEARING
Justice RAPP delivered the opinion of the court:
Respondent, Ronald C. Hughes, appeals from orders of the circuit court of Ogle County entered one year after his dissolution of marriage from petitioner, Stacy J. Hughes, granting her petition to increase child support. Ronald argues that the trial court erred in determining that a substantial change in circumstances had occurred since the entry of the original judgment for dissolution of marriage. We reverse.
The record indicates that a judgment for dissolution of marriage was entered on December 2, 1998, between Stacy J. and Ronald C. Hughes. The judgment apparently was not by agreement of the parties, as it was rendered after the court heard evidence and arguments of the parties. Pursuant to the judgment, Ronald was ordered to pay child support in the amount of $1,113 per month and nonmodifiable rehabilitative maintenance to Stacy in the amount of $788 per month for a period of 12 months, effective September 1, 1998. Ronald was also ordered to pay 12 monthly payments on a Honda Odyssey awarded to Stacy, after which time Stacy would be responsible for the debt.
On September 27, 1999, Stacy filed a petition to modify the judgment for dissolution of marriage. Stacy alleged that (1) because of the termination of the maintenance and car payments, Ronald's expendable income has increased by $1,038 per month; (2) Ronald's income has substantially increased as a result of a promotion; (3) her income is very limited; (4) the children's needs have substantially increased; (5) her income has substantially decreased as a result of the termination of maintenance payments; and (6) her expenses have substantially increased as a result of the termination of the car payments and her responsibility for making the car payments in the amount of $250 per month.
On October 25, 1999, Ronald filed a response denying the allegations of Stacy's petition. An evidentiary hearing on the petition to modify the judgment for dissolution of marriage was held on November 30, 1999.
Stacy testified that she had become employed since the dissolution and is now earning $1,000 per month as a part-time college clerk, but that, even with the addition of $1,113 per month in child support, she is unable to meet her estimated $3,500 in monthly expenses. She explained that she is unable to meet her monthly expenses because she no longer receives maintenance and car payments from Ronald. *25 She also testified that the needs of the children have increased based on day-care expenses, increased school tuition, and extracurricular activities.
Ronald testified as an adverse witness that he is still employed as a new car manager at a car dealership and would earn $72,000 in 1999, several thousand dollars more than in the previous year. Ronald also testified that the last quarter of each year is slow in the automobile business.
At the close of Stacy's case, Ronald moved for a judgment on the ground that Stacy had failed to show that a substantial change in circumstances had occurred since the 1998 judgment for dissolution of marriage. The court took the issues under advisement.
On December 15, 1999, the court entered an order granting Stacy's petition to modify and ordered Ronald to pay $1,275 per month for child support. The court found that "there has been a material change in circumstances requiring modification of the child support as previously ordered." The court reasoned:
"[Stacy] has show[n] that [Ronald's] financial situation has changed and that change has taken place by the fact that he is no longer responsible [for] $788.00 in maintenance expenses and[,] in addition[,] is not required to pay $250.00 per month towards [Stacy's] automobile."
The court did not make any determination that the needs of the children had substantially increased, although it did note that it was not awarding any additional day-care expenses based on the fact that Ronald is responsible for all uncovered medical, dental, and optical expenses for the children.
On January 7, 2000, the trial court entered a support order and an employer's income withholding order to implement the new child support amount. On January 13, 2000, Ronald filed a timely notice of appeal.
Ronald submits that the court's finding of a substantial change in circumstances was based on a misapprehension of law and that, therefore, the trial court erred as a matter of law in modifying the judgment for dissolution of marriage. Ronald contends that a determination of a "substantial change in circumstances" cannot be based on changes in financial conditions contemplated by the judgment for dissolution of marriage. Specifically, Ronald argues that the termination of maintenance and car payments cannot form the basis for a modification of child support because such termination of payments was contemplated by the original judgment. Stacy argues that there has been a substantial change in circumstances in that Ronald now has more expendable income due to the cessation of maintenance and car payments to her.
Motions to modify judgments awarding child support are governed by section 510(a) of the Illinois Marriage and Dissolution of Marriage Act (the Act) (750 ILCS 5/510(a) (West 1998)). Section 510(a) provides, among other things, that an order for child support may be modified only "upon a showing of a substantial change in circumstances." 750 ILCS 5/510(a)(1) (West 1998). To satisfy this burden, the petitioner must show that a substantial change in circumstances has occurred since the entry of the judgment. In re Marriage of Fazioli, 202 Ill.App.3d 245, 251, 147 Ill.Dec. 495, 559 N.E.2d 835 (1990). "After the threshold question of whether a substantial change in circumstances has occurred is answered, then and only then may the court determine the amount of the increase in child support." In re Marriage of Pylawka, 277 Ill.App.3d 728, 731, 214 Ill.Dec. 651, 661 N.E.2d 505 (1996).
*26 The substance of this appeal revolves around whether a "substantial change in circumstances," required under section 510(a)(1) of the Act to modify child support, may be founded on changes in financial conditions contemplated by the judgment for dissolution of marriage. This is a question of the legal effect of undisputed facts, which we review de novo. Gay v. Dunlap, 279 Ill.App.3d 140, 145, 215 Ill.Dec. 691, 664 N.E.2d 88 (1996); In re Marriage of Demattia, 302 Ill.App.3d 390, 393, 235 Ill.Dec. 807, 706 N.E.2d 67 (1999).
In order to establish a substantial change in circumstances, the petitioning party must show an increased ability of the supporting spouse to pay and an increase in the needs of the children since the previous order. In re Marriage of Schmerold, 88 Ill.App.3d 348, 350, 43 Ill.Dec. 629, 410 N.E.2d 629 (1980). The change in circumstances must occur after the date of the decree. Dixon v. Dixon, 45 Ill.App.3d 934, 937, 4 Ill.Dec. 550, 360 N.E.2d 486 (1977).
Here, the trial court found that a substantial change in circumstances had occurred as a result of the termination of maintenance and car payments to Stacy. The increase in Ronald's available income to pay child support following the termination of maintenance and car payments did not constitute a substantial change in circumstances because these events were contemplated and expected by the court when the judgment for dissolution of marriage was entered.
Stacy argues that the judge entering the judgment for dissolution of marriage relied on inaccurate financial information in establishing child support in the amount of $1,113. A petitioner cannot use a motion to modify as a vehicle for launching a collateral attack on the accuracy of the evidence upon which the court relied in formulating its judgment. See In re Marriage of Bean, 181 Ill.App.3d 671, 674, 130 Ill.Dec. 275, 537 N.E.2d 342 (1989).
In any event, we have also examined this case under section 510(a)(2)(A) of the Act (750 ILCS 5/510(a)(2)(A) (West 1998)). Section 510(a)(2)(A) of the Act provides that an order for child support may be modified without the necessity of showing a substantial change in circumstances:
"upon a showing of an inconsistency of at least 20%, but no less than $10 per month, between the amount of the existing order and the amount of child support that results from application of the guidelines specified in Section 505 of this Act unless the inconsistency is due to the fact that the amount of the existing order resulted from a deviation from the guideline amount and there has not been a change in the circumstances that resulted in that deviation." 750 ILCS 5/510(a)(2)(A) (West 1998).
Here, the increase of child support from $1,113 to $1,275, a difference of $162 or roughly 14.6%, does not meet the requirements for the modification of an order for child support under section 510(a)(2)(A). We have examined this case under section 510(a)(2)(A) of the Act merely to determine if an injustice has been done. We note that this same section is applicable by its own terms only in cases in which a party is receiving certain support services from the Illinois Department of Public Aid and only when at least 36 months have elapsed since the order for child support was entered or last modified.
We conclude that the trial court erred as a matter of law in determining that a substantial change in circumstances permitting the modification of child support had occurred since the entry of the judgment for dissolution of marriage.
*27 For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the circuit court of Ogle County is reversed.
Reversed.
GROMETER and CALLUM, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9740646 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:39:29.661071+00 ===

STEELE, Circuit Judge.
Joel Witchey (Witchey) appeals from an order denying habeas corpus relief. We affirm the circuit court.
PROCEDURAL HISTORY
Witchey was convicted in Brown County of the crime of rape and sentenced to an indeterminate term of ten to twenty years in the South Dakota State Penitentiary on January 7, 1987.
This habeas corpus petition was filed on September 20, 1990, before the Honorable David Gilbertson, Circuit Court Judge, Fifth Judicial Circuit, Brown County. Judge Gilbertson denied habeas corpus relief and issued a Certificate of Probable Cause on December 5, 1990. Witchey commenced his appeal to this court on December 20, 1990. He claims that he was deprived of effective assistance of counsel guaranteed to him by the Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution and Article VI, § 7 of the South Dakota Constitution.
FACTS
Only the facts relevant to this appeal will be recited. Witchey and Anita Witchey (Anita) were married in October 1976. In the fall of 1979, D.W. was a student living in Aberdeen, South Dakota. She also worked part time as a waitress at the Holiday Inn in Aberdeen. At approximately 2:30 a.m. on October 6, 1979, while exiting her ear after work, she was forcibly abducted and raped by an assailant she did not know. D.W. immediately reported the rape to law enforcement officials; the investigation produced no suspects at the time.
Witchey and Anita were divorced in April 1981. In November 1984 Anita was contacted by detective Glen Spitzer (Spitzer) of the Aberdeen Police Department concerning an attempted rape allegation unrelated to the rape of D.W. During the conversation Anita informed the detective that Wit-chey had been the perpetrator of a rape in Aberdeen in 1979. Based upon the information supplied by Anita the_ alleged rape of D.W. was investigated further, and led to the arrest of Witchey on January 2, 1985, more than six years after the incident.
Between the months of July and November 1984, D.W. was employed as a cocktail waitress at the Silver Dollar Bar in Aberdeen. During this time period, she cashed three checks drawn on three separate occasions by Witchey to pay for drinks. She therefore saw Witchey on at least three occasions after the rape but did not recognize him as her assailant.
Law enforcement did not conduct an investigatory pretrial lineup, nor was a pretrial identification process requested by George Rice (Rice), Witchey’s counsel. At the preliminary hearing and again at trial, D.W. identified Witchey as her assailant.
Prior to trial, Rice moved to suppress the expected testimony of Anita under the marital communication privilege. The motion was granted by the trial court, and the state appealed the ruling. This Court held in State v. Witchey, 388 N.W.2d 893 (S.D. *2041986) that the communications at issue were not privileged because the communications concerned a crime in which Witchey and Anita were joint participants.
Rice also moved to suppress the testimony of Anita as to certain other bad acts of Witchey pursuant to SDCL 19-12-5. After an evidentiary hearing, the trial court ruled that she could testify regarding the “cruising of bars” by Witchey to look for women and follow them, concluding that such evidence was relevant and that its probative value outweighed its prejudicial effect.
At trial, detective Spitzer was called as a witness by the state, and was asked the following questions and gave the following answers:
Q: Now, Detective Spitzer, I will now call your attention to approximately November 20th of 1984. Did you then have an occasion to talk to Anita Witchey at that time?
A: Yes.
Q: Now, did you go to Anita Witchey to talk to her? Did she contact you?
A: I went to Anita Witchey.
Q: What was the reason you contacted Anita Witchey?
A: Because we were investigating an assault, attempted rape that had happened to a [L.M.] on November 18th of 1984.
Q: What was the reason that you went to Anita Witchey?
A: Because [L.M.] referred us to Anita Witchey.
Q: What time was that?
A: It was on November 20th of 1984. I believe we talked to her approximately 10:30 in the morning.
Q: And when did the attempted rape occur on [L.M.]?
A: November 18th of 1984.
Q: So you were doing a follow-up investigation on this attempted rape of [L.M.]?
A: Yes.
Q: Were you able to find Anita Wit-chey?
A: Yes.
Q: Did you talk to her?
A: Yes.
Q: What were you particularly interested in at the time you talked to Anita Witchey on November 20, 1984?
A: To get some background information concerning her ex-husband, Joel.
Q: Why did you want this background information?
A: Because [L.M.] had told us that Joel Witchey would possibly match the description of the person who attacked her.
Q: When you went to talk to Anita Wit-chey, was she able to provide you any background information concerning the defendant?
A: Yes.
Q: What did she tell you at the time? MR. RICE: Objection. Any conversation between Anita Witchey and Officer Spit-zer as hearsay, not binding on the defendant.
THE COURT: Why would that be hearsay and inadmissible?
STATE’S ATTORNEY: Your Honor, I am not offering this testimony to prove the truth of the matter. I am merely offering this testimony for the chronology of the investigation.
THE COURT: I am going to sustain the objection as to specific conversation.
The prosecutor, through detective Spit-zer, attempted to offer into evidence a statement given by Anita to law enforcement on December 7, 1984. Defense counsel objected to the offer, which objection was sustained by the trial court.
At trial, Anita testified that she and her husband went to Aberdeen on 25 or 30 occasions and that Witchey would look for and follow women for the purposes of having sex with them. She also testified that the alleged rape of D.W. occurred in October of 1979; defense counsel pointed out on cross-examination that in her written statement, she alleged that the rape occurred in October of 1978. The prosecutor thereafter recalled the investigating officer in an attempt to explain the inconsistency; *205the statement was reoffered at the close of the officer’s testimony and received without objection.
After trial, on January 5, 1987, Rice conversed with Witchey about an appeal of the conviction. He informed Witchey that in his opinion no appealable issue existed because of the strong testimony of the victim and Anita, and that if Witchey was successful on appeal and then reconvicted he would face the possibility of an enhanced sentence. Witchey told Rice that he did not wish to appeal.
On January 7, 1987, the court sentenced Witchey and advised him of his right to appeal, the appropriate time limitation, and his right to an attorney on appeal.
On January 8, 1987, Rice mailed a letter to Witchey confirming their conversation of January 5th. The letter recited that if an appeal were taken, it must be commenced within thirty days.
Witchey contends that he mailed a letter to Rice on January 11, 1987, advising that he had changed his mind and wished to appeal. Rice denies having received the letter.
On January 15, 1987, Rice petitioned to withdraw as attorney of record and mailed a copy of the petition, a notice of hearing thereon, and a letter of explanation to Wit-chey. Hearing on the petition to withdraw was held on January 20, 1987. Witchey did not respond to the petition, either in person or in writing. He contends that he attempted to make arrangements with the prison officials to attend the January 20th hearing, but was not allowed to do so.
The court allowed Rice to withdraw by order dated January 26, 1987.
DECISION
Witchey’s claim is that the performance of his counsel was so deficient that he was deprived of the effective assistance of counsel guaranteed him under the Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution and Article VI, § 7 of the South Dakota Constitution.
One who claims that he has been denied effective assistance of counsel must show:
1. That counsel’s performance was deficient in that errors were made which were so serious that counsel was not functioning as the “counsel” guaranteed by the sixth amendment.
2. That the deficient performance prejudiced the defense. This requires a showing that counsel’s errors were so serious as to deprive the defendant of a fair trial, a trial whose result is reliable. Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668, 104 S.Ct. 2052, 80 L.Ed.2d 674 (1984); Luna v. Solem, 411 N.W.2d 656 (S.D.1987).
Prejudice exists when “[tjhere is a reasonable probability that, but for counsel’s unprofessional errors, the proceeding would have been different. A reasonable probability is a probability sufficient to undermine confidence in the outcome.” Woods v. Solem, 405 N.W.2d 59, 61 (S.D. 1987) (quoting Strickland). The burden of proving prejudice rests upon the defendant. Woods, supra.
The reasonableness of counsel’s performance is to be evaluated from counsel’s perspective at the time of the alleged error and in light of all of the circumstances and the standard of review is highly deferential. Luna, supra.
With the above standards in mind, we examine five areas in which Witchey claims his counsel’s performance was deficient and which prejudiced his defense.
I.
During the period between the rape and the arrest (in excess of six years), the victim had seen Witchey at least three times and had not recognized him as her assailant, and defense counsel knew of that fact. The claim is that counsel should have requested an out-of-court lineup or other identification process before the preliminary hearing to test the accuracy of the victim’s expected in-court identification. Defense counsel explained at the habeas corpus hearing that he did not request an out-of-court identification because he felt it *206would be better strategy to cross-examine the victim concerning her failure to recognize Witchey as her assailant on the occasions when she saw him after the incident.
Defense counsel’s reasoning was sound. If he had requested an out-of-court lineup, and if the court had allowed the request, the victim may well have identified Wit-chey, which identification would have been admissible in evidence. The victim’s credibility would then have been substantially enhanced and the cross-examination would not have been nearly as effective. Therefore, defense counsel’s failure to request an out-of-court identification process was not deficient representation. In considering trial tactics of a defense counsel, the court will not substitute its theoretical judgment for that of counsel. State v. McBride, 296 N.W.2d 551 (S.D.1980).
II.
Witchey next contends that defense counsel allowed the prosecution to present, without objection, inadmissible evidence of a bad act through the testimony of detective Spitzer. The testimony in question is set forth in the recitation of facts.
The prosecutor was asking foundational questions of Spitzer concerning an interview the detective conducted with Anita; he asked why the detective wanted background information from Anita about Wit-chey. The detective answered that Wit-chey possibly matched the description given him by another alleged rape victim. Defense counsel objected on the grounds of hearsay, and the prosecutor responded that he was not offering the evidence to prove the truth of the matter asserted, but solely for the purpose of laying foundation for the chronology of the investigation. The court sustained the hearsay objection as to “specific conversation.” Defense counsel did not ask for a limiting instruction or move for a mistrial.
We assume without deciding that (1) Spitzer’s testimony related a bad act inadmissible under SDCL 19-12-5, and (2) that defense counsel’s failure to move for a mistrial or request a limiting instruction constituted deficient performance. Even so, we conclude that under the circumstances the deficiency did not prejudice Witchey’s right to a fair trial.
The answer given by Spitzer concerning another rape allegation was not responsive to the question, which foreclosed defense counsel’s opportunity to object before the answer was given. The prosecutor made it clear that the proffered evidence was offered only as foundational. There was subsequent evidence of other bad acts which had been ruled allowable by the trial court. There was strong testimony by both the victim and by Anita as to the occurrence of the rape and the identification of Witchey as the perpetrator. We are firmly convinced that the result would have been the same had Spitzer not made the disputed statement. Therefore, this contention fails the second part of the Strickland-Luna, test in that no prejudice has been shown.
III.
Witchey next claims that Anita was allowed to testify that she was present with Witchey on 25 or 30 occasions when Witchey looked for and followed other women for the purpose of trying to have sex with them, and that there was nothing in the record as to a finding of the court that the evidence was admissible.
There is no merit to this contention. Defense counsel moved prior to trial to exclude prior bad acts. The court held an evidentiary hearing, and made the required determination that Anita’s proffered testimony was relevant, and that its probative value outweighed its prejudicial effect. Roden v. Solem, 431 N.W.2d 665 (S.D. 1988); State v. Goodroad, 442 N.W.2d 246 (S.D.1989). The court entered a ruling on the motion which allowed Anita to testify as to Witchey’s modus operandi in cruising bars to look for and follow women. Defense counsel made the proper motion and the proper order was entered. His performance was not deficient in any manner.
IV.
The next claim is that defense counsel failed to object to the prosecution’s *207offer into evidence of the written statement that Anita gave to law enforcement. The statement was basically duplicative of her testimony. Witchey contends that the statement was cumulative, hearsay, and unfairly highlighted the testimony because it gave the jury the opportunity to review it in the jury room.
The contention ignores the order of events leading to the admission of the statement. Early in the trial the prosecution attempted to offer the statement through detective Spitzer; the offer was properly objected to by defense counsel as hearsay, and was sustained by the trial judge. Anita later testified, and on cross-examination Rice pointed out that in her statement she alleged that rape occurred in October of 1978, when on direct examination she stated that the time of the incident was October of 1979. The prosecution thereafter recalled detective Spitzer in an attempt to explain the inconsistency and reoffered the statement at the close of the testimony. Rice did not object to the offer.
The statement was used by Rice as a prior inconsistent statement to impeach the credibility of the witness. Its admission into evidence was arguably beneficial to Witchey rather than detrimental because it served to highlight the inconsistency.
In light of all of the circumstances surrounding the admission of the statement into evidence and evaluating the state of the evidence at the time of the alleged error from defense counsel’s perspective, we conclude that his performance was not deficient under the Strickland-Luna standards.
V.
Witchey’s last claim is that defense counsel failed to perfect an appeal of the judgment of conviction after being asked to do so.
Regarding this contention, if defense counsel’s performance was deficient, then prejudice is presumed because of a complete failure to perform a required duty. Loop v. Solem, 398 N.W.2d 140 (S.D.1986); Anders v. State of California, 386 U.S. 738, 87 S.Ct. 1396, 18 L.Ed.2d 493 (1967).
We hold that there was no deficiency in the post trial conduct of defense counsel. The key issue of the admissibility of Anita’s testimony had already been resolved by intermediate appeal. Witchey was informed by both court and counsel of his right to appeal and the appropriate time limitation. Rice’s recommendation to fore-go appeal was reasonable under the circumstances; another trial, in the face of the strong evidence, would have likely had the same result. Witchey’s appeal rights were twice addressed in written correspondence from Rice shortly after the conviction. He was notified of Rice’s petition to withdraw and failed to object in any manner. He has failed to show that his alleged letter to Rice advising of his desire to appeal was in fact ever written. He had ample time after the withdrawal of defense counsel to seek another attorney to perfect an appeal.
Constitutional rights, including those in the Bill of Rights, may be waived if the waiver is made voluntarily, knowingly, and intelligently, with sufficient awareness of the relevant circumstances and likely consequences. Brady v. United States, 397 U.S. 742, 90 S.Ct. 1463, 25 L.Ed.2d 747 (1970); Jones v. State, 353 N.W.2d 781, 783 (S.D.1984). In this case, we conclude that Witchey voluntarily and knowingly acquiesced in Rice’s withdrawal and was fully aware of his appeal rights. Therefore, he cannot now complain of a failure by counsel to perfect an appeal.
We affirm the holding of the circuit court on all issues.
MILLER, C.J., and HENDERSON and SABERS, JJ., concur.
AMUNDSON, Justice, concurs in part and concurs in result in part.
STEELE, Circuit Judge, for WUEST, J., disqualified.

=== CASE 9740647 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:39:29.665849+00 ===

*208AMUNDSON, Justice
(concurring in part and concurring in result in part).
I agree with the majority’s holding on Issues I, II, III and IV.
The last issue raises a contention that Attorney Rice rendered ineffective assistance of counsel by failing to perfect an appeal from the judgment of conviction. This court addressed a similar contention in Loop v. Solem, 398 N.W.2d 140 (S.D.1986), and quoted extensively from the United States Supreme Court decision of Anders v. State of California, 386 U.S. 738, 87 S.Ct. 1396, 18 L.Ed.2d 493 (1967), reh’g denied 388 U.S. 924, 87 S.Ct. 2094, 18 L.Ed.2d 1377. The Anders court held that an attorney who finds an appeal frivolous after undertaking or being appointed to represent a convicted felon should advise the court of same and move to withdraw. Further, such a motion “must be accompanied by a brief referring to anything in the record that might arguably support the appeal. A copy of counsel’s brief should be furnished the indigent and time allowed him to raise any points that he chooses.” 386 U.S. at 744, 87 S.Ct. at 1400, 18 L.Ed.2d at 498.
In this case, it is not clear whether or not Attorney Rice was retained or appointed counsel, but there is no question that Attorney Rice was still attorney of record for the appeal, otherwise there would have been no need for filing of a motion to withdraw. The defendant did not appear at the hearing on the motion and whether or not he filed anything with the court or Attorney Rice in resistance to same is somewhat nebulous from this record. (It should come as no surprise that defendant did not personally appear since, at the time of the hearing, he was incarcerated in the South Dakota State Penitentiary in Sioux Falls, South Dakota, some 250 miles from Aberdeen, South Dakota, and it is fair to assume, generally, that a person who has been so incarcerated loses a certain degree of freedom of movement.)
The Rice motion filed with the court states that the principal issue which could have been raised on a direct appeal had already been decided by this court on an intermediate appeal and, having discussed all aspects of an appeal with defendant which included the status of the law and risks involved, that the best interest of defendant would be served by not perfecting an appeal. The motion further states that defendant concurred with counsel. Also, attached to the motion was a letter which counsel sent to defendant at the penitentiary. No brief or other data was submitted to the trial court which set forth any information regarding the first four issues addressed in this appeal and why they were deemed meritless or frivolous by counsel.
Attorney Rice, while being examined at the habeas hearing, testified that he filed the motion to withdraw because of his experience in the Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals. Hence, he was extremely conversant with the absolute right of appeal that a convicted felon possesses but responded that he was not familiar with the Loop decision handed down by this court about one month before the motion to withdraw was heard in this case.
This court further stated in Loop:
The procedure outlined in Anders comports with our Code of Professional Responsibility. DR 2-110(A)(2) states: “A lawyer shall not withdraw from employment until he has taken reasonable steps to avoid foreseeable prejudice to the rights of his client.” That section further requires that a lawyer give notice to his client that will allow time for employment of other counsel. In any future cases involving similar questions of compliance with DR 2-110(A)(2), we suggest that the issue of the reasonableness of counsel’s steps should be viewed in accordance with our directions as adopted from Anders.
398 N.W.2d at 143. The handling of the motion to withdraw in this case falls far short of our directions.
The United States Supreme Court again addressed this withdrawal of counsel issue in Penson v. Ohio, 488 U.S. 75, 109 S.Ct. 346, 102 L.Ed.2d 300 (1988), where appellate counsel had filed a motion to withdraw, which stated:
*209“MOTION
Appellant’s attorney respectfully requests a Journal Entry permitting him to withdraw as appellant’s appellate attorney of record in this appeal thereby relieving appellant’s attorney of any further responsibility to prosecute this appeal with the attorney/client relationship terminated effective on the date file-stamped on this Motion.”
488 U.S. at 78, 109 S.Ct. at 348-49. The motion to withdraw was granted and the case came before the Supreme Court on a grant of certiorari after his appeal had been dismissed in state court. The Supreme Court in discussing the right to counsel on appeal stated:
Approximately a quarter of a century ago, in Douglas v. California, 372 US 353, [9 L.Ed.2d 811, 83 S.Ct. 814] (1963), this Court recognized that the Fourteenth Amendment guarantees a criminal appellant the right to counsel on a first appeal as of right. We held that a procedure in which appellate courts review the record and “appoint counsel if in their opinion” the assistance of counsel “would be helpful to the defendant or the court,” id., at 355, [9 L.Ed.2d 811, 83 S.Ct. 814,] is an inadequate substitute for guaranteed representation. Four years later, in Anders v. California, 386 US 738, [18 L.Ed.2d 493, 87 S.Ct. 1396] (1967), we held that a criminal appellant may not be denied representation on appeal based on appointed counsel’s bare assertion that he or she is of the opinion that there is no merit to the appeal.
The Anders opinion did, however, recognize that in some circumstances counsel may withdraw without denying the indigent appellant fair representation provided that certain safeguards are observed. Appointed counsel is first required to conduct “a conscientious examination” of the case. Id., at 744, [18 L.Ed.2d 493, 87 S.Ct. 1396]. If he or she is then of the opinion that the case is wholly frivolous, counsel may request leave to withdraw. The request “must, however, be accompanied by a brief referring to anything in the record that might arguably support the appeal.” Ibid. Once the appellate court receives this brief, it must then itself conduct “a full examination of all the proceeding^] to decide whether the case is wholly frivolous.” Ibid. Only after this separate inquiry, and only after the appellate court finds no nonfrivolous issue for appeal, may the court proceed to consider the appeal on the merits without the assistance of counsel. On the other hand, if the court disagrees with counsel — as the Ohio Court of Appeals did in this ease — and concludes that there are nonfrivolous issues for appeal, “it must, prior to decision, afford the indigent the assistance of counsel to argue the appeal.” Ibid.
488 U.S. at 79-80, 109 S.Ct. at 349-50 (footnote omitted).
The casual procedure for withdrawal employed in this case certainly did not comport with this court’s previous directives. While the time for appeal was running, counsel for defendant moved to terminate the attorney/client relationship. The motion was totally inadequate under Anders and Loop. There was no signed waiver by defendant of his right to appeal nor even an acknowledgment that defendant had received the attorney’s correspondence and concurred in the recommendations. I cannot, in good conscience, place a stamp of approval on the withdrawal procedure implemented in this case since it certainly impacted the defendant’s absolute right to appeal. Further, the record is devoid of any consideration being given regarding potential prejudice to defendant’s absolute right to appeal, such as appointment of other counsel to assist in the appeal. This court cannot stress the importance of attorneys following the directions handed down by this court in circumstances where a defendant’s time for appeal is running after conviction and his attorney wants to abandon the ship.
In Loop, this court remanded the matter for resentencing so as to reinstate the appeal period. I do not deem that necessary *210in this case, since defendant has now had an opportunity to argue the grounds for appeal in this case in conjunction with his ineffective assistance of counsel claim, and it is evident that he would not have prevailed on those claimed errors on a direct appeal, and concur in the result on the last issue.

=== CASE 2224389 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:20.811268+00 ===

483 N.W.2d 344 (1992)
In the Interest of D.B., A Child,
A.B., Natural Mother, Appellant.
No. 91-1076.
Court of Appeals of Iowa.
February 25, 1992.
*345 John S. Pieters of Pieters, Pieters & Corzine, Waterloo, for appellant mother.
Bonnie J. Campbell, Atty. Gen., John M. Parmeter, Sp. Asst. Atty. Gen., and Judy Sheirbon, Asst. Atty. Gen., for appellee State.
Heard by DONIELSON, P.J., and HAYDEN and HABHAB, JJ.
DONIELSON, Presiding Judge.
When the child, D.B., was born in April of 1990, his blood tested positive for cocaine. On that basis, he was adjudicated to be a child in need of assistance almost immediately, and the Department of Human Services placed him with his maternal aunt. While D.B.'s aunt cared for him during the first eight months of his life, she repeatedly requested that he be removed from her home. She voluntarily withdrew each of these requests however, and D.B. was left in her care.
However, on December 16, 1990, D.B. was removed from his aunt's home at her request. She explained that her back problem was worsening and that she planned to leave town for five months. She also expressed the hope that a temporary removal from her home might motivate the child's mother to quit using drugs and show more responsibility. The caseworker also noted D.B.'s aunt had failed to take him to several Early Development Intervention appointments.
D.B. was then placed in non-relative foster care, where he has since remained. His aunt exercised visitation sporadically during the child's foster care, missing a number of the scheduled visits. During her inhome visitation, D.B.'s aunt allowed him to have unsupervised contact with his mother, violating a juvenile court order.
In January 1991, the State filed a petition to terminate the parental rights of both natural parents. D.B.'s mother, A.B., has a severe substance abuse problem, which she has never successfully addressed. She has little education, has never held employment, and has a record of arrests for prostitution. D.B. has never lived with his mother, and D.B.'s putative father, who cannot be located, has had no role in his life.
After a hearing, the juvenile court terminated the parental rights of both parents. In its order, the juvenile court denied the aunt's request that the child be placed in her guardianship and custody. Instead, the juvenile court transferred the child's guardianship and custody to the Department of Human Services for adoptive placement. In declining to place D.B. with the aunt, the juvenile court stated the aunt "has exhibited inconsistency and instability with respect to caring for the child, and the child has now developed a stable relationship *346 with his present foster parents." The juvenile court further stated that its ruling "is not intended to preclude the Department from considering [the aunt] as an adoptive parent."
The mother has appealed from the juvenile court's order. She does not challenge the termination of her own parental rights but contends only that the juvenile court should have placed D.B. with the aunt pending adoptive placement. The mother argues the aunt has previously cared for D.B. effectively and should be given a preference because she is D.B.'s natural relative. The State responds that placement with the aunt is not in D.B.'s best interests. The State also questions the mother's standing to challenge the juvenile court's placement of D.B. following the termination.
On our de novo review, we affirm the juvenile court's order. The mother's parental rights were terminated by the juvenile court. Having decided not to seek review of that decision, the mother has allowed that portion of the order to become final. The termination of A.B.'s parental rights concerning D.B. divests her of all privileges, duties and powers with respect to the child. Iowa Code § 232.2(52) (1991 Supp.). As such, A.B.'s failure to challenge the termination of her parental rights to D.B. relinquishes any legally recognizable interest she would have concerning the guardianship or custody of D.B. Therefore, she cannot be said to have been prejudiced or aggrieved by the placement order. A party who is not aggrieved by a judgment or other final ruling has no right to appeal. See Wyatt v. Crimmins, 277 N.W.2d 615, 617 (Iowa 1979). Consequently, we need not even entertain this appeal. Id.
We, nevertheless, find the juvenile court's order to be in the child's best interests. The aunt's vacillation in her resolve to keep the child, her eventual decision to have D.B. temporarily placed in foster care, her violation of court orders regarding D.B.'s welfare, her failure to regularly visit D.B. in foster care, her failure to take D.B. to his required appointments, and D.B.'s stable relationship with his present foster parents all militate against granting D.B.'s guardianship and custody to his aunt. Furthermore, the caseworker indicated there would be a preference given to black families in the adoption of D.B. Nothing in the record leads us to believe D.B.'s racial identity has been ignored by the court or will be ignored by the Department of Human Services.
The costs of this appeal are taxed to the mother, A.B.
For all the reasons stated, the judgment of the juvenile court is affirmed.
AFFIRMED.

=== CASE 9740648 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:39:34.255668+00 ===

Danhof, C.J.
Defendant, an inmate, was originally charged with assault with intent to murder, MCL 750.83; MSA 28.278, but was ultimately convicted by a jury of the lesser misdemeanor offense of aggravated assault, MCL 750.81a; MSA 28.276(1).1 His conviction stemmed from the stabbing of a fellow inmate. He was sentenced to a one-year term in prison to run consecutively to the sentence he was serving at the time the assault occurred. Defendant appeals the conviction and sentence as of right, and we affirm.
We first consider defendant’s assigning of error to the trial court’s ordering him to serve the sentence in the custody of the Department of Corrections rather than the county jail. In this case, defendant was convicted under MCL 750.81a; MSA 28.276(1), which provides:
Any person who shall assault another without any weapon and inflict serious or aggravated injury upon the person of another without intending to commit the crime of murder, and without intending to inflict great bodily harm less than the crime of murder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, *117punishable by imprisonment in the county jail or the state prison for a period of not more than one year, or fine of $500.00, or both.
In support of his claim that he should have been ordered to serve the one-year sentence in the county jail, defendant cites MCL 769.28; MSA 28.1097(1), which provides in pertinent part:
Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, in case of the commitment or sentence of a person convicted of a crime or contempt of court to imprisonment for a maximum of 1 year or less, the commitment or sentence shall be made to the county jail of the county in which the person was convicted, and not to a state penal institution.
Michigan courts consistently have interpreted this statute to require that crimes for which the punishment is one year or less be punished by imprisonment in the county jail and not in the state prison system. Kent Co Prosecutor v Kent Co Sheriff, 425 Mich 718, 730, n 10; 391 NW2d 341 (1986); Recorder's Court of Detroit v Detroit, 134 Mich App 239, 241; 351 NW2d 289 (1984); People v Blythe, 417 Mich 430, 437; 339 NW2d 399 (1983); People v Harper, 83 Mich App 390, 397; 269 NW2d 470 (1978); People v Biniecki, 35 Mich App 335; 192 NW2d 638 (1971).
At the time the stabbing occurred in this case, defendant was already serving a sentence in a state prison for his convictions of assault with intent to murder and possession of a firearm during commission of a felony, MCL 750.227b; MSA 28.424(2). By operation of the consecutive sentencing statute, MCL 768.7a(l); MSA 28.1030(1X1), the sentence imposed was made to run consecutively to that already being served. MCL 768.7a(l); MSA 28.1030(1X1) provides:
*118A person who is incarcerated in a penal or reformatory institution in this state, or who escapes from such an institution, and who commits a crime during that incarceration or escape which is punishable by imprisonment in a penal or reformatory institution in this state shall, upon conviction of that crime, be sentenced as provided by law. The term of imprisonment imposed for the crime shall begin to run at the expiration of the term or terms of imprisonment which the person is serving or has become liable to serve in a penal or reformatory institution in this state.
We are aware of no case analyzing the effect, if any, of the consecutive sentencing statute upon MCL 769.28; MSA 28.1097(1).2 The issue whether the Legislature intended that MCL 769.28; MSA 28.1097(1) operate to require that inmates convicted of crimes while incarcerated be subsequently committed to the county jail to serve sentences of one year or less after completing their original prison term(s) is one of first impression.
The purpose of the consecutive sentencing statute is to deter persons convicted of one crime from committing other crimes by removing the security of concurrent sentencing. The statute should be construed liberally in order to achieve the deterrent effect intended by the Legislature. People v Smith, 423 Mich 427, 442; 378 NW2d 384 (1985); People v Kirkland, 172 Mich App 735, 737; 432 NW2d 422 (1988). In view of the purpose of the statute, the legislative intent would be abrogated by allowing inmates to be taken out of the prison setting where their subsequent crimes were com*119mitted and moved to the local county jail to complete the consecutive sentence. To construe the consecutive sentencing statute in this way would be to thrust the responsibility for punishing internal prison crimes onto the local county, an authority far less equipped to handle that responsibility than the prison authority. Because statutes are to be construed so as to avoid absurd or unreasonable consequences, People v Payne, 180 Mich App 283, 286; 446 NW2d 629 (1989), we reject this latter construction.
Therefore, today we hold that prisoners who commit crimes while incarcerated as defined in the consecutive sentencing statute must serve any resulting consecutive sentence in the custody of the Department of Corrections, not the county jail, notwithstanding the provisions of MCL 769.28; MSA 28.1097(1).
Defendant also claims that the trial court’s imposition of a consecutive sentence in this case was improper because he was convicted of a misdemeanor rather than a felony.3 Defendant appears to be basing his argument, at least in part, on case law holding that consecutive sentencing is not permitted for the commission of a misdemeanor while a felony charge is pending. This authority is unpersuasive because at the time of this assault defendant did not have a felony charge pending against him and because it is based on MCL 768.7b; MSA 28.1030(2) before its amendment by 1988 PA 31, which substantially rewrote the statute_
*120Defendant also makes the argument that the imposition of a consecutive sentence for a misdemeanor conviction was error, given the language of MCL 768.6; MSA 28.1029, which provides:
Any person now or hereafter confined in any penal or reformatory institution in this state, and who during the term of such confinement shall commit any crime or offense punishable under the laws of this state by imprisonment in such institution, shall be subject to the same punishment as if the crime had been committed any other place or by a person not so confined. [Emphasis added.]
The emphasized language is nearly identical to language found in MCL 768.7a(l); MSA 28.1030(1) (1), quoted above. As we understand defendant’s argument, he urges us to hold that a consecutive sentence may not be imposed for a misdemeanor conviction because a misdemeanor is not punishable by imprisonment in a penal or reformatory institution, as required by the statute, but is only punishable by imprisonment in a county jail under MCL 769.28; MSA 28.1097(1). This argument is different from the first issue addressed in this case in that defendant is not challenging the situs of his confinement while serving the consecutive sentence, but rather the imposition of a consecutive sentence.
This Court has previously held that a county jail is a "penal or reformatory institution” for purposes of § 7a. People v Sheridan, 141 Mich App 770; 367 NW2d 450 (1985). The Sheridan Court reasoned that the fact of the defendant’s incarceration was of greater import than was the specific type of institution in which the incarceration occurred, given the legislative purpose in enacting the statute. Id., 773-774. Although the escape aspect of § 7a was under consideration in Sheridan, *121we see no logic in giving a different construction to the words "penal or reformatory institution” the second time they are used in the same sentence of that statute.
Therefore, because defendant committed a crime punishable by imprisonment in a county jail while incarcerated in a prison in this state, a consecutive sentence was properly imposed under § 7a.
Defendant also claims that the trial court became an advocate for the prosecution in the manner in which it responded to a jury question concerning verdict choices. However, because defendant did not object to the trial court’s response below, appellate review is precluded absent manifest injustice. People v Sharbnow, 174 Mich App 94, 99; 435 NW2d 772 (1989). We have reviewed the trial court’s comments and find that they were not of such a nature as to influence unduly the jury. Therefore, no manifest injustice will occur through our declining to review the issue.
Defendant also contends that the prosecutor improperly questioned him concerning whether he knew it was against prison rules for a prisoner to possess a weapon. The defense thereafter unsuccessfully moved for a mistrial. In view of the other evidence adduced at trial regarding this issue by both the defense and the prosecution, we find that the question did not deny defendant a fair trial. Therefore, the trial court did not abuse its discretion in denying defendant’s motion for a mistrial. People v Manning, 434 Mich 1, 7; 450 NW2d 534 (1990).
Defendant also claims that the trial court abused its discretion in allowing the prosecution to question a witness on redirect examination concerning whether he found other weapons at the crime scene, arguing that that question exceeded the scope of cross-examination. We disagree, not*122ing that the defense asked this witness for his observations of the crime scene on cross-examination.
We next address defendant’s claim that the trial court improperly refused to allow a defense witness to testify concerning statements he heard the victim make. Defendant argues that this testimony was not hearsay, but was to be used only to impeach the victim’s testimony. However, defense counsel did not lay a proper foundation for the admission of impeachment testimony under MRE 613. In cross-examining the victim, defense counsel asked if the victim had ever told the defense witness that he was "going to get” defendant. However, in attempting to impeach the victim’s denial, counsel called the defense witness in question and asked him if he had overheard a conversation between the victim and a third party. We find no abuse of discretion. People v Barnett, 165 Mich App 311, 315-316; 418 NW2d 445 (1987).
Defendant contends that he was deprived of the effective assistance of counsel because the trial court improperly admitted evidence of statements made to a hearing officer during a prison disciplinary hearing.4 We disagree with both prongs of this claim. No abuse of discretion occurred in the trial court’s ruling that the statements in question were admissible for impeachment purposes. People v Thomason, 173 Mich App 812, 817; 434 NW2d 456 (1988). We note that defense counsel did object to the admission of the statements, albeit unsuccessfully. Given the propriety of the trial court’s ruling and the fact that counsel in fact objected to the admission of the evidence, we can find no deficiency in counsel’s performance or prejudice to defendant. Therefore, defendant’s claim is unper*123suasive. People v Tommolino, 187 Mich App 14, 17; 466 NW2d 315 (1991).
Affirmed.
Defendant was also originally charged as an habitual offender, fourth offense, MCL 769.12; MSA 28.1084, but he was never tried for this status offense because the jury found him guilty of a misdemeanor.
Although a somewhat analogous factual situation was presented in People v McKee, 167 Mich App 258, 259-260; 421 NW2d 655 (1988), the ramifications of MCL 769.28; MSA 28.1097(1) were not addressed in that opinion. Also, the defendant in McKee appears to have been convicted of assault of a prison employee, MCL 750.197c; MSA 28.394(3), which is a felony.
Defendant raises in propria persona this claim in a supplemental brief. Because this issue was not raised in the original brief prepared on his behalf by appellate counsel, defendant’s brief violates MCR 7.212(F), Check Reporting Services, Inc v Michigan National Bank-Lansing, 191 Mich App 614, 628; 478 NW2d 893 (1991). However, we choose to review the issue in this case. MCR 7.216(A)(3), (7); People v McKendrick, 188 Mich App 128, 146; 468 NW2d 903 (1991).
See footnote 3.

=== CASE 9740650 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:39:36.699384+00 ===

Per Curiam.
Following a jury trial, the defendant, Anthony T. Reynolds, was convicted of first degree assault and sentenced to imprisonment for 2 to 4 years. The defendant has appealed and contends that the trial court erred in admitting, over objections as to relevancy, certain testimony.
The assault involved the defendant’s 4-month-old son. As a result of the assault, the child developed shaken baby syndrome, and his development has been seriously impaired.
The record shows that on February 26, 1990, at about 4 p.m., Carrie Reynolds, wife of the defendant, left for work and left their 4-month-old son, Justin Reynolds, with the defendant. That afternoon Justin was fussy, cranky, and whiny and wanted a lot of attention; however, before she left for work, Justin had calmed down and was doing fine. At about 7 p.m., when Carrie called home to check on the defendant and Justin, the defendant told her that Justin had been fine since she left.
At about 9:58 p.m., the defendant called Carrie at work, told her that there was something wrong with Justin, and said that she should come to the hospital. When Carrie arrived at the hospital, Justin was lying unconscious in the emergency room, with oxygen being pumped into his mouth.
Carrie was not informed of what was wrong with Justin until a few days after the incident. At that time, she was told that Justin had suffered a brain hemorrhage and that the injury and hemorrhage had caused Justin’s brain to swell to the point that the brain’s oxygen supply had been cut off and Justin had stopped breathing. It was explained to her that Justin was a victim of shaken baby syndrome.
*625At trial, Dr. Mark Horton, a pediatrician, testified as a medical expert on shaken baby syndrome. He testified that an infant suffering from a violent shaking exhibits a breathing or respiratory problem and convulsions or seizures. The infant may appear lethargic or unarousable and/or may incur a subdural or subarachnoid hemorrhage.
Dr. Karlyle Christian-Ritter, pediatric chief resident at St. Joseph Hospital, testified that on February 26, 1990, Justin Reynolds was brought to the hospital. When Justin arrived at the emergency room, he was not breathing on his own, appeared lethargic, and was unresponsive. She also observed that he had a bulging fontanel (soft spot on the head) and a retinal hemorrhage in the left eye.
Following a CAT scan, Christian-Ritter determined that Justin had a left subdural hematoma. After further tests were run, infection was ruled out, and Justin was diagnosed as being a shaken infant because his symptoms indicated brain trauma and there were no outward signs of bruising or physical abuse.
Three other physicians testified at the trial regarding their examination and findings concerning Justin’s medical condition. All were of the opinion that his injury was life threatening. Two of the physicians opined that Justin’s injury was most likely due to a violent shaking.
Charles Clark, an investigator for the Bellevue Police Department, interviewed the defendant as part of his investigation and was told by the defendant that earlier in the afternoon of February 26, 1990, he had been bouncing Justin on his hip in an attempt to get Justin to stop crying. The defendant said that he was not paying much attention to how he was holding Justin because he just wanted Justin to stop crying.
The defendant also told Clark that later that evening after defendant took a shower, he went to get Justin up, and Justin appeared lethargic and was having difficulty breathing. The defendant attempted to arouse Justin by shaking him. When Justin did not respond, the defendant shook Justin harder a second time.
The defendant testified that after Carrie left for work that day, Justin was fine and that there were no problems. The defendant fed Justin and put him down to sleep. When he tried *626to wake Justin up later that evening, the defendant noticed that Justin would not respond and was having difficulty breathing. The defendant testified that he panicked and began to shake Justin because he thought Justin was suffering from sudden infant death syndrome. There is a history of that syndrome in defendant’s family.
The defendant contends that certain testimony by his wife which was admitted into evidence over his objections was irrelevant and prejudicial.
Carrie was allowed to testify, over the defendant’s objections as to relevancy, regarding the defendant’s attitude toward Justin after he regained consciousness. When it appeared that Justin would be retarded for the rest of his life, the defendant told Carrie that she would have to choose between him and Justin.
The State argues that this evidence is relevant to the issue of the defendant’s intent in this case.
“Relevant evidence means evidence having any tendency to make the existence of any fact that is of consequence to the determination of the action more probable or less probable than it would be without the evidence.” Neb. Evid. R. 401, Neb. Rev. Stat. § 27-401 (Reissue 1989). Neb. Evid. R. 402 permits the admission of relevant evidence only. State v. Robertson, 219 Neb. 782, 366 N.W.2d 429 (1985). To be relevant, evidence must be rationally related to an issue by a likelihood, not a mere possibility, of proving or disproving an issue to be decided. State v. Baltimore, 236 Neb. 736, 463 N.W.2d 808 (1990); State v. Robertson, supra.
“Although relevant, evidence may be excluded if its probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger. of unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury, or by considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or needless presentation of cumulative evidence.” Neb. Evid. R. 403, Neb. Rev. Stat. § 27-403 (Reissue 1989). ... In the context of Neb. Evid. R. 403, “unfair prejudice” means an undue tendency to suggest a decision on an improper basis.
State v. Lonnecker, 237 Neb. 207, 210-11, 465 N.W.2d 737, 740-41 (1991).
*627Whatever probative value this part of Carrie’s testimony might have to the issue of the defendant’s intent, the value is minimal when compared to the unfair prejudice the testimony caused the defendant. Given the facts and the issue involved in this case, evidence of the defendant’s attitude following Justin’s regaining consciousness would have an undue tendency to influence the jury’s decision on an improper basis, and the trial court erred in admitting the testimony into evidence over the defendant’s objections.
Carrie was also allowed to testify, over the defendant’s objection, about an incident that occurred at the hospital while she and her family were waiting for Justin to go into surgery. The defendant wanted Carrie to go with him to get something to eat; however, she did not want to leave Justin’s room until he went into surgery. Carrie’s mother suggested that the defendant get something to eat without Carrie, and the defendant became angry.
Carrie further testified:
A.... And I told him to get out, I said, “Just get out,” and he said, “No, you tell them to leave, because this is our child and they have nothing to do with this.” And I said, “I want you to leave.” So Jim stood up, my stepfather, and was asking Tony, he said, “Come on, let’s go outside, ” you know. Tony got very upset and he raised his fist to Jim.
Q. Who did?
A. Tony.
Q. Did he say anything at that time?
A. He said, “Come on, old man, I’ll lay you out right here, ” or something like that.
The State suggests that the evidence was properly admitted because it was evidence of the defendant’s intent and quick temper. There is no merit to that argument.
The evidence as to the defendant’s angry outburst at the hospital was irrelevant and prejudicial, and it was error to receive it in evidence.
Error in admitting or excluding evidence in a criminal trial is prejudicial unless it can be proved that the error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. State v. Baltimore, 236 Neb. 736, 463 N.W.2d 808 (1990); State v. Lenz, 227 Neb. 692, 419 *628N.W.2d 670 (1988). Harmless error exists in a jury trial of a criminal case when there is some incorrect conduct by the trial court which, on review of the entire record, did not materially influence the jury in a verdict adverse to a substantial right of the defendant. State v. Christian, 237 Neb. 294, 465 N.W.2d 756 (1991).
In this case, we are unable to say that the admission of the improper evidence was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.
The judgment is reversed, and the cause is remanded for a new trial.
Reversed and remanded for a new trial.
Grant and Fahrnbruch, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9740652 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:39:36.706939+00 ===

Boslaugh, J.,
dissenting.
I dissent only from that part of the opinion which holds that it was error for the trial court to admit, over defendant’s objections, the testimony of the defendant’s wife, Carrie, concerning his statement that she would have to choose between the defendant and their son, Justin, and the conversation at the hospital while they were waiting for Justin to be taken into surgery.
The defendant was charged with assault in the first degree, which required the State to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant’s assault upon Justin, which clearly caused serious bodily injury, was made “intentionally or knowingly.” Neb. Rev. Stat. § 28-308 (Reissue 1989).
There is substantial evidence in this case from which the jury could infer that Justin was an unwanted child so far as the defendant was concerned. The defendant made a number of statements which were inculpatory in varying degrees, but he finally admitted that he had shaken Justin vigorously when, *629according to the defendant, Justin appeared to be comatose. The evidence established that the injury had to have occurred before that time..
It may be conceded that the testimony in question was prejudicial to the defendant, as most incriminating evidence is. However, I do not agree that it was not relevant or unfairly prejudicial.
The evidence as a whole tended to prove that the defendant deliberately and intentionally shook Justin violently in an effort to stop his crying. Defendant succeeded not only in stopping the crying, but also in so permanently injuring Justin that he will be retarded for the rest of his life.
In my opinion, the testimony in question was relevant to the issue of the intent with which the act was done, and it was within the discretion of the trial court to overrule the defendant’s objections to it. I would affirm the judgment.
White, J., joins in this dissent.

=== CASE 9740653 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:39:38.120905+00 ===

FINE, J.
Alvin Jenkins appeals his conviction for first-degree murder, in violation of section 940.01, Stats. (1985-86).1 He raises two issues. First, he contends that the trial court should not have received into evidence the recitation by a former assistant district attorney of a statement made by the victim's three-year-old son four days after the murder. Second, Jenkins argues that the trial court erred in not instructing the jury on the lesser-included offense of second-degree murder, in violation of section 940.02(1), Stats. (1985-86).2 We affirm.
*184I.
Jenkins was charged with killing Carol Greenwade, who was shot in the head by a shotgun at a range of between two and six inches. The only direct evidence linking Jenkins to the murder was what Greenwade's three-year-old son told the Honorable John J. DiMotto, then an assistant district attorney, and Jenkins' alleged confession to an acquaintance, Gerald Clark.
Greenwade's son was seven years old at the time of trial, and was called as a witness by the prosecution. The boy's memory was limited, as revealed by his responses to the prosecutor's questions:
Q Do you remember what happened to your mother?
A Yes.
Q What happened to your mother?
A She died.
Q Do you remember when?
A No.
Q Do you remember anything about that time?
A No.
At the prosecutor's request, the trial court declared the boy to be "unavailable." See Rule 908.04(1)(c), Stats. (" 'Unavailability as a witness' includes situations in which the declarant:... Testifies to a lack of memory of the subject matter of his statement."). The prosecution then called as a witness Judge DiMotto, who, as an assistant district attorney, had interviewed the boy four days *185after the murder, three and one-half years earlier. The trial court permitted Judge DiMotto to relate that the boy told him that Jenkins and Greenwade first fought and then Jenkins shot her. Judge DiMotto testified as follows:
I asked him, has anything ever happened between his mother and Uncle Alvin [Jenkins]. And he said that his mama hit Alvin with a telephone and a knife on the leg. And that Alvin hit her on the face and she fell to the floor.
I then asked him whether or not he had ever seen a gun in the house. And he said, yes, my daddy's gun. And he said that Alvin got the gun. I seen it. I seen Alvin shoot mama. That she fell to the floor.
... I asked him, what did it sound like? He said it sounded hard. He told me, mama said stop and then the gun went off. And he said, bang.
Judge DiMotto testified that the boy also said that his mother had been shot six times and that she walked to the basement after the shooting. Jenkins claims that the trial court improperly admitted hearsay evidence and denied him his constitutional right to confrontation.
Every defendant in a criminal case has a constitutional right to confront his or her accusers. The Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution provides: "In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right ... to be confronted with the witnesses against him." Similarly, Article I, section 7, of the Wisconsin Constitution provides: "In all criminal prosecutions the accused shall enjoy the right ... to meet the witnesses face to face." The rights of a defendant in a criminal case under these two provisions are the same. State v. Burns, 112 Wis. 2d 131, 144, 332 N.W.2d 757, 764 (1983). The constitutional issue of confrontation is not reached, *186however, unless the out-of-court statement is admissible under a recognized hearsay exception, Rules 908.03 and 908.045, Stats., or a hearsay exclusion, Rule 908.01(4), Stats.3 See State v. Martinez, 150 Wis. 2d 62, 70, 440 N.W.2d 783, 786 (1989). Accordingly, we begin our analysis with the question of hearsay.
A.
"A trial court's decision to admit or exclude evidence is a discretionary determination that will not be upset on appeal if it has 'a reasonable basis' and was made 'in accordance with accepted legal standards and in accordance with the facts of record,' " Lievrouw v. Roth, 157 Wis. 2d 332, 348, 459 N.W.2d 850, 855 (Ct. App. 1990) (citations omitted). If the trial court's decision is supportable by the record, we will not reverse even if the trial court gave the wrong reason, see Martinez, 150 Wis. 2d at 72, 440 N.W.2d at 787, or no reason at all, see Kolpin v. Pioneer Power & Light Co., 162 Wis. 2d 1, 30, 469 N.W.2d 595, 607 (1991) ("[W]e will uphold the discretionary decision of the circuit court if we can conclude ab initio that there are facts of record which could support the circuit court's decision, had discretion been exercised on the basis of those facts.").
The trial court admitted the out-of-court statements by Greenwade's son pursuant to Rule 908.03(5), Stats., as the boy's recorded past recollection. In asking us to affirm admission of these statements, the State *187makes six arguments. First, the State contends that Jenkins waived objection to admission of the statements under Rule 908.03(5). Second, the State argues that, waiver aside, the statements are admissible under Rule 908.03(5). Third, the State argues that the statements are admissible under Rule 908.03(2), Stats, (excited utterance). Fourth, the State contends that the statements are admissible under the residual exception, Rule 908.03(24), Stats. Fifth, the State argues that the statements are admissible under 908.01(4) (a)3, Stats, (prior statement of identification by witness). Finally, the State submits that even if the trial court erred in receiving the statements into evidence, the error was harmless. We discuss these matters in turn.
1. Waiver. Prior to trial, the defendant filed a motion in limine that sought, among other things, an order prohibiting the prosecution "from presenting any evidence concerning a statement made by [the victim's son] to law enforcement and/or prosecution officials shortly after the murder of the victim for the reasons that such statements constitute hearsay and otherwise violate the defendant's constitutional right to confront witnesses against him." A pre-trial hearing was held on the motion, and the trial court ruled that the boy's out-of-court statements would be received under Rule 908.03(5), Stats. The State contends that Jenkins waived his objection to that ruling because at the hearing his trial attorney did not specifically argue lack of admissibility under Rule 908.03(5) but, rather, focussed on his client's constitutional right to confrontation. We disagree.
A party objecting to the admission of evidence need not specify the rule into which the evidence does not fit. See State v. Peters, 166 Wis. 2d 168, 174, 479 N.W.2d *188198, 200 (Ct. App. 1991). Rather, the proponent has the burden to show why the evidence is admissible. Ibid. Jenkins' pre-trial motion in limine sufficiently alerted the trial court that he was objecting on two grounds: hearsay and his right to confrontation. Cf. Rule 901.03(1)(a), Stats. ("Error may not be predicated upon a ruling which admits . . . evidence unless ... a timely objection or motion to strike appears of record, stating the specific ground of objection, if the specific ground was not apparent from the context."). There was no waiver. See State v. Bergeron, 162 Wis. 2d 521, 528-529, 470 N.W.2d 322, 324-325 (Ct. App. 1991) ("A defendant who has raised a motion in limine generally preserves the right to appeal on the issue raised by the motion without also objecting at trial" unless "the issue raised by appeal is different in fact or law from that presented by the motion in limine.").
2. Past recollection recorded. Rule 908.03(5), Stats., permits the receipt of:
A memorandum or record concerning a matter about which a witness once had knowledge but now has insufficient recollection to enable the witness to testify fully and accurately, shown to have been made when the matter was fresh in the witness's memory and to reflect that knowledge correctly.4
Judge DiMotto testified that notes of his interview of Greenwade's son were made by police officers who were present at the time, and that he reviewed those notes prior to his testimony in order to refresh his recollection. He did not, however, read the notes to the jury.
*189A memorandum or record whose contents accurately reflect what a witness once knew but no longer remembers need not have been personally prepared by that witness in order to be admissible under Rule 908.03(5), Stats. See Federal Advisory Committee Note to Federal Rule 803(5), reprinted at 59 Wis. 2d at R268-269; 4 J. Weinstein & M. Berger, WEINSTEIN'S EVIDENCE ¶ 803(5) [01] at 803-166 to 803-167 (1991); 2 S. Saltzburg & M. Martin, FEDERAL RULES OF EVIDENCE MANUAL 269-270 (5th ed. 1990). In order to be admissible under Rule 908.03(5), however, the recorded recollection must exist in some physical form; testimony by someone to whom the declarant made the statement is not sufficient. 4 J. Weinstein & M. Berger, WEINSTEIN’S Evidence ¶803(5)[01] at 803-167 (1991). Judge DiMotto's testimony about what Greenwade's son told him was thus not admissible under Rule 908.03(5).
3. Excited utterance. Rule 908.03(2), Stats., provides that an out-of-court statement is "not excluded by the hearsay rule" if it relates "to a startling event or condition made while the declarant was under the stress of excitement caused by the event or condition." Although the out-of-court statement need not be made contemporaneously with the event to which it relates, the statement is not admissible under the rule unless the declarant is still under the "stress of excitement caused by the event" at the time the statement is made. See State v. Moats, 156 Wis. 2d 74, 96-98, 457 N.W.2d 299, 309-310 (1990). The State did not argue at the hearing that Judge DiMotto's recitation of what Greenwade's son told him was admissible as an excited utterance, and the trial court did not receive Judge DiMotto's testi*190mony under that exception.5 This case is thus different from those authorities cited by the State where trial-court decisions to admit out-of-court statements under Rule 908.03(2) were upheld as within the trial courts' discretion even though the evidence in those cases was sketchy, at best, that the children were under the "stress of excitement" when they made the out-of-court statements. See Moats, 156 Wis. 2d at 96-97, 457 N.W.2d at 309-310; State v. Gollon, 115 Wis. 2d 592, 598-599, 340 N.W.2d 912, 915 (Ct. App. 1983). Although the point is certainly subject to speculation, there is no evidence in the record that Greenwade's son was under the "stress of excitement" caused by his mother's death when he spoke to then assistant district attorney DiMotto, and there is no finding by the trial court to that effect. We may not affirm a discretionary determination based on a rationale not advanced by the trial court when there is no evidence in the appellate record to support that rationale. See In Matter of Guardianship of Eberhardy, 102 Wis. 2d 539, 571, 307 N.W.2d 881, 895 (1981) (appellate court bound by the record); cf. Kolpin, 162 Wis. 2d at 30, 469 N.W.2d at 607 (appellate court will uphold discretionary ruling on a reason not advanced by trial court when "there are facts of record which could support" the appellate court's rationale).
4. Contemporaneous identification. Although the State's argument that Judge DiMotto's recitation of what Greenwade's son told him was admissible under Rule 908.01 (4) (a)3, Stats., is listed after its contention *191that Judge DiMotto's testimony was admissible under the residual exception to the rule against hearsay, Rule 908.03(24), Stats., the residual exception should not be considered unless no specific exception or exclusion applies. Accordingly, we analyze whether the boy's statements to Judge DiMotto fall within the "contemporaneous identification" exclusion from the hearsay rule.
Rule 908.01(4) (a)3, Stats., provides that an out-of-court statement is "not hearsay" if it is "[o]ne of identification of a person made soon after perceiving the person." This rule is limited to identification and does not extend to descriptions of the event that underlies the criminal charge. See, e.g., Swafford v. State, 533 So. 2d 270, 276 (Fla. 1988) (an observer's description of suspect not an "identification of a person"), cert. denied, 489 U.S. 1100. The boy's out-of-court statements to Judge DiMotto were not admissible under Rule 908.01(4) (a)3.
5. The residual exception. The State argues that Judge DiMotto's testimony about what Greenwade's son told him was admissible under Rule 908.03(24), which provides that an out-of-court statement is "not excluded by the hearsay rule" even though it is "not specifically covered" by the exceptions in Rule 908.03(1) through (23) as long as the statement has "circumstantial guarantees of trustworthiness" that are "comparable" to those exceptions.6 Like its counterpart, Rule 908.045(6), Stats., Rule 908.03(24) does not contemplate "unfettered *192judicial discretion" in admitting evidence otherwise excludable by the rule against hearsay but, rather, "was intended to allow admission of evidence under new and unanticipated situations which demonstrate a trustworthiness consistent with that required under other specifically stated exceptions." State v. Sorenson, 143 Wis. 2d 226, 243, 421 N.W.2d 77, 83 (1988) (applying Rule 908.045(6) to preliminary-examination testimony).
The State contends that Judge DiMotto's recitation of what Greenwade's son told him four days after the murder has circumstantial guaranties of trustworthiness that are comparable to the past-recollection-recorded exception under Rule 908.03(5), Stats. We agree.
The rule against hearsay recognizes that ascertainment of the truth is best served by having as in-court witnesses those persons who can relate contested events from their own personal knowledge. Cf. Rule 906.02, Stats. ("A witness may not testify to a matter unless evidence is introduced sufficient to support a finding that the witness has personal knowledge of the matter.").7 As the United States Supreme Court has noted:
Out-of-court statements are traditionally excluded because they lack the conventional indicia of reliability: they are usually not made under oath or other circumstances that impress the speaker with the solemnity of his statements; the declarant's word is not subject to cross-examination; and he is not available in order that his demeanor and credibility may be assessed by the jury.
*193Chambers v. Mississippi, 410 U.S. 284, 298 (1973). The various exceptions to the rule against hearsay are designed to accommodate a presumed trustworthiness of certain types of evidence on the one hand against the need for the evidence on the other. See Dutton v. Evans, 400 U.S. 74, 93, 95-96 (1970) (Harlan, J., concurring) (analysis of the related concept of a defendant's right to confrontation); State v. Bauer, 109 Wis. 2d 204, 212-213, 325 N.W.2d 857, 861-862 (1982) (reaffirming approval of Justice Harlan's concurrence). Thus, for example, Wisconsin recognizes that the residual exception is an appropriate mechanism for the receipt into evidence of out-of-court statements by young sexual assault victims:
We conclude there is a compelling need for admission of hearsay arising from young sexual assault victims' inability or refusal to verbally express themselves in court when the child and the perpetrator are sole witnesses to the crime. In the absence of a specific hearsay exception governing young children's statements in sexual assault cases, use of the residual exception is an appropriate method to admit these statements if they are otherwise proven sufficiently trustworthy.
Sorenson, 143 Wis. 2d at 243, 421 N.W.2d at 83-84. Although Jenkins' appeal here does not involve the issue of whether out-of-court statements of a young sexual-assault victim may be admitted into evidence, Soren-son's rationale is equally applicable: "the child and the perpetrator are sole witnesses to the crime," id., 143 Wis. 2d at 243, 421 N.W.2d at 84, who have survived. Accordingly, we must analyze whether Judge DiMotto's recitation of what Greenwade's then three-year-old son told him four days after Greenwade was murdered has "circumstantial guarantees of trustworthiness" that are *194"comparable" to the memorandum or record required by Rule 908.03(5).
Prior to its codification as Federal Rule 803(5) and Rule 908.03(5), Stats., the "hearsay exception for recorded recollection [was] generally recognized and [was] described as having 'long been favored by the federal and practically all the state courts that have had occasion to decide the question.' " Federal Advisory Committee Note to Federal Rule 803(5), reprinted at 59 Wis. 2d R267 (quoting United States v. Kelly, 349 F.2d 720, 770 (2d Cir. 1965), cert. denied, 384 U.S. 947). The reason is clear: a past-recollection-recorded document is at least as "trustworthy" as oral testimony, and indeed, "a contemporary, accurate record is inherently superior to a present recollection subject to the fallibility of human memory." 4 J. Weinstein & M. Berger, WEIN-STEIN'S Evidence, ¶ 803(5)[0l] at 803-158 (1991).
There are four prerequisites to the admission of a past-recollection-recorded document under Rule 908.03(5), Stats. First, the witness must once have known about the matter that is recorded in the document. Second, the witness must have insufficient present memory about the event to permit full and accurate testimony. Third, the document must have been made when the matter was fresh in the witness' mind. Finally, the document must accurately reflect what the witness once knew.8 Although Jenkins contends that some of what Greenwade's son told Judge DiMotto could not *195have happened, that contention goes to weight not admissibility because Jenkins does not argue that there was not sufficient contemporaneity between the murder and Judge DiMotto's interview with Greenwade's son so that the boy's statement did not reflect his knowledge at the time of the murder. Stated another way, the focus of Rule 908.03(5) is whether a witness' contemporaneous knowledge concerning an event was accurately recorded, not whether that knowledge in fact accurately reflects the event. See United States v. Edwards, 539 F.2d 689, 692 (9th Cir. 1976), cert. denied, 429 U.S. 984 (witness' intoxication at time out-of-court statement was made goes to weight not admissibility where witness testified that he believed statement accurately reflected his recollection at time statement was made).
By admitting Judge DiMotto's testimony under Rule 908.03(5), Stats., the trial court presumptively found that the four prerequisites to admission of a past-recollection-recorded statement under that rule were established. Accordingly, as we have already seen, since there is no requirement that the memorandum be prepared by the person whose past recollection it records, the officers' notes of that interview are within the ambit of Rule 908.03(5), Stats., and would have been admissible under that rule had they been offered into evidence. Therefore, if Judge DiMotto's testimony accurately reflected the contents of those notes, its trustworthiness would be comparable to the notes and would thus fall within Rule 908.03(24), Stats. Cf. 4 J. Weinstein & M. Berger, Weinstein'S Evidence ¶803(5)[01] at 803-168 (1991) (The memorandum received under Federal Rule 803(5) "is viewed as a substitute for the oral testimony" of the declarant.).
*196At the time he interviewed Greenwade's son, Judge DiMotto was Director of the Milwaukee County District Attorney's Sensitive Crimes Unit. According to Judge DiMotto's unrebutted testimony, the unit was "responsible for the review and prosecution of all cases such as sexual assaults, child neglect and a number of other cases where children may be victims or witnesses." During his tenure as an assistant district attorney, Judge DiMotto had interviewed "[w]ell in excess of a hundred" children as young as Greenwade's son. Judge DiMotto explained why he did not take notes when he interviewed the boy:
I feel that if I were sitting there scribbling down or writing down notes that the child might not talk to me. So I did not take any notes down, but the detectives who were in the room, two of them I believe, Detective [Donald] Demokowski and Detective [David] Slowinski, were sitting between Detective [Roosevelt] Harrell and [Greenwade's son], and they took down the notes and they prepared a police report.
Judge DiMotto told the trial court and jury that he had read the report prepared by the officers prior to testifying in order to refresh his recollection, and that once his memory was refreshed, the interview and salient points of the boy's story "stood out in my mind."9 Judge *197DiMotto also testified that the boy appeared normal and was "able to talk to me, and he was able to use the language that I have related." Although the officer's notes of Judge DiMotto's interview with the boy were not introduced into evidence, they were available to Jenkins' trial counsel to test the accuracy of Judge DiMotto's testimony. Indeed, Jenkins' trial counsel had attached the notes as an exhibit to his motion in limine to prevent the boy's statements to Judge DiMotto from being received into evidence, and could have sought an order requiring the State to introduce the notes into evidence in lieu of Judge DiMotto's testimony. The notes, which are included in the appellate record, parallel Judge DiMotto's testimony.10 Under these circumstances, Judge DiMotto's testimony about what Green-wade's son told him four days after the murder, had *198"circumstantial guarantees of trustworthiness" that were "comparable" to the officers' notes, and Judge DiMotto's testimony was thus admissible under Rule 908.03(24), Stats. See 4 J. Weinstein & M. Berger, WEINSTEIN'S Evidence ¶803(5)[01] at 803-167 (1991) (Rule 803(24) might permit testimony by one who recalls what an observer reported about an event.).
B.
As already noted, the possible admission of an out-of-court statement in a criminal case under an exception to the rule against hearsay does not end our analysis. We must also consider whether admission of Judge DiMotto's testimony about what Greenwade's son told him violated Jenkins' constitutional right to confrontation.
The crux of the right to confrontation is the " 'opportunity for effective cross-examination.' " United States v. Owens, 484 U.S. 554, 559 (1988) (emphasis deleted, citation omitted). There is no right, however, to " 'cross-examination that is effective in whatever way, and to whatever extent, the defense might wish.' " Ibid. (citation omitted). There is an "opportunity for effective cross-examination" for confrontation purposes if the declarant testifies at the trial even though he or she may have no memory concerning the event described by the out-of-court statement. Id., 484 U.S. at 559-564 (statement of prior identification under Federal Rule 801(d)(1)(C)). Cf. Vogel v. State, 96 Wis. 2d 372, 386-392, 291 N.W.2d 838, 845-848 (1980) (Admission under Rule 908.01(4) (a) 1, Stats., of a prior statement that is inconsistent with the witness' trial testimony does not violate a defendant's right to confrontation *199even though the witness claims not to remember giving the statement.). Since Judge DiMotto's testimony had circumstantial guarantees of trustworthiness that were comparable to the officer's notes, we analyze whether Jenkins was deprived of his constitutional right to confrontation in the context of the past-recollection-recorded exception to the rule against hearsay, Rule 908.03(5), Stats.
By definition, the person whose past-recollection recorded statement is admitted into evidence "has insufficient recollection" to permit full and accurate testimony about the event described in the statement. Rule 908.03(5), Stats. Since a witness' inability to "recall either the underlying events that are the subject of an extra-judicial statement or previous testimony or recollect the circumstances under which the statement was given, does not have Sixth Amendment [confrontation] consequence," California v. Green, 399 U.S. 149, 188 (1970) (Harlan, J., concurring), quoted in Owens, 484 U.S. at 558, admission of a past-recollection-recorded document under Federal Rule 803(5), Stats., does not violate a defendant's constitutional right to confrontation. See 4 J. Weinstein & M. Berger, WEINSTEIN'S EVIDENCE ¶ 803(5)[01] at 803-161 to 803-162 & nn.24-25 (1991); United States v. Riley, 657 F.2d 1377, 1385-1386 (8th Cir. 1981); United States v. Marshall, 532 F.2d 1279, 1285 (9th Cir. 1976), United States v. Smalls, 438 F.2d 711, 714 (2d Cir. 1971), cert. denied, 403 U.S. 933; Kelly, 349 F.2d at 770-771. Thus, although the responses of Greenwade's son to the prosecutor's direct examination indicated that his current memory of his mother's murder was essentially non-existent, the boy did testify; there was accordingly an opportunity for cross-examination, and Jenkins was not deprived of his constitutional *200right to confrontation.11 Owens, 484 U.S. at 559-560 (There is no violation of a defendant's right to confrontation "when the witness' past belief is introduced and he is unable to recollect the reason for that past belief.").12 Additionally, as we have seen, the past-recollection-recorded exception to the hearsay rule is firmly rooted in our jurisprudence, Federal Advisory Committee Note to Federal Rule 803(5), reprinted at 59 Wis. 2d R267, and " [w]here proffered hearsay has sufficient guarantees of reliability to come within a firmly rooted exception to the hearsay rule, the Confrontation Clause is satisfied." White v. Illinois, 112 S. Ct. 736, 738 (1992). Accordingly, the traditional confrontation-issue inquiry of whether the proffered out-of-court statement by a *201non-testifying declarant has the requisite " 'indicia of reliability' " or ” 'particularized guarantees of trustworthiness' " need not be made. Owens, 484 U.S. at 560 (quoting Dutton v. Evans, 400 U.S. 74, 89 (1970) and Ohio v. Roberts, 448 U.S. 56, 66 (1980)). Judge DiMotto's testimony relating what Greenwade's son told him four days after the murder was properly admitted.
II.
Jenkins also argues that the trial court should have instructed the jury on second-degree murder. First-degree murder in violation of section 940.01, Stats. (1985-86), was a class A felony and required that the defendant have "intent to kill," sec. 940.01(1), Stats. (1985-86), that is, "the mental purpose to take the life of another human being," sec. 940.01(2), Stats. (1985-86). Second-degree murder in violation of section 940.02(1), Stats. (1985-86), on the other hand, was a class B felony and required that the defendant "cause[d] the death of another human being . . . [b]y conduct imminently dangerous to another and evincing a depraved mind, regardless of human life."
Conduct imminently dangerous to another is conduct "inherently and consciously dangerous to life, not such as casually produces death by misadventure." To meet the requirement of evincing a "depraved mind,” the mind must "not only disregard the safety of another but be devoid of regard for the life of another." "The depravity of mind referred to in second degree [depraved mind] murder exists when the conduct causing death demonstrates an utter lack of concern for the life and safety of another and for which conduct there is no justification or excuse."
*202State v. Davis, 144 Wis. 2d 852, 863, 425 N.W.2d 411, 416 (1988) (brackets in original, citations omitted). The defendant must have intended to either inflict some harm on the victim, although not the death that resulted, State v. Blair, 164 Wis. 2d 64, 73-74, 473 N.W.2d 566, 570-571 (Ct. App. 1991), or put the victim in imminent danger, State v. Bernal, 111 Wis. 2d 280, 282-285, 330 N.W.2d 219, 220-222 (Ct. App. 1983).
Second-degree murder in violation of section 940.02(1), Stats. (1985-86), is a lesser-included crime of first-degree murder in violation of section 940.01, Stats. (1985-86). See section 939.66(2), Stats. ("An included crime [is] ... [a] crime which is a less serious type of criminal homicide than the one charged."). Whether the trial court should have submitted second-degree murder to the jury for its consideration is a matter that we must analyze independently of the trial court's determination. State v. Kramar, 149 Wis. 2d 767, 791, 440 N.W.2d 317, 327 (1989).
Submission of a lesser-included offense is permitted "only when there are reasonable grounds in the evidence both for acquittal on the greater charge and conviction on the lesser offense." Id., 149 Wis. 2d at 792, 440 N.W.2d at 327 (emphasis in original). In making this determination, the evidence must be viewed "in the light most favorable to the defendant." Ibid. Additionally, and of special significance here, the trial court must, upon request, submit a lesser-included-offense instruction to the jury "even when the defendant has given exculpatory testimony" if a reasonable view of the evidence, including testimony by the defendant other than the exculpatory portions of that testimony, "supports acquittal on the greater charge and conviction on the lesser charge." *203State v. Wilson, 149 Wis. 2d 878, 900, 440 N.W.2d 534, 542 (1989).13 We examine the evidence in this light.
Clark testified that he and Jenkins were fishing together shortly after Greenwade's murder when Jenkins remarked, "you know, I killed Carol." According to Clark, Jenkins said he used a sawed-off shotgun. Clark also told the jury that, subsequently, he had seen Jenkins threaten another girl friend by putting "a gun to her head several times telling her he was going to kill her like he killed Carol." Clark responded to questions posed by Jenkins' attorney on cross-examination as follows:
Q And [Jenkins] also told you that he and Carol had been tussling and the gun went off and shot her in the head?
A Yes.
Q You also testified that or told somebody earlier that [Jenkins] said quote we was wrestling with the gun and the gun slipped up, man, I shot her in the head, is that right?
A Yes.
Although Jenkins' alleged out-of-court statements to Clark elicited by Jenkins' trial counsel were hearsay, the State did not object. Unobjected-to-hearsay is admissible as substantive evidence. Schlichting v. Schlichting, 15 Wis. 2d 147, 160, 112 N.W.2d 149, 156 (1961).
*204Jenkins testified on his own behalf and denied killing Greenwade. He also denied telling Clark that he shot Greenwade, and denied that he had ever threatened the other woman. We must, however, disregard this testimony in evaluating whether Jenkins was entitled to have the lesser-included offense of second-degree murder submitted to the jury for its consideration. See Wilson, 149 Wis. 2d at 900-901, 440 N.W.2d at 542-543.
If we disregard Jenkins' denial that he killed Green-wade, we are left with Clark's testimony and the out-of-court statements by Greenwade's son. When looked at in a light most favorable to Jenkins, Clark's testimony as to what Jenkins told him about the killing does not support the view that Jenkins lacked intent to kill and either intentionally put Greenwade in imminent danger or intended to inflict some harm on Greenwade. Accordingly, Clark's testimony does not support both an acquittal on the first-degree murder charge and a conviction on the lesser charge of second degree, depraved-mind, murder. Similarly, the out-of-court statements by Green-wade's son do not support an acquittal on the first-degree murder charge because no reasonable jury could conclude from the boy's account of how Jenkins first got the gun and then shot Greenwade after she told him to "stop" that Jenkins lacked intent to kill. Jenkins was thus not entitled to have the lesser-included charge of second-degree murder submitted to the jury.
By the Court — Judgment affirmed.
The victim was killed on December 1, 1986. Section 940.01, Stats. (1985-86), was repealed and recreated by 1987 Wis. Act 399 section 472zkcn, applicable to crimes committed on or after January 1, 1989, 1987 Wis. Act 399 sec. 3204(57)(ag).
Section 940.02, Stats. (1985-86), was repealed and recreated by 1987 Wis. Act 399 section 472zkco, applicable to crimes committed on or after January 1, 1989. 1987 Wis. Act 399 sec. 3204(57) (ag).
Jenkins also asked the trial court to instruct the jury on "heat of passion" manslaughter under section 940.05(1), Stats. (1985-86), but has abandoned any claim of error in that regard by *184not raising it on this appeal. See Reiman Assocs., Inc. v. R/A Advertising, Inc., 102 Wis. 2d 305, 306 n.1, 306 N.W.2d 292, 294 n.1 (Ct. App. 1981).
Rules 908.03 and 908.045, Stats., are exceptions to the general rule that hearsay is not admissible. See Rule 908.02, Stats. ("Hearsay is not admissible except as provided by these rules . . .."). Those out-of-court statements that fall within Rule 908.01(4), Stats., are, by definition, "not hearsay." Rule 908.01(4) (emphasis added).
Rule 908.03(5), Stats., was amended into this form by section 202 of 1991 Wis. Act 32, effective July 27, 1991. The amendment made the provision gender-neutral without any substantive change.
The prosecutor argued at the pre-trial hearing that Judge DiMotto's testimony was alternatively admissible under Rule 908.03(3), Stats, ("existing state of mind, emotion, sensation, or physical condition"). The State does not argue on appeal that Rule 908.03(3) applies.
Rule 908.03(24), Stats., is the residual exception that applies whether or not the declarant is available. Its counterpart, Rule 908.045(6), Stats., applies when the declarant is not available to testify at the proceeding. Other than that distinction, there is no difference in the application of the two rules. See State v. Sorenson, 143 Wis. 2d 226, 242-243, 421 N.W.2d 77, 83 (1988).
Rule 906.02, Stats., was amended into this form by section 170 of 1991 Wis. Act 32, effective July 27, 1991. The amendment made the provision gender-neutral without any substantive change.
The dissent's statement that our listing of the four prerequisites to the admission of a past-recollection-recorded document under Rule 908.03(5), Stats., does "not include the vital 'physical form' initially found to be dispositive when the majority rejected the use of the statement pursuant to sec. 908.03(5)," Dissent at *195205, overlooks that the four prerequisites are to the admission of a document, which must — per force — exist in "physical form."
Judge DiMotto's testimony on this point is as follows:
And [the report] did in fact refresh my recollection specifically because the child was sitting on Detective Harrell's lap. That stood out in my mind. And also the statement about his mother hitting Alvin [Jenkins] with the phone and a knife on the leg, and the mother being hit and the mother being shot. And then the mother — him saying she walked down to the basement. When I read this report, it clearly refreshed my recollection because of those particular circumstances.
The pertinent part of the officers' notes record the following:
[Greenwade's son] was seated on the knee of Det. Roosevelt Harrell, and he was asked questions by Asst. Dist. Atty. John DiMotto. Asst. Dist. Atty. John DiMotto asked [the boy] if anything happened between his mama and Alvin, at which time [the boy] replied, "Mama hit Alvin with [a] telephone and a knife on the legs, and Alvin hit mama on the face. Mama fell to the floor." John DiMotto also asked [the boy] if he has ever seen a gun in the house in which [sic] [the boy] replied, "My daddy's gun, and Alvin got the gun, I seen it. I seen Alvin shoot mama. I was in the living room. [The boy] was asked, "What did it sound like?" He replied, "It sounded hard. Mama said stop, and then the gun went off, bang. Mama hit Alvin with the brown telephone. When she took [illegible] phone, Alvin shot her. After Alvin shot mama, mama got back up and walked to the basement. She went down into the basement." Asst. Dist. Atty. DiMotto asked him, "Did you carry her? [The boy] replied no. He also asked [the boy], "Did Alvin carry her?" He replied no. "Alvin went out the front door. Alvin- put the gun in mama's room and I stayed in the living room."
(Capitalization in original omitted.)
As noted earlier, the trial court declared the boy to be an "unavailable" witness because of the demonstrated lack of memory. As Owens points out, however, a witness may be "subject to cross-examination" even though "unavailable" under Federal Rule 804(a)(3), the federal rule equivalent to Rule 908.04(1)(c), because of a memory loss. Owens, 484 U.S. at 563-564. As already noted, Jenkins' trial counsel had the officers' notes of what Greenwade's son told Judge DiMotto. Nevertheless, trial counsel did not probe the boy's lack of memory, or attempt to refresh his recollection.
As Owens explains:
The weapons available to impugn the witness' statement when memory loss is asserted will of course not always achieve success, but successful cross-examination is not the constitutional guarantee. They are, however, realistic weapons, as is demonstrated by defense counsel's summation in this very case, which emphasized [the vic-timas memory loss and argued that his identification of [the defendant] was the result of the suggestions of people who visited him in the hospital.
Owens, 484 U.S. at 560. Jenkins' trial counsel's closing argument to the jury made much of the alleged infirmities in the statement by Greenwade's son.
We agree with the State that permitting a defendant to deny any involvement in a crime but still get the benefit of a lesser-included instruction is inappropriate. We are, however, bound by supreme court precedent. See State v. Lossman, 118 Wis. 2d 526, 533, 348 N.W.2d 159, 163 (1984).

=== CASE 9740654 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:39:38.127162+00 ===

MOSER, P.J.
(dissenting). The majority permits an interrogator to repeat in court the out-of-court statement of another witness, a statement which the majority admits cannot meet the requirements of sec. 908.03(5). *205Initially, the majority states that to be admissible under subsection (5), the recorded recollection of the proffered statement must exist in some physical form. Majority opinion at 189. Subsequently, the majority implies that there are only four prerequisites for admission under subsection (5), all of which are present. Majority opinion at 194-195.1 note however, that the "four prerequisites" listed do not include the vital "physical form" initially found to be dispositive when the majority rejected the use of the statement pursuant to sec. 908.03(5).
The majority opinion states that the recitation has "circumstantial guarantees of trustworthiness that are comparable to the past-recollection-recorded exception under Rule 908.03(5), Stats.," majority opinion at 192 (emphasis added), paving the way for its admission under the residual exception, sec. 908.03(24), Stats., even though the recitation itself is not admissible under Rule 908.03(5). Because this reasoning is circular, I dissent. I disagree that the recitation in question does in fact have the required "comparable guaranties of trustworthiness."
On its face, subsection (5) presents four1 "circumstantial guaranties of trustworthiness":
1) a memorandum or record,
2) the witness' knowledge of the matter of concern,
3) a showing that the recollection was fresh when the memorandum or record was made, and
4) a showing that the memorandum or record reflects the witness' knowledge correctly.
*206The memorandum or record itself is not just a formality, its existence and physical immutability guarantee that the "fresh recollection" is accurately brought before the fact-finder. The existence of a physical record is thus one of the most important circumstantial guaranties of trustworthiness to be found in subsection (5). Even more importantly, the showing that the memorandum or record reflects the witness' knowledge correctly is another, independent and important guarantee of trustworthiness. The majority substitutes the "presumptive" finding of this element by the trial court for an explicit finding, based upon record evidence. Majority opinion at 195. To blithely presume that a trial court, which erroneously admitted testimony clearly lacking one required element of subsection (5), has in fact correctly scrutinized the remaining four elements, sets a dangerous precedent with constitutional overtones for the defendant in this criminal case. I would require that the necessary comparable guarantees be supported by evidence of record and not hold, as the majority does, that the trial court presumptively found the remaining elements of subsection (5). Nothing in the record supports such a presumption. The trial court merely allowed DiMotto's testimony to stand.
Despite DiMotto's sincere and accurate (after reading the written report of the officer) reporting of the words he heard spoken by the boy, DiMotto can only assure the court that the memorandum accurately reflects the words spoken by the boy out of court. DiMotto, as former interrogator, cannot be permitted to assure the jury by his personal demeanor, credibility and current title that that statement reflects the boy's knowledge correctly. Introduction of a statement on the theoretical grounds that its trustworthiness is supported by guarantees comparable to those of sec. 908.03(5) *207requires that a reasonable substitute for all of those guaranties be present, not merely substitutes for some of them. Stated another way, I cannot accept that the focus of an exception to the exclusion of hearsay is merely an accurate physical record of an unexamined and therefore possibly inaccurate statement. See majority opinion at 195.
In my opinion, the records of the officers recording DiMotto's questioning of the boy might be permitted to augment the boy's testimony about events that he can no longer remember, pursuant to sec. 908.03(24). However, these records cannot permit DiMotto to testify about those events. At a minimum, the prosecution should be required to present the boy's additional testimony concerning his current belief that his earlier statements accurately reflected his childish perceptions at the time of the murder. Cf. United States v. Edwards, 539 F.2d 689, 692 (9th Cir. 1976), cert. denied, 429 U.S. 984.
Finally, it is important to note that the underlying rationale for the introduction of DiMotto's recitation is lacking. This is not a case where we seek to balance a "presumed trustworthiness" against the "need for evidence." Majority opinion at 193. The prosecution was merely faced with a tactical choice: to introduce the written record of the statement (the officers' reports) after making a showing of the five elements required by subsection (5) or to present DiMotto's recitation of that statement.
In essence, the majority opinion in this case would permit members of the prosecution staff to testify to the truth underlying any statement that they had ever heard, provided someone had accurately recorded the statement at the time it was made. Such testimony cannot be allowed, under the aegis of the statutory catch-all of subsection (24) and an easily overlooked substitution *208of "presumptive trial court findings" for record evidence. Appellate decisions concerning the rules of evidence are applied in a wide variety of settings, not just difficult criminal cases. The majority opinion would require that in the future any personable witness with a refreshed recollection of accurately recorded statements could be substituted for documentary evidence. The opposing party is thereby forced to confront not the declarant, who by definition lacks memory, and possibly other attributes of reliability such as maturity, sobriety, or sanity, but the proponent's selected witness.
Subsection (5) has an additional requirement, present recollection insufficient for testimony, which cannot be classified as a guaranty of trustworthiness.

=== CASE 9740655 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:39:40.009828+00 ===

Reilly, P.J.
Plaintiff appeals as of right from circuit court orders granting defendants’ motions for summary disposition pursuant to MCR 2.116(C) (10). We affirm.
Plaintiff was employed as a computer operator by defendant R. L. Polk Company (Polk), a publishing and market research company, from November 1985 to March 1988. Plaintiff was discharged from his job in March 1988 for allegedly threatening a customer, defendant Crestwood Dodge.
Before his termination, plaintiff had experienced problems with his car and took it to Crestwood for repair. A dispute arose between plaintiff and Crestwood regarding the amount owed for use of a replacement car. Crestwood brought a small claims action to recover this amount. Plaintiff participated in mediation of the action with two representatives of Crestwood.
During the course of the mediation, the mediator left the room so that the parties could resolve the matter between themselves. What happened when the mediator left is disputed by the parties. Plaintiff asserts that he told the Crestwood representatives that he would take a day off from work and stand out in front of the dealership to pass out letters indicating that his Dodge Shadow was a "lemon.” The Crestwood representatives asserted that plaintiff stated that he worked for Polk and that if the small claims matter was not dropped he would send letters stating that his car was a "lemon” to all of Chrysler’s customers. The representatives believed that the mailing was to be *5accomplished by using information available to plaintiff through his employment at Polk.
Crestwood sent a letter informing Polk of plaintiffs alleged threat. In the letter, Crestwood expressed concern regarding the improper use of its customer lists and requested assurance from Polk that "Mr. Prysak’s stated plan does not come to fruition.” On the day his employment was terminated, plaintiff was called into the personnel office and was shown the letter. Plaintiff was informed that he was being discharged for threatening a customer.
In his complaint, plaintiff alleged that he was employed pursuant to a contract providing for termination for just cause only that was breached by Polk when his employment was terminated. Plaintiff also claimed that his termination was against public policy and constituted an intentional infliction of emotional distress. Additionally, it was alleged that Crestwood had intentionally interfered with the contractual relationship between plaintiff and Polk and that Crestwood’s letter to Polk contained libelous statements regarding plaintiff.
Both Polk and Crestwood brought motions for summary disposition pursuant to MCR 2.116(C) (10). The circuit court granted both motions.
On appeal, plaintiff asserts that the trial court improperly granted defendants’ motions for summary disposition. A motion for summary disposition premised on MCR 2.116(C)(10) tests the factual support for a claim. The court must consider the pleadings, affidavits, depositions, and other documentary evidence available to it and grant summary disposition if there is no genuine issue regarding any material fact and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. A party opposing a motion brought under C(10) may not *6rest upon the mere allegations or denials in the pleadings, but must by affidavit, deposition, admission, or other documentary evidence set forth specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial. MCR 2.116(G)(4). Panich v Iron Wood Products Corp, 179 Mich App 136, 139; 445 NW2d 795 (1989). This Court is liberal in finding a genuine issue of material fact. St Paul Fire & Marine Ins Co, v Quintana, 165 Mich App 719, 722; 419 NW2d 60 (1988). Nonetheless, where the opposing party fails to come forward with evidence, beyond the allegations or denials in the pleadings, to establish the existence of a material factual dispute, the motion is properly granted. SSC Associates v General Retirement System of the City of Detroit, 192 Mich App 360; 480 NW2d 275 (1991); Morganroth v Whitall, 161 Mich App 785, 788; 411 NW2d 859 (1987); MCR 2.116(G)(4).
i
Plaintiff first claims that summary disposition was improper in regard to his claims of breach of an employment contract and wrongful discharge because there was a genuine issue of material fact whether plaintiff was employed pursuant' to a contract providing for termination for just cause only. Plaintiff asserts that his claim of a just-cause contract is supported by the employee handbook issued by Polk and statements made to him by a supervisor at Polk.
Generally, a contract for permanent employment is for an indefinite period of time and is presumed to provide for employment at will. Toussaint v Blue Cross & Blue Shield of Michigan, 408 Mich 579, 596; 292 NW2d 880 (1980). However, a contract providing for termination for just cause only may be created by an express agreement or *7as a result of an employee’s legitimate expectations grounded in the policy statements of the employer. Id. at 598.
An employee’s legitimate expectations may be based on the employer’s written policy statements set forth in an employee manual or handbook. Id. at 599. While plaintiff argues that the existence of Polk’s employee manual creates an issue of fact regarding the existence of a just-cause contract, he admits in his brief on appeal and in his deposition testimony that he does not recall ever receiving an employee policy manual. Nor does he claim that he was told of its contents. Therefore, we fail to see how plaintiff can assert that his interpretation or understanding of the manual or handbook gave rise to an expectation either subjective or objective, that he would be terminated only for just cause. Compare Stoken v J E T Electronics & Technology, Inc, 174 Mich App 457, 465; 436 NW2d 389 (1988). Accordingly, we reject plaintiff’s argument that statements made in Polk’s employee manual or handbook create an issue of fact regarding the existence of a just-cause contract.
Plaintiff also asserts that oral representations made to him by an agent of Polk create a genuine issue of material fact in regard to the existence of a just-cause contract. In his deposition, plaintiff stated that he had a discussion with a manager at Polk regarding another employee who was not "working out.” Plaintiff testified that the manager told him "you just can’t go firing people for no reason . . . you got [sic] to have a reason.”
In order to overcome the presumption of employment at will, oral statements of job security must be "clear and unequivocal.” Rowe v Montgomery Ward & Co, Inc, 437 Mich 627, 644; 473 NW2d 268 (1991). The Court in Rowe determined that oral statements made to the plaintiff at her initial *8interview that as long as she sold, she would have a job at Montgomery Ward did not clearly indicate an intent to form a contract to terminate only for cause. Id. at 645.
It was noted by the Court that the statements made to Mrs. Rowe were similar to the statement considered in Toussaint, supra. However, the Court found lacking objective evidence that would permit a reasonable juror to find that a reasonable promisee would interpret the statements as a promise of termination for cause only. Rowe, supra at 643. In making this determination, the Court noted that the statement was not made in response to any inquiry by the plaintiff regarding job security or during the course of negotiating the terms of employment.
The statement relied on by plaintiff in this case is not a "clear and unequivocal” promise of job security. Furthermore, the circumstances surrounding the statement do not provide objective evidence that a just-cause contract existed. The statement was not made in the context of negotiating plaintiff’s terms of employment or in response to inquiries regarding his job security. Rather, they were made during the course of a discussion regarding the job performance of another employee. Under these circumstances, a reasonable juror could not find that the statements made to plaintiff could be reasonably interpreted as a promise of termination for cause only.
On the basis of the foregoing, we conclude that no issue of fact existed regarding the existence of a just-cause contract. Polk’s motion for summary disposition of the claims of wrongful termination and breach of contract was properly granted.
ii
Next, plaintiff argues that summary disposition *9was improper because facts existed to support his claim that the termination of his employment was contrary to public policy. Specifically, plaintiff claims that he was discharged for stating that he was going to exercise his constitutional right to free speech by standing in front of Crestwood Dodge and expressing his dissatisfaction with Crestwood’s product and service.
Generally, at-will employment may be terminated at any time, for any reason. Suchodolski v Michigan Consolidated Gas Co, 412 Mich 692, 694-695; 316 NW2d 710 (1982). However, there is an exception to the general rule based on the principle that some grounds for termination are so contrary to public policy as to be actionable. Id. at 695. These proscriptions have been found in explicit legislative statements that prohibit the discharge, discipline, or other adverse treatment of employees acting in accordance with a statutory right or duty. Id. at 695. See, e.g., MCL 37.2701; MSA 3.548(701) (Civil Rights Act), and MCL 15.362; MSA 17.428(2) (Whistleblowers’ Protection Act). Additionally, courts have implied a prohibition on retaliatory discharge where the reason for the discharge was the employee’s exercise of a statutory right, Sventko v Kroger Co, 69 Mich App 644; 245 NW2d 151 (1976) (employee discharged in retaliation for filing a workers’ compensation claim), or the employee’s refusal to violate a law. Trombetta v Detroit, T & I R Co, 81 Mich App 489; 265 NW2d 385 (1978).
While this Court has recognized that it may be a violation of the First Amendment for a county employer to discipline or discharge an employee for engaging in certain types of speech, Pilarowski v Brown, 76 Mich App 666; 257 NW2d 211 (1977), plaintiff has not cited, and we have not found, any *10Michigan authority that addresses the issue whether an employee of a private employer who is terminated for exercising his constitutional right to free speech may maintain an action under the public policy exception to at-will employment. Both the United States and Michigan Constitutions guarantee the plaintiff’s right to free speech. However, unlike the statutory provisions that have provided the basis for the public policy exception in the above-noted cases, the federal and the Michigan constitutional provisions guaranteeing free speech do not extend to private conduct, but have been limited to protection against state action. US Const, Am I; Const 1963, art 1, § 3; Hudgens v NLRB, 424 US 507, 513; 96 S Ct 1029; 47 L Ed 2d 196 (1976); Woodland v Michigan Citizens Lobby, 423 Mich 188, 212; 378 NW2d 337 (1985). Because Polk is a private employer, it is not bound by the constitutional provisions guaranteeing freedom of speech.1 Accordingly, plaintiff has failed to state a claim upon which relief can be granted, MCR 2.116(C)(8), and summary disposition was properly granted with regard to the claim, albeit for the wrong reason. Griffey v Prestige Stamping, Inc, 189 Mich App 665, 669; 473 NW2d 790 (1991).
hi
Plaintiff’s next argument is that summary disposition was premature because it was granted be*11fore Polk answered interrogatories submitted by plaintiff. Plaintiff claims that the interrogatories were vital to discovery because they were designed to reveal Polk’s past employment and termination policies and practices.
Generally, summary disposition granted before discovery on a disputed issue is complete is considered premature. Kassab v Michigan Basic Property Ins Ass’n, 185 Mich App 206, 216; 460 NW2d 300 (1990), lv gtd 439 Mich 864 (1991). However, summary disposition may be proper before discovery is complete where further discovery does not stand a fair chance of uncovering factual support for the position of the party opposing the motion. Id.
In the present case, Polk’s motion for summary disposition was not granted prematurely. The motion was granted after the discovery period had expired. See MCR 2.301(A). Although plaintiff told the court at the time the motion was granted that Polk had not answered the interrogatories, our review of the lower court record shows that there is no indication that plaintiff ever filed a motion to compel Polk to respond to the interrogatories before or after the expiration of the period for discovery.
Furthermore, summary disposition was appropriate because further discovery would not have provided a fair chance of uncovering factual support for plaintiff’s claim. Plaintiff claims that the answers to interrogatories would have provided him with information regarding Polk’s policies regarding hiring and termination practices. However, as was discussed previously, plaintiff’s claim that he had a just-cause employment contract was based on the oral representations made by a superior and the statements of policy made in the employee handbook. However, as we concluded previously, because plaintiff did not remember *12ever receiving the handbook and he does not claim he was informed of the contents of the handbook, he could not rely on any policy statements made therein. Furthermore, plaintiff stated in his deposition that he did not know Polk’s criteria for firing someone or even if Polk had such criteria. As was stated previously in regard to the employee handbook, plaintiff cannot claim that he relied on policies or "criteria” of which he had no knowledge. Accordingly, any further discovery regarding Polk’s hiring and termination policies would not have provided further factual support for plaintiff’s claim.
iv
Next, plaintiff argues that a genuine issue of material fact exists in regard to his claim that Crestwood tortiously interfered with his contractual relationship with Polk.
A plaintiff may maintain an action for tortious interference with an at-will employment contract. Feaheny v Caldwell, 175 Mich App 291, 304; 437 NW2d 358 (1989).
[O]ne who alleges tortious interference with a contractual or business relationship must allege the intentional doing of a per se wrongful act or the doing of a lawful act with malice and unjustified in law for the purpose of invading the contractual rights or business relationship of another. [Stanton v Dachille, 186 Mich App 247, 255; 463 NW2d 479 (1990), quoting Feldman v Green, 138 Mich App 360, 378; 360 NW2d 881 (1984).]
See also Formall, Inc v Community National Bank of Pontiac, 166 Mich App 772, 779; 421 NW2d 289 (1988). A wrongful act per se is an act that is inherently wrongful or an act that can *13never be justified under any circumstances. Id. at 780.
We note that this Court has held that defendants motivated by legitimate business reasons are protected from liability under this cause of action. Id.; Christner v Anderson, Nietzke & Co, PC, 156 Mich App 330, 348-349; 401 NW2d 641 (1986), modified on other grounds 433 Mich 1; 444 NW2d 779 (1989). However, in Jim-Bob, Inc v Mehling, 178 Mich App 71, 96-97; 443 NW2d 451 (1989), a panel of this Court declined to hold that a defendant who is motivated by legitimate business interests is therefore free from liability. The Court stated that motive is but one of several factors that must be weighed in determining the propriety of a defendant’s actions. Id. The other factors include (1) the nature of the defendant’s conduct, (2) the nature of the plaintiff’s contractual interest, (3) the social utility of the respective interests of the plaintiff and the defendant, and (4) the proximity of the conduct of the defendant with the interference. Id. at 97. We need not resolve the conflict, if one exists, between Christner and Jim-Bob because we are able to analyze plaintiff’s claim under the standard set out in Stanton, Feldman, and Formal1.
In the present case, plaintiff alleged in his complaint that Crestwood intentionally caused his discharge from Polk through its letter to Polk. The letter expressed Crestwood’s concern over the possible misuse of customer lists. The dealership sought assurances from Polk that plaintiff’s plan would not "come to fruition” and stated that if it did not receive such assurances, it would turn the matter over to its legal department.
Plaintiff asserts on appeal that Crestwood’s letter "unjustifiably” led to plaintiff’s termination. However, plaintiff has not presented any facts to *14suggest that Crestwood’s action in sending the letter was wrongful conduct per se or was lawful conduct that was done with malice and that sending the letter was an unjustified act done for the purpose of invading his contractual relationship with Polk.
In light of the evidence presented, we hold that the trial court correctly determined that there was no genuine issue of material fact in regard to plaintiff’s claim. The letter itself is merely an expression of Crestwood’s concern over the alleged threats made by plaintiff. The letter, while employing strong language, does not call for the discharge of plaintiff. Rather, Crestwood sought assurances that its customer lists would not be misused. There is no indication that Crestwood was acting with a wrongful or malicious intent to interfere with plaintiff’s employment. To the contrary, Crestwood appears to have been acting solely to protect the confidentiality of its customer lists.
v
Lastly, plaintiff argues that summary disposition was improper in regard to his libel claim. Plaintiff alleges that the statements made in Crestwood’s letter were false and defamatory.
Libel has been defined as a "statement of and concerning the plaintiff which is false in some material respect and is communicated to a third person by written or printed words and has a tendency to harm the plaintiff’s reputation.” Stablein v Schuster, 183 Mich App 477, 480; 455 NW2d 315 (1990).
In the present case, the trial court found that Crestwood’s statements in the letter were protected under a qualified privilege. The determina*15tion whether a privilege exists is one of law for the court. Id. The elements of a qualified privilege are (1) good faith, (2) an interest to be upheld, (3) a statement limited in its scope to this purpose, (4) a proper occasion, and (5) publication in a proper manner and to proper parties only. Bufalino v Maxon Bros, Inc, 368 Mich 140, 153; 117 NW2d 150 (1962); Smith v Fergan, 181 Mich App 594, 596-597; 450 NW2d 3 (1989). A plaintiff may overcome a qualified privilege only by showing that the statement was made with actual malice, i.e., with knowledge of its falsity or reckless disregard of the truth. Id. at 597. General allegations of malice are insufficient to establish a genuine issue of material fact. Gonyea v Motor Parts Federal Credit Union, 192 Mich App 74; 480 NW2d 297 (1991); Smith, supra at 597.
The trial court correctly determined that the letter written by Crestwood Dodge was subject to a qualified privilege. The letter was written in response to perceived threats to the confidentiality of its customer lists and was limited in scope to addressing this concern. Plaintiff failed to overcome the qualified privilege because he has presented no evidence of, and does not even allege that the letter was written with actual malice. Accordingly, we conclude that summary disposition was proper with regard to this claim.
Affirmed.
Gillis, J., concurred.
We note that even if we were to find that a private employer’s termination of an employee for exercising his right to free speech came within the public policy exception to at-will employment, we would find that, under the facts of this case, plaintiffs termination was not so contrary to public policy as to be actionable. Plaintiffs proposed speech did not involve a matter of public concern, but was regarding a private matter, plaintiffs complaints regarding his car. Any interference with plaintiffs right to comment on this matter by his employer is not so contrary to the public policy of this state as to be actionable. See Pilarowski, supra at 675, and Schultz v Industrial Coils, Inc, 125 Wis App 2d 520; 373 NW2d 74 (1985).

=== CASE 9740656 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:39:40.01507+00 ===

Michael J. Kelly, J.
(concurring in part and dissenting in part). Defendant Crestwood posits its claim that there was no genuine issue of material fact regarding plaintiffs claim of tortious interference with his contractual relationship with defendant Polk on its assertion that plaintiff threatened *16to circulate letters to Crestwood’s customers. Crestwood further asserts that its employees, Jeffrey E. Gedz and Deborah A. Yowtz, were told by plaintiff that he would make copies of all service work that Crestwood did on his car, attach a letter stating what a lemon it was, and "send it to all of Chrysler’s customers. This was to be done to the best of our knowledge with information he had access to at R. L. Polk.” Plaintiff denies this. In granting summary disposition, the trial court said:
He threatened them. . . . He made the statements, no question about that.
His statements were such that any reasonable person would have to so react.
But I have a very real question about what statements plaintiff made. I do not see where he admits to having made statements that he would cull R. L. Polk lists to obtain names and addresses of customers of Crestwood Dodge or Chrysler Corporation and that he would use those mailings to communicate his lemon message.
Plaintiff testified in this regard during questioning by Crestwood’s attorney as follows:
Q. Now, it says on this piece of paper which is signed and dated by Jeffrey Gedz and Deborah A. Yowtz. I’d like to read it. "During the course of mediation on December 16, 1987 it was stated by Daniel Prysak while the mediator was out of the room that he worked for R. L. Polk and that if our small claims action was not dropped that he could make copies of all service work that had been done on his car and attach a letter stating, quote, 'what a lemon he had for a car,’ and send it to all of Chrysler’s customers. This was to be done to the best of our knowledge with information he had *17access to at R. L. Polk.” Now, did you make that type of statement to these two individuals?
A. No, I did not.
A. I was really mad. I said here’s all my bills, here’s, you know, a list of all my repairs and everything, I says this is getting too expensive, I says I’m going to copy off all these bills and, you know, just write a little note if you’re thinking about buying a Shadow don’t, you know, it is a lemon. I said I’ll take a day off work and I said I’ll stand out on your sidewalk and pass it out to Crestwood’s customers, and they’re like I wouldn’t advise that but you can do what you want to. Where they got this I have no idea.
Q. You told them you would stand out in front of Crestwood Dodge?
A. Yeah. I said I’ll stand out in front of Crest-wood Dodge and pass it out to customers.
Q. Did you say anything about sending a letter to customers?
A. I said I’ll write a letter saying what a lemon I had and staple to it all my bills and say here you go, if you’re thinking about buying a Dodge Shadow don’t.
Q. Did you say anything about sending it in the mail?
A. Oh, no, no.
Q. You made no statements about sending the letter to customers in the mail?
A. .. . No.
This is a classic question of fact. Certainly the jury or trier of fact could infer that plaintiff threatened to use R. L. Polk lists to communicate his grievances to defendant’s customers. The trial court on motion for summary disposition could not make that inference in the face of plaintiffs denials. Crestwood’s employees and agents could make *18that inference, which they did, but it is an inference, not a fact.
I believe that the majority’s disposition of issues IV and V is improper because they assumed that plaintiff admitted, or his counsel admitted for him, that he threatened improper use of R. L. Polk lists to communicate his grievances to customers of Crestwood Dodge. For that reason, I would reverse the grant of Crestwood’s motion for summary disposition.
I concur in the majority’s disposition regarding affirmation of summary disposition in favor of the employer, R. L. Polk Company.

=== CASE 2224413 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:21.446789+00 ===

751 N.E.2d 233 (2001)
Clifford N. FAULK, Sr., Appellant-Plaintiff,
v.
NORTHWEST RADIOLOGISTS, P.C., and B. Richard Goldburg, M.D., Appellees-Defendants.
No. 49A04-9909-CV-409.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
May 14, 2001.
Publication Ordered July 10, 2001.
*236 David B. Hughes, Indianapolis, IN, Attorney for Appellant.
Steven J. Cohen, David Becsey, Zeigler Cohen & Koch, Indianapolis, IN, for B. Richard Goldburg, M.D.
Karl L. Mulvaney, Mary H. Watts, Candace L. Sage, Bingham Summers Welsh & Spilman, Indianapolis, IN, for Northwest Radiologists, P.C. *234
*235 OPINION
SHARPNACK, Chief Judge.
Clifford N. Faulk, Sr., appeals from the trial court's entry of judgment in favor of Northwest Radiologists, P.C. ("Northwest"), and B. Richard Goldburg, M.D. Faulk raises four issues, which we consolidate and restate as:
1) whether the trial court abused its discretion when it denied Faulk's motions for judgment on the evidence against Northwest and Dr. Goldburg on their defenses of contributory negligence; and
2) whether the trial court abused its discretion in the course of instructing the jury.
We affirm.[1]
The relevant facts follow. On February 27, 1991, Dr. Calvin Russell examined Faulk, who complained of a "mass" on the right side of his neck. Record, p. 645. Dr. Russell was concerned that the neck mass might be cancerous and referred Faulk to Dr. Goldberg, an otolaryngologist.[2] Dr. Goldburg examined Faulk on March 4, 1991, and during the course of the examination he felt a "hard mass" in the right base of Faulk's tongue in addition to observing the mass on Faulk's *237 neck. Record, p. 453. On March 8, 1991, Dr. Goldburg performed an esophagoscopy and laryngoscopy on Faulk, during which Dr. Goldburg obtained biopsies from Faulk's tongue and neck. Tests of the neck tissue indicated that it was cancerous, but the tongue tissue appeared not to be cancerous. Further tests failed to reveal the primary source for Faulk's cancer.
On April 24, 1991, Dr. Goldburg performed a right radical neck dissection on Faulk, in the course of which he removed twenty-eight lymph nodes from Faulk's neck. Before and after the surgery, Dr. Goldburg told Faulk that Faulk should return for check-ups
"every month for the first (1st) year, every two (2) months the second (2nd) year, every three (3) months the third (3rd) year, every four (4) months the fourth (4th) year, twice during the fifth (5th) year, for the rest of my life I practice in their life, we see them ... once a year."
Record, p. 2310.
On May 13, 1991, Dr. Goldburg reexamined Faulk, referred him to Northwest for radiation therapy, and scheduled a follow-up appointment with Faulk for June 13, 1991. Despite receiving an appointment card reminding him of the June 13, 1991, follow-up appointment, Faulk missed that appointment. Faulk did not request another appointment with Dr. Goldburg and did not see Dr. Goldburg again for almost two years.
Meanwhile, on May 21, 1991, Dr. F.W. Peyton, a radiation oncologist who worked for Northwest, examined Faulk. Dr. Peyton determined that radiation therapy would be applied to Faulk's neck, but in the absence of evidence of a primary source for the cancer no radiation would be administered to Faulk's mouth. Faulk underwent radiation therapy from June 18, 1991 to August 2, 1991.
After completing the radiation therapy, Faulk returned to Northwest for several follow-up examinations over the course of the next year and a half. On each occasion Faulk was examined by one of Northwest's radiation oncologists, and on each occasion the oncologist found no evidence of recurring or new tumors in his mouth. Northwest's oncologists were aware that Dr. Goldburg had planned to see Faulk frequently for follow-up appointments and that Faulk had not returned to Dr. Goldburg. Three of the four oncologists who examined Faulk told him that he should see Dr. Goldburg in addition to seeing them.
Faulk missed two appointments with Northwest scheduled for March 30, 1993, and April 6, 1993. After being contacted by Northwest about the missed appointments, Faulk returned to Northwest for an examination on May 12, 1993. Although the oncologist who examined him concluded that Faulk remained free of cancer, Faulk complained of frequent severe headaches. Consequently, Northwest referred Faulk to a neurologist for evaluation. The neurologist ordered a CT scan of Faulk's sinus area, which revealed a soft tissue mass in the left side of Faulk's tongue.
Faulk returned to Northwest on June 15, 1993, and during the course of an examination Dr. Peyton concluded that although Faulk's mouth did not contain visual or palpable lesions, Faulk's tongue deviated to the left. Consequently, Northwest scheduled an appointment with Dr. Goldburg for Faulk. Dr. Goldburg examined Faulk on June 16, 1993, and detected by palpitation a mass in the base of Faulk's tongue. Subsequent biopsies of the tongue revealed the mass to be cancerous.
Dr. Goldburg sent Faulk to the Indiana University Medical Center, and on June *238 30, 1993, Dr. Raleigh Lingeman performed surgery on Faulk. In the course of the surgery, Dr. Lingeman performed a second radical neck dissection and removed Faulk's vocal cords and tongue.
Faulk filed a proposed complaint with the patient's compensation division of the Indiana Department of Insurance, asserting that Dr. Goldburg and Northwest had committed medical malpractice. A medical review panel concluded that the evidence did not establish that Dr. Goldburg or Northwest had failed to meet the appropriate standard of care in their treatment of Faulk. Subsequently, Faulk filed suit against Dr. Goldburg and Northwest. The case proceeded to a jury trial, and at the close of Dr. Goldburg and Northwest's presentations of evidence Faulk moved for judgment on the evidence against Dr. Goldburg and Northwest on their defenses of contributory negligence. The trial court denied both of the motions. Over Faulk's objection, the trial court instructed the jury on contributory negligence and incurred risk. The jury returned verdicts for Dr. Goldburg and Northwest.
I.
The first issue is whether the trial court abused its discretion when it denied Faulk's motions for judgment on the evidence against Northwest and Dr. Goldburg on their defenses of contributory negligence. The purpose of a motion for judgment on the evidence is to test the sufficiency of the evidence. Zemco Mfg., Inc. v. Pecoraro, 703 N.E.2d 1064, 1071 (Ind.Ct.App.1998), trans. denied. The grant or denial of a motion for judgment on the evidence is within the broad discretion of the trial court and will be reversed only for an abuse of that discretion. Id.
Motions for judgment on the evidence are governed by Indiana Trial Rule 50, which provides, in relevant part:
Where all or some of the issues in a case tried before a jury or an advisory jury are not supported by sufficient evidence or a verdict thereon is clearly erroneous as contrary to the evidence because the evidence is insufficient to support it, the court shall withdraw such issues from the jury and enter judgment thereon or shall enter judgment thereon notwithstanding a verdict.
Ind. Trial Rule 50.[3] When we review a trial court's ruling on a motion for judgment on the evidence, this court is bound by the same standard as the trial court. Campbell v. El Dee Apartments, 701 N.E.2d 616, 619 (Ind.Ct.App.1998). We may not substitute our judgment for that of the jury on questions of fact nor should a motion for judgment on the evidence be granted because the evidence preponderates in favor of the moving party. Id. Rather, we determine only: (a) whether there exists any reasonable evidence supporting the claim; and (b) if such evidence does exist, whether the inference supporting the claim can be drawn without undue speculation. Id. We consider the evidence in the light most favorable to the nonmoving parties. Pecoraro, 703 N.E.2d at 1071.
Here, Faulk asserts that the trial court abused its discretion when it denied his motions for judgment on the evidence because he contends that there is no evidence that he negligently contributed to the misdiagnosis of his cancer and the delay in treating it.[4] The general rule on *239 the issue of the plaintiff's contributory negligence is that the plaintiff must exercise that degree of care that an ordinary reasonable person would exercise in like or similar circumstances. Memorial Hosp. of South Bend, Inc. v. Scott, 261 Ind. 27, 37, 300 N.E.2d 50, 56 (Ind.1973). Contributory negligence is conduct on the part of the plaintiff, contributing as a legal cause to the harm the plaintiff has suffered, which falls below the standard to which the plaintiff is required to conform for his or her own protection. Id. at 37, 300 N.E.2d at 56. A patient's contributory negligence operates as a complete defense to medical negligence. King v. Clark, 709 N.E.2d 1043, 1046 (Ind.Ct.App.1999), trans. denied. Faulk raises challenges against Dr. Goldburg and Northwest's contributory negligence defenses, and we shall address each challenge in turn.
A.
In regard to Dr. Goldburg, Faulk claims that he relied upon Northwest's oncologists to examine him during the two years that he did not see Dr. Goldburg, and that it was Dr. Goldburg's duty to see that Faulk came to his office for check-ups. As a result, he concludes that his behavior was reasonable. However, in light of evidence that Faulk unreasonably failed to follow Dr. Goldburg's instructions, we disagree.
Both prior to and after performing a radical neck dissection upon Faulk on April 24, 1991, Dr. Goldburg instructed Faulk that he should return for check-ups
"every month for the first (1st) year, every two (2) months the second (2nd) year, every three (3) months the third (3rd) year, every four (4) months the fourth (4th) year, twice during the fifth (5th) year, for the rest of my life I practice in their life, we see them ... once a year."
Record, p. 2310. In addition, Dr. Goldburg testified that he routinely explains to his patients why they need to return for check-ups, and that he has "[n]ever failed" to do so. Record, p. 2324. Dr. Goldburg scheduled Faulk for a follow-up appointment to be held on June 13, 1991, and gave Faulk an appointment card. Despite these instructions, Faulk missed the June 13 appointment, and Faulk did not see Dr. Goldburg again for almost two years.
After his radiation therapy ended on August 2, 1991, Faulk saw the oncologists at Northwest for regular examinations over the course of two years. On each occasion Faulk was examined by one of Northwest's radiation oncologists. Three of the four oncologists who examined him over the course of two years of examinations were aware that Faulk had not returned to Dr. Goldburg for follow-up examinations, and they told Faulk that he should see Dr. Goldburg in addition to seeing them. Nevertheless, Faulk never returned to Dr. Goldburg on his own initiative. Eventually, Northwest scheduled an appointment with Dr. Goldburg on Faulk's behalf on June 15, 1993. This evidence that Faulk ignored the instructions of Dr. Goldburg and Northwest's oncologists supports a conclusion that Faulk acted unreasonably. See, e.g., Fall v. White, 449 N.E.2d 628, 632-633 (Ind.Ct.App.1983) (holding that an instruction on contributory negligence was supported by sufficient evidence where the patient did not follow *240 his doctor's instructions to undergo tests and failed to give the doctor complete information), reh'g denied. Faulk's claims that Dr. Goldburg bore the burden of contacting him about missed appointments and that he reasonably relied upon Northwest's examinations are requests to reweigh the evidence, which we cannot do when reviewing a ruling upon a motion for judgment on the evidence. See Pecoraro, 703 N.E.2d at 1071.
Next, Faulk claims that even if he acted unreasonably, there is no evidence that his behavior was the proximate cause of his damages. Specifically, he points to the testimony of Dr. James Spahn, an expert who stated that if Faulk's tongue cancer had been detected in March 1991, Faulk's tongue and larynx would have been removed at that point in time. Faulk concludes from this testimony that his failure to return to Dr. Goldburg did not cause or exacerbate his damages. We disagree.
An expert witness for Northwest, Dr. Irene Gordon, testified that the tumor that was discovered under Faulk's tongue in 1993 was not present in 1991 when Dr. Goldburg examined Faulk and performed the neck dissection. Thus, it can be reasonably inferred that the tumor was not present in 1991, but developed sometime after Faulk stopped seeing Dr. Goldburg. In addition, one of Faulk's expert witnesses, Dr. William J. Powell, testified as follows with regard to Faulk's conduct and his tumor:
[Dr. Goldburg:] Was Dr. Goldburg's follow-up plan ... an appropriate follow-up plan for Mr. Faulk?
[Dr. Powell:] It was.
[Dr. Goldburg:] And, if Mr. Faulk had returned to see Dr. Goldburg in compliance with that follow-up plan, do you have any opinion as to whether or not Mr. Faulk's cancer would have been diagnosed?
[Dr. Powell:] It's more probable than not that if he had followed that plan, the cancer would have been apparent.
[Dr. Goldburg:] And, it would have been diagnosed?
[Dr. Powell:] Yes.
Record, p. 2483.
Thus, it can also be reasonably inferred that Faulk's failure to follow-up with Dr. Goldburg delayed the diagnosis and treatment of his second tumor. See, e.g., King, 709 N.E.2d at 1048 (determining that there was sufficient evidence to support giving an instruction on contributory negligence where a patient's failure to follow the doctor's instructions could have caused her injury because she failed to report her symptoms to the doctor promptly and delayed obtaining tests that the doctor ordered, thereby delaying diagnosis and treatment of the cancer). Faulk's claim regarding Dr. Spahn's testimony is a request to reweigh the evidence, which we cannot do. See Pecoraro, 703 N.E.2d at 1071.
There was evidence from which it could be inferred that Faulk acted unreasonably with regard to Dr. Goldburg's instructions, and that Faulk's unreasonable behavior was a proximate cause of Faulk's injuries. See, e.g., King, 709 N.E.2d at 1048. Consequently, there was evidence that Faulk was contributorily negligent with regard to Dr. Goldburg, and as a result the trial court did not abuse its discretion when it denied his motion for judgment on the evidence against Dr. Goldburg's defense of contributory negligence.
B.
Turning to Faulk's motion for judgment on the evidence against Northwest's defense of contributory negligence, *241 Faulk once again claims that he acted reasonably because he was entitled to rely upon Northwest's oncologists' repeated examinations of him from August 1991 to December 1992 and their repeated findings that he was cancer free. However, as we discussed above, over the course of his examinations at Northwest, Northwest's oncologists knew that Faulk was supposed to be seeing Dr. Goldburg, and three of the four oncologists admonished Faulk to return to Dr. Goldburg for check-ups. In light of Northwest's repeated instructions to return to Dr. Goldburg, Faulk was not entitled to rely solely upon Northwest's examinations and conclusions. Faulk's repeated refusal to obey Dr. Goldburg and Northwest's instructions is evidence that he acted unreasonably. See, e.g., Fall, 449 N.E.2d at 632-633.
Faulk also argues that even if there is evidence that he acted unreasonably, there is no evidence that his conduct, rather than that of Northwest, caused his damages. However, as we discussed above, there is evidence that the tumor that was discovered in 1993 was not present in 1991, and that if Faulk had maintained Dr. Goldburg's follow-up schedule, the tumor would have been diagnosed earlier. See supra Part I.A. Thus, there was evidence that Faulk's conduct was a proximate cause of the injuries that resulted from the second tumor. See, e.g., King, 709 N.E.2d at 1048. We conclude that there was sufficient evidence that Faulk was contributorily negligent, and the trial court did not abuse its discretion when it denied Faulk's motion for judgment on the evidence against Northwest's defense of contributory negligence.
II.
The second issue is whether the trial court abused its discretion in the course of instructing the jury. The decision to give a particular instruction rests with the trial court's sound discretion and will be reviewed only for an abuse of that discretion. King, 709 N.E.2d at 1046. When determining whether error resulted from the giving of an instruction, we apply the following three prong test: 1) whether the tendered instruction correctly states the law; 2) whether there is evidence in the record to support giving the instruction; and 3) whether the substance of the instruction is covered by other instructions that are given. Id. In reviewing a claim that evidence was insufficient to support the giving of an instruction, the appellate court may look only to that evidence most favorable to the appellee and any reasonable inferences to be drawn therefrom. Underly v. Advance Mach. Co., 605 N.E.2d 1186, 1191 (Ind.Ct.App.1993), reh'g denied, trans. denied. If there is any evidence to support the instruction, it was properly given. Id.
Here, Faulk challenges three of the trial court's final instructions, and we will address each in turn.
A.
The first instruction at issue, final instruction twenty-seven, provides as follows:
The patient has a duty to exercise reasonable care in following a physician's instructions. If the physician has proved by a preponderance of the evidence each of the following:
(1) The plaintiff failed to follow the physician's reasonable instructions, which the physician gave concurrently with or prior to the alleged act of malpractice;
(2) A reasonably prudent person exercising reasonable care in the same or similar circumstances would have followed the physician's instructions;
*242 (3) The plaintiff's failure to follow the physician's instructions proximately caused the plaintiff's injury;
then your verdict should be for the physician.
Record, p. 214.
Faulk argues that this instruction is unsupported by the evidence because even if his failure to return to Dr. Goldburg was unreasonable, it occurred after Dr. Goldburg and Northwest had negligently misdiagnosed his cancer and could not have been a proximate cause of his injuries.
As we discussed above, in order to constitute a bar to recovery, contributory negligence must be a proximate cause of the injury. Smith v. Hull, 659 N.E.2d 185, 192 (Ind.Ct.App.1995), trans. denied. The contributory negligence must be simultaneous with the fault of the defendant and enter into the creation of the cause of action. See id.
At trial, Faulk claimed that Dr. Goldburg was negligent in failing to diagnose his tongue cancer in 1991 and that Northwest was negligent in failing to provide radiation therapy to Faulk's mouth as well as his neck in 1991, which was before Faulk failed to return to Dr. Goldburg for follow-up appointments. However, Faulk also presented evidence that Dr. Goldburg was negligent by failing to follow-up with Faulk during the two years that Faulk did not return for appointments, and that Northwest was negligent by failing to order MRI scans, CT scans, and additional biopsies of Faulk's tongue during the same period of time. Thus, Faulk's unreasonable refusal to return to Dr. Goldburg was simultaneous with several of Dr. Goldburg and Northwest's alleged negligent acts, and because Faulk's conduct was united with several of the doctors' actions, the jury could properly conclude that Faulk's conduct contributed as a proximate cause to the harm that he suffered. See King, 709 N.E.2d at 1047. Thus, there is sufficient evidence to support the contributory negligence instruction, and the trial court did not abuse its discretion when it read the instruction to the jury.[5]See id.
B.
The second instruction at issue, final instruction twenty-eight, provides as follows:
A person incurs the risk of injury if he knew of a danger, understood the risk involved, and voluntarily exposed himself to such danger.
In deciding whether the plaintiff incurred the risk, you may consider the experience and understanding of the plaintiff; whether the plaintiff had reasonable opportunity to abandon the course of action; and whether a reasonable person would have abandoned the course of action.
If you decide that plaintiff incurred the risk of some or all of the injuries *243 claimed, then the plaintiff's conduct is negligent.
Record, p. 215.
Faulk argues that there is insufficient evidence to support this incurred risk instruction because there is no evidence that he was aware of the risks of failing to return to Dr. Goldburg for two years. We disagree.
Incurred risk is an affirmative defense. Town of Highland v. Zerkel, 659 N.E.2d 1113, 1121 (Ind.Ct.App.1995), trans. denied. In determining whether a plaintiff incurred the risk of his or her injuries, a subjective analysis is required focusing on the plaintiff's actual knowledge and appreciation of the specific risk involved and the plaintiff's voluntary acceptance of that risk. Id.
In Spirito v. Temple Corp., 466 N.E.2d 491, 492 (Ind.Ct.App.1984), reh'g denied, trans. denied, a patient at a medical care facility was injured when she fell off of a toilet, and the evidence indicated that she had been trying to get back into her wheelchair without help, even though a nurse had told her not to do so. The trial court instructed the jury on incurred risk, and the patient claimed that there was insufficient evidence to support giving the instruction. Id. at 493. We concluded that the evidence that the patient had been told not to try to get back in her wheelchair without help but had done so anyway was sufficient to support the trial court's instruction. Id.
In King, supra, a patient visited her doctor over the course of several years to treat fibrocystic disease in her breasts. King, 709 N.E.2d at 1044. At one point, the patient developed swelling and soreness in her left breast but delayed seeing her doctor for three to four weeks. Id. When she did see the doctor, he ordered her to undergo tests, but she delayed obtaining the tests for an additional five weeks. Id. at 1047. The patient then visited other doctors, who diagnosed her as having breast cancer, but she rejected their recommendations that she undergo a mastectomy and full chemotherapy course, opting instead to undergo a lumpectomy and a shortened course of chemotherapy. Id. The trial court instructed the jury on incurred risk, and we concluded that the patient's delay in seeking treatment and testing, as well as her choice not to undergo the recommended treatment, was sufficient evidence to support the trial court's decision to give the instruction. Id. at 1048.
Here, the record reflects that both before and after Dr. Goldburg performed the radical neck dissection on Faulk on April 24, 1991, he informed Faulk that Faulk should return for a series of regular and frequent check-ups over the course of several years. Dr. Goldburg routinely explains to his patients why they need to come in for follow-up appointments. He also said that Faulk never gave him any indication that Faulk did not understand his instructions. Nevertheless, Faulk missed his June 14, 1991, appointment with Dr. Goldburg and did not see him again for almost two years. Furthermore, Dr. Peyton, a radiation oncologist at Northwest, instructed Faulk and his family on numerous occasions to return to Dr. Goldburg for follow-up appointments, but "it was very obvious that they weren't going back." Record, p. 3271. Several other oncologists at Northwest also told Faulk to return to Dr. Goldburg for follow-up appointments, but Faulk did not do so. All of the above evidence indicates that Faulk was told to keep seeing Dr. Goldburg, was aware of why he needed to do so, and voluntarily chose not to do so, thereby incurring a risk that the detection of his second tumor would be delayed and *244 require serious treatment to remove it. This evidence is sufficient to support the trial court's decision to give the incurred risk instruction to the jury, and as a result the trial court did not abuse its discretion.[6]See King, 709 N.E.2d at 1048; Spirito, 466 N.E.2d at 492.
Nevertheless, Faulk once again argues that the incurred risk instruction is erroneous because "any risk incurred by a cancer patient like [Faulk] after the original malpractice could only, at most, reduce (not completely bar) his recovery." Appellant's Brief, p. 56. However, as we discussed above, at trial Faulk's claims of malpractice against Dr. Goldburg and Northwest included claims that both defendants acted negligently during the two years during which Faulk did not go back to Dr. Goldburg. See supra Part II.B. Thus, Faulk incurred the risk of his injuries simultaneously and in unity with Dr. Goldburg and Northwest's alleged negligence. See King, 709 N.E.2d at 1048. His claim that his actions occurred after the alleged malpractice is a request to reweigh the evidence, which we cannot do. There was sufficient evidence to support the jury instruction on incurred risk. See id.
C.
The third instruction at issue, final instruction 29, provides:
A defendant has the burden of proving any claimed contributory negligence or any claimed incurred risk on the part of a plaintiff. Thus, a defendant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence any claimed negligence or any claimed incurred risk on the part of a defendant and that such negligence or incurred risk was a factor of the resultant damages claimed by the plaintiff against such defendant. If either defendant fails to prove either of these propositions, then plaintiff cannot be found contributorily negligent as to such defendant.
Record, p. 216.
Once again, Faulk's sole challenge to this instruction is that the evidence is insufficient to support this instruction. However, he presents no arguments against this instruction independent of his arguments against instructions twenty-seven and twenty-eight. We have already addressed those arguments above, and in *245 the absence of additional arguments against this instruction we conclude that the evidence is sufficient to support this instruction as well. See supra Parts II.A. & II.B.
For the foregoing reasons we affirm the judgment of the trial court.
Affirmed.
MATHIAS, J., concurs.
SULLIVAN, J. concurs as to Parts I B, II B and II C and concurs in result as to Parts I A and II A.
ORDER
This Court having heretofore handed down its Memorandum Decision in this case on May 14, 2001.
The Appellant, by counsel, having thereafter filed his Petition for Rehearing and Request for Publication of said opinion and Appellee Northwest Radiologists, PC. having thereafter filed it brief in Opposition to the Petition for Rehearing, all in the following words and figures, to-wit:
(H.I.)
And the Court, having reviewed its opinion, having examined the Appellant's Petition for Rehearing and the Brief in Opposition thereto by the Appellee Northwest Radiologists. P.C., and being duly advised, now finds that the Appellant's Petition for Rehearing should be denied and that the appellant's Petition to Publish should be granted.
IT IS THEREFORE ORDERED as follows:
1. The Appellant's Petition for Rehearing is denied;
2. The Appellant's Petition to Publish is granted and this court's opinion heretofore handed down in this cause on May 14, 2001, marked Memorandum Decision, Not for Publication, is now ordered published.
NOTES
[1]  Northwest argues, apparently as a cross-appeal issue, that there was sufficient evidence to support the judgment in its favor. However, because Faulk is not directly challenging the sufficiency of the evidence in regard to the final judgment, we do not address this issue.
[2]  An otolaryngologist specializes in diseases of the ears, nose, and throat and performs surgery on the head and neck. BLAKISTON'S GOULD MEDICAL DICTIONARY 967 (4th ed.1979).
[3]  An amended version of Ind. Trial Rule 50 went into effect on January 1, 2001, but we are applying the version of Trial Rule 50 that was in effect during the trial.
[4]  Faulk also argues, in passing, that the trial court should have granted him judgment on the evidence on Dr. Goldburg and Northwest's defenses of incurred risk. However, when Faulk moved for judgment on the evidence at trial, he did not address incurred risk, only contributory negligence. Consequently, he did not raise this argument at trial and has waived it for appellate review. See Mitchell v. Stevenson, 677 N.E.2d 551, 558 (Ind.Ct.App.1997), trans. denied. Faulk did raise a timely objection to the trial court's final jury instructions on incurred risk, and we address his arguments on those instructions below.
[5]  We distinguish Harris, a case cited by Faulk, from the instant case. Harris v. Cacdac, 512 N.E.2d 1138 (Ind.Ct.App.1987), reh'g denied, trans. denied. In Harris, a patient sued her doctor for performing unnecessary surgery. Id. at 1138. The doctor contended that the patient was contributorily negligent because she failed to perform certain neck exercises after the surgery. Id. at 1140. We determined that the trial court erred when it instructed the jury on contributory negligence because the patient's alleged negligence was "wholly subsequent" to the doctor's alleged negligence and therefore could not have contemporaneously contributed to her harm. Id. In the instant case, Faulk's alleged negligence (failing to return to Dr. Goldburg) occurred simultaneously with several of the alleged negligent acts of Dr. Goldburg (failing to contact Faulk for two years) and Northwest (failing to order additional tests for Faulk during two years of treatment). Thus, Harris is inapplicable here.
[6]  Northwest contends that this instruction is supported by evidence that Faulk was told to quit smoking, was told that if he did not quit smoking he was at risk for developing recurrent disease, and continued to smoke despite receiving that information, thereby incurring the risk that his smoking would cause a second tumor to develop. Faulk argues that this contention is without merit because the trial court specifically barred Northwest from presenting evidence or argument to the jury as to whether Faulk's smoking caused his cancer. Faulk has submitted a second supplemental record in support of his argument. We conclude, after reviewing the entire record, that pursuant to the trial court's order Northwest did not present any evidence showing that Faulk's smoking against his doctors' advice caused his second tumor. In the absence of such evidence, Faulk's continued smoking does not support the trial court's decision to read final instruction 28 to the jury. Nevertheless, as we discuss below, there is other evidence that supports the trial court's final instruction 28. Because of that other evidence, because no argument was made to the jury that Faulk's smoking caused his second tumor, and because no instruction from the court told the jury that Faulk's smoking could be considered a form of incurred risk, the lack of evidence of a causal link between Faulk's smoking and his cancer does not warrant a reversal based upon this instruction. Cf. Sauders v. County of Steuben, 693 N.E.2d 16, 20 (Ind.1998) (reversing a judgment where the trial court instructed the jury that an inmate's suicide could constitute incurred risk in an action against the custodians of the inmate for failure to exercise care to prevent his suicide).

=== CASE 2224414 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:21.482343+00 ===

193 Mich. App. 231 (1992)
483 N.W.2d 448
In re APPORTIONMENT OF CLINTON COUNTY  1991
Docket No. 145250.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided March 9, 1992, at 9:00 A.M.
Miller, Canfield, Paddock & Stone (by James R. Lancaster, Jr.), for the petitioners.
*233 Charles D. Sherman, Prosecuting Attorney, for the respondent.
Before: SHEPHERD, P.J., and MICHAEL J. KELLY and FITZGERALD, JJ.
AFTER REMAND
PER CURIAM.
This petition for review of a newly adopted apportionment plan for the Board of Commissioners of Clinton County comes before this Court for review pursuant to MCL 46.406; MSA 5.359(6). This Court by our order of January 23, 1992, struck down the plan initially adopted, because one district consisted of several townships, two of which touched only at a corner, holding that the plan violated the contiguity requirement of MCL 46.404(b); MSA 5.359(4)(b).[1] This Court remanded to the Clinton County Apportionment *234 Commission for the presentation of a new plan to this Court within ten days, jurisdiction being retained.
Following adoption of a substitute plan on January 31, 1992, and the filing of new objections by petitioners, this Court granted oral argument. The plan now before this Court divides the county into seven districts, with a population variation from highest to lowest of 3.4 percent, computed according to the method of New York City Bd of Estimate v Morris, 489 U.S. 688, 700, n 7; 109 S. Ct. 1433; 103 L. Ed. 2d 717 (1989). Petitioners advocate a competing plan, which they presented to the commission on remand, also of seven districts, with a population variation they claim amounts to only 1.7 percent.
Clinton County is an essentially rural county, demographically "dominated" by the City of St. Johns with a population of 7,284 and the City of DeWitt with a population of 3,964. Township populations range from a low of 989 in Bengal Township to 8,614 in DeWitt Township. The total county population is 57,883.
The adopted plan splits three townships: Essex and Bingham Townships are split across two districts each, and DeWitt Township is divided across four different districts. The competing plan advocated by petitioners splits five townships into two districts each.
*235 Petitioners claim that the four-way division of DeWitt Township is designed for partisan political purposes, to dilute Democratic Party voting strength. However, at oral argument it was conceded that there is effectively no Democratic political strength throughout the county and, in fact, the adopted plan represents only minor adjustments from the plan adopted in 1982, to account for a two percent increase in population during the decade. Other than petitioners' naked claim, no evidence has been presented to this panel that satisfactorily proves that the division of DeWitt Township accomplishes, in fact, a partisan political advantage, whatever its motivation.
We therefore need not decide whether a motivation test, City of Mobile v Bolden, 446 U.S. 55; 100 S. Ct. 1490; 64 L. Ed. 2d 47 (1980), or a stricter 483ults test, Chisom v Roemer, 501 US ___; 111 S. Ct. 2354; 115 L. Ed. 2d 348, 364-365 (1991), is appropriate when a petition is filed challenging the legality of a reapportionment plan in light of MCL 46.404(h); MSA 5.359(4)(h). We note, however, that if partisanship can be demographically and cartographically established, it is usually considered intentional for the reasons adduced in Gaffney v Cummings, 412 U.S. 735, 749-751; 99 S. Ct. 2321; 37 L. Ed. 2d 298 (1973).
Petitioners contend that the interplay between the "one person, one vote" requirement of the Fourteenth Amendment and the "one township, one commissioner" standard of Const 1963, art 7, § 7, requires that a county reapportionment commission start by assigning, within the numerical district limitations of MCL 46.402; MSA 5.359(2), one commissioner to each township in a county, then begin making population adjustments. It is clear to us that, in a county like Clinton County, with a maximum of twenty-one commissioners by *236 statute, comprised of sixteen townships, with a total population more than fifty-eight times that of its least populous township and the largest township having nine times the population of the smallest township, such a process, if workable at all, would be extraordinarily cumbersome. We agree with respondents that neither the state or federal constitution nor the holding in Apportionment of Wayne Co Bd of Comm'rs  1982, 413 Mich. 224; 321 NW2d 615 (1982), either singly or in combination, compels an apportionment commission to adhere to any preordained method in devising an apportionment plan. It is the final plan as adopted, and not the intermediate steps, with which this Court must concern itself under MCL 46.406; MSA 5.359(6).
We are likewise of the opinion that Wayne Co Apportionment  1982 does not impose a "best plan" test as advocated by petitioners. Under such a test, a plan which had been adopted and which meets threshold constitutional and statutory standards nevertheless would have to be rejected by this Court if a competing plan more closely approaches perfection.
We think the Michigan Supreme Court was fully aware when it rendered that decision that a "best plan" review standard would be a prescription for perpetual litigation. The United States Supreme Court has recognized that reapportionment by its nature involves "fundamental choice about the nature of representation" in what is "primarily a political and legislative process." Gaffney v Cummings, supra, 412 U.S. 747. A reviewing court, in determining whether a plan "meets the requirements of the laws of this state," MCL 46.406; MSA 5.359(6), must allow the political organs to whom the redistricting task has been delegated some scope for the "exercise of judgment," and a plan *237 that represents a "reasonable choice in the reasoned exercise of judgment" must be sustained, Wayne Co Apportionment  1982, supra, 413 Mich. 264, notwithstanding that a marginally better plan might be devised. Otherwise, the courts would be involved in the never ending process of litigation every time "a resourceful mind hits upon a plan better than the Master's by a fraction of a percentage point." Gaffney v Cummings, supra, 412 U.S. 750-751.
Testing the adopted plan by this standard, we note that, for federal constitutional purposes, the "one person, one vote" standard is fully satisfied. The 3.4 percent population deviation is well below the 10 percent considered de minimis for Fourteenth Amendment purposes. Brown v Thomson, 462 U.S. 835, 842-843; 103 S. Ct. 2690; 77 L. Ed. 2d 214 (1983). And, while MCL 46.404(a); MCL 5.359(4)(a) requires all districts to be "as nearly of equal population as is practicable," the Michigan Supreme Court in Wayne Co Apportionment  1982 held that because the standard is statutory, it is subsidiary to the constitutional standard of "one township, one commissioner" of Const 1963, art 7, § 7. Even if we were to accord to the statutory population standard a meaning different from that imposed by the Fourteenth Amendment, the 3.4 percent population divergence computed under the adopted plan nearly two years after the census was taken may be less  and is certainly not significantly more  than the inherent inaccuracies of the census itself, which is, after all, only a "snapshot in time" that, in any event, never completely accurately counts any population. Gaffney v Cummings, supra, 412 U.S. 745; see also Karcher v Daggett, 462 U.S. 725, 731-732; 103 S. Ct. 2653; 77 L. Ed. 2d 133 (1983).
We have already noted that in Clinton County it *238 would be impossible to assign one commissioner district to each township and then make population adjustments, because such a scheme would require more than fifty-eight commissioner districts in view of the fact that the township with the lowest population would have to have one vote, all districts must be single member districts, MCL 46.404(a); MSA 5.359(4) (a), and the population of the county is more than fifty-eight times that of the smallest township. Because not more than twenty-one districts can be created in a county with between 50,001 and 600,000 persons, MCL 46.402; MSA 5.359(2), any plan must combine some townships with others, and this Court's function is to test the adopted plan by the standards of MCL 46.404(a)-(h); MSA 5.359(4)(a)-(h). Wayne Co Apportionment  1982, supra.
In the plan adopted by the Clinton County Apportionment Commission on January 31, 1992, all districts are contiguous. All districts are likewise reasonably compact and square in shape. No township or part thereof has been combined with any city or part thereof for a single district, except where needed to meet the population standard. In this regard, we note that the City of DeWitt is too small to form one district, and so it has been combined with portions of its surrounding township to form a district; however, it was not unnecessarily divided so as to create more than the minimal number of township-city combinations. The same is true for the City of St. Johns.
We come now to the crux of the case before us. Petitioners contend that the adopted plan divides two townships once each and DeWitt Township four times, for a total of six divisions, whereas the competing plan divided five townships once each, for a total of five divisions. We take this opportunity *239 to note that petitioners' counting method is not entirely satisfactory. The number of divisions is perhaps less important than the number of "pieces." Here, petitioners' plan divides five townships into ten pieces, while the adopted plan divides three townships into a total of only eight parts. Even if the situation were reversed, it is not clear that such a marginal difference would exceed the legitimate scope of legislative discretion that this Court must accord to the apportionment commission.
Because there is no claim that precincts have been divided, and we have already rejected a claim that districts were drawn to effect partisan political advantage  particularly in the absence of any indication that the adopted plan unfairly alters the existing allocation of political power vis-a-vis voting strength, thus putting judicial interest "at its lowest ebb," Gaffney v Cummings, supra, 412 U.S. 753-754; Davis v Bandemer, 478 U.S. 109, 128-129; 106 S. Ct. 2797; 92 L. Ed. 2d 85 (1986)  we conclude that the adopted plan "meets the requirements of the laws of this state."
Accordingly, the January 31, 1992, apportionment plan adopted by the Clinton County Apportionment Commission is deemed to be constitutional and otherwise in compliance with the laws of this state, and it therefore becomes the official apportionment plan for the county until the next United States official decennial census figures are available. MCL 46.408; MSA 5.359(8). Petitioner's motion to declare the adopted plan invalid is accordingly denied.
NOTES
[1]  Our order of January 23, 1992, provided, in relevant part:
This Court recognizes that the definition of "contiguous" varies with context. Indeed, there is a split of authority in sister state jurisdictions as to whether parcels of land which touch only at corners are `contiguous' for homestead exemption and tax assessment purposes. 40 Am Jur 2d, Homestead, § 37, p 141; 40 CJS, Homesteads, § 39, p 210 (1991 rev ed); Anno, 73 A.L.R. 116, 142; Griffin v Denison Land Co, 18 ND 246; 119 N.W. 1041 (1909); Wilkerson v Harrington, 115 Miss 637; 76 So 563 (1917). See also Parsons v Dils, 172 Ky 774; 189 S.W. 1158 (1916) and Baham v Vernon, 42 So 2d 141 (La App, 1949) (adverse possession). There is similarly a split of authority in the adverse possession context, compare Baham v Vernon, supra, with Parsons v Dils, supra, as well as with regard to mechanics or other construction liens, Stewart Concrete & Material Co v James H Stanton Construction Co, 433 S.W.2d 76 (Mo App, 1968); Tallapoosa Lumber Co v Copeland, 223 Ala 41; 134 So 658; 75 A.L.R. 1325 (1931), and in condemnation situations, Seckman v Georgia Power Co, 155 Ga App 204; 270 SE2d 328 (1980).
But in the jurisprudential area which involves determining political boundaries, the courts in sister states, unanimously so far as we are able to determine, consider mere touching at the corners inadequate to meet a contiguity requirement. Annexation cases include Kane v Paulus, 41 Or App 455; 599 P2d 1154 (1979); In re Annexation to the Village of Downers Grove, 92 Ill App 3d 682; 48 Ill Dec 261; 416 NE2d 292 (1981); Big Sioux Twp v Streeter, 272 NW2d 924 (SD, 1978), Bryant v City of Charleston, 295 SC 408; 368 SE2d 899 (1988), and Village of Niobara v Tichy, 158 Neb 517; 63 NW2d 867 (1954). Michigan likewise rejects mere cornering as insubstantial. Owosso Twp v Owosso, 385 Mich. 587; 189 NW2d 421 (1971). We therefore agree with the Florida Supreme Court that, in legislative districting, "cornering" is inadequate to meet the statutory contiguity requirement. In re Apportionment Law Appearing as Senate Joint Resolution 1E 1982 Special Apportionment Session; Constitutionality Vel Non, 414 So 2d 1040 (Fla, 1982).

=== CASE 9740657 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:39:41.465404+00 ===

JUSTICE KNECHT delivered the opinion of the court: Plaintiff, Peter Pappas, filed a declaratory judgment action against defendants, Don Waldron, individually and doing business as North-. gate Amusement Company. Plaintiff alleged defendants triggered a 90-day option-to-buy period in a lease agreement plaintiff had executed with Joseph Vono, who is not a party to this lawsuit. Defendants claimed the 90-day option period was not triggered. Both parties filed motions for summary judgment and the trial court granted defendants’ motion. Plaintiff did not receive a copy of the judge’s ruling because the circuit clerk failed to mail copies of the docket entry to the parties, and, therefore, plaintiff failed to file a timely notice of appeal. Plaintiff appeals the trial court’s ruling granting defendants’ motion for summary judgment. We dismiss the appeal. I. BACKGROUND Plaintiff Peter Pappas entered into a lease agreement with Joseph Vono, whereby Vono agreed to lease Pappas’ bar and restaurant. Originally, Vono was unable to acquire financing to purchase Pappas’ property, so the parties agreed to a five-year lease with an option to purchase with written notice during the last 90 days of each one-year period. During negotiations for the lease, Vono mentioned to plaintiff he might borrow money from defendant, Don Waldron, for a down payment to purchase plaintiffs property. Plaintiff did not desire to do any business with defendant Waldron and insisted if defendant Waldron became involved in the purchase of his property, he (defendant Waldron) would have to pay for the property in full. To evidence his intentions, plaintiffs attorney drafted a paragraph into the lease agreement giving defendant Waldron a 90-day option to buy plaintiffs property if certain conditions occurred, and if defendant Waldron did not exercise the option, he would lose any future rights to the property. Defendant Waldron was not a party to the lease agreement, but he did sign the lease as “approved.” After, plaintiff Pappas and Vono entered into the lease, defendant Waldron loaned money to Vono and, sometime thereafter, Vono assigned the lease to defendants. Plaintiff Pappas believed this assignment triggered the 90-day option-to-buy period and filed an action seeking declaratory judgment, asking the court to find (1) defendants had a contractual right to exercise the option to purchase as outlined in paragraph six of the lease, for a 90-day period after defendants gained a lien or claim to the leased property; (2) defendants failed to timely exercise their rights in accordance with the terms of the lease; and (3) the option to purchase had expired. Defendants filed a motion to dismiss, which the trial court granted because plaintiff failed to allege a condition precedent to the option. Plaintiff filed an amended complaint, and defendants again filed a motion to dismiss. The trial court denied defendants’ second motion to dismiss, finding plaintiff alleged a circumstance triggering the option, and the existence of the circumstance was an issue of proof. Defendants and plaintiff both filed motions for summary judgment. The trial court heard arguments on April 14, 2000. The court granted defendants’ motion, finding no material question of fact on whether defendants had “not claimed a lien on any part of the business premises.” Accordingly, the trial court denied plaintiffs motion and entered judgment in favor of defendants. The record is unclear as to whether the trial court ruled on the motion in open court in the presence of the attorneys or took the matter under advisement and ruled later. Plaintiff asserts the judge took the matter under advisement and did not rule in open court. Defendants do not address this issue in their brief and we do not have a transcript of the proceedings to consult. The April 14 docket entry reads: “This cause comes on for consideration on the [mjotion for [s]ummary judgment filed by each party. Both parties are present by counsel. Arguments heard. Judgment is entered for defendant. There exists no material question of fact that [d]efendant has not claimed a lien on any part of the premises. The lack of a demand or claim of a lien precludes the commencement of the 90-day option period. THE CLERK IS DIRECTED TO SEND A COPY OF THIS DOCKET ENTRY TO MR. PAVLIK AND MR. YOUNG. CAUSE STRICKEN.” The clerk did not send copies of the docket entry to either party. Plaintiffs attorney did not follow up on the case until more than 30 days after entry of the final judgment. This time lapse arguably precludes a timely filing of a notice of appeal as required by Supreme Court Rule 303(a)(1) (155 Ill. 2d R. 303(a)(1)). On July 25, 2000, plaintiff filed a motion to expand the docket entry and for other relief regarding the entry of a final judgment. Plaintiff sought to expand the docket entry to reflect the April 14, 2000, matter was taken under advisement and was not ruled upon in open court. Plaintiff also requested the April 14, 2000, docket entry be reentered because “due process of law requires notice and the opportunity to exercise rights attendant to the entry of a final judgment.” On September 14, 2000, the trial judge heard arguments and on September 19, 2000, denied plaintiff’s motion. The September 19, 2000, docket entry reads as follows: “Cause comes on for consideration on [p]laintiff s [m]otion for [r]elief. Both parties are present by counsel. While the court did not announce at the conclusion of the hearing that it would mail an order to the parties, that was and is certainly the usual practice of the [c]curt. The record further shows that the court ordered the [c]lerk to mail the [o]rder to the parties and that the [c]lerk failed to do so. The [c]curt finds that the facts here are not so squarely on point with Graves v. Pontiac Firefighters[’] Pension [Board, 281 Ill. App. 3d 508, 667 N.E.2d 136 (1996)] to distinguish this action from Mitchell v. Fiat-Allis, Inc.[, 158 Ill. 2d 143, 632 N.E.2d 1010 (1994)]. While justice, equity, fairness, and the preservation of due process favor the [p]laintiff, the [c]curt believes it is bound by Mitchell. The motion is denied. THE CLERK IS DIRECTED TO MAIL THIS ORDER TO COUNSEL OF RECORD.” (Emphasis in original.) This appeal followed. II. ANALYSIS Plaintiff appeals, arguing (1) this court has jurisdiction to hear this appeal; and (2) the trial court erred when it granted defendants’ motion for summary judgment. We find the clerk’s failure to mail a copy of the docket entry does not excuse plaintiffs late filing of his notice of appeal, and the appeal should be dismissed. A. Jurisdiction Defendants contend we do not have jurisdiction to hear this appeal because plaintiff failed to comply with Supreme Court Rule 303. We agree. •1 Supreme Court Rule 303(a)(1) (155 Ill. 2d R. 303(a)(1)) provides the notice of appeal from final judgments in civil cases “must be filed with the clerk of the circuit court within 30 days after the entry of the final judgment appealed from.” Plaintiff contends because the circuit clerk failed to mail copies of the docket entry, the late filing of his notice of appeal should be excused. The Illinois Supreme Court is clear on this issue: the fact an attorney does not receive actual notice of a trial court’s order or ruling, “even if caused by clerical oversight, does not excuse counsel’s failure to monitor his case closely enough to become aware that the circuit court had ruled.” Mitchell, 158 Ill. 2d at 151, 632 N.E.2d at 1013. In Mitchell, the trial court held a hearing on a complaint for administrative review of an Industrial Commission decision and took the matter under advisement on January 10, 1991. On February 7, 1991, the court signed an order setting aside the Industrial Commission’s decision. This order also directed the circuit clerk to send notice of the judgment to all parties, but the clerk failed to mail the notice. On April 25, 1991, plaintiffs attorney learned of the trial court’s decision. The trial judge suggested plaintiffs counsel should file a motion to vacate, which the trial court ultimately granted, and then reentered the same order. This allowed plaintiff to timely file a notice of appeal. Defendant argued the appellate court lacked jurisdiction because more than 30 days had elapsed since the circuit court entered its final order. The appellate court ruled jurisdiction would be upheld on grounds of equity, because plaintiffs counsel relied on the circuit court’s incorrect directive to file a motion to vacate to correct the circuit clerk’s error of not mailing notice of the trial court’s ruling. The supreme court understood the concern the appellate court expressed but nevertheless stated “neither the trial court nor the appellate court has the ‘authority to excuse compliance with the filing requirements of the supreme court rules governing appeals.’ ” Mitchell, 158 Ill. 2d at 150, 632 N.E.2d at 1012, quoting In re Smith, 80 Ill. App. 3d 380, 382, 399 N.E.2d 701, 702 (1980). Furthermore, the court stated “ [implementation of Rule 303 requires attorneys to monitor their cases to insure that appeals are timely filed.” Mitchell, 158 Ill. 2d at 150, 632 N.E.2d at 1013. In Mitchell, the supreme court discussed its holding in a similar case, where one party did not receive notice of the trial court’s order through the mail and, as a result, failed to file a timely notice of appeal: “ ‘actual notice is not required, so long as the order appealed from was expressed publicly, in words and at the situs of the proceeding.’ ” Mitchell, 158 Ill. 2d at 148, 632 N.E.2d at 1012, quoting Granite City Lodge No. 272, Loyal Order of the Moose v. City of Granite City, 141 Ill. 2d 122, 123, 565 N.E.2d 929, 929 (1990). In the present case, the trial judge’s ruling was expressed publicly, in words, and at' the courthouse where the proceeding occurred. •2 Plaintiff, however, contends the present case is controlled by Graves, 281 Ill. App. 3d 508, 667 N.E.2d 136. In Graves, we excused a late filing of a notice of appeal where the parties did not receive notice of the trial court’s order. However, in Graves, the trial court expressly entered an order stating the case was taken under advisement and the court would rule by mail. Graves, 281 Ill. App. 3d at 516, 667 IS[.E.2d at 141. In the present case, the trial court never entered such an order or told the parties it would rule by mail, nor does the record show the trial court took the matter under advisement. In fact, the trial court denied plaintiffs motion to expand the April 14, 2000, docket entry to include plaintiffs assertion the trial judge took the matter under advisement. The trial court merely stated, after the fact, it was the usual practice of the court to send copies of the docket entry to the parties. •3 Plaintiff next urges us to find his reliance on the court’s “standard operating procedures” to mail notice was sufficient, under principles of equity, to excuse the late filing of his notice of appeal. Plaintiff cites Comdisco, Inc. v. Dun & Bradstreet Corp., 306 Ill. App. 3d 197, 202, 713 N.E.2d 698, 701 (1999), in which the First District held the trial court’s failure to follow its standard operating procedure in mailing its final judgment to the parties warranted an equitable tolling of the time for filing an appeal. We decline to extend Comdisco to the present case. The trial judge in Comdisco expressly found plaintiff relied on the court’s standard operating procedure. Comdisco, 306 Ill. App. 3d at 202, 713 N.E.2d at 700. The record before us fails to show plaintiffs failure to timely file his notice of appeal was due to his reliance on the court’s standard operating procedure as opposed to his failure to monitor his case. The trial judge indicated it was his usual practice to mail notice to the parties, but he did not indicate plaintiffs failure to timely file his notice of appeal was the direct result of the court not following its usual practice. Also, plaintiff never indicated he called the courthouse, checked the docket entry, or followed up on his case in any other way, in the more than three months that elapsed between the April 14, 2000, docket entry and his July 25, 2000, motion to expand docket entry. The docket entry was recorded publicly, in words, at the courthouse on the same day the proceeding was held. Had plaintiff properly monitored his case, we would not be addressing this issue today. Further, we find Comdisco erodes the supreme court’s holding in Mitchell, which was based on the premise an attorney has a professional responsibility to monitor his or her cases and failure to do so could lead to harsh results. Graves carves an exception for parties who specifically rely on a trial judge’s order he or she will rule by mail. Comdisco widens this exception to the point where Mitchell is rendered virtually meaningless. Comdisco essentially means if notice is usually sent through the mail, parties are excused from monitoring their cases and the 30-day rule will be extended if notice is allegedly not mailed. This not only contradicts Mitchell, but it opens the door for a myriad of other excuses to be carved out of the “standard operating procedure” exception. Even though results under Mitchell may be harsh, it provides a bright-line rule to encourage attorneys to monitor their cases and guards against abuse. We find Mitchell controls the present case, and the circuit clerk’s failure to mail copies of the April 14, 2000, docket entry to the plaintiff does not excuse his untimely filing of a notice of appeal. B. Motion for Summary Judgment Plaintiff contends the trial court improperly granted defendants’ motion for summary judgment because there is a genuine issue of material fact as to whether the option period as described in paragraph six of the lease was triggered when Vono assigned the lease to defendants. We disagree. •4 The standard of review in cases involving summary judgment is de novo. Ragan v. Columbia Mutual Insurance Co., 183 Ill. 2d 342, 349, 701 N.E.2d 493, 496 (1998). Summary judgment should be granted only when “the pleadings, depositions, and admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law.” 735 ILCS 5/2—1005(c) (West 1998). Defendants contend Vono’s assignment of the lease to them does not trigger the 90-day option period because they did not “demand or claim a lien,” as required by the contract language. Plaintiff contends defendants acquired “some sort of an interest” in the property when the lease was assigned to Waldron, thereby triggering the 90-day option period. The trial court found there was “no material question of fact that [defendants have] not claimed a lien on any part of the premises. The lack of a demand or claim of a lien precludes the commencement of the 90-day option period.” Plaintiff contends the trial court erred because “it is very clear that the paragraph reads more generously in terms of the [defendants] obtaining some sort of an interest in the [p]laintiff s property entitling [them] to some sort of rights.” Plaintiff contends the use of certain language in the second sentence of paragraph six renders the paragraph ambiguous and urges us to consider extrinsic evidence to determine his intent in including the financing option in the lease. •5 The basic rule of contract interpretation, commonly known as the “four-corners rule,” requires the following: “ ‘[a]n agreement, when reduced to writing, must be presumed to speak the intention of the parties who signed it. It speaks for itself, and the intention with which it was executed must be determined from the language used. It is not to be changed by extrinsic evidence.’ ” Air Safety, Inc. v. Teachers Realty Corp., 185 Ill. 2d 457, 462, 706 N.E.2d 882, 884 (1999), quoting Western Illinois Oil Co. v. Thompson, 26 Ill. 2d 287, 291, 186 N.E.2d 285, 287 (1962). Courts use several guidelines to apply the four-corners rule. First, they look to the language of the contract alone. If the language of the contract is unambiguous, the contract is interpreted as a matter of law without the aid of paroi evidence. If, however, the language of the contract is open to more than one meaning, an ambiguity is present and only then may paroi evidence be used to help resolve the ambiguity. Air Safety, 185 Ill. 2d at 462-63, 706 N.E.2d at 884. The contract language in question is found in paragraph six, which is entitled “Financing Option of Lessee”: “The [ljessee may seek financing help from Don Waldron, doing business as Northgate Amusement Co., or with a corporation or business in which Don Waldron has an interest. In the event that the [l]essee becomes indebted to said Don Waldron or any such corporation or business, and Don Waldron or any such business demands or claims a lien on any of the premises or equipment herein, Don Waldron or any such business will have the option to purchase the premises and property herein for the total balance due on this [l]ease and [o]ption to [plurchase, on ninety (90) days written notice to [l]essor after asserting said lien or claim. Failure of Don Waldron or any such business to exercise said option shall terminate any rights or claims of Don Waldron or any corporation or business in which he has an interest. Endorsement of this [l]ease by Don Waldron will be an acceptance of the terms herein.” (Emphasis added.) « •6 According to the contract, two conditions must occur before defendants trigger the 90-day option period: (1) Vono must be indebted to defendants, and (2) defendants must demand or claim a lien on the property or equipment subject to the lease. Without question, Vono became indebted to defendants and defendants did not demand or claim a lien against the premises or property. Defendants, therefore, argue they have not triggered the 90-day option period. Plaintiff, however, contends the phrase “demands or claims a lien” is inconsistent with the words “said lien or claim,” which occur later in the same sentence. Plaintiff submitted two affidavits along with his brief, one from himself and the other from the attorney who prepared the lease contract for him. These affidavits state plaintiffs intent was never to do business with defendant Waldron, and paragraph six was included in the lease to insure if defendant Waldron ever acquired any interest in the property, defendant Waldron would have to pay for the property in full or lose any future interest to the property. According to plaintiff, when Vono assigned the lease, defendant Waldron acquired “some sort of interest” in the property, which, under paragraph six of the lease, triggered the 90-day option period. We find the contract language is clear and unambiguous. The “said lien or claim” language simply refers to the “demands or claims a lien” language occurring earlier in the sentence. Two definitions of “lien” in Black’s Law Dictionary refer to a “lien” as a “claim”: “[a] claim, encumbrance, or charge on property for payment of some debt, obligation or duty”; and “[r]ight or claim against some interest in property created by law as an incident of contract.” Black’s Law Dictionary 922 (6th ed. 1990). Therefore, if one “claims a lien” on property, it would be proper to refer to the lien as either a “claim” or a “lien,” and this explains the use of “said claim or lien” near the end of the second sentence of paragraph six. The language of paragraph six is clear and unambiguous, and, accordingly, we will interpret the paragraph -without reference to extrinsic evidence. Further, we will not consider extrinsic evidence because the contract contains an integration clause: “This [a]greement constitutes the entire agreement between the parties relating to the subject matter hereof, superseding all prior agreements, and may be modified only by a written instrument executed by all parties.” The supreme court has stated, “where parties formally include an integration clause in their contract, they are explicitly manifesting their intention to protect themselves against misinterpretations which might arise from extrinsic evidence.” Air Safety, 185 Ill. 2d at 464, 706 N.E.2d at 885. Plaintiff goes to great lengths to persuade us paragraph six reads very generously, and the language “said lien or claim” means a “claim,” in addition to a “lien,” could trigger the 90-day option. Plaintiff further asserts the assignment of the lease resulted in defendant Waldron acquiring a “claim” to the property. However, plaintiff provides no authority supporting the proposition an assignment of a lease may be considered a “claim” against property, and our research rendered no such authority. Even if we were to construe paragraph six to mean defendants’ demand of a lien or claim would trigger the 90-day option period, the assignment of a lease cannot be considered a claim against property. A “claim” is generally defined as “[a] cause of action,” a “[djemand for money or property as of right,” or a “[rjight to payment.” Black’s Law Dictionary 247 (6th ed. 1990). When Vono assigned the lease, defendant Waldron became lessee and actually acquired a contractual duty to pay plaintiff rent. Even in the broadest sense of the word, defendants never acquired a “claim” against plaintiffs property when Vono assigned the lease to them. Paragraph six is clear and unambiguous and its meaning can be gleaned from the language of the contract alone. Even if the contract is interpreted broadly to include plaintiffs proposition a “claim” could trigger the 90-day option period, defendants never acquired a “claim” against plaintiffs property. We also note plaintiffs attorney drafted the contract, and as such, it should be interpreted against him. Symanski v. First National Bank, 242 Ill. App. 3d 391, 396, 609 N.E.2d 989, 992 (1993). Plaintiff could easily have written paragraph six of the lease to include an assignment of the lease as a trigger to the 90-day option period if such was his intent. He did not. Accordingly, the trial court properly granted defendants’ motion for summary judgment. III. CONCLUSION Plaintiff failed to timely file a notice of appeal within 30 days after entry of final judgment, and, therefore, we dismiss the appeal. Appeal dismissed. COOK, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9740658 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:39:41.47073+00 ===

JUSTICE MYERSCOUGH, dissenting: I respectfully dissent and request that the supreme court revisit Mitchell, a case in which I was the trial court judge. In neither the case at bar nor Mitchell could the appellants have accurately monitored their cases given the multitude of mistakes in the circuit clerk’s office. Where these ministerial errors occur, trial courts should be able to correct those errors. The mistake here, as in Mitchell, was actually the fault of the circuit clerk. The only way counsel could have accurately monitored this case was to constantly, .even daily, initiate ex parte communications with the judge or, perhaps, his or her court reporter or secretary, if he is fortunate enough to have one. Such communication is certainly undesirable. Attempts to monitor the case through the circuit clerk’s office, in the face of obvious malfeasance, would be futile, as well as nearly physically impossible, given the traffic in our overworked, understaffed, underpaid clerks’ offices. Moreover, in Mitchell, monitoring the case through the clerk’s office would not have uncovered entry of the order because it was not entered in the docket sheet or the file but had been misplaced by the clerk. The clerk was, in fact, unable for a period of time to find the order I requested. In response to the Mitchell situation, the circuit clerk in Sangamon County established a system to ensure that docket entries and orders were sent out as ordered. This system required the circuit clerk to file and certify a written proof of service each time that a docket entry or order is sent out by mail as the trial court ordered. This was the practice followed in the case at bar on at least three occasions, two prior to April 14, 2000, and one following April 14, 2000, and was relied upon by the attorneys of record: “PETER PAPPAS VS 99 MR 000273 DONALD WALDRON PROOF OF SERVICE The undersigned certifies that service of the foregoing, together with a copy of the 9-15-99 docket referred to herein, was made by enclosing a true copy thereof in an envelope plainly addressed to: Atty Duane Young 1330 S. 8th St. Ste. 2 Spfld, Illinois 62703 and depositing the same in the U.S. Mail postage pre-paid on the 16th day of Sept[.], 1999. Anthony R Libri Circuit Clerk JB_ Deputy Clerk ([stamped] FILED Sep[t.] 16[,] 1999 CIV-7 Anthony E Libri[,] Jr.[,] Clerk of the Circuit Court [certified] SEAL [of the] 7th JUDICIAL CIRCUIT COURT * SANGAMON CO., ILL *)” “PETER PAPPAS VS 99 MR 000273 DONALD WALDRON PROOF OF SERVICE The undersigned certifies that service of the foregoing, together with a copy of the docket 10-26-99 referred to herein, was made by enclosing a true copy thereof in an envelope plainly addressed to: DUANE D[J YOUNG LABARRE, YOUNG & DIETRICH 1330 S. 8TH ST[.], SUITE 2 SPRINGFIELD!,] IL 62703 THOMAS C[J PAVLIK 1 SE OLD STATE CAPITOL SPRINGFIELD!,] IL 62701 and depositing the same in the U.S. Mail postage pre-paid on the 27th day of Oct[.] 1999. Anthony P[J Libri Circuit Clerk _B_ Deputy Clerk ([stamped] FILED Oct[.] 27[,] 1999 CIV-7 Anthony P Libri[,] Jr.[,] Clerk of the Circuit Court [certified] SEAL [of the] 7th JUDICIAL CIRCUIT COURT * SANGAMON CO., ILL *)” “PETER PAPPAS VS 99 MR 000273 DONALD WALDRON PROOF OF SERVICE The undersigned certifies that service of the foregoing, together with a copy of the docket 9-19-00 referred to herein, was made by enclosing a true copy thereof in an envelope plainly addressed to: DUANE D[J YOUNG LABARRE, YOUNG & DIETRICH 1330 S. 8TH ST[J, SUITE 2 SPRINGFIELD [,] IL 62703 THOMAS C[.] PAVLIK 1 SE OLD STATE CAPITOL SPRINGFIELD!,] IL 62701 and depositing the same in the U.S. Mail postage pre-paid on the 27th day of Oct[.] 1999. Anthony P[.] Libri Circuit Clerk _il_ Deputy Clerk ([stamped] FILED Oct[J 27[,] 1999 CIV-7 Anthony E Libri[,] Jr.[,] Clerk of the Circuit Court [certified] SEAL [of the] 7th JUDICIAL CIRCUIT COURT * SANGAMON CO., ILL *)” Unfortunately, on the critical occasion, April 14, 2000, the clerk failed to mail the trial court’s docket entry awarding summary judgment, although the clerk did enter a docket entry in the court file at the judge’s direction to strike the cause of action. The docket entry stated: “4/14/2000 DOCKET D Judge: APPLETON, THOMAS R. Rep: FITZGERALD [,] MARY This cause comes on for consideration on the Motion for Summary Judgment filed by each party. Both parties are present by counsel. Arguments heard. Judgment is entered for [defendant. There exists no material question of fact that [defendant has not claimed a lien on any part of the business premises. The lack of a demand or claim of a lien precludes the commencement of the 90-day option period. THE CLERK IS DIRECTED TO SEND A COPY OF THIS DOCKET ENTRY TO MR. PAVLIK AND MR. YOUNG. CAUSE STRICKEN.” The circuit clerk’s entry stated: “4/14/2000 Cause Stricken Signed Judge APPLETON THOMAS R. Status: Cause Stricken. Report: Terminated Apr[.] 14, 2000.” (Although this entry refers to the judge’s signature, the record contains no docket entry or document bearing the judge’s signature.) The record, unfortunately, does not reflect whether or when the April 14, 2000, judgment order docket entry of Judge Thomas Appleton was placed in the court file or input into the clerk’s computer. Neither is the record clear when this information was available to counsel in the court file or the clerk’s computer. In fact, the docket entry itself, though dated April 14, 2000, does not indicate on what date and time the docket entry was actually placed in the computer or the court file. The fact that a court reporter enters a docket entry in his computer does not indicate whether the clerk’s office transferred the docket entry to the case file or the clerk’s computer contemporaneously or at a later date. Under such circumstances, where a judge takes a matter under advisement with the understanding that his or her ruling will be mailed to the parties at a later date by the clerk, and the judge thereafter rules in his or her chambers and directs the clerk to mail the ruling to the parties, but the clerk fails to mail the ruling, the court has not expressed its order publicly, in words, at the situs of the proceeding as required. See Granite City, 141 Ill. 2d at 127, 565 N.E.2d i at 931. While this trial court did not expressly state that it would rule by mail, the court practice was clearly to rule by mail. Graves should, therefore, control here. That is, since the order was never mailed to the parties or their attorneys, the order did not become final for purposes of appeal. Moreover, the supreme court in Mitchell additionally stated: “The ‘mistake’ in the instant case was the belief of the circuit court and Mitchell’s counsel that a motion to vacate the judgment order, more than 30 days after its entry, was a valid means by which the circuit court could reenter the same order and thereby start a new 30-day period in which to file notice of appeal.” Mitchell, 158 Ill. 2d at 151, 632 N.E.2d at 1013. Here, the court and counsel made no such “mistake,” and for that reason, the court should be allowed to correct the clerical error. The supreme court should follow the law prior to Mitchell that allowed courts to apply equitable principles to correct mistakes of ministerial officers (see Cesena v. Du Page County, 145 Ill. 2d 32, 38, 582 N.E.2d 177, 180 (1991)), and to excuse a litigant’s mistaken reliance on a judge’s erroneous direction (see Needham v. White Laboratories, Inc., 639 F.2d 394, 398 (7th Cir. 1981)). However, the supreme court distinguished Mitchell from these cases, stating: “We do not believe, however, that the case at bar is analogous to the cases which employ equitable principles to correct ministerial mistakes.” Mitchell, 158 Ill. 2d at 151, 632 N.E.2d at 1013. Mitchell actually involved the very mistakes found in Cesena and Needham: (1) the clerk’s mistake in failing to file and forward my decision and (2) the court’s erroneous direction to file a motion to vacate the judgment order on the grounds of the clerical error. Clearly, Mitchell involved both the error of the ministerial officer, the clerk, and the judge’s erroneous direction. The trial and appellate courts in Mitchell, therefore, should have been affirmed. Alternatively, since the Mitchell court distinguished its facts from Cesena and Needham, indicating a difference between the case at issue there from the cases that employ equitable principles to correct ministerial mistakes, the court here can clearly reverse to correct the clerk’s ministerial error, even relying on Mitchell. For these reasons, I would reverse the trial court’s judgment in this case.

=== CASE 2224417 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:21.554836+00 ===

483 N.W.2d 554 (1992)
240 Neb. 631
STATE of Nebraska, Appellee,
v.
Maurice T. DAVIS, Appellant.
No. S-90-1023.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
May 8, 1992.
*555 Thomas M. Kenney, Douglas County Public Defender, and Brian S. Munnelly, Omaha, for appellant.
Don Stenberg, Atty. Gen., and Kimberly A. Klein, Lincoln, for appellee.
HASTINGS, C.J., and BOSLAUGH, WHITE, CAPORALE, SHANAHAN, GRANT, and FAHRNBRUCH, JJ.
GRANT, Justice.
After trial to the court, sitting without a jury, defendant-appellant, Maurice T. Davis, was convicted of possession with intent to deliver a controlled substance (crack cocaine), in violation of Neb.Rev. Stat. § 28-416(5)(a) (Reissue 1989). After a presentence investigation, defendant was sentenced to 5 to 6 years in the Department of Correctional Services, with credit of 226 days being given on such sentence.
Defendant timely appealed, and in this court assigns three errors, contending that the trial court erred (1) in overruling defendant's motion to suppress physical evidence seized, (2) in overruling defendant's motion to suppress statements made by the defendant, and (3) in convicting defendant, where the evidence was insufficient to support his conviction. We affirm.
In reviewing a criminal conviction, an appellate court must view the evidence in the light most favorable to the prevailing party. State v. Red Kettle, 239 *556 Neb. 317, 476 N.W.2d 220 (1991). The appellate court does not resolve conflicts in the evidence, pass on the credibility of witnesses, or reweigh the evidence. Such matters are for the finder of fact, and the verdict will be affirmed, in the absence of prejudicial error, if properly admitted evidence, viewed and construed most favorably to the State, is sufficient to support the conviction. State v. Timmerman, 240 Neb. 74, 480 N.W.2d 411 (1992). Viewed in that light, the record shows the following:
In early 1990, Omaha police were investigating defendant's possible involvement in cocaine distribution in the North Omaha area. A confidential informant had supplied information that defendant was a dealer who received his supplies from Kansas City.
On February 19, 1990, police drafted an affidavit in support of an application for a search warrant. That affidavit first detailed specific activities which caused police to suspect defendant's participation in drug activity. The affidavit then set forth specific information which police received from a confidential informant.
Four weeks prior to defendant's arrest, the confidential informant identified defendant and told police officers that defendant was then involved in distributing cocaine. On February 7, 1990, the informant stated the defendant had received 5 ounces of cocaine from Kansas City and that defendant was using workers at a residence at 3305 North 40th Avenue in Omaha to distribute crack cocaine for him. On February 13, the informant told police that defendant had asked the informant to accompany him to Kansas City to pick up another purchase of cocaine and transport it back to Omaha.
The informant had seen "several ounces" of crack in defendant's possession and at 4115 North 42nd Street, where defendant lived with his mother. Less than 48 hours before defendant was arrested the informant had, under police supervision, purchased cocaine from defendant.
On February 19, 1990, the defendant, driving a cream-colored Chevrolet Impala, went to 4115 North 42nd Street while the house was under surveillance. Defendant entered the home and left a few minutes later. The police stopped the car and a drug detection dog brought to the scene "alerted" to the odor of cocaine during a "perimeter" survey of the car. Defendant consented to a search of the vehicle. The search turned up no evidence of drugs or drug dealing. Defendant was arrested for suspicion of possession of a controlled substance and taken to police headquarters.
At headquarters, defendant waived his Miranda protections and agreed to speak with the officers. Sgt. William Agnew then briefly questioned defendant. Defendant specifically stated that there would not be any drugs in his bedroom and that he would be surprised if police found cocaine at his mother's home.
The police finished drafting the affidavit, obtained a search warrant for 4115 North 42nd Street, and returned there to execute the warrant. Pursuant to the order of Sergeant Agnew, the defendant was taken with the police at that time. Agnew testified this was done because "I wanted him to be present at the house."
Police entered the locked residence by using a key on defendant's key chain, after defendant requested that his key be used. On entering the home, defendant indicated that his room was the northeast bedroom on the main floor. The subsequent search of the residence uncovered over 54 grams of cocaine, a portion of which was found in a tennis shoe in defendant's bedroom, and $1,400 in U.S. currency. Defendant was charged with possession with intent to deliver a controlled substance.
At the suppression hearing, defendant, asserting the search warrant was invalid, moved to suppress all physical evidence. Defendant also moved to suppress all statements made to police because they had been coerced and made without the defendant's being advised of his Miranda protections. The court overruled both motions.
At trial, both the evidence and the statements were objected to, the objections were overruled, and the evidence was received.
*557 Thus, defendant has properly preserved the issues for appeal. See State v. Hall, 237 Neb. 169, 465 N.W.2d 150 (1991).
In his first assignment of error, appellant asserts that "[t]he District Court erred in overruling the Defendant's motion to suppress physical evidence seized as a result of the search by Omaha police on February 19, 1990."
When reviewing a motion to suppress, an appellate court will not reweigh or resolve conflicts in the evidence, but will uphold the trial court's findings unless they are clearly erroneous. State v. Groves, 239 Neb. 660, 477 N.W.2d 789 (1991). In making this determination, the trial court is the trier of fact, and the reviewing court takes into consideration that the trial court has observed the witnesses testifying regarding the motion to suppress. Id.
Defendant's motion to suppress all physical evidence obtained from the search of 4115 North 42nd Street contended that there was no probable cause for the granting of the warrant; that the affidavit upon which the warrant was granted was insufficient; that the warrant was defective on its face; that the warrant was not executed according to its terms; and that the search was made prior to, and not incident to, a lawful arrest, and without probable cause.
In State v. Groves, 239 Neb. at 665, 477 N.W.2d at 794-95, this court stated:
This court has adopted the "totality of the circumstances" test set forth by the U.S. Supreme Court in Illinois v. Gates, 462 U.S. 213, 103 S. Ct. 2317, 76 L. Ed. 2d 527 (1983), to determine the sufficiency of an affidavit used to obtain a search warrant. [Citation omitted.] It is only the probability, and not a prima facie showing, of criminal activity which is the standard of probable cause for issuance of a search warrant. [Citation omitted.]
In evaluating probable cause for the issuance of a search warrant, the magistrate must make a practical, commonsense decision whether, given the totality of the circumstances set forth in the affidavit before him, including the veracity and basis of knowledge of the persons supplying hearsay information, there is a fair probability that contraband or evidence of a crime will be found in a particular place. [Citation omitted.] The duty of the reviewing court is to ensure that the issuing magistrate had a substantial basis for determining that probable cause existed. [Citation omitted.]
Defendant contends that "the information [within the affidavit] was not `reasonably trustworthy under the circumstances, because of the almost total lack of accurate, detailed information concerning the informer's reliability.'" Brief for appellant at 12.
The affidavit stated that the confidential informant had given information in the past which had proven "accurate and reliable through independent investigation" and that the informant had on two prior and separate occasions assisted police in controlled purchases of crack cocaine. The affidavit also set out a description, furnished by the informant, of a cream-colored Chevrolet Impala which the informant stated that defendant used to transport cocaine for distribution. The informant later identified that vehicle, parked at 4115 North 42nd Street. It was in this car that the defendant sold to the informant, in another controlled-buy situation, a substance which field tested positive for cocaine. All of this was done within 48 hours of the application for the warrant.
The affidavit, under the "totality of the circumstances," was sufficient to support an independent magistrate's finding that probable cause existed to issue a search warrant for the residence at 4115 North 42nd Street. Thus, all evidence seized pursuant to that search warrant was properly admitted into evidence. This assignment of error is without merit.
In his second assignment, defendant asserts that the trial court erred in failing to suppress a statement made by the defendant, because the statement "was, in fact, the result of improper influence." Brief for appellant at 18.
The statement to which defendant refers was made to Sergeant Agnew, inside the residence at 4115 North 42nd, during the *558 search. After witnessing the police uncover a Crown Royal bag filled with cocaine and cash, defendant asked to speak to Agnew. Agnew testified that he and the defendant went into another room: "I asked Mr. Davis what he wanted, at which time he stated you found everything. Don't tear the house up. Will you put everything back[?]"
In State v. Melton, 239 Neb. 506, 510, 476 N.W.2d 842, 845 (1991), this court held: "To be admissible in evidence, an accused's statement, confession, or admission must have been freely and voluntarily made...."
Defendant correctly notes that, as to its burden, the State must also show that the admission made by the accused was not the product of any promise or inducement, direct or implied, no matter how slight, before it will be admitted into evidence. State v. Haynie, 239 Neb. 478, 476 N.W.2d 905 (1991).
In State v. Hall, 237 Neb. 169, 174, 465 N.W.2d 150, 153 (1991), this court restated that "[v]oluntariness is determined by the totality of the circumstances, and a determination by the trial judge that [an admission] was made voluntarily will not be overturned on appeal absent an abuse of discretion." (Citing State v. Walker, 236 Neb. 503, 461 N.W.2d 755 (1990).)
In the present case, defendant was taken to the house and seated in the living room. Defendant then requested to be in the kitchen area in order to observe the inventory of all seized evidence. Upon witnessing the systematic search of his mother's home and the discovery of the cocaine and cash, defendant asked to speak with Agnew. Defendant then volunteered the statements, without any inducement of leniency or even questioning by Agnew.
Defendant seems to suggest that his will was overborne by watching police inventory and "mess up" his mother's home. The nature of the statement does not suggest that any deal was offered or threats made toward defendant. The record shows that defendant was given his Miranda warnings prior to execution of the warrant. Nothing suggests that any officer indicated or implied to defendant that the search would be terminated or what any other benefit to him would enure in exchange for such a statement.
Considering the totality of the circumstances, we cannot say that defendant's statement was coerced or the result of improper influence to make an admission. The trial court did not abuse its discretion in finding that defendant's statements were voluntarily made and in overruling defendant's motion to suppress his statements. This assignment is without merit.
Defendant's final assignment of error alleges the evidence was "insufficient as a matter of law to sustain the defendant's conviction" because "it [was] not clearly established that the Defendant in fact resided at the residence of 4115 N. 42nd Street." Brief for appellant at 18-19.
Defendant was detained by police shortly after leaving the residence. Upon execution of the search warrant, police entered the locked home using a house key on defendant's car-key chain. Once inside, defendant indicated that the house's northeast bedroom was his. Inside that room, a traffic citation directed to defendant was found, which was dated February 7, 1990, just 12 days before the warrant was executed. The address listed on the citation was 4115 North 42nd Street. Police also seized from a wastepaper basket a receipt dated February 19, 1990, from Centel Cellular Company, made out to defendant.
In addition, defendant's mother was called by defendant as a witness. After denying that defendant lived with her at 4115 North 42nd Street, the mother testified as follows:
Q. Did he ever have mail sent to that address?
A. Yes, on my request it was mailed right there.
Q. Did he have access to the residence at 4115 North 42nd Street?
A. Yes, he did.
Q. What type of access did he have?
A. I gave him a key.
*559 Q. Do you recall when you gave Maurice a key?
A. I gave him a key basically when he moved in. I gave all my kids a key.
All this evidence and testimony, if believed, proved that the defendant resided, at least occasionally, at 4115 North 42nd Street. Finally, when the defendant, without threats or coercion, stated, "[Y]ou found everything," evidence clearly established that the cocaine was his. We find this assignment to have no merit.
The trial court's rulings upon defendant's motions to suppress were correct, and evidence was sufficient to sustain a guilty verdict at trial. The judgment of the trial court is affirmed.
AFFIRMED.

=== CASE 9740659 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:39:42.349499+00 ===

HAYDEN, Judge.
This case arises from the financial failure and bankruptcy of two related corporations, Des Moines Boating Center, Inc., formerly located in Ankeny, Iowa, and Boat-land, Inc., formerly located in Omaha and Lincoln, Nebraska. Both corporations had the same stockholders and officers. Prior to December 1988 both corporations were in the business of retailing boats and motors. For purposes of this appeal the two corporations will be treated as a single entity, hereinafter referred to as DMBC.
Mercury Marine is a division of Brunswick Corporation. DMBC established a relationship with Mercury Marine for the sale of engines and parts produced by Mercury Marine. As part of this relationship, Mercury Marine offered its dealers a rebate *340program as an incentive to buy its products and to market those products aggressively. Mercury Marine rebated a portion of the purchase price paid by the dealer and also a portion of the price paid by the ultimate consumer. During 1988 DMBC had accumulated approximately $109,000 in Mercury Marine’s rebate program. Those accumulated rebate funds are the focus of the dispute in this case.
Beginning in 1984 DMBC financed the purchase of boat motors through Mercury Marine Acceptance Corporation (MMAC). MMAC took security interests in certain collateral. MMAC is a wholly owned subsidiary of Chrysler First Corporation. It is a separate entity from Mercury Marine.
In 1987 West Des Moines State Bank (West Bank) issued a $1 million line of credit to DMBC in return for a general security interest in all inventory, accounts, general intangibles and equipment of DMBC. In addition, West Bank took a specific assignment of the rebate funds on November 5, 1987.
In November 1988 DMBC notified its creditors it was having financial difficulties. As a result of those difficulties, DMBC was unable to pay its debt to MMAC. On December 13, 1988, MMAC notified DMBC it was accelerating DMBC’s debt and sought payment in the amount of $813,998.83. This amount was not paid by DMBC.
On December 14, 1988, Mercury Marine notified DMBC it was terminating DMBC’s direct sales contract. On December 15, 1988, DMBC filed for bankruptcy.
In January 1989 MMAC informed Mercury Marine DMBC’s accounts were delinquent. MMAC demanded payment from Mercury Marine pursuant to an agreement between Mercury Marine and MMAC. That agreement provided MMAC had full recourse against Mercury Marine for any debt not paid by a financed dealer. On January 16, 1989, Mercury Marine paid MMAC the amount owed by DMBC. On January 19, 1989, MMAC assigned to Mercury Marine all rights MMAC had in the unpaid obligations of DMBC.
Both West Bank and Mercury Marine obtained relief from the bankruptcy court’s automatic stay. Both creditors then repossessed and sold certain inventory items to recover some of the debt owed them. In addition, West Bank laid cláim to the $109,-000 in dealer-incentive rebates based on its security interest.
West Bank filed the present suit against Mercury Marine and its parent corporation, Brunswick, seeking the $109,000 in rebate money held by Mercury Marine. Mercury Marine claimed West Bank was not entitled to the rebate funds because DMBC’s direct sales contract was terminated prior to the end of the year; thus, the funds remained profits of Mercury Marine. In addition, Mercury Marine counterclaimed, alleging West Bank had wrongfully repossessed certain DMBC inventory in which Mercury Marine had a prior security interest. Mercury Marine’s counterclaim sought damages for conversion.
This action was tried to the court which ruled in favor of West Bank on all issues. The district court found Mercury Marine owed $109,000 in dealer-incentive rebate money to DMBC. In addition, the court determined West Bank’s general security interest in DMBC’s assets entitled West Bank to the rebate money. The district court also rejected Mercury Marine’s counterclaim, holding its security interest did not cover the controverted inventory items.
Mercury Marine appeals from the district court’s ruling. Mercury Marine does not dispute DMBC had accumulated rebate funds during 1988. Mercury Marine contends, however, DMBC was not entitled to receive the rebate funds because DMBC was neither a contracted dealer nor in good standing on December 31, 1988. In the alternative, Mercury Marine argues even if it was obligated to pay rebates to DMBC at the end of 1988, it was nonetheless entitled to offset the debt DMBC owed to MMAC and by assignment owed to Mercury Marine. Finally, Mercury Marine contends the district court erred in rejecting its counterclaim against West Bank for conversion arising from West Bank’s repossession of DMBC inventory.
*341I. Scope of Review. Our review is for correction of errors at law. Iowa R.App.P. 4. The trial court’s findings of fact have the effect of a special verdict and are binding on us if supported by substantial evidence. Id.; Iowa R.App.P. 14(f)(1).
II. Rebate Funds. The rebate program at issue was available to dealers only if they were (1) contracted dealers and (2) in good standing at the end of the calendar year. Mercury Marine claims DMBC was not in good standing at the end of 1988 because its account with MMAC had to be current to qualify as a dealer in good standing. Mercury Marine’s claim is not supported by the incentive rebate program agreement. By its terms the incentive rebate program applied only to “contracted dealers in good standing” at the end of the year. No language appears indicating DMBC’s account with MMAC had to be current to fulfill the good standing requirement, nor does the testimony of Mercury Marine’s own witnesses support its assertion. They testified all terms of the rebate program were contained exclusively in the incentive rebate program agreement. Furthermore, the evidence shows during the previous year DMBC’s rebate check was sent from Mercury Marine directly to MMAC presumably to bring DMBC’s account with MMAC current. This evidence contradicts Mercury Marine’s position that the MMAC account had to be current in order for DMBC to be in good standing.
Mercury Marine additionally claims DMBC was not a contracted dealer at the end of the year because Mercury Marine had terminated DMBC’s sales contracts on December 13, 1989. By the terms of the direct sales and service contract, Mercury Marine could, upon notice, immediately terminate the contract for cause based on any one of nine events, or terminate on thirty-days’ notice for no cause. Mercury Marine claims it gave notice of immediate termination for cause by a letter dated December 13, 1988. In its letter Mercury Marine stated the reason for termination was DMBC’s “failure to maintain a satisfactory payment record with Mercury Marine.” The trial court found, however, and we agree, at all times prior to January 16, 1989, DMBC’s account with Mercury Marine was current. In addition, failure to maintain a satisfactory payment record with Mercury Marine was not one of the nine events in the direct sales and service contract which would justify immediate termination. Insolvency was, however, listed as an event which would justify immediate termination upon notice. We must therefore determine whether a notice is effective to cancel a contract when, by its terms, it does not .conform to the for-cause termination events of the contract.
A similar issue was addressed in Oldfield v. Chevrolet Motor Co., 198 Iowa 20, 199 N.W. 161 (1924). The plaintiff in Oldfield possessed an automobile agency contract under which he was entitled to an additional rebate on purchases made by him during the fiscal year ending July 31, provided the contract remained in force on that date and other conditions, not relevant to this appeal, were met. Id. at 21, 199 N.W. at 161. The contract allowed either party to terminate the agreement on five days’ written notice. Id. On July 13 Chevrolet mailed the plaintiff a notice stating termination of Oldfield’s dealer contract would terminate within five days from the date of the letter. Id. The letter did not reach the plaintiff on the thirteenth so as to provide him with five days’ written notice from that date. Id. at 23, 199 N.W. at 162. Oldfield brought suit for the additional rebate.
The Iowa Supreme Court held the notice was ineffective to cancel the contract. Id. at 24, 99 N.W. at 162. The court required strict adherence to the contract’s notice provision to effect a termination. Id. at 25, 119 N.W. at 163.
Oldfield was limited in Harrington v. Bremer County Farmers Mutual Fire Insurance Association, 203 Iowa 282, 211 N.W. 383 (1926). The court in Harrington stated
[i]n [Oldfield], we were construing a contract ... where the effect of the termination ... by notice was to deprive the other party to it of substantial, subsisting rights under it, which only the lapse *342of a short time and the continuation of the contract were required to mature. It was there held, under such circumstances, that the party preparing the contract and attempting to terminate it by notice was bound to a strict compliance of the provisions of the contract for its termination.
Id. at 284, 211 N.W. at 384. In comparison, the rights of the parties in Harrington were future rights. Id. Under those circumstances, the court determined strict compliance with the notice provision was not required. Id.
In Shain v. Washington National Insurance Co., 308 F.2d 611 (8th Cir.1962), the court was asked to apply Oldfield. The court refused to do so because the claim before the court was for payment for services currently rendered, or to be rendered in the future, rather than an accumulation of amounts already earned by past services as was the situation in Oldfield. Id. at 616.
In the present case, termination of the contract effectively deprived DMBC of its rights in funds already earned by past services, and only the lapse of a short time and continuation of the contract were required to mature. We conclude this case is controlled by Oldfield. Therefore, Mercury Marine’s notice, which by its terms did not comport with the termination-for-cause events in the contract, was not effective to cancel DMBC’s sales contracts.
We also reject Mercury Marine’s claim that DMBC had no substantial, subsisting rights in the rebate funds because there was no liability for payment of the funds until February 24, 1989. The attempted termination in Oldfield occurred less than two weeks before the dealer would have been entitled to recover the rebate and one and one-half months before it was to be paid. Oldfield, 198 Iowa at 21-22, 199 N.W. at 161-62. Nevertheless, the court awarded the rebate to the dealer.
Relying on C.C. Hauff Hardware Inc. v. Long Manufacturing Co., 257 Iowa 1127, 136 N.W.2d 276 (1965), Mercury Marine also asserts there is a distinction between terminations of dealer contracts for cause and terminations without cause upon notice. In Hauff it was stated
a contract which contemplates services, expenditures and action other than personal services only, is valid and effective until at least a reasonable notice of cancellation is given, or good cause for termination is shown. (Emphasis added.)
Id. at 1130, 136 N.W.2d at 278.
Mercury Marine argues the parties contractually agreed to the specific events which would constitute a breach of the contract by DMBC which would give rise to an immediate termination for cause. One of those reasons, insolvency, existed at the time DMBC’s contract was terminated. Mercury Marine claims under the holding of Hauff it was not required to provide notice because a good cause for termination was present. We disagree. The claimed contract in Hauff was oral. Thus, there was no provision requiring notice be given. In the present case, however, the direct sales contract explicitly requires Mercury Marine to provide DMBC with notice of termination even if the termination is for cause.
Based on the evidence presented and existing Iowa case law, we hold the district court correctly determined Mercury Marine was obligated to pay the rebate fund to DMBC.
III. Mercury Marine’s Claim of Offset. In the alternative, Mercury Marine argues even if it was obligated to pay rebates to DMBC, it was entitled to offset amounts owed by DMBC. Mercury Marine claims a right of offset for two reasons.
First, Mercury Marine asserts it had a right to charge back-paid but unearned rebates. This reason was rejected by the trial court which found there was no written charge-back policy prior to April 1990 and no showing the policy was previously applied or communicated to West Bank or DMBC. We agree with the trial court’s findings.
Second, Mercury Marine claims a right of offset as a result of paying DMBC’s debt to MMAC and MMAC’s subsequent assignment to Mercury Marine of
*343all rights it had in the unpaid obligations of DMBC. An assignee takes its interest subject to defenses or claims of the account debtor against the assignor which accrue before the account debtor receives notification of the assignment. See Iowa Code § 554.9318 (1991). The assignee’s rights can rise no higher than those of its assign- or. First National Bank of Louisville v. Master Auto Service Corp., 693 F.2d 308, 314 (4th Cir.1982).
In November 1987 DMBC assigned its interest in the rebate funds to West Bank. At that time West Bank had in place a financing statement which included accounts receivable and general intangibles. West Bank gave sufficient notice of the assignment to Mercury Marine. See Iowa Code § 554.1201(26)(a) (1991). Mercury Marine had not acquired any right of offset prior to receiving notification. On January 16, 1989, Mercury Marine paid DMBC’s debt to MMAC and took an assignment from MMAC of the unpaid obligations of DMBC. DMBC’s obligations to Mercury Marine did not create a right of offset until the assignment by MMAC on January 19, 1989. By that time Mercury Marine had notice of West Bank’s claim to the rebate funds. If the secured party gives notice of its interest prior to when the offset accrues, the secured party has priority. Bank of Kansas v. Hutchison Health Services, 13 Kan.App.2d 421, 427, 773 P.2d 660, 665 (1989). Thus, the district court correctly determined West Bank had priority to the rebate funds. We affirm on this issue.
IV. Mercury Marine’s Counterclaim for Conversion. Finally, Mercury Marine contends the district court erred in denying its counterclaim for conversion against West Bank. Mercury Marine claims the district court misinterpreted a security interest it held in the controverted inventory items. West Bank contends its security agreements and financing statement filed March 12, 1987, covers the inventory it repossessed and sold.
West Bank’s documents contain the following description of its collateral: “All of the Debtor’s inventory now owned or hereafter acquired....” MMAC’s security agreement and financing statement filed November 26, 1984, and subsequently assigned to Mercury Marine identifies MMAC’s collateral as follows:
All of Dealer’s [DMBC] presently owned and hereafter acquired Inventory, and all Proceeds thereof. The term “Inventory” means all of the following types of goods held for sale or lease by Debtor, consisting of, but not limited to, marine engines, including parts, accessories and the like bearing the brand names Mercury, Mer-cruiser and Quicksilver, acquired by Debtor from Mercury Marine, and for which Secured Party [MMAC] has made an Advance on behalf of Dealer to Manufacturer [Mercury Marine].
Mercury Marine focuses on the phrase “consisting of, but not limited to” and claims this language gave it a security interest in all of DMBC’s inventory. To determine whether all of DMBC’s inventory is included in Mercury Marine’s collateral, we must interpret the security agreement to ascertain the intent of the parties. There are two issues in this determination: whether the security agreement can be read objectively to include the controverted collateral and whether the parties to the agreement intended to include such collateral in their agreement. American Employers Insurance Co. v. American Security Bank, 747 F.2d 1493, 1500 (D.C.Cir. 1984).
The security agreement does not state “inventory” means all goods held for sale or lease. Rather, the agreement states the following goods held for sale or lease. The goods that follow are all qualified by the modifiers “acquired by Debtor from Mercury Marine, and for which [MMAC] has made an Advance.” If the “consisting of, but not limited to” language is to have meaning at all, this description must mean those goods acquired from Mercury Marine and financed by MMAC, consisting of but not limited to those types of goods such as engines, parts and accessories bearing the enumerated brand names. Under this interpretation, the district court found MMAC had an interest in certain types of *344marine products but only to the extent (1) they had the brand names of “Mercury, Mercruiser, and Quicksilver,” (2) they were purchased from Mercury Marine, and (3) MMAC had made an advance on behalf of DMBC to Mercury Marine. In addition, the district court found the parties’ intent or understanding of the language conformed to this interpretation. The inventory repossessed and disposed of by West Bank was comprised of engines, boats, parts, and accessories which were manufactured and sold by companies other than Mercury Marine. We hold the district court correctly rejected Mercury Marine’s counterclaim for conversion. We affirm this issue.
V. Conclusion. We affirm the district court on all issues. Costs of this appeal are taxed to Mercury Marine.
AFFIRMED.
SCHLEGEL, P.J., concurs.
SACKETT, J., dissents.

=== CASE 2225239 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:41.12153+00 ===

330 Mass. 239 (1953)
112 N.E.2d 788
ROSE McGEEVER
vs.
AMERICAN NATIONAL RED CROSS, BEVERLY CHAPTER.
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Essex.
April 7, 1953.
May 27, 1953.
Present: QUA, C.J., LUMMUS, WILKINS, WILLIAMS, & COUNIHAN, JJ.
Franklin N. Flaschner, (John S. Whipple with him,) for the plaintiff.
Charles W. O'Brien, (Thomas F. Fitzgibbon with him,) for the defendant.
WILLIAMS, J.
This is an action of replevin to recover possession of an automobile. The case comes here on the plaintiff's exceptions, one of which is to the direction of a verdict for the defendant after the conclusion of the evidence.
There was evidence that on August 30, 1948, the plaintiff owned an automobile described as a 1948 Mercury station wagon, motor Number 899A 2235685. On that day she authorized her husband, James T. McGeever, to sell the automobile for her at an auction which was to be held within the State of New York a few miles from Albany. The rules of the auction provided that anyone could offer automobiles for sale but that only "registered dealers could buy them." McGeever offered the automobile for sale but no bids were received as high as $2,200, the refusal price which he had set. The automobile was taken from the auction. Thereafter a man approached McGeever, represented that he was L.O. Gilbreath, and asked McGeever "if he wanted to sell the car." From the conversation which followed McGeever "understood he was a northern buyer for Bill Chancey Motor Sales of Birmingham, Alabama," and agreed "to sell this car to the Bill Chancey Motor Sales for $2,200." The man, to whom we shall refer as Gilbreath, produced a check on the face of which was *241 printed "Birmingham, Ala.," at the top, "The First National Bank of Birmingham" in the place for the name of the drawee, "Bill Chancey Motors by" in the place for the name of the drawer, and "Bill Chancey Motors Used Cars Bought & Sold 1900 5th Avenue, South," across the left end. Under Gilbreath's instructions the auctioneer's secretary filled in the check with McGeever's name as payee and the amount of $2,200. She wrote on the back at the end usually used for indorsements "1948 Mercury sta. wagon mot # 899A 2235685." Gilbreath signed "L.O. Gilbreath" under the printed words "Bill Chancey Motors by," and the check was taken by McGeever. After looking at it he inquired concerning the financial responsibility of Bill Chancey Motor Sales from the owner of the auction. McGeever delivered the automobile to Gilbreath with a bill of sale, the keys to the automobile, and the plaintiff's certificate of registration which that morning she had indorsed in blank under the words "statement of transfer." The name of the transferee was not written in. McGeever did not remember to whom the bill of sale was made out. The check was deposited and on September 7 was returned "unpaid". The owner of Bill Chancey Motor Sales knew L.O. Gilbreath but he was not employed by that organization at the time of the sale and had no authority to sign its checks. The automobile was traced to the possession of the defendant which had purchased it on September 24, 1948, from Beaconsfield Motors, Brookline. The certificate of registration which had been signed in blank by the plaintiff was produced in evidence and showed the words "L.O. Gilbreath Motors Gadsden, Alabama," typed in the space reserved for the name of the transferee.
The question for decision is whether the judge should have submitted the case to the jury. The defendant contends that as matter of law the plaintiff has no present title to the automobile and that if she has title she is precluded by New York Personal Property Law, § 104, from prevailing in her action. A plaintiff in replevin must maintain *242 his case on the strength of his own title or claim. Davis v. Smith-Springfield Body Corp. 250 Mass. 278, 284. Sheehan & Egan, Inc. v. American Railway Express Co. 274 Mass. 331. Marsh v. S.M.S. Co. 289 Mass. 302. It is not disputed that the plaintiff owned the automobile at the time her agent McGeever delivered it with a transfer of the certificate of registration to Gilbreath. As that transaction was completed in New York it was governed by the law of that State. Shohfi v. Rice, 241 Mass. 211, 213-214. In the leading case of Phelps v. McQuade, 220 N.Y. 232, 234, 236, it is stated: "Where the vendor of personal property intends to sell his goods to the person with whom he deals, then title passes, even though he be deceived as to that person's identity or responsibility. Otherwise it does not. It is purely a question of the vendor's intention." When the possession of goods is obtained by a false representation of agency "There is no intention on the part of the vendor to sell to the pretended agent or representative and no title passes." See also M. Brotchiner & Sons, Inc. v. M. Ullman, Inc. 252 N.Y. Sup. 244, 246; Wyckoff v. Vicary, 75 Hun, 409. From these cases it appears that the effect of McGeever's acts upon the plaintiff's title depended upon his intention as to its transfer. This was a fact to be determined by the jury. They could find from the evidence that he did not intend to sell the automobile to Gilbreath but intended to sell to Bill Chancey Motor Sales which he believed Gilbreath was representing and that he only entrusted Gilbreath with the automobile for transmission to his alleged principal. See M. Brotchiner & Sons, Inc. v. M. Ullman, Inc., supra. If they so found title passed neither to Gilbreath nor to Bill Chancey Motor Sales. There was no contract of sale entered into with the latter as its purported agent had no authority to represent it. See Rodliff v. Dallinger, 141 Mass. 1, 6. The issue as to the transfer of title should have been submitted to the jury.
New York Personal Property Law, § 104, provides that "where goods are sold by a person who is not the owner thereof, and who does not sell them under the authority or *243 with the consent of the owner, the buyer acquires no better title to the goods than the seller had, unless the owner of the goods is by his conduct precluded from denying the seller's authority to sell." The statute is substantially the same as G.L. (Ter. Ed.) c. 106, § 25, and refers to conduct by the owner of goods which results in something akin to an estoppel. Williston on Sales (Rev. ed.) § 311. See Denno v. Standard Acceptance Corp. 277 Mass. 251, 255-256. It is urged that even if title did not pass to Gilbreath, the plaintiff as matter of law is precluded by her conduct from denying Gilbreath's authority to sell. "In order to work an estoppel it must appear that one has been induced by the conduct of another to do something different from what otherwise would have been done." Boston & Albany Railroad v. Reardon, 226 Mass. 286, 291. Salonen v. Paanenen, 320 Mass. 568, 573. There is nothing in the record relating to the transaction between Beaconsfield Motors and the defendant other than a statement that the latter purchased the automobile from the former on September 24, 1948. The plaintiff's certificate of registration and a bill of sale to Beaconsfield Motors which purports to bear the signature of Gilbreath were in evidence as the defendant's exhibits but it does not appear that the defendant had knowledge of them before or at the time the automobile was bought. From the mere fact of possession of the automobile it could not have been ruled that Beaconsfield Motors was held out by the plaintiff as her agent. Cardinal v. Taylor, 302 Mass. 220, 223. See Royle v. Worcester Buick Co. 243 Mass. 143, 146. If there had been evidence that the defendant was influenced by the plaintiff's conduct there might have been a question of fact for the jury. See Stiff v. Ashton, 155 Mass. 130, 132-133; Oliver Ditson Co. v. Bates, 181 Mass. 455, 457; United Shoe Machinery Co. v. Bresnahan Shoe Machinery Co. 197 Mass. 206, 215. It is clear that in its absence the direction of a verdict for the defendant based upon the statute cannot be supported.
Exceptions sustained.