=== CASE 2220872 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:59.467248+00 ===

654 N.E.2d 29 (1995)
Angelic Maria BELL, Appellant,
v.
In the Matter of the ADOPTION OF: A.R.H., S.A.H., D.L.H., and L.A.H., Mr. and Mrs. Doe, Appellees.
No. 49A04-9411-CV-454.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
August 3, 1995.
*30 Mark Small, Swetnam & Small, Indianapolis, for appellant.
Michael A. Wilkins, Ice Miller Donadio & Ryan, Indianapolis, Linda Walker Thrapp, Indianapolis, for appellees.
OPINION
DARDEN, Judge.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
Angelic Bell appeals the denial of her petition to withdraw her consents to adoption. We affirm.
ISSUE
Whether the trial court erred in denying Bell's petition to withdraw her consents to adoption.
FACTS
In early August of 1993, 23 year-old Angelic Bell contacted Katrina Carlisle at the Coleman Adoption Agency to inquire about placing *31 her four oldest children for adoption.[1] Bell explained that she wanted to place the children for adoption because she was neither emotionally nor financially able to care for them. Further, Bell told Carlisle that she had been thinking of placing her children for adoption for at least a year.
On August 17,1993, Bell met with Carlisle; Pam Allen, another Coleman employee; and Mr. and Mrs. Doe, the prospective adoptive parents. During the meeting, which lasted approximately two and one half to three hours, Bell and the Does discussed the reasons that Bell wanted to place the children for adoption. Mrs. Doe testified that when she left the meeting, it was her understanding that Bell had made a firm decision about placing her children in a permanent adoptive home. Mr. Doe testified that Bell had convinced the Does "without a shadow of a doubt that she no longer wanted the children." (R. 289).
On August 19,1993, Carlisle and Allen met with Donald Hinton, the children's biological father. Hinton signed consents to adoption for all four children. The next day, Friday, August 20, 1993, Bell returned to Coleman with her four children. Bell signed four documents in the presence of Carlisle and Allen. Before Bell signed the documents, Carlisle read and explained each one to her. The first document was a parental affidavit, which provided in pertinent part as follows:
I have read the Consent to Adoption Form.
The form has been explained to me by a representative of the agency. I understand what the consent form says. I understand that signing the consent form is a final act and that after signing, I cannot change my mind and cancel or revoke the consent.
All of my questions concerning the consent form and its significance and any other aspects of adoption and adoption procedures have been answered to my satisfaction.
I am not under the influence of any drugs, alcohol or medication which would impair my capacity to make an informed decision about my adoption plan. No one has threatened or coerced me or made promises to me to encourage me to consent to the adoption of my child.
(R. 66). Bell checked the word "yes" after each statement and signed the document.
Bell also signed two affidavits, one naming the father of the children, and the other approving the children's placement. The second affidavit provided that Bell's "consent was freely and voluntarily given to this adoption." (R. 139). The final document was an authorization for the children's medical treatment.
After Bell had signed all of the papers, Carlisle drove Bell to the City-County Building where Bell signed two consents to adoption for each child. Each consent provided as follows:
CONSENT TO ADOPTION
ANGELIC MARIA BELL
the undersigned, being the parent and being 23 years of age, hereby consents to the adoption of [name of child] born on [date of birth]. By signing this consent, I hereby waive notice of hearing and opportunity to file objection with respect to the above named child. This consent was voluntarily executed by me without coercion or duress and without disclosure of the names or other identification of the adopting parents.
(R. 5-13). Bell signed the consents in the presence of both Carlisle and Commissioner William Fatout of the Marion Superior Court, Probate Division. Carlisle read the consents to Bell before Bell signed them, and Commissioner Fatout testified that he always follows the following procedure:
I make reference to Indiana Code . . . 31-6-5-3 and I, in fact, keep a copy of that *32 particular statute in my desk drawer. When I'm asked to witness a consent to adoption, I get that out and I go through the rights that are contained in that section and advise the natural parent of those rights asceiterining, after I describe each right, that the natural parent understands the right and at the conclusion of the advising of rights, I ask them do they mean to consent to the adoption of their child and if they doif they agree to that, I ask them to sign the form and after they have signed the form, I sign an acknowledgment.
(R. 245). After Bell had signed all of the papers, she left her children at Coleman. The children were placed with the Does that same day.
Bell testified that she telephoned Coleman on Monday, August 23, and told Carlisle that she wanted her children returned to her. Carlisle acknowledges receiving a telephone call from Bell, but she denies that Bell requested the return of her children.
Seven months later, on March 21, 1994, Bell filed a Petition to Withdraw Consent to the adoptions. The trial court denied Bell's petition on July 20, 1994, and the adoptions were finalized on July 22, 1994. Bell now appeals the denial of her petition to withdraw her consents. She argues that: 1) her consent was not voluntary, and 2) it would be in the best interests of her children to permit her to withdraw her consent.
DECISION
As a reviewing court, we will not disturb the trial court's decision in an adoption proceeding unless the evidence at trial leads to but one conclusion, and the trial court reached the opposite conclusion. Williams v. Townsend (1994), Ind.App., 629 N.E.2d 252, 253. We will not reweigh the evidence, but instead will examine the evidence most favorable to the trial court's decision. Matter of Adoption of Marcum (1982), Ind.App., 436 N.E.2d 102, 103. Further, we will not assess the credibility of witnesses. In re Adoption of M.J.C. (1992), Ind.App., 590 N.E.2d 1095, 1101.
A. Consent
Bell claims that her consent was not voluntary. Specifically, Bell contends that she "made her decision . . . as a result of undue influence and, further, . . . she was unaware of the facts involved as to adoption." Bell's Brief, p. 11. We disagree.
Ind.Code 31-3-1-6 provides in pertinent part as follows:
(a) [A] petition to adopt a child under eighteen (18) years of age may be granted only if written consent to adoption has been executed by: . . .
(2) The mother of a child born out of wedlock and the father of a child whose paternity has been established by a court proceeding other than the adoption proceeding, except as provided in IC 31-66.1-2(e).
For the execution of the parent's consent to be valid, the consent must be voluntary. Matter of Adoption ofTopel (1991), Ind.App., 571 N.E.2d 1295, 1298. A parent's consent to an adoption is voluntary if it is an act of the parent's own volition, free from duress, fraud, or any other consent-vitiating factor, and if it is made with knowledge of the essential facts. Id. The issue of an invalid consent may be raised by a petition to withdraw consent, and the burden of proof in such a matter falls on the petitioner. Id.
Bell argues that her consent was involuntary and invalid because she was grief-stricken and "devastated by the death of her grandmother." Bell's Brief, p. 12. Bell's argument must fail.
In Matter of Adoption of Hewitt (1979), Ind.App., 396 N.E.2d 938, a mother petitioned to withdraw her consent to adoption. She argued that her consent was involuntary and invalid because: 1) it was executed two days after the birth of her child, 2) during her pregnancy she was abandoned and ostracized by her family, 3) she did not consult with her own attorney, and 4) her doctor had advised her that he thought that she had six months to change her mind, but she should talk to an attorney about it. The trial court denied the mother's petition. We affirmed and stated that "emotion, tensions, and pressure are . . . insufficient to void a consent *33 unless they rise to the level of overcoming one's volition."
Here, Bell has directed us to no evidence that her grief over her grandmother's death rose to the level of overcoming her volition. Rather, our review of the record reveals three stages of Bell's voluntariness in consenting. First, Bell told Carlisle that she had been thinking of placing her children for adoption for the past year because she was neither emotionally nor financially able to care for them. Then, Bell spent two and one half to three hours with the prospective adoptive parents before she signed the consents to adoption. Finally, the day after she met with the adoptive parents, Bell signed the consents to adoption and left her children at Coleman. We find no evidence that Bell's consent was executed under duress, fraud, or other consent-vitiating factors. Rather, the evidence reveals that Bell's consent was voluntary.
Bell further argues that her consent was invalid because she lacked knowledge of the essential facts. Specifically, Bell argues that she "was under the impression that she had a 'grace period.'" Bell's Brief, p. 13. In support of her argument, Bell directs us to Topel, supra, wherein the biological father executed a visitation agreement contemporaneously with his consent to adoption. The visitation agreement provided that Topel had "guaranteed visitation with [his son] every other weekend." Id. at 1297. Six months later, the adoptive parents informed Topel that the visitation arrangement was not working out. They further told Topel that he could either: 1) get his son back for $3,000.00 as reimbursement for the expenses which they had incurred in caring for the child, or 2) proceed with the adoption and forgo visitation with his son. Topel filed a petition to withdraw his consent to the adoption, and the trial court denied it. This court found that Topel had not been aware of all the essential facts involved in giving his consent to the adoption. Specifically, we found that it was obvious that Topel had not been aware that his consent to adoption would terminate his legal right to see his son. We reversed the trial court because the evidence led unerringly to a conclusion opposite the one reached by the trial court.
However, Topel is distinguishable from the facts before us. Although Bell testified that she was under the impression that she had a two week grace period, there was no such written evidence. Further, Carlisle testified as follows:
I made it very clear to [Bell] that we do not have any period of time that she could change her mind once a consent is signed. I make that clear from the very first conversation I have with a client over the phone that the most important thing for a client to remember is that she should never sign adoption consents until she's absolutely certain in her mind that this is a definite plan that she wants to proceed with because once the consents are signed, they are final.
(R. 67-68).
In addition, the documents that Bell signed refute Bell's claim of a grace period. For example, the Consent to Adoption Form provided that Bell "waived an opportunity to file an objection . . . by signing this consent." (R. 5). Further, Bell indicated on the parental affidavit that she understood that signing the consent form was a final act, and that she could not "change [her] mind and cancel or revoke the consent . . . after signing." Our review of the record reveals that the evidence does not lead unerringly to a conclusion opposite the one reached by the trial court, and we decline Bell's invitation to reweigh the evidence and assess the credibility of witnesses.
B. Best Interests
Bell further argues that the trial court erred in failing to find that it is in the best interests of Bell's children to permit Bell to withdraw her consent. We disagree.
Ind.Code 31-3-1-6(h) provides in pertinent part as follows:
A consent to adoption may not be withdrawn prior to the entry of the decree of adoption unless the court finds, after notice and opportunity to be heard afforded to the petitioner, the person seeking to withdraw is acting in the best interests of *34 the person sought to be adopted and the court orders the withdrawal.
When a mother petitions to withdraw her consent to the adoption of her child, the mother has the burden of establishing that she is acting in the best interests of the child. Matter of Adoption of Johnson (1993), Ind. App., 612 N.E.2d 569, 573, trans, denied.
Bell appears to argue that she met her burden of proof because no one said "anything negative" about her, and all of her witnesses testified that she was "a good mother who loves her children." Bell's Brief, p. 15. However, Bell misunderstands her burden.
In Rhodes v. Shirley (1955), Ind., 234 Ind. 587, 129 N.E.2d 60, our supreme court held that natural parents do not have an absolute right to revoke their consent to adopt at any time prior to the decree of adoption. In so holding, our supreme court stated as follows:
We do not construe our statutes as implying an intention that natural parents, having consented to the adoption of their children, have a right to arbitrarily revoke that consent at any time prior to the final decree of adoption. Neither does reason indicate such a rule. On the contrary, if such a rule were followed there would be no purpose in obtaining a consent prior to the placement of children and the subsequent supervisory period, all of which, under our procedure, ordinarily precedes the actual adoption proceedings.
Id. at 577.
In Hewitt, supra, the mother executed a consent to adoption two days after her child was born. The adopting parents filed a petition to adopt, and received temporary custody of the child. Ten days later, the natural mother filed a petition to withdraw her consent claiming a change in circumstances and, as the natural mother, a better ability to raise the child. The trial court denied the mother's petition, and she appealed. We affirmed the trial court, and stated as follows:
The trial judge must recognize there are three parties whose interests and feelings are involved in the adoption process and all must be treated fairly. That judge must balance the interest of the natural parents and their sacred relationship to their child against the hope, expectation, reliances, and desires of the adoptive parentsall against the best interest of the child which, after all, rules supreme.
The trial court had evidence before it as to the present circumstance of the Natural Mother and the Adoptive Parents. The trial judge also had the opportunity to observe and judge the credibihty, demeanor, and maturity of these respective parties. Upon his shoulders fell the awesome responsibility of determining what was, in fact, in the best interest of the child. We do not disturb the judgment of the trial judge unless the evidence at trial led to but one conclusion and the trial court reached the opposite conclusion. This situation does not exist in this record.
Hewitt, 396 N.E.2d at 942-43. Our review of these cases reveals that in order to meet her burden of proof that she was acting in the best interests of her children, Bell needed to do more than present witnesses that she was a good mother who loved her children. Specifically, Bell needed to specify precisely why it would be in her children's best interests to permit her to withdraw her consents to adoption.
For example, in Johnson, supra, Gretchen Johnson petitioned to withdraw her consent to her daughter's adoption because the adoptive parents were infected with HIV, the virus which causes AIDS (Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome). Johnson testified, in effect, that it would not be in the child's best interest to be adopted and then orphaned. After finding that the adoptive parents were expected to develop AIDS in the next year or two, at which time they would have been unable to care for the child, the trial court granted Johnson's petition. This court empathized with the adoptive parents; however, we found that the trial court had not erred in determining that Johnson's withdrawal of her consent was in the child's best interest.
Here, Bell has not alleged that the adoptive parents were ill or unfit. Further, the record reveals that the adoptive parents have been married for 22 years, own their home, and are self-employed. They have 14 children, *35 eight of whom are from Guatemala. All of the children participate in family activities, such as camping, bike riding, and swimming. The four children at issue in this case began calling the Does "mom and dad" shortly after their arrival at the Doe's home. The evidence does not lead unerringly to a conclusion opposite the one reached by the trial court.
Affirmed.
RILEY and HOFFMAN, JJ., concur.
NOTES
[1]  At the time, Bell had five childrensix year-old D.H., five year-old L.H., three year-old A.H., two year-old S.H., and one year-old L.H., Jr. Bell had had previous contacts with Coleman. In 1992, Bell contacted Coleman about the possibility of placing L.H., Jr. for adoption. In late 1990, Bell contacted Coleman about the possibility of placing S.H. for adoption. Neither of Bell's previous contacts with Coleman resulted in Bell placing her children for adoption.

=== CASE 9738804 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:03:07.886595+00 ===

Snell, J.
(concurring in part and dissenting in part) — I concur in the reversal of this case and in all of the majority opinion, except the conclusion reached in Division I that the question of suicide was properly submitted to the jury.
I think this is the exceptional case where the presumption against suicide has been overcome as a matter of law. The evidence admits of no other logical conclusion.
If, however, as the majority holds, the question is to be submitted the instructions should include one on presumption of intent.
Plaintiffs concede that decedent ended his life by his own hand. His intent is the question. Intent is a state of mind and is rarely susceptible of direct proof but a person is presumed to intend the natural consequences of an act intentionally done. Death is a natural consequence of sliding off into space with one end of a rope or length of binder twine around the neck and the other end tied to an overhead beam. The presumption against suicide is too weak to stand against the facts in this case. There is no accident when a natural and almost inevitable result follows an intentional act.

=== CASE 9738805 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:03:07.89089+00 ===

Larson, J.
(dissenting) — Although it seems a futile gesture, I feel compelled to dissent, especially in light of the fact *1228that, in order to reverse, the majority admittedly overrule two well established rules of long standing in this court. The situation certainly is not one which, in the interest of justice, makes a change necessary or desirable. Those rules do not cause a wrongful result here, and plaintiffs should not be denied a deserved judgment in their favor. The majority hold, and I agree, that there was ample evidence to require submission of this case to the jury. Its verdict is overwhelmingly supported by the evidence.
The majority, however, extend themselves to find reversible error in both Divisions II and III of the opinion. I can agree with neither under this record.
I. In Division II the majority point out that defendant’s counsel, anticipating an unfavorable ruling upon an objection to testimony concerning an alleged conversation between Doctor Dankle and Mr. Bill, said: “Your Honor, we would like to make an offer of proof in chambers.” No ruling on that objection appears, but we gather that the court, counsel and witness retired to chambers where further interrogation took place. Until an offer of that alleged conversation is made, the court can be charged with no erroneous ruling. What was defendant’s offer here ¶ It was pointed out in Hidy v. Murray, 101 Iowa, 65, 69, 69 N.W. 1138, 1140, that much depends upon the offer made. There the offer included various papers which were improper, and the court made this pertinent pronouncement: “Had the offer been made alone as to the judgment, we should have thought it error to' exclude it.” So we must look to see what kind of offer was made here, if any. The record fails to show any offer was really made, although the majority assume there was one.
Only in Subdivision (C) of appellant’s Division IV does it complain of the court’s refusal to permit testimony heard in chambers, and there it fails to set forth the record as to the alleged offer, merely referring to the pages of the record where the alleged error might be found. From the record we find that in the jury’s presence the following questions were propounded to Doctor Dankle by appellant: “Q. Now, Doctor, will you state whether you had a conversation with Mr. Bill before *1229leaving the Niedert farm that evening? A. Yes. I talked to him, yes. Q. And what was said?” Plaintiffs objected to that testimony as hearsay and not binding on Norma Bill. When her presence had been established, the question was asked: “Q. What was said at that time? A. 1 asked him if there was any doubt in his mind that his son committed suicide.” Objection was made and, as stated by the majority, the appellant, not waiting upon a ruling, stated he would like to make an offer of proof outside the presence of the jury.
Thereafter, outside the presence of the jury, counsel for defendant asked Doctor Dankle: “Q. Doctor, did you have a conversation with Ernest Bill in the presence of Norma Bill at the Niedert farmhouse just before you left on the night of January 12? A. Yes. Q. What did that conversation consist of on your part and on his ? A. I said to Mr. Bill, ‘Is there any doubt in your mind that your son committed suicide?’ and if I might describe the situation, he and his wife were sitting at the table mourning and tearful, and he just shook his head. Q. In what direction, Doctor, if you will say it so that the record can pick it up. A. A lateral motion of the head. Q. That is commonly interpreted as a negative sign? A. Which I interpreted as a negative sign.” Counsel then said: “Thank you, Doctor. That is all.” Following an objection and an informal discussion off the record, further questions were propounded. “Q. Doctor, had there been any discussion of this in the presence of the Bills before you asked them the question? A. Well, I don’t know about that. Q. Not between you and the Bills but between you and Powers and Niedert in the presence of the Bills. A. No.” Obviously the question as to the probative value of this so-called conversation was discussed.
Whatever happened, it is clear that no specific offer of this so-called conversation was ever made. It appears that, following an informal discussion not reported, the court expressed an opinion that such evidence was not admissible, that the description of the father’s head motion as interpreted by the witness would not itself establish an inference that Mr. Bill admitted his son committed suicide. In that view I believe the court was correct. Considering the shock and strain these *1230parents were then under, and the fact that Mr. Bill did not go closer to the boy’s body than the ladder to the loft, and the mother did not enter the barn, the head motion could reasonably be intended as a gesture of bewilderment, an indication of “I don’t know.” Certainly the probative value of this evidence as an admission against interest would be almost nil and, even if it had been properly offered and refused, would not have amounted to reversible error.
Obviously, as the majority concede, if the offer had been properly made and if there had been a valid basis for its rejection, the court’s action in rejecting it for a wrong reason would not be reversible error. They also concede that if a bulk offer is made, and some parts thereof are improper, all may be excluded. Since, in addressing the court, appellant itself used the singular, i.e. “would like to make an offer”, its offer, if it was an offer at all, was a bulk offer. Since it is admitted that Doctor Dankle’s interpretation of Mr. Bill’s head movement as a negative reply was inadmissible, it is inescapable that under our well established rule this bulk offer was inadmissible. The majority do not deny this is the rule announced in Vandell v. Roewe, 232 Iowa 896, 898, 6 N.W.2d 295, 296, 297, which they cite, and in every other case heretofore decided on that question. Hidy v. Murray, supra, 101 Iowa 65, 69, 69 N.W. 1138; Flam v. Lee, 116 Iowa 289, 297, 90 N.W. 70, 93 Am. St. Rep. 242; Mosnat v. Chicago & N. W. Ry. Co., 114 Iowa 151, 152, 86 N.W. 297; Allen v. Travelers Protective Assn., 163 Iowa 217, 226, 143 N.W. 574, 48 L. R. A., N. S., 600. Also see Bates v. Brooks, 222 Iowa 1128, 1141, 270 N.W. 867, 109 A. L. R. 1371.
They do somehow find in appellant’s request “to make an offer” a request to make a separate offer of each and every question and answer of the so-called conversation between Dankle and Bill. How they can say appellant offered each question separately and charge plaintiffs with failure to object until a specific offer was tendered, I cannot understand. Nothing in the record supports such a claim as to the offers. Such a rule, if accepted, would relieve every offeror of his just responsibility to make a good clear specific offer upon which the court could rule, and place the obligation upon opposing counsel to object *1231to every parcel thereof under penalty of having waived objection. It would make the court’s task impossible, for until all of the proposal is before the court it would be difficult to tell whether it would be competent, relevant and material to any issue before the court.
In the Vandell v. Roewe case we considered the identical question and held that, although there were eight questions and answers in the offer, it was a bulk offer, and that the inclusion of inadmissible questions made rejection of the offer necessary. The majority “do not now agree with this holding”, and so, with little or no consideration of the existing rule, good or bad, hold that where the evidence was produced by separate questions and answers, readily subject to separate objections and separate rulings by the court, such questions and answers are separate offers and require separate rulings by the court regardless of form of the offer. I cannot agree that this rule change is necessary or even desirable. The burden of making a proper and specific offer should not be shifted to opposing counsel and the court under no less penalty than a waiver for the lack of timely objections. The better rule is to require the offeror to make clear his proposal, either as separate offers or as one offer of evidence in bulk if that is his desire. Here, if we consider appellant made any offer, the offer of the purported conversation was in bulk and, since it included inadmissible testimony, its rejection would have been perfectly proper.
I further do not agree with the majority that this “evidence was on an important point, and * * * sufficiently prejudicial to require reversal.” The probative value of this testimony was insignificant. When its relevancy is doubtful, we usually permit the trial court’s judgment to prevail on such matters. I seriously doubt that the jury would have seriously considered this alleged answer to such an untimely question by Dankle, to say nothing of considering it an admission that the father believed his son had committed suicide. He had never been closer than the loft ladder to his son’s body, and Mrs. Bill had never been in the barn. I would hold no prejudice occurred in refusing that testimony and in accepting the testimony of the Bills that they knew of no reason why their son would wish to *1232commit suicide. The latter statement has generally been held permissible. See Kirschbaum v. Metropolitan Life Ins. Co., 133 N. J. L. 5, 42 A.2d 257, 258, 158 A. L. R. 743 (1945). I would hold this alleged error does not justify granting a new trial here.
II. In Division III the majority overrule a well established and carefully considered rule which has existed in this court for over a half century. With a weak apology to the learned trial court, and no apology to able counsel and the litigants, the rule is changed. Of course this court has that right, but I submit it should not be done hastily and without careful consideration.
No adequate consideration seems to have been given to changing this rule requiring that the testimony or proof produced by the defendant, in order to overcome the legal presumption against suicide, must be such that among reasonable minds every reasonable hypothesis or theory of death inconsistent with suicide has been excluded by the preponderance of defendant’s testimony. The thought that this rule has not been fully considered in the past has no support at all. It was so considered by some of our ablest Judges. In the case of Michalek v. Modern Brotherhood of America, 179 Iowa 33, 39-45, 161 N.W. 125, Judge Weaver discussed the application of this rule saying these rules and principles must govern in such a case:
“That the defense relied upon is an affirmative one, and the burden of establishing it is upon the appellee, is so well settled that we will not take the time necessary for the citation of authorities. The burden thus assumed is something more than ordinarily rests upon a party who undertakes to establish an asserted fact over the bare denial of his adversary. In a case of the latter class, there is ordinarily no presumption for or against either party. Here, however, the defendant is met by a presumption against suicide or suicidal intent. That such is the general rule, all courts admit, but as to its effect and operation, there is some dissonance of opinion. Some have treated the presumption as of rather slight value and easily overcome (Agen v. Metropolitan Life Ins. Co., 105 Wis. 217); but by far the greater number and the better reasoned cases unite in holding that the party charging suicide, where circum*1233stantial evidence is relied upon to support the claim, can overcome the presumption against self-slaughter only by proof of facts which exclude every reasonable hypothesis of natural or accidental death. Such has repeatedly been our own holding. We have said, for example:
“ ‘This presumption has the effect of affirmative evidence, and, unless so negatived ... as to leave room for no other reasonable hypothesis than that of suicide, such presumption will be allowed to prevail, and a verdict thereon will not be set aside for want of evidence.’ Stephenson v. Bankers Life Assn., 108 Iowa 637, 641.
“It has been elsewhere said:
“ ‘If the known facts are consistent with a cause of death which does not involve self-destruction, that cause must be accepted. After all the hypotheses which are consistent with an innocent or accidental death are eliminated, the conclusion of suicide may then be drawn. The burden is upon the defendant to show that the circumstances and conditions are inconsistent with any other reasonable cause of death than that of suicide; that is, it must eliminate and disprove all other causes of death which are consistent with the evidence before the jury is justified in inferring that the deceased committed suicide.’ Lindahl v. Supreme Court I. O. F., 100 Minn. 87 (110 N.W. 358).
“See also Metropolitan Life Ins. Co. v. DeVault, 109 Va. 392, 402. * * * Says the Virginia court:
“ ‘We are of opinion that the defense of suicide should be established by clear and satisfactory proof, such as is required to establish a fraud.’ Life Ins. Co. v. Hairston, 108 Va. 832. Walden v. Bankers Life Assn., 89 Neb. 546.
“Even where, as in this case, there is direct evidence that the death was caused by a weapon in the hands of the deceased himself, the presumption still prevails; because, if nothing more than that is shown, there is still room for the hypothesis that his act in that regard may have been involuntary or accidental. Paulsen v. Modern Woodmen of Am., 21 N. D. 235 (130 N.W. 231); Industrial v. Watt, 95 Ark. 456; Walden v. Bankers Life Assn., 89 Neb. 546 (131 N.W. 962). This presumption has been held to prevail where it was certain that the pistol could not *1234have been fired except by pulling the trigger, because it may have been pulled unintentionally or involuntarily. Mutual Life Ins. Co. v. Ford (Tex.), 130 S.W. 769 (131 S.W. 406). * * * This is not saying that the facts mentioned have no tendency to prove suicide; for they do. * * * It would also have been proper for the jury — indeed, it would have been its duty- — to throw into the scale in plaintiff’s favor the fact of universal knowledge and observation that sane men do not generally seek death, but rather are at all times solicitous to avoid it. In this connection is to be remembered another fact: that suicide by a sane man is an act of moral turpitude, if not a crime; and, if the facts surrounding death can be reconciled with any reasonable theory of an innocent or accidental cause, it is the duty of courts and jurors to adopt that explanation. Walcott v. Metropolitan Life Ins. Co., 64 Vt. 221.”
Judge Weaver concludes: “The attitude of this court with reference to the strength of the presumption against suicide is shown in the Stephenson case, from which we hereinbefore quoted. There the insured had been confined in an asylum for the insane. He was permitted to go home, accompanied by a friend. He then obtained a revolver with the avowed intention of shooting the sheriff, should that officer attempt to take him back to the asylum. Coming home with the weapon, instead of going into the house, he passed into the barn, and very quickly a shot was heard. His friends, going to the barn, found him flat on his back, his hand extended, grasping the revolver; and near the center of the forehead, a fatal bullet wound. There, as here, the company asserted it was a plain case of suicide; but we held that the question was one for the jury. * * *
“It must be remembered that, in order for plaintiff to recover under the issues and the admitted facts, she was not required to set up or prove the truth of any particular theory of the exact manner of Michalek’s death. To defeat her recovery, the defense was required to prove its theory of suicide, and this it cannot be said to have done, no matter how strong or persuasive the showing, unless it goes to the extent of eliminating every theory of death otherwise than by suicide.”
In Wilkinson v. National Life Assn., 208 Iowa 246, 247, 248, *1235251, 225 N.W. 242, we quoted with approval from Michalek v. Modern Brotherhood of America, supra, and also from the first Wilkinson case, 203 Iowa 960, as follows:
“ ‘It was not for the trial court, nor is it for this court, to determine facts or draw inferences, where reasonable minds might come to different conclusions. The defendant had the burden of proof. No witness saw the deceased at or near the time or place of the tragedy. The evidence is entirely circumstantial. The presumption is against suicide. To overcome this presumption by circumstantial evidence, the defendant must show the existence of such circumstances and conditions as to leave room for no other reasonable hypothesis than that of suicide. In other words, .the evidence must be such that all reasonable minds must say that the presumption has been overcome, suicide has been proved, and any hypothesis or theory inconsistent with suicide excluded’.” Judge Wagner also had this to say as to the rule we have heretofore followed:
“It is not for us to determine how the deceased met his death. The presumption is that the death was accidental. The burden of proof is upon the defendant to prove its theory of suicide, and it cannot be said to have done this, no matter how strong or persuasive the showing, unless it goes to the extent of eliminating every theory of death otherwise than by suicide. * * * Under the record, the death of the decedent was either accidental or suicidal. The burden was upon the defendant to prove the latter and overcome the presumption of the former. This cannot be clone by showing a probability only of suicide. The circumstantial evidence is not sufficient to exclude every reasonable hypothesis other than that decedent’s death was suicidal.” (Emphasis supplied.)
In Green v. New York Life Ins. Co., 192 Iowa 32, 39, 40, 182 N.W. 808, 811, we again consider the rule and its reasons, reaffirmed the eases above cited, and quoted this from Stephenson v. Bankers Life Assn., 108 Iowa 637, 641, 79 N.W. 459, 460:
“ ‘There is a presumption in favor of the theory of accident. This presumption has the effect of affirmative evidence, and, unless so negatived by the surrounding facts and circumstances *1236as to leave room for no other reasonable hypothesis than that of suicide, such presumption will be allowed to prevail, and a verdict founded thereon will not be set aside for want of evidence.’ ” In this regard Judge Faville said:
“However, it is clear that the burden rests upon the defendant to establish that the death was the result of suicide, rather than accident, and that the evidence to overcome the presumption of death by accident must be such ‘as to leave no other reasonable hypothesis than that of suicide.’ * * * Applying these rules to the instant case, we are met with this proposition: Do the facts disclosed by the evidence so negative the presumption that death was accidental as to leave no other reasonable hypothesis than that of suicide? If it could fairly be said that, under all the evidence, the minds of reasonable men might differ as to whether the insured came to his death by accident or by suicide, then it was a question for the jury.”
Clearly, the majority here overlook the exceptional nature of these insurance cases where the company in its policy has willingly accepted the burden of proof to establish the fact of suicide if it denies liability. They see no reason for a different rule in such cases than in the usual ease where only circumstantial evidence is submitted. In support of what they call the general rule of long standing they cite several cases, none of which involves insurance or suicide. Then they say: “Evidence tending to show suicide is in almost all cases circumstantial; and our general rule has been for many years that one who seeks to establish his case hy such evidence is not required to exclude all other reasonable theories or hypotheses; only to prove his theory by evidence which makes it reasonably probable, and more probable than any other hypothesis based on such evidence.” They do not recognize any need for a different rule in the insurance suicide ease, and do not attempt to meet the reasons heretofore advanced for such a rule. I am not convinced.
It is sufficient to say that the cases I have cited all recognize the extra burden which is assumed by the insurance company’s contract, a contract which provides it will pay full death benefits except and unless “the insured * * '* shall, within two years from the date of issue of this policy, die by suicide * * *1237Insurance companies certainly have recognized the burden assumed by them and have considered this well established legal presumption against one willfully taking his own life, when inserting such a provision in their contracts. It may be assumed their contracts were prepared with that in mind. Why should it be changed now?
The rule we have set out as applicable to cases of this nature is a good one and I feel the majority’s reasons for overruling it have no merit. Admittedly, this is not the case involving double indemnity claims, such as Allison v. Bankers Life Co., 230 Iowa 995, 999, 299 N.W. 889, where the rule advocated- by the majority was applied. There is a mark of distinction between them. The burden of proof in that case was upon the beneficiaries to prove death was an accident, and the same strong presumption does not aid them here. It is quite different where the burden is placed upon the beneficiaries of the insurance to prove an accidental death, and where the beneficiary aided by the presumption against suicide actually defends, with the insurer assuming the burden to prove death occurred only from that cause.
Suicide, as used in the policy of insurance involved, means an “Act or an instance of taking one’s own life voluntarily and intentionally.” Webster’s New International Dictionary, 2d Ed. The defense relied upon herein is an affirmative one, both due to the fact that defendant pleaded nonliability because of suicide and because of the common-law presumption that death is natural or accidental. Much has been written on the nature of this presumption and the effect of rebuttal upon it. Marquette Law Review, Volume 19-20, pages 20-38; Yale Law Journal, Volume 56, pages 482-508. However, as pointed out in In re Estate of Lundvall, 242 Iowa 430, 437, 46 N.W.2d 535, 539 (1951), and in 37 Iowa Law Review 300 (1952), these propositions are no longer open to doubt in Iowa. We have rejected the Thayer-Wigmore Theory and adhere to what is known as rule 14(a) of the Uniform Rules of Evidence (1953). Rule 13 of said rules provides: “A presumption is an assumption of fact resulting from a rule of law which requires such fact to be assumed from another fact or group of facts found or otherwise established in the action.”
*1238Tbe Iowa court, at least in some of its decisions, has taken a position similar to the uniform rules of the Conference of the Commissioners on Uniform State Laws.
The presumption against suicide, as we have often pointed out, is a strong one. Brown v. Metropolitan Life Ins. Co., 233 Iowa 5, 10, 7 N.W.2d 21. The “logical core” upon which it is based is that sane men do not ordinarily seek death, but on the contrary at all times try to avoid it. In Reddick v. Grand Union Tea Co., 230 Iowa 108, 118, 296 N.W. 800, 804, we recognized the logical basis of this presumption, saying “Love of life is strong. Suicide by a rational man is an act of moral turpitude. If the facts surrounding death can be reconciled with any reasonable theory of innocence or accidental cause, that explanation will be adopted.”
It is sufficient to point out in the case at bar there are no circumstances or evidence tending to prove LeRoy had any reason or desire to take his own life. Outside of the physical facts disclosed when he was discovered, there is nothing in the record to rebut the basic assumption that he desired to live and did not lack moral integrity.
It is clear to me that the rule we have previously followed in such cases is soundly based, even if it is considered an exception to what the majority wish to call the general rule as to defendant’s burden, and there is no adequate showing here why that long established rule should be abandoned. I have attempted to explain why it should not be discarded. I would, of course, affirm the trial court and its judgment herein.

=== CASE 2217735 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:33.77559+00 ===

387 N.E.2d 1309 (1979)
Michael E. WADE, Appellant,
v.
STATE of Indiana, Appellee.
No. 1078S233.
Supreme Court of Indiana.
April 12, 1979.
*1310 Joe Tipton, Indianapolis, for appellant.
Theodore L. Sendak, Atty. Gen., Alembert W. Brayton, Deputy Atty. Gen., Indianapolis, for appellee.
GIVAN, Chief Judge.
Appellant was convicted of armed robbery and of inflicting an injury in the perpetration of a robbery. He was sentenced to life imprisonment.
Shortly after midnight on July 23, 1975, a black man with a stocking over his face accosted the attendants at Richard's Market Basket on East 52nd Street in Indianapolis. The intruder ordered one attendant to lie face down on the floor and then proceeded to tie the attendant's hands behind his back. The attacker then shot the attendant in the back. The bullet pierced the attendant's body between his liver and kidney. He was hospitalized for three months. The assailant then marched the attendant to the office, unlocked the door and removed about $3,000.00 from the office safe. The attendant identified appellant at trial as resembling the gunman.
Investigating police officers recovered a spent bullet and a spent casing from the scene. Appellant was later apprehended. A.32 caliber automatic pistol and four live shells were recovered when he was searched. A ballistics test by a police expert showed that the spent bullet was fired from the gun recovered from appellant. Detective Green of the Indianapolis Police Department interrogated appellant after the ballistics test was completed. Appellant first denied participation in the robbery and attempted to blame it on others. When he was confronted with those accused, he admitted that he had committed the robbery and shot the attendant.
Appellant first contends the trial court erred in overruling his motion for discharge under CR. 4(C). The information against him was filed on July 8, 1976; however, he was not served with the capias until October, 1977, as he was incarcerated in the Indiana State Prison in Michigan City. Rule 4(C) provides:
"Defendant discharged. No person shall be held on recognizance or otherwise to answer a criminal charge for a period in aggregate embracing more than one year from the date the criminal charge against such defendant is filed, or from the date of his arrest on such charge, whichever is later ... ." (emphasis supplied.)
In the case at bar appellant was arrested on the charge on October 27, 1977, and was tried by jury on May 4, 1978. His incarceration from July, 1976, to October, 1977, was for a separate conviction and had no relationship to the charges in the present information. He was "held on recognizance" for this specific information only from October, 1977, through May, 1978. Appellant therefore was not entitled to discharge under CR. 4(C). Cooley v. State (1977) Ind. App., 360 N.E.2d 29.
Appellant further argues that he was denied his constitutional right to a speedy trial by reason of the State's failure to prosecute him promptly after the information was filed. Assessment of this right involves a consideration of the particular facts of each case, including the length of delay, the reasons for the delay, the defendant's assertion of his right, whether the State made a good faith effort to afford him a speedy trial and the degree of prejudice to the defendant. Barker v. Wingo (1972) 407 U.S. 514, 92 S.Ct. 2182, 33 L.Ed.2d 101; Hart v. State (1973) 260 Ind. 137, 292 N.E.2d 814. In the case at bar the delay in serving appellant with the capias was 15 months. At that time appellant was incarcerated in the Indiana State Prison. He has shown absolutely no prejudice by reason of the delay in serving him. Under such circumstances it cannot be said that appellant's constitutional right to a speedy trial has been abridged.
Appellant next alleges that evidence of his confession was erroneously admitted. *1311 He contends that he was not advised of his constitutional rights before confessing, that he did not knowingly and voluntarily waive such rights and that the confession was obtained by direct and implied promises of immunity. The State has the burden of proving voluntariness beyond a reasonable doubt. Ortiz v. State (1976) 265 Ind. 549, 356 N.E.2d 1188. Here, Detective Green testified that he orally advised appellant of his rights, that appellant read them back to Green from a form, that Green and appellant signed the waiver of rights form. At the time appellant was not intoxicated and appeared to understand his actions. This testimony, along with the waiver of rights form which was introduced in evidence, is sufficient evidence of probative value to support the trial court's determination that appellant was advised of his rights and voluntarily waived them.
As to the contention that the confession was obtained through the use of promises of immunity, the evidence again fails to support the appellant's position. Detective Green testified that he made no promises to appellant regarding the Market Basket robbery. He explained that other possible charges against him in other matters did not involve an "inflicting injury" charge and that these other charges could be included in a deal. However, the Market Basket incident involved inflicting injury in the perpetration of a robbery and that charge would be filed. Green refused to promise appellant that he would not be charged in connection with this robbery. Thus, the trial court's finding clearly is supported by sufficient evidence and will not be disturbed on appeal.
Appellant claims the trial court erred in overruling his third motion for continuance. The motion was not supported by affidavit and in no way complies with the requirements of IC § 35-1-26-1 [Burns 1979]. Hence, we must apply the rule that a motion for continuance, upon grounds other than statutory ones, is within the sound discretion of the trial court and will be reversed only where a clear abuse of such discretion is shown. TR. 53.4; Works v. State (1977) Ind., 362 N.E.2d 144. Appellant here had previously been granted two continuances. This third motion merely stated that he needed additional time to find an alibi witness and to hire private counsel to replace his public defender. He has shown no reasons whatsoever for his inability to find the witness or procure counsel prior to the motion. The trial court was well within its judicial discretion in overruling the motion for a continuance.
Appellant next submits that the spent bullet and casing were erroneously admitted in evidence as the State failed to establish a proper chain of custody.
"An exhibit is admissible if the evidence regarding its chain of custody strongly suggests the exact whereabouts of the evidence at all times. The State need not exclude all possibilities of tampering, but need only provide `reasonable assurance' that the exhibit has passed through the various hands in a undisturbed condition." Rinard v. State (1976) 265 Ind. 56, 60, 351 N.E.2d 20, 23.
The evidence shows that one of the investigating officers placed the items in an envelope, marked it, sealed it and delivered it to the police property room. The envelope was checked out by the ballistics expert when the test was conducted on the gun recovered from the appellant. The envelope was then returned to the property room and was brought to the court on the day of trial. When it was opened at trial the bullet and casing were found wrapped in tissue paper. The investigating officer testified he could have wrapped them in this paper but could not precisely recall whether he had done so. The ballistics expert stated that the tissue was in the envelope when he checked it out from the property room, and that after the test, he placed his identifying mark on the tissue paper and wrapped the items again in it before placing them back in the envelope.
*1312 Appellant's sole argument is that the presence of this tissue taints the evidence and casts serious doubt on the chain of custody. We cannot accept the argument. While the origin of the tissue paper is unexplained, the testimony of the officers strongly suggests the exact whereabouts of the evidence at all times. Appellant has raised at most a mere "possibility of tampering" which cannot render the admission of the evidence improper.
Finally, appellant contends that since his confession was inadmissible, the evidence therefore is insufficient as a matter of law. We have held that the confession was properly admitted. This, coupled with the other evidence heretofore recited, is substantial evidence of probative value from which the jury could have inferred that appellant committed the crimes charged.
The judgment of the trial court is in all respects affirmed.
DeBRULER, HUNTER, PIVARNIK and PRENTICE, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 2217737 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:33.808561+00 ===

75 Ill.2d 173 (1979)
387 N.E.2d 685
THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF ILLINOIS, Appellant,
v.
WILLIAM FRANKLIN, Appellee.
No. 51055.
Supreme Court of Illinois.
Opinion filed March 20, 1979.
*174 William J. Scott, Attorney General, of Springfield, and Michael M. Mihm, State's Attorney, of Peoria (Donald B. Mackay, Melbourne A. Noel, Jr., and William M. Wippold, Assistant Attorneys General, of Chicago, and James E. Hinterlong, of the State's Attorneys Appellate Service Commission, of Ottawa, of counsel), for the People.
Robert Agostinelli and Gary R. Garretson, of the *175 Office of the State Appellate Defender, of Ottawa, for appellee.
Reversed and remanded.
MR. JUSTICE UNDERWOOD delivered the opinion of the court:
The defendant, William Franklin, was found guilty of theft by deception in a Peoria County jury trial and sentenced to a term of 1 1/2 to 4 1/2 years' imprisonment. The appellate court reversed the judgment and remanded the cause for a new trial on the grounds that defendant was denied his right to effective assistance of counsel because the court-appointed assistant public defender who represented him at trial had, as an assistant State's Attorney, successfully prosecuted the defendant on an unrelated matter 4 1/2 years earlier. (60 Ill. App.3d 905.) We granted the State's petition for leave to appeal.
During a March 31, 1977, sentencing hearing, Assistant Public Defender Donald Courson, who was the third public defender staff member to represent defendant, but had represented him throughout his earlier trial, realized for the first time that as an assistant State's Attorney he had secured a burglary conviction against the defendant in September of 1972. It had been defendant's earlier position that the William Franklin convicted in 1972 was not he, and it apparently was not until his belated acknowledgement of the falsity of his contention that his attorney realized his earlier prosecutorial role. On the basis of this newly discovered fact, defense counsel supplemented defendant's motion for a new trial by alleging a conflict of interest. Specifically, he argued that the combination of two facts resulted in a conflict of interest: (1) that Assistant Public Defender Courson, who represented defendant at his 1977 trial, was the assistant State's Attorney who prosecuted and obtained a conviction against defendant in 1972, and (2) that Assistant Public Defender Courson was a Peoria County assistant State's Attorney from the time defendant was indicted on May *176 26, 1976, until January 1, 1977. The trial court thereupon conducted a brief hearing on the matter during which defense counsel indicated that he did not recall his prior prosecution of defendant until the sentencing stage of this case and had not done any work on the present case while employed in the State's Attorney's office. Failing to find even the appearance of impropriety under these facts, the trial court denied the motion for a new trial.
This court has repeatedly stated that a defendant's fundamental right to effective assistance of counsel entitles the person represented to the undivided loyalty of counsel and prohibits a defense attorney from representing conflicting interests or undertaking the discharge of inconsistent obligations. (People v. Coslet (1977), 67 Ill.2d 127, 134; People v. Kester (1977), 66 Ill.2d 162, 166; People v. Stoval (1968), 40 Ill.2d 109, 111-12.) In furtherance of this fundamental right, this court has adopted a per se rule which provides essentially that where defense counsel is involved in an actual or potential conflict of interest, it is unnecessary for the defendant to establish actual prejudice, as prejudice is presumed by law. People v. Vriner (1978), 74 Ill.2d 329, 340; People v. Precup (1978), 73 Ill.2d 7, 10; People v. Coslet (1977), 67 Ill.2d 127, 133; People v. Kester (1977), 66 Ill.2d 162, 168; People v. Stoval (1968), 40 Ill.2d 109, 113.
The question, of course, is whether an actual or potential conflict existed, an issue this court has considered with some frequency. In People v. Stoval (1968), 40 Ill.2d 109, the defendant's conviction for burglary and theft was reversed where defendant's court-appointed attorney was a member of a law firm which represented both the jewelry store which defendant was accused of burglarizing and its owner. Additionally, defense counsel had personally represented the store and its owner in previous legal matters. This court held that sound public policy disfavored representation of an accused by an *177 attorney with such possibly conflicting interests "for who can determine whether his representation was affected, at least, subliminally, by the conflict." (40 Ill.2d 109, 113.) The showing of actual prejudice in that context was held unnecessary.
Subsequently, in People v. Kester (1977), 66 Ill.2d 162, this court held that where the court-appointed assistant public defender who represented the defendant at the time his guilty pleas were accepted had earlier appeared on three occasions in the same criminal proceeding on behalf of the People as an assistant State's Attorney, there existed a potential conflict of interest necessitating reversal of defendant's conviction.
In People v. Coslet (1977), 67 Ill.2d 127, the defendant widow was convicted of voluntary manslaughter in connection with the death of her husband. She was represented at trial by court-appointed counsel who was also acting as attorney for the administrator of decedent's estate. As attorney for the administrator counsel had a duty to maximize the assets of the estate which would be distributed to decedent's heirs. Also, his fee, as attorney for the administrator, would be affected by the value of the estate. Defendant's conviction of manslaughter might have resulted in decedent's real estate interests becoming part of that estate rather than passing to defendant as the surviving joint tenant. The conflict presented by the possibility that defendant's conviction might enrich her deceased husband's estate, the administrator of which her attorney represented, was enough to warrant a new trial under the Stoval per se rule.
The defendant here relies heavily on Kester for support of his contention that "defense counsel was laboring under a per se conflict of interest arising from counsel's former prosecution of defendant for burglary." Likewise, the appellate court cited Kester in reversing defendant's theft conviction. We do not agree, however, *178 that Kester requires reversal, for there is between the facts in this case and those in Kester a crucial difference. There, the court-appointed defense attorney had served previously as an assistant State's Attorney in the same criminal proceeding. In that capacity, defendant's court-appointed assistant public defender had thrice appeared in court on behalf of the People in the same case in which he later represented the defendant. That this distinguishing feature formed the underlying basis for the decision in Kester is evident from excerpts from that opinion:
"However, we believe that a potential conflict of interest nevertheless exists in a situation such as this when a prosecutor who personally has been involved in the prosecution of a defendant in a particular criminal proceeding later assumes the duties of court-appointed defense counsel for that defendant in the same proceeding. * * * It might be contended, for example, that the advice and performance of court-appointed counsel in such a situation was affected by a subliminal reluctance to attack pleadings or other actions and decisions by the prosecution which he may have been personally involved with or responsible for. A defendant who has entered a plea of guilty might later suspect that his attorney's advice thereon had been influenced to some degree by a subconscious desire to avoid an adversary confrontation with the prosecution as a consequence of his previous participation in the case as the prosecuting attorney." (Emphasis added.) 66 Ill.2d 162, 167-68.
In the case before us, defense counsel, while he was employed by the State's Attorney's office, was not involved in defendant's case. Although he had, 4 1/2 years earlier, prosecuted and convicted defendant on a prior burglary charge, he had no recollection thereof during the *179 trial. Obviously, the "subliminal effects" referred to in Stoval (40 Ill.2d 109, 113) and "subtle influences" suggested in Kester (66 Ill.2d 162, 163) need not concern us here for those factors require an awareness, not present here, of the facts creating them. In our judgment it is entirely clear that no conflict of interest arose under the facts of this case, and we need not speculate as to the result had counsel recalled the former prosecution. Accordingly, we decline to extend Kester to the facts of this case.
Finally, citing Holloway v. Arkansas (1978), 435 U.S. 475, 55 L.Ed.2d 426, 98 S.Ct. 1173, defendant contends that once counsel raised the possibility that a conflict of interest existed, the trial court had a duty to either make an inquiry regarding the substance of defense counsel's representations or accept counsel's word that a conflict of interest existed. In Holloway, the United States Supreme Court held that where counsel appointed to represent several codefendants in a joint trial makes a timely pretrial motion for appointment of separate counsel due to the risk of a conflict of interest, the failure of the trial court to either appoint separate counsel or to take adequate steps to ascertain whether the risk is too remote to warrant separate counsel denies defendants their constitutional right to assistance of counsel and requires reversal.
Holloway, however, is inapposite here. It dealt with a pretrial request for separate counsel due to a possible conflict of interest, while defense counsel here made a supplemental post-trial motion for a new trial based on an alleged conflict of interest. Furthermore, this case does not involve the Holloway issue of joint representation of codefendants. Finally, defendant overlooks the fact that the trial judge in this case did make inquiry of counsel regarding the foundation for his allegations that a conflict of interest existed, and determined that counsel neither recalled the former prosecution until the trial had ended *180 nor had his previous work in the State's Attorney's office included defendant's case.
There is, in our judgment, an additional ground for reversal not discussed by the parties but which we believe deserves mention. The logical inferences from this record are that had defendant not denied that it was he who was the subject of the 1972 prosecution and conviction, defense counsel would have realized prior to trial, as he did after the trial, that he had prosecuted the 1972 case against defendant. The question of a conflict, if one was thought to exist, could then have been explored in timely fashion. To now reward defendant's deceit with a new trial would make a mockery of the truth-seeking process upon which our system of justice is founded.
The judgment of the appellate court reversing the circuit court and remanding the cause to the trial court is reversed, and the cause remanded to the appellate court for consideration of the additional issue there presented but not resolved.
Reversed and remanded.

=== CASE 2217740 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:33.880568+00 ===

387 N.E.2d 1354 (1979)
Thomas Lee HOOKER, Appellant,
v.
STATE of Indiana, Appellee.
No. 1-578A108.
Court of Appeals of Indiana, First District.
April 23, 1979.
Rehearing Denied May 31, 1979.
*1355 John G. Bunner, Evansville, for appellant.
Theodore L. Sendak, Atty. Gen., Terry G. Duga, Deputy Atty. Gen., Indianapolis, for appellee.
LYBROOK, Presiding Judge.
Defendant-appellant Thomas Lee Hooker was found guilty of voluntary manslaughter by a jury in the shooting death of his brother, Moses, and sentenced to be imprisoned for not less than two nor more than 21 years.
His appeal raises three issues for our review:
(1) Whether the trial court erred in overruling Hooker's motion to suppress a confession he made to police;
(2) Whether the trial court erred in re-reading the confession to the jury during deliberations and upon the jury's request; and
(3) Whether the trial court erred in giving State's instruction No. 8.
We affirm.
Issue I.
Hooker argues his confession was not voluntarily given under the guidelines of Miranda v. Arizona (1966) 384 U.S. 436, 86 S. Ct. 1602, 16 L. Ed. 2d 694, because he is illiterate and lacks sufficient mental comprehension to understand the rights he waived and to know the consequences of his making a statement to police officers.
The record shows that Moses Hooker was shot at the residence he shared with the defendant between 12:30 and 1:00 a.m. on July 20, 1977. The defendant was taken to a police station where he signed a waiver of rights form at 2:40 a.m. At 5:15 a.m., he signed a typewritten record of a statement he made to the police. The trial court denied Hooker's motion to suppress the statement at trial.
Hooker signed the printed waiver form and made his statement without having an attorney present. As this court said in Bauer v. State (1973) 157 Ind. App. 400, 405, 300 N.E.2d 364:
"When this occurred, a heavy burden rested on the State to demonstrate that [the defendant] knowingly and intelligently waived his privilege against self-incrimination and his right to counsel. Dickerson v. State (1972), 257 Ind. 562, 276 N.E.2d 845; Escobedo v. Illinois (1964), 378 U.S. 478, 490, 84 S. Ct. 1758, 1764, 12 L. Ed. 2d 977. A printed waiver form signed by [the defendant] is not conclusive. Dickerson v. State, supra.
The crucial test of the Miranda warning was set forth in Coyote v. United States, supra, 380 F.2d 305, [10th Cir.] at 308:
`... What Miranda does require is meaningful advice to the unlettered and *1356 unlearned in language which he can comprehend and on which he can knowingly act. We will not indulge semantical debates between counsel over the particular words used to inform an individual of his rights. The crucial test is whether the words in the context used, considering the age, background and intelligence of the individual being interrogated, impart a clear, understandable warning of all of his rights.' (Our emphasis.)"
The evidence at the hearing on Hooker's motion to suppress showed that Hooker went to the fifth grade in school, was functionally illiterate, could not read, could not write, could print only his name, did not know his age or birthdate, had no concept of time, and did not know the current month.
Two experts who testified at the suppression hearing offered conflicting views as to whether Hooker was mentally competent to appreciate the significance of waiving his Miranda rights and giving a statement to the police. One expert examined Hooker's statement to the police and, on that basis, estimated his intelligence quotient in the range of 80 or below normal. He testified that he believed that Hooker could understand the language of State's Exhibit No. 47, the Evansville Police Department Statement of Miranda Rights and Waiver of Rights, if the contents were read aloud to him in a "slow friendly manner" without the aid of further explanation.
The second expert testified that an oral, standardized intelligence test placed Hooker's intelligence quotient at 45. He said that a person with an I.Q. in the mid-50's was "educable" and that he considered Hooker to be "educable" because he had been able to earn a living and had no prior serious problems with the law. This expert first testified that, in his opinion, Hooker could understand the forms if they were read aloud to him and "a very strong effort was made to go through it step-by-step and laboriously explain the meaning of each of the Miranda rights." He later hedged this testimony somewhat: "I don't think . . that unless every step of this Miranda Rights was very carefully and very elaborately explained to him that he could understand it," and "If it was a very very considered effort, it might be that he could understand it, yet, I somehow don't feel that he could fully understand it." He found Hooker to be "tractable" in that he could probably be easily led into answering certain questions a certain way.
Policeman Richard Tenbarge testified that he participated, along with other officers, in securing Hooker's waiver and his statement. Tenbarge said that Exhibit No. 47 was read to Hooker twice, once by another officer and once by Tenbarge. Tenbarge also said, "... then the rights were ad-libbed on to a degree." When asked to explain precisely what he meant by "adlibbed on to a degree", Tenbarge explained:
"It was stated to him that he had the right to remain silent and this meant that he didn't have to talk to us; that anything he did tell us could and would be used against him in a Court; and that he had the right to talk to a lawyer or attorney and that he had the right to have one present during the questioning and that if he couldn't afford a lawyer, that the State would hire or appoint him a lawyer and that he could stop talking to us at any time or he could ask for an attorney at any time that he wanted to."
Further testimony from Tenbarge was, in part, as follows:
"Q. After the rights were explained to Mr. Hooker, what did he do or say?
A. He, you know, agreed to talk to us and to give us a statement.
* * * * * *
Q. When you said you have the right to remain silent, what did he say?
A. He just really didn't say anything. When I asked him if he understood his rights, he said yes.
Q. Did he say anything when you said anything you say can and will be used against you in a Court of Law?
A. He really didn't make any particular response.
*1357 Q. Alright. You have the right to talk to a lawyer and have him present with you while you are being questioned. What did he say about that?
A. He made no particular response.
Q. If you cannot afford to hire a lawyer, one will be appointed to represent you before any questioning, if you wish.
A. He made no particular response.
Q. Did you explain to him that if he didn't have any money how or who would appoint a lawyer to represent him?
A. Yes.
Q. What did you tell him?
A. I told him there were several different possibilities. I said that generally in a case like this the Vanderburgh County Superior Court Misdemeanor Section would appoint him an attorney.
Q. When would they appoint that attorney?
A. That appointment would be the next day when he appeared in Court. And prior to that, if he wanted an attorney, we would contact the Prosecutor's Office.
Q. And you can decide at any time to exercise these rights and not answer any questions or make any statements. Did he make any comment with regard to that?
A. No particular comment."
Tenbarge testified that he believed that Hooker understood his rights and knew that his statement could well be used against him in court.
Justice DeBruler set forth these applicable rules for our review in Ortiz v. State (1976) 265 Ind. 549, 356 N.E.2d 1188 at 1191:
"In determining whether a statement was voluntarily given, we look to all the circumstances surrounding its giving to determine whether it was `induced by any violence, threats, promises, or other improper influence.' Montes v. State (1975) Ind., 332 N.E.2d 786, 792. The same test determines whether a waiver of the Miranda rights has occurred. Nacoff v. State (1971) 256 Ind. 97, 267 N.E.2d 165. The burden is on the State to prove beyond a reasonable doubt the voluntariness of the statement or waiver. Burton v. State (1973) 260 Ind. 94, 292 N.E.2d 790. In reviewing the trial court's ruling on the voluntariness of a statement or waiver, we do not weigh the evidence, but determine whether there is sufficient evidence to support the trial court's finding. Raines v. State (1971) 256 Ind. 404, 269 N.E.2d 378."
The defendant did not testify at the motion hearing so Tenbarge's testimony is uncontradicted. One expert said that reading the language of the forms aloud would have been sufficient, and Tenbarge said this was done twice. The other expert said that the language of the forms would have to have been accompanied by further oral explanation, and Tenbarge said this was done. The conflict in the testimony of the two experts is not dispositive because a reviewing court will not disturb a ruling by the trial court as to the admissibility of a confession when it is based upon conflicting evidence, except for an abuse of discretion. Drake v. State (1977) Ind. App., 369 N.E.2d 941.
Under the Ortiz rule, we must conclude that there is sufficient evidence to support the trial court's ruling that Hooker knowingly and intelligently waived his right to remain silent and his right to have an attorney present during questioning.
Issue II.
During deliberations, the bailiff received a note from the jury foreman asking for Hooker's statement to the police, State's Exhibit No. 48. The jury was returned to the courtroom and the foreman explained to the court that the request was being made because of disagreement among the jurors. The judge reread Hooker's statement to the jury and Hooker alleges this was error. This precise issue was laid to rest in Ortiz, supra, 356 N.E.2d at 1197:
*1358 "After the jury retired to deliberate, its members sent a note to the court requesting the re-reading of Williams' statement. The court called the jury back into the courtroom and read the edited statement.
.....
Indiana Code § 34-1-21-6 (Burns 1973) provides in relevant part:
`After the jury has retired for deliberation, if there is a disagreement between them as to any part of the testimony ... they may request the officer to conduct them into court, where the information required shall be given ...'
We construe this statute to provide that the judge must, on the jury's request, have read to them any properly admitted testimony or documentary evidence. This holding is compatible with the A.B.A.'s Standards for Criminal Justice, Trial by Jury, § 5.2(a) at p. 134 (Approved Draft 1968), the comments to which note that this is the usual practice. Id. at pp. 134-36. There was no error in rereading Williams' statement."
Consequently, there was no error in the case at bar.
Issue III.
Defendant's final allegation of error is addressed to the court's giving of State's tendered instruction No. 8 as follows:
"The Court further instructs you that the condition of mind which usually and immediately follows the excessive use of alcoholic liquors is not, in and of itself, the unsoundness of mind meant by our law. Mere voluntary drunkenness or intoxication does not excuse the crimes of second degree murder, voluntary and/or involuntary manslaughter, and a defendant cannot escape punishment for the crimes on the gound [sic] that he did an alleged unlawful act while drunk; and such drunkness [sic] and/or intoxication does not lessen or abate the severity of punishment prescribed by law. In other words, mere voluntary drunkenness or intoxication is no excuse for those crimes."
Hooker argued at trial and to this court that the instruction is not a proper statement of the law because it indicates to the jury that specific intent is not an element of the offense of voluntary manslaughter.[1]
We first note that, except for the specific reference to the crimes of second-degree murder, voluntary manslaughter and involuntary manslaughter, and the omission of a final phrase, this instruction is in all other respects like the one approved by our Supreme Court in Wilson v. State (1970) 253 Ind. 585, 255 N.E.2d 817, as follows:
"The Court further instructs you that the condition of mind which usually and immediately follows the excessive use of alcoholic liquors is not, in and of itself, the unsoundness of mind meant by our law. Mere voluntary drunkenness or intoxication does not excuse crime and a defendant cannot escape punishment for a crime on the ground that he did an alleged unlawful act while drunk: and such drunkenness and/or intoxication does not lessen or abate the severity of punishment prescribed by law.
In other words, mere voluntary drunkenness or intoxication is no excuse for crime, nor does it in any degree mitigate or palliate an offense actually committed."
The omission of the phrase "nor does it in any degree mitigate or palliate an offense actually committed" would have worked to Hooker's advantage, if anything, because it seemingly lessens the severity of the instruction's *1359 restrictions on the use of evidence of intoxication. We are left then with the question of whether the enumeration of the three specific crimes makes what otherwise is a correct statement of the law an erroneous one.
In relation to the evidence presented as to Hooker's possible intoxication at the time of the shooting of his brother, the court also gave its own final instruction No. 29 as follows:
"Temporary mental incapacity, as a result of being under the influence of alcohol furnishes no legal excuse for the commission of a crime.
However, such incapacity may produce a state of mind which prevents the defendant from being able to form a specific intent which you must find before you can convict the defendant of First Degree Murder. If the defendant was suffering from temporary mental incapacity, as a result of being under the influence of alcohol, so that he could not at the time form the necessary specific intent, then he would not be guilty of First Degree Murder.
Any intoxication, not necessarily total, may be considered on the question of specific intent.
The term `intoxication' means a condition resulting from the drinking of alcoholic beverages which impair a person's normal faculties  either of perception or will of judgment  so that he no longer has the capacity to form a specific intent to commit such an act.
It is for you to determine the extent of the defendant's intoxication, and whether it operated to prevent his forming the specific intent necessary to constitute the crime."
This instruction is, of course, a correct statement of the law. James v. State (1976) 265 Ind. 384, 354 N.E.2d 236. We agree with the defendant that the import of the two instructions on intoxication, when read together, is that the offense of first-degree murder requires the State to prove specific intent, an element which could be negated by sufficient evidence of intoxication, while the offense of voluntary manslaughter does not require proof of specific intent and thus could not be negated by such evidence. We do not agree with Hooker, however, that this is an erroneous conception of the law.
It is true that earlier cases held that an intention to kill is a necessary element of the offense of voluntary manslaughter. Ketring v. State (1936) 209 Ind. 618, 200 N.E. 212; King v. State (1918) 187 Ind. 220, 118 N.E. 809. No case has clearly held, however, that this is a requirement of a showing of specific intent. In fact, Hill v. State (1937) 212 Ind. 692, 11 N.E.2d 141, found erroneous an instruction stating that the only difference between voluntary manslaughter and involuntary manslaughter is that in voluntary manslaughter the actor must intend to kill his victim, and in involuntary manslaughter there need not be any intention to take life. The Hill court said, at 698, 11 N.E.2d at 144, "This is not a clear distinction between the two classes of manslaughter and should not have been given." In Brattain v. State (1945) 223 Ind. 489, 61 N.E.2d 462, the Supreme Court, without distinguishing between voluntary and involuntary manslaughter, stated that no specific intent is required in order to support a finding of guilty of manslaughter.
While not specifically holding that specific intent is or is not an element of the offense of voluntary manslaughter, the Supreme Court has held that second-degree murder under Ind. Code 35-1-54-1, since repealed, is not a crime of specific intent. Wilson v. State (1978) Ind., 374 N.E.2d 45; Kriete v. State (1975) 263 Ind. 381, 332 N.E.2d 209. A comparison of the language of the statutes which define these offenses is helpful.
Ind. Code 35-1-54-1 reads, in part, as follows:
"Whoever, purposely and maliciously, but without premeditation, kills any human being, is guilty of murder in the second degree... ."
Ind. Code 35-13-4-2 reads, in part, as follows:
*1360 "Whoever voluntarily kills any human being without malice, expressed or implied, in a sudden heat, is guilty of voluntary manslaughter... ."
The key terms which must be compared relevant to the required levels of mens rea are "purposely" in reference to second-degree murder and "voluntarily" in reference to voluntary manslaughter. Our courts have given these definitions:
Purposely: "intentionally or designedly", Eaton v. State (1904) 162 Ind. 554, 70 N.E. 814.
Voluntarily: "by the free exercise of the will, done by design, purposely", Neff v. State (1978) Ind. App., 379 N.E.2d 473; Murphy v. State (1869) 31 Ind. 511.
Black's Law Dictionary (rev. 4th ed. 1968) at 1400 defines "purposely" to mean "intentionally, designedly, consciously, knowingly". Black's at 1746 defines "voluntary" to mean "unconstrained by interference, unimpelled by another's influence, spontaneous, acting of oneself, done by design or intention, purpose, intended."
22 C.J.S. Criminal Law § 29 (1961) says that all crimes of which intent is a necessary element must be "voluntary", that is they "must proceed from the will, from a mind free to act, and it is in that sense that a criminal act may be properly said to be done with design, purpose, or intent."
That the Supreme Court has not dispositively laid to rest the issue at hand is shown by Williams v. State (1969) 252 Ind. 154, 246 N.E.2d 762, wherein the court accepts for the sake of argument only the appellant's assertion that actual intent to kill is a necessary element of voluntary manslaughter.
Given the legislature's choice of voluntariness as an element of the offense of voluntary manslaughter, and the Supreme Court's interpretation of the level of intent denoted by the word "purposely" in the second-degree murder statute, we do not believe the legislature intended voluntary manslaughter to be a specific intent offense. We hold that specific intent is not an element of voluntary manslaughter under Ind. Code 35-13-4-2. Consequently, the jury was not misled by the challenged instruction.
Affirmed.
LOWDERMILK and ROBERTSON, JJ., concur.
NOTES
[1]  Specific intent is present when from the circumstances the offender must have subjectively desired the prohibited result. General criminal intent exists when from the circumstances the prohibited result may reasonably be expected to follow from the offender's voluntary act, irrespective of a subjective desire to have accomplished such result. 22 C.J.S. Criminal Law §§ 32 and 35 (1961). This distinction, germane to a discussion of voluntary manslaughter under Ind. Code 35-13-4-2, since repealed, will no longer be relevant under the 1977 Indiana Penal Code which codifies the degrees of mens rea, or mental intent, required for the commission of a crime. Ind. Code 35-41-2-2.

=== CASE 2217747 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:33.994823+00 ===

387 N.E.2d 1321 (1979)
George D. GOFFNER, Appellant,
v.
STATE of Indiana, Appellee.
No. 1178S263.
Supreme Court of Indiana.
April 17, 1979.
*1322 Harriette Bailey Conn, Public Defender, Jewell K. Smith, Deputy Public Defender, Indianapolis, for appellant.
Theodore L. Sendak, Atty. Gen., Philip R. Blowers, Deputy Atty. Gen., Indianapolis, for appellee.
GIVAN, Chief Justice.
This appeal arises from the denial of appellant's petition for post-conviction relief. On August 15, 1961, appellant was indicted for first degree murder by the Knox County Grand Jury. On August 19, appellant appeared in court with his attorney and tendered his plea of guilty to second degree murder. The trial court accepted the plea and following pre-sentence investigation, sentenced the appellant to life imprisonment. In March, 1978, appellant filed a petition for post-conviction relief, alleging that his guilty plea was not entered knowingly, intelligently and voluntarily. The trial court denied relief.
On appeal, it is first contended that the guilty plea proceeding is devoid of evidence showing the original trial court advised appellant of the elements of second degree murder or found a factual basis for the plea of guilty. Appellant concedes that his case must be adjudicated according to the law applicable in 1961, rather than the more recent standards imposed by Boykin v. Alabama (1969) 395 U.S. 238, 89 S. Ct. 1709, 23 L. Ed. 2d 274; Williams v. State (1975) 263 Ind. 165, 325 N.E.2d 827; Ind.R.Cr.P. 10; and IC § 35-4.1-1-3 and 4 [Burns 1979]. In general, these authorities require the record of the guilty plea proceeding to show that the defendant was adequately informed of his constitutional rights; that the court is satisfied that there is a factual basis for the plea; and that the plea is entered knowingly and voluntarily.
*1323 Prior to Boykin, the law in Indiana was stated by the case of Harshman v. State (1953) 232 Ind. 618, 115 N.E.2d 501. In reversing and remanding the cause for the withdrawal of a guilty plea, this Court stated in that case:
"Under our practice an accused may enter a plea of guilty in any case, and thereby waive his constitutional right to trial by jury. But to be valid and binding upon the accused, such a plea must be made by the accused intelligently, advisedly and understandingly, with full knowledge of his rights, and with the considered approval of the judge before whom he stands charged.
"A valid plea of guilty in a court having jurisdiction of the offense is a judicial confession of guilt. Batchelor v. State, 1920, 189 Ind. 69, 125 N.E. 773. It admits the incriminating facts alleged. 22 C.J.S., Criminal Law, § 424. It should be cautiously received. It should not be accepted from one who does not know, or who, at the time of arraignment, asserts that he does not know, whether or not he has committed the crime charged, for such would be entirely incompatible with the idea of an admission of guilt, and wholly inconsistent with the due administration of justice.
"... [s]o far as the record before us discloses, no evidence whatever pointing to appellant's guilt was adduced, either before, during or after the entry of the plea." 232 Ind. at 620-21, 115 N.E.2d at 502. (emphasis added.)
It is clear from these principles that before accepting a guilty plea the pre-Boykin trial court had to insure that the accused was informed of the elements of the crime with which he was charged and was required also to find facts which supported the entry of the plea.
Although the authorities now require the record of the guilty plea proceeding to demonstrate the voluntariness of the plea and the advisement of rights, we think that judicial review of pre-Boykin pleas need not be so narrow. Thus, in determining the propriety of a pre-Boykin guilty plea, a post-conviction court may consider not only the record of the proceeding at which the plea was formally accepted, but also the entire range of surrounding circumstances, including any other proceedings and events in the same approximate time frame.
In the case at bar appellant was arraigned on August 15, 1961. At this hearing, the deputy prosecuting attorney read to appellant the indictment charging first degree murder. Upon direction from the court, he also read the statutes for first degree murder, second degree murder and manslaughter. The court then advised appellant of his rights, determined that appellant understood them and appointed pauper counsel to represent appellant. The arraignment was continued and on August 19, 1961, appellant again appeared in open court with his court-appointed attorney. He informed the court that he wished to enter a plea of guilty to the charge of second degree murder. The court thereupon questioned appellant as to whether he had discussed all aspects with his attorney and whether he knew what he wanted to do. Appellant responded affirmatively. After a further determination that the plea was not the result of threats or coercion, the court accepted the plea and delayed imposition of the sentence pending a pre-sentence report.
The investigation of appellant's background for the pre-sentence report was conducted by the probation officer. His report contained appellant's lengthy version of the events and his confession to the homicide. According to the report, appellant had stated that he felt he was guilty of second degree murder, but not first degree murder as he did not perpetrate the crime with premeditation. The report also contained a copy of appellant's confession to the police and the investigator's version of the offense. The court examined this report, and on August 22, 1961, sentenced appellant to life imprisonment.
At the post-conviction hearing appellant testified that he recalled telling the probation officer in 1961 that he had been fully *1324 advised of his rights and that his attorney had fully explained the law and penalty for each of the charges prior to the entry of the guilty plea.
It is clear from the foregoing that at the time he entered the plea, appellant was fully advised of his rights and understood the import of the charges as well as the consequences of his plea. Although the charges apparently were not read to him on the date his guilty plea was accepted, we think the series of proceeding and events in toto constitute sufficient evidence to support the finding of the trial court that he was advised of and understood the elements of the crime of second degree murder. The transcripts of the arraignment, the guilty plea proceeding and the pre-sentence report bear out this conclusion.
We next consider whether the trial court found a factual basis for the guilty plea. The pre-sentence report established sufficient, factual basis to support the finding that the entry of the guilty plea was not "incompatible with the idea of an admission of guilt." Harshman v. State, supra. Although the report was not seen by the trial court until after the plea was technically accepted, we must presume that had the pre-sentence report been void of sufficient facts to justify the guilty plea, the original trial court would either have attempted to ascertain such facts or permitted immediate withdrawal of the plea. The point is moot, however, as the pre-sentence report satisfactorily sets forth the facts forming the basis for the guilty plea. In light of the foregoing, it cannot be said that this guilty plea was entered unknowingly and unintelligently or that the trial court improperly accepted the plea under the law applicable in 1961.
The other argument advanced in this appeal is that the trial court erred in admitting into evidence the transcript of arraignment and the pre-sentence report. Again, we refer to the previously cited authorities applicable to the pre-Boykin era. We think the trial court properly considered not merely the transcript of the guilty plea proceeding, but also all the attendant proceedings and circumstances in the same time frame. We therefore find no abuse of the discretion vested in the trial court by PC 1, § 5, to receive and consider evidence at a post-conviction hearing.
The judgment of the trial court is affirmed.
DeBRULER, HUNTER, PIVARNIK and PRENTICE, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 3784406 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2016-07-06 07:34:07.880289+00 ===

This case is filed in this court as an original suit, praying a writ of mandamus, in which the relator, the board of education of the South Zanesville village school district, prays that the board of education of the Zanesville city school district be required to assume a portion of the indebtedness which was an obligation of the South Zanesville district prior to the severance of a portion of the territory of the South Zanesville district and the annexation of the same to the Zanesville district. The issue is joined by a demurrer to the petition, which of course admits the truth of all well-pleaded facts, and we therefore look to the allegations of the petition alone. These allegations are that the village school district of South Zanesville, at the time of the loss of territory, had a net indebtedness of $78,165.56; that the appraisement for purposes of taxation of the taxable property severed from the South Zanesville district is $1,716,320, and that the total tax valuation of all property of the South Zanesville district before division was $3,374,720. It therefore appears that 50.86 per cent. of all the taxable property in the district was taken away and added to the Zanesville district. It is *Page 477
sought by this proceeding to compel the board of education of the Zanesville district to assume a like percentage of the amount of the indebtedness which was an obligation against the South Zanesville district before division, in the sum of $39,755.
The cause involves the construction of Section 4690, General Code, which provides:
"When territory is annexed to a city or village, such territory thereby becomes a part of the city or village school district, and the legal title to school property in such territory for school purposes shall be vested in the board of education of the city or village school district. Provided, however, if there be any indebtedness on the school property in the territory annexed, the board of education of the city or village school district, shall assume such indebtedness and shall levy a tax annually sufficient to pay such indebtedness and shall pay to the board of education of the school district or districts from which such territory was detached, the amount of money collected from such levy as it becomes due."
It is insisted by respondents that this language, properly interpreted, calls upon the Zanesville district to assume only such indebtedness as is charged against the school buildings and equipment thereof located within the territory severed from the one district and annexed to the other. Counsel for relator argues for the broader interpretation, which would include all property within the territory severed and annexed which is subject to taxation for the maintenance of schools.
The petition alleges that the school building in the property detached cost for erection and equipment the sum of $26,900, while the school buildings and *Page 478
equipment in the territory remaining in the South Zanesville district cost approximately $80,000. The petition further recites that 115 pupils of school age reside in the territory transferred to the Zanesville district, and that 450 pupils reside in the territory remaining in the South Zanesville district.
It is difficult to see how these facts relating to value of school buildings and number of pupils required to be taught have any bearing upon the controversy, except that they present a strong equity in favor of giving relief to the South Zanesville district. We are, however, solely concerned with the proper interpretation of the section of the General Code above quoted. As bearing upon this interpretation, it is proper to refer to other related sections of the Code.
It will not be disputed that no indebtedness can attach to the school property itself; that is to say, no lien can attach thereto, either for the security of mechanics, or by way of mortgage or other lien executed by a board of education. No such property could be sold as upon execution. All such property is exempt from taxation. The members of a board of education cannot be individually held liable for indebtedness contracted in the usual and regular way, in compliance with law, and for the use and benefit of the schools of the district. The only manner in which the obligations of a board of education can be enforced is by compelling a levy and collection of taxes upon all taxable property within the jurisdiction of the board.
The difficulty about this controversy turns upon the proper meaning to be given to the term "school property." We are of the opinion that school property *Page 479
does not mean the school buildings and equipment utilized in conducting the schools, but rather all the taxable property within the district subject to taxation. No other interpretation would produce equitable results. The language of the statute is quite as susceptible of this interpretation as of any other. The Legislature would not be presumed to have intended that term to be employed in any manner which would produce inequitable and unjust results.
All this indebtedness was incurred at a time when all of the taxable property of the district was being benefited by the establishment and maintenance of schools, and all of the property of the district must therefore be held for the payment of such indebtedness. A division of the district having been made by the authorities authorized to make it, and having been made regularly and legally, that portion of the district which has been severed from the original district should not be released entirely from the discharge of that indebtedness. The Zanesville district having received the benefit of the annexed territory, including the right to levy taxes upon the property of the severed territory, is ipso facto enabled to discharge the same proportion of the indebtedness of the South Zanesville district as the South Zanesville district is entitled to be relieved from by a like equitable process. While this proposition presents no great difficulty, and it would seem that no authority need be cited to support the conclusions reached, authority is nevertheless available. In State, ex rel.Board of Education of Swanton Village School Dist., v. Board ofEducation of Sharples Village School Dist., 114 Ohio St. 603,151 N.E. 669, this *Page 480
court had under consideration a case involving many similar points. That case involved an interpretation of Section 4696, General Code, and the facts differed only in that territory had been severed from the county of Lucas and annexed to the county of Fulton.
The provision for making adjustment of indebtedness in such case is governed by Section 4696, General Code. The portion of the section relating to that matter is as follows:
"(2) An equitable division of the funds and indebtedness between the districts involved shall be made by the county board of education, which in the case of territory transferred to a county school district shall mean the board of education of the county school district to which such territory is transferred * * *."
Without further guide, this court held that the equitable method of apportioning the indebtedness would be "a division in the proportion that the taxable value of the transferred district bears to the taxable value of the original district," and that this would be the only basis upon which an equitable division could be made. That principle being directly applicable to the instant controversy, that case becomes a pertinent authority for the conclusions we have reached. The demurrer to the petition must be overruled, and a peremptory writ of mandamus allowed.
Writ allowed.
DAY, ALLEN, ROBINSON, JONES and MATTHIAS, JJ., concur.
KINKADE, J., not participating. *Page 481

=== CASE 2217752 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:34.107229+00 ===

119 N.W.2d 123 (1962)
A.S. NYSTROM, Plaintiff,
v.
STATE of South Dakota, Defendant.
No. 9945.
Supreme Court of South Dakota.
December 21, 1962.
Roswell Bottum, Burnell H. Hendricksen, Rapid City, for plaintiff
A. C. Miller, Atty. Gen., John Wehde, Asst. Atty. Gen., for defendant.
HANSON, Judge.
This is an inverse condemnation action by a private landowner against the State of South Dakota for damages caused by the unlawful taking of plaintiff's land without compensation. The land taken is an elongated strip of property located in Rapid Canyon. It was formerly a part of the old Crouch Line Railway right of way which plaintiff acquired by purchase. In a prior companion action[1] title to the subject *124 property was quieted in plaintiff adverse to the State's contention that title to the abandoned railroad right of way vested in the abutting owners by virtue of Sec. 13, Art. VI, of the S.D.Const. and related statutes.
The present action was commenced by plaintiff in this court for damages under the permissive provisions of SDC 1960 Supp. 33.0604. The Hon. George D. Lampert, one of the judges of the Seventh Judicial Circuit, was appointed to act as Referee and ordered to submit the issue of damages to a jury pursuant to SDC 1960 Supp. 37.40 relating to trials in eminent domain proceedings. The Referee accordingly submitted the issue of damages to a jury which returned a verdict in favor of plaintiff in the amount of $3,678. Plaintiff's objections to the Referee's Report all pertain to one ruling on evidence.
In their relation to the evidentiary question presented the facts show the property taken from plaintiff by the State for highway purposes is a serpentine strip of unplatted property 100 feet wide and approximately one and a half miles long containing 12.26 acres. It is located approximately 8 miles northwest of Rapid City in one of the scenic canyon areas of the Black Hills. It runs along, but not adjacent to, Rapid Creek except the creek crosses the property at right angles at four different points. In other words there is intervening land between the Nystrom property and the creek except at the crossings. According to plaintiff's evidence the property could feasibly have been developed by subdividing it into 38 lots suitable for residential use in which event an access road and four bridges would have to be constructed. A map showing this hypothetical subdivision was introduced in evidence as Exhibit 8.
Tom Flack, a real estate dealer from Rapid City, testified and qualified as a land value expert for plaintiff. In his opinion the fair and reasonable market value of the land taken was $2,000 per acre. As reasons for his opinion the witness was allowed to testify on direct examination that he took into consideration the size, location, and topography of the property taken, the lack of similar property and public demand for the same, together with its potential use and development as lots for homesites. As a further basis for his opinion Flack said he took into consideration other sales of comparable property. He then described two other tracts of land recently sold in that vicinity. One was a sale to Paulson and one to an undisclosed buyer. On objection by the State he was not allowed to testify to the specific prices paid for such other real property. It is this ruling which plaintiff contends constitutes reversible error justifying a new reference on the issue of damages.
This court has heretofore approved the majority, or Massachusetts, rule which allows evidence of the sale price of other similar property to be shown as substantive proof of the value of property in question. As indicated in Tidball v. Miller, 72 S.D. 243, 32 N.W.2d 683, "We are of the view that the rule with respect to proof of value by evidence of sales of other property is correctly stated in Naftzger et al. v. State, 24 Ohio App. 183, 156 N.E. 614, 615, as follows: `By the great weight of authority, when the value of land is in issue, evidence of actual sales of other lands, and prices for which they were sold, is competent, if they are similar in their situation, relative position, and other circumstances relating to value, and such sales are fair and open in the market. However, sales by sheriffs and sales that are in the nature of a compromise, or are affected by an element which does not enter into similar transactions made in the ordinary course of business, not being a fair criterion of value, are not admissible in evidence.'" See recent comprehensive annotation on subject in 85 A.L.R. 2d 110 which supplements 118 A.L.R. 869 and supersedes annotation in 174 A.L.R. 386.
*125 The evidence indicates the following dissimilarities between the property taken and the two sales sought to be introduced in evidence by plaintiff:
Undisclosed
Land Taken             Paulson Tract             Buyer Tract
Size:      12.26 Acres            1 Acre                    1.7 Acres
Access:    No road. A road and    Partially
4 bridges would have   graveled road             Passable road
to be built
Creek
Frontage:  None for               Creek frontage            Creek frontage
resident use
Shape:     Long strip -           Regular                   One homesite
100 ft. wide
Proximity
to Rapid
City:      8 miles                5 or 6 miles              8 miles
Because of such dissimilarities plaintiff concedes the two outside sales are not similar in the sense of being admissible as independent proof of value of the property taken. Nevertheless, he contends the other properties are comparable, at least in usable area, to one hypothetical lot on plaintiff's land if the same were platted as shown by Exhibit 8. Therefore, according to plaintiff, the sale prices of the two outside sales should have been admitted into evidence for the limited purpose of showing additional reasons for the expert's opinion of value.
We believe the admission or exclusion of such evidence was a matter resting within the sound discretion of the trial court. Whenever the value of land is in issue evidence of other recent and comparable real property sales in the neighborhood may be shown on direct examination of an expert land value witness(1) as independent proof of value of the land in controversy, or (2) as foundation for the expert's opinion of value. In either event the competency, relevancy, and similarity of such other sales are matters committed to the sound judicial discretion of the trial court. State Highway Commission v. Lacey, S.D., 113 N.W.2d 50.
Finding no abuse of discretion on the ruling complained of judgment will accordingly be entered in favor of the plaintiff, A. S. Nystrom, against the State of South Dakota in the amount of $3,678 together with interest thereon at the rate of 6 per cent per annum from the 25th day of October, 1961.
All the Judges concur.
NOTES
[1]  Nystrom et al. v. State et al., 78 S.D. 498, 104 N.W.2d 711.

=== CASE 9738806 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:03:22.142014+00 ===

Mr. JUSTICE WILSON delivered the opinion of the court: Defendant was charged by indictment with seven counts arising from an abortion he allegedly performed on Manon Broomfield. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1973, ch. 38, pars. 81—13(g), 12—4(a), 12—4(a), 12—4(a), ch. 91, pars. 16j, 16k, 16q.) Following a bench trial, he was convicted on the criminal abortion count (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1973, ch. 38, par. 81—13(g)) and sentenced to one to three years in prison. On appeal defendant contends that the criminal abortion statute under which he was convicted is unconstitutional and that he was not proven guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. We affirm. State’s Case At trial, Vita Broomfield (Vita) testified that she was the mother of Manon Broomfield (Manon), the complainant. On April 15,1975, she took her daughter to the Midwest Clinic at 316 North Michigan Avenue for the purpose of having an abortion performed on Manon. When they arrived, Vita paid the receptionist and Manon left her mother’s presence. An hour later she returned without having had an abortion. Vita had a conversation at the clinic with a counselor named Valerie who subsequently called her on the telephone several times over the next three days. All but *30 of Vita’s money was returned to her. At noon, on April 18,1975, she took Manon to the Northeast Clinic at 1200 North Dearborn for an appointment. No one was there, so she went downstairs, called Valerie, and returned to the clinic. At approximately 12:45 p.m., defendant arrived, stating he had just come from the hospital, and Vita assumed he was a doctor. They entered the clinic and Vita and defendant went to the examining room while Manon remained in the waiting room. He gave her insurance papers and she paid him *250. Defendant told her that they could come back the next day, a Saturday, but Vita wanted the abortion done immediately because the following day her husband would be at home. Defendant told her that the abortion was not legal. Subsequently defendant and Manon went into his office and closed the door. Vita did not see her daughter again until 3:30 p.m. At that time, Manon was in the examining room and appeared very ill and pale. There was blood all around her. Defendant told Vita that he might have to send her daughter to the hospital, and that Manon’s blood pressure was low. He directed her to go to the drugstore to pick up some medicine, and that he would order the prescription over the phone. However, he did not have the prescription filled. Defendant then told Vita that Dr. Stewart would take care of Manon in the hospital. Subsequently, Manon got dressed and defendant’s receptionist and Vita helped Manon to the elevator. In the elevator, Manon fainted. When she recovered, the receptionist accompanied Manon and her mother to the hospital. After their arrival at the hospital, Vita did not see Manon again until 8 p.m. when she went to Manon’s room and Manon was being examined by defendant and Dr. Stewart. Manon was screaming during the examination. The following day Vita learned that Dr. Stewart would no longer be Manon’s doctor and Dr. Fiakpuis would take over. On Monday evening she and her husband went to the hospital, spoke with Dr. Fiakpuis and signed a consent form for an operation to be performed on Manon the following morning. During cross-examination, Vita testified that on April 15, 1975, she believed that Manon was pregnant. The previous day she had taken Manon to Billings Hospital but to her knowledge, her daughter was not examined. She did not leave Manon at Billings Hospital because the abortion procedure would have taken too long. At Billings, they gave her the address of the North Michigan Avenue Clinic, where she subsequently took Manon. Vita had also considered taking Manon to Detroit for an abortion. Vita further testified that during the previous January and February, she noticed that Manon had been gaining weight, but Manon insisted that she was having her menstrual period every month between January and April. Manon finally admitted to her that she had been lying because she was afraid. Vita had not told her husband of their daughter’s pregnancy because she did not want to disappoint him. Vita also stated that it was at defendant’s suggestion, that his receptionist accompany her and her daughter to the hospital. Vita did not tell the admitting personnel why Manon was being admitted nor did she recall being asked. Although the hospital form bears the notation “incomplete abortion,” she did not impart that information. After Manon was admitted, Vita met a doctor from India who was wearing a turban, and she lied to him, saying that Manon had been having intermittent abdominal pains and vaginal bleeding since that morning. Vita further testified that Valerie did not tell her that defendant could arrange to get her daughter into a hospital and keep quiet the fact that she was having an abortion. She also admitted during cross that there is a civil suit pending against defendant and others on Manon’s behalf. On redirect, Vita stated that she gave incorrect information to the Indian doctor because she was under the impression from defendant that the abortion was illegal. Defendant had told her that she would not have to give any information at the hospital. During recross, Vita said that she lied to the doctor even though she thought her daughter would die. Dr. Hilbert Stewart testified that he is a licensed physician and surgeon affiliated with Illinois Central Hospital. He knew defendant for a number of years, had met him socially a few times and thought that he was an osteopath. Dr. Stewart explained that an osteopath is a combined medical doctor and chiropractor and that some osteopaths perform surgery and prescribe drugs. On April 18,1975, Dr. Stewart spoke to defendant on the telephone. Defendant told him that he had a patient in his office that had had a “surgical procedure” concerning the “generative organs,” and that the child was in a “compromised position.” Stewart could not specifically remember what defendant said he had done. He did recall defendant stating that the patient was having an abortion or had had an abortion and that she was in shock. Defendant asked him to arrange hospitalization and Stewart did so and became the treating physician on a temporary basis. On the same day, defendant introduced him to the mother of the patient. He treated Manon until the 20th of April and diagnosed that she possibly had some sort of perforation of her uterus. He may have thought at the time that she was aborted. During cross-examination, Stewart testified that he did not believe that defendant said that he performed the abortion. Dr. Everett Fiakpuis testified that he is licensed to practice medicine and perform surgery. On April 21, 1975, he examined Manon upon the request of Dr. Stewart. He observed that her abdomen was soft and she was experiencing some tenderness. Her genitalia were within normal limits, and her cervix was closed. Her uterus was soft, slightly tender and enlarged to about ten to twelve gestational sizes. That is, the appearance of her uterus was one of a woman who is 10 to 12 weeks pregnant. Defendant called him several times between April 21 and April 23, 1975. On April 22, Fiakpuis performed surgery on Manon. He performed an “exploratory laborotomy” where he discovered a ragged perforation in Manon’s uterus and “necratic, foul-smelling products of conception adhering to the endometrium.” The whole of the anterior cervix of the uterus was discolored. Fiakpuis was of the opinion that the tear in the uterus was probably caused by an instrument. He performed a total abdominal hysterectomy on Manon. During cross-examination, Fiakpuis could not say what kind of instrument caused the tear. He could not say that a corkscrew instrument made the hole. During redirect, he stated if a corkscrew were long enough, it could have caused the hole and during redirect, he stated that the tear was located 8 to 10 inches from the opening. William Mavrelis, the director of pathology and clinical pathology at Illinois Central Hospital testified that he examined the uterus after it was surgically removed from Manon Broomfield. He found that it had an unusual tear that could have been made by an instrument that was used from the inside out. There was hemorrhaging into the uterine cavity and into the wall of the uterus. He diagnosed it as a pregnant uterus with perforations and “endo cervicitis or erosive cervicitis.” Because of the removal of her uterus, Manon will not be able to produce children. During cross-examination Mavrelis stated that there were pus cells that could have caused the patient harm and possibly her life. Manon Broomfield, the complainant, testified that she was 18 years old at the time of trial. In April of 1975, she thought she was pregnant because she had missed about three menstrual periods. On April 15,1975, she went with her mother to a clinic at 316 North Michigan where she was examined by a doctor. At approximately 12:30 p.m. on April 18,1975, she went to a clinic at 1200 North Dearborn and defendant arrived 45 minutes later. At the clinic, she went into an examination room, put on a gown, laid down on the examination table and put her feet into stirrups. She had not been bleeding or in pain prior to this time. Defendant brought his tools over to the table. He first inserted a vagina widener into her. She had read about this instrument in a medical guide. He then gave her a pain shot in the vagina. Subsequently he took a pair of long manicuring scissors and inserted them into her vagina and began “cutting or pushing against something.” She felt “like water rushing out,” and defendant wiped the table with a rag. He then picked up a 6- to 7-inch-long tool that looked like a corkscrew, inserted it and began twisting it. This procedure lasted from 45 minutes to an hour. He asked her whether she felt pain and then gave her another pain shot. He took what looked like the same corkscrew and inserted it again for a second 45-minute period. She felt water dripping again and he cleaned off the table and put the matter into a dish which he subsequently poured down the drain. The dish was filled with blood and blood clots. Defendant then gave her a sanitary pad. Defendant came to see her at the hospital and called her three times on the telephone. On the phone, he told her he was sorry and offered to start a trust fund for her. He said that he did not want to go to jail because he had just started his practice. His receptionist brought her flowers. During cross-examination, Manon admitted that she failed to or would not tell her mother that she had missed her period. At the Loop Clinic she was told that she was more than 12 weeks pregnant. She did not recall whether she told anyone at the hospital that defendant had used a corkscrew. She was aware of the pending lawsuit against defendant but did not know anything about it. On redirect, Manon stated that the doctor at the Loop Medical Center examined her with his hands and did not use any instrument. She was able to observe the device defendant used in his office, because she lifted her head to watch. The State read into the record the contents of a certified court proceeding which reflected that defendant had two previous convictions in 1966 and 1970. Defendant’s Case Defendant testified in his own behalf that in April 1975, he was licensed to practice chiropractic medicine but is no longer so licensed. He was practicing at the Northeast Clinic at 1200 North Dearborn. At 2:35 p.m. on April 18, 1975, he received a phone call from Valerie McCullough. One half hour later, Manon and Vita Broomfield arrived at the Clinic, as arranged by McCullough, where he was waiting for them. He gave them a confidential patient introductory form to fill out. He subsequently took Manon to the examining room, gave her a gown to change into, and left. When he returned she was a little pale, slightly shaking and appeared to be in “some sort of distress.” When he began examining her she started to perspire so he took her temperature and found her temperature to be slightly elevated. He took her blood pressure and found it to be slightly low. Her pulse was very rapid and not very strong. He observed that she was wearing a large sanitary napkin which she bled through. He asked her to remove it, and when she did, a large blood clot came out. With his hands, he palpated her uterus, which he was allowed to do under his license, and found her uterus to be swollen. He then used a vaginal speculum which was also an activity authorized under his license, and noticed that the cervix had dilated and had a bluish discoloration. He asked Manon how long she had been having this problem and she responded that it had started that morning. She had been to see a friend of her mother’s, a doctor, “but she didn’t want to get involved.” Defendant placed a fresh sanitary napkin on her. He noticed that Manon appeared faint and when he again took her blood pressure, he found that it had fallen considerably. He then went into the waiting room where Vita was and told her that her daughter had said she had been to see someone else and that she was suffering from an acute loss of blood and was going into shock. He told Vita that he would call over a prescription to the drugstore and asked her to pick up the medicine. She left and he helped Manon get dressed. She was shaky and still bleeding. He called the drugstore and told them to send Vita back. He then telephoned Dr. Stewart and did not tell him that he had performed surgery. When Vita returned, defendant told her that he had arranged to send Manon to the hospital. Since she had indicated on the form that she did not have insurance, he told her she would need a cash deposit. At that time, she stated that she did have insurance. She said that her husband would “kill both of us” if he finds out. Defendant responded that the safety of her daughter was her first concern. He then called Stewart and told him that they had insurance. He asked his receptionist who was also his sister to accompany them to the hospital. Defendant further testified that he did not use a corkscrew or even have such an instrument at his office. He did not do any of the things that Manon described and used only a sponge forceps to clean out the vaginal vault so he could observe her cervix, a procedure which was within the scope of his license. He assumed that she was threatening to have a spontaneous abortion and thought that she probably had had a partial incomplete abortion performed by someone else. He went to her hospital room that evening but never called her or offered to set up a trust fund. Vita Broomfield paid him *25 in cash. He never told her that he would see what he could do about an abortion and never told her what he was doing was not legal. He denied telling her to lie to people at the hospital, nor did he tell his sister to bring Manon flowers. During cross-examination, defendant testified that he diagnoses pregnancies and was prepared to do so for Manon. He diagnoses pregnancies by manual examination and at other times, by urine tests. There was some blood on his table during Manon’s exam which he wiped off with a paper towel. Her bag of water did not rupture in his office. He did not tell Stewart that an abortion had been performed on Manon. Defendant further testified that 25 minutes passed between the two times he took Manon’s blood pressure. He assumed her blood pressure fell because of the bleeding. McCullough had only once before sent over a patient to him. On redirect, defendant stated that he had in the past, referred patients to other doctors to have them hospitalized and would follow up by visiting them. Upon examination by the court, defendant stated that he automatically gave youngsters pelvic examinations. The Broomfields did not know whether he was an M.D. or a chiropractor. Vita told him that Manon was having cramps and pain in her abdomen. He had never called the pharmacy before that day but thought that they would accommodate him in an emergency. It was also the first time that he had referred a patient to Dr. Stewart. Upon further redirect, defendant stated that three weeks before, McCullough had tried to sell him a tax shelter, and that he had seen her two or three times before. Upon further examination by the court, defendant stated that if a patient has gestated long enough, one can determine whether her ambiotic (sic) sac is filled with fluid. State’s Case in Rebuttal Manon testified that no other person used an instrument on any part of her body. On cross, she testified that the first time her blood pressure was taken by defendant she was lying down and the second time, she was sitting up. Dr. Antonio Scommegna testified as an expert in obstetrics and gynecology. The State posed a hypothetical question concerning the fluctuations in blood pressure as described by defendant and he responded that such fluctuations were possible. Likely causes for the drop in blood pressure would be from hemorrhage or a vaginal reaction due to “donatation.” The reaction would take place if the cervix of a woman who had not previously had a child were dilated by an instrument. Removal of á blood clot attached to a sanitary napkin would not cause the drop in blood pressure. Furthermore, if the bleeding were significant a vaginal reaction is unlikely. The blood pressure of the patient could go back up by placing her in a reclining position. On cross-examination the doctor said that the sudden drop in blood pressure could be caused by internal or external bleeding and that a cursory examination could miss internal bleeding. He also stated that if there was a tear in the uterus there may be significant bleeding to account for the drop in blood pressure. The doctor was also asked a hypothetical question concerning the effect of the insertion and twisting of a 6-7 inch corkscrew type instrument. He stated that such an instrument could not remove the contents of the uterus but would do a great deal of damage to the integrity of the uterine wall. On redirect, the doctor stated that this instrument could tear the uterus. The State’s last witness was Valerie McCullough who testified that she is an independent contractor for the Chicago Loop Medical Clinic and runs a counseling service for women who wish to obtain abortions. On April 15, 1975, McCullough had a conversation with Vita Broomfield in the presence of Manon. Subsequently she telephoned defendant. She had met defendant the previous December and had his business card. She told him that she had a hysterical patient who had an “A.B.” and asked him if he knew someone who could put the patient in the hospital. He responded that he would see what he could do. She spoke to him the next day and he told her he could arrange to put Manon in an osteopathic hospital and to send her to him. In another phone conversation, McCullough told defendant that Manon only had four hours for the procedure. He responded that if it were her first trimester, she could be taken care of within that amount of time; if her pregnancy was beyond the first trimester, she would have to stay. He also directed her to send the Broomfields to him on the 18th of April. During this same time period, McCullough spoke to Vita approximately three times on the phone. During cross-examination, McCullough testified that she knew that defendant was a chiropractor, and had not, prior to April 18, 1975, referred anyone to him for the purposes of an abortion. In her conversations with him regarding Manon Broomfield, he did not say that he would perform one. The State then stipulated to the fact that McCullough had received immunity from prosecution for her testimony before the grand jury, except that she was not immune from prosecution for perjury. Upon examination by the court, MCullough stated that she had tried to sell defendant a tax shelter, but he did not purchase one. Both Manon and her mother were in tears when she met them. The cost of the abortion was to be *250 unless it was necessary for Manon to become an in-patient. During cross-examination, McCullough testified that defendant may have said that he would examine Manon to determine the period of her pregnancy. Opinion The threshold issue before us is whether the provision in the criminal abortion statute under which defendant was convicted is unconstitutional. Section 3 of the Illinois Abortion Law (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1973, ch. 38, par. 81 — 13(g)) defines “criminal abortion” as follows: “° ° ° the use of any instrument, medicine, drug or other substance, whatever, with the intent to procure a miscarriage of any woman except when done by a physician in conformity with this Act. It shall not be necessary in order to commit a criminal abortion that the woman be pregnant, or if pregnant, that a miscarriage be accomplished.”  Defendant contends that the recent Federal district court opinion in Wynn v. Scott (N.D. Ill. 1978), 449 F. Supp. 1302, appeal pending sub nom. Carey v. Wynn, No. 78 229, appeal filed August 9,1978, compels a holding in this case that the provision in issue is unconstitutional. We disagree. In Wynn, plaintiffs in the two consolidated class action cases involved were four male physicians, two women who were pregnant at the time of the action, two not-for-profit corporations which perform abortion services and one physician who regularly performs abortions. One of the issues involved concerned the constitutionality of the portion of the 1975 Illinois statute defining criminal abortion, which was identical, in wording, to the 1973 provision involved in the instant case. Plaintiffs challenged the provision on due process grounds because of vagueness and because it punished unintentional conduct. The court found: “The absence of a definition of ‘miscarriage’ in the definition of criminal abortion gives rise to a true vagueness problem. Because this critical term is not defined, physicians cannot tell what conduct is prohibited.” (Emphasis added.) 449 F. Supp. 1302, 1328. Having so reasoned, the court later concluded: “[W]e declare the following portions of the Illinois Abortion Act void and unenforceable because they conflict with rights guaranteed plaintiffs by the due process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution of the United States: §2(6), the definition of criminal abortion; * 449 F. Supp. 1302, 1331. At the outset, we note that the court in Wynn found the statute unconstitutional as to plaintiffs because as physicians, they would not know what conduct was proscribed by the use of the word “miscarriage.” Therefore they stood to be punished for unintentional conduct. The defect existing in Wynn is not present in the case at bar. Defendant is not being punished for unintentional conduct; he is being punished for an intent that is quite clear. The statute clearly indicates that such a procedure should not be done “except when done by a physician in conformity with this Act.” Section 4 of the Illinois Abortion Law (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1973, ch. 38, par. 81—14) describes with particularity who may perform an abortion, when, where, and under what conditions: “(a) During the first trimester an abortion shall be performed by a physician; (b) During the second trimester or thereafter, an abortion shall be performed by a physician, in a hospital, on an inpatient basis, with measures for life support which must be available and utilized if there is any clearly visible evidence of viability; (c) During the third trimester, an abortion shall only be performed to preserve the life or to preserve the physical or mental health of the mother by a physician after consultation with at least two other physicians not related to or engaged in practice with the attending physician.” (Emphasis added.) Further, section 3 of the Illinois Abortion Law (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1973, ch. 38, par. 81—13(d)) defines physician as “a person licensed to practice medicine in all its branches under the Illinois ‘Medical Practices Act.’ ” Clearly, defendant, a chiropractor who by definition is not a physician, knew his undertaking to be proscribed under the provisions of the Act. We need not even consider as was necessary in Wynn, whether the term “miscarriage” is vague as to him, a nonphysician. Having determined that the statute in issue is constitutional as applied to defendant in this case, we next turn to defendant’s contention that the State failed to prove him guilty beyond a reasonable doubt of this charge. The testimony offered by the State and defendant clash in almost every respect as to the actions of defendant, the understanding of Vita, and the condition of Manon from the time the Broomfields arrived at defendant’s clinic through the time of Manon’s hospital stay. The only crucial point they do agree upon is that someone performed an abortion upon Manon Broomfield.  It is well established that in a bench trial, the determination of credibility and the weight to be given testimony, are matters within the province of the trier of fact, since he has the superior opportunity to observe the witnesses. (People v. Pagan (1972), 52 Ill. 2d 525, 288 N.E.2d 102; People v. Jones (1976), 42 Ill. App. 3d 353, 356 N.E.2d 114.) We, as a reviewing court, are unwilling to disturb his finding, unless the proof of guilt is so unsatisfactory as to create a reasonable doubt. (People v. Pagan (1972), 52 Ill. 2d 525, 288 N.E.2d 102; People v. Novotny (1968), 41 Ill. 2d 401, 244 N.E.2d 182.) The testimony of even one witness, if positive and credible is sufficient to convict, even though it is contradicted by the accused. (People v. Novotny (1968), 41 Ill. 2d 401, 244 N.E.2d 182; People v. Jones (1976), 42 Ill. App. 3d 353, 356 N.E.2d 114.) Finally, we are unwilling to reverse a conviction solely on the ground that the trial court chose to believe the State’s witnesses, rather than those of the defense. People v. Gomez (1963), 29 Ill. 2d 432, 194 N.E.2d 299; People v. Fulton (1967), 84 Ill. App. 2d 280, 228 N.E.2d 203, cert. denied (1968), 390 U.S. 953, 19 L. Ed. 2d 1145, 88 S. Ct. 1045.  Defendant points to certain factors which he contends illustrate that both Broomfield women were unworthy of belief. Vita Broomfield tried to conceal from her husband the fact of their daughter’s pregnancy. Further she failed to tell the Indian doctor that Manon had undergone an abortion and instead lied about her condition, even though she thought Manon’s life was in danger. Manon lied to her mother about her pregnancy for several months. Without commenting on the wisdom of either Vita’s or Manon’s actions, we do not find that these factors seriously taint their testimony so as to raise a reasonable doubt of guilt. The trial judge considered these factors, as well as the fact of the civil lawsuit pending against defendant on behalf of Manon, in determining the weight to be given their testimony. Defendant also urges that the medical testimony completely contradicted Manon’s account of the procedure she underwent in defendant’s office, and corroborated his. We disagree. Dr. Fiakpuis, who performed the hysterectomy, testified that the tear in Manon’s uterus occurred 8-10 inches from the vagainal opening while Manon testified that the corkscrew device was 6-7 inches long. The trial court apparently decided that this discrepancy need not be given great weight and we concur since Fiakpuis did testify that it was possible for a corkscrew to have caused the tear. Defendant also points to the testimony of the expert, Dr. Scommegna, that if a corkscrew instrument had been used, it would damage the uterine wall but would not remove the fetus. Although the pathologist, Dr. Mavrelis, did not testify whether or not there were portions of the fetus remaining, the doctor who performed the hysterectomy testified that there were “necratic, foul smeEing products of conception adhering to the endometrium.”  We find parallels between the instant case and People v. Fulton (1967), 84 Ill. App. 2d 280, 228 N.E.2d 203, cert. denied (1968), 390 U.S. 953, 19 L. Ed. 2d 1145, 88 S. Ct. 1945. In Fulton, defendant contended that he was not proven guilty of criminal abortion beyond a reasonable doubt, where his version of events contradicted that of the State’s witnesses. In that case, complainant testified that she went to the store of defendant, a pharmacist, and while there he inserted a tube in her uterus and packed it with cotton. She said that the procedure took about 10 minutes and she paid defendant 100. The person who accompanied complainant to the store for a prearranged meeting, testified that she saw complainant go into a back room with defendant and return 15 mimites later. The witness heard defendant tell complainant to leave the packing in for a certain period of time and complainant paid him money. A doctor corroborated the fact that an abortion had been performed. Defendant testified that he was led to believe complainant needed publicity on his radio show, and he set up an audition for her. He said that complainant was nauseous and used his bathroom for 5-10 minutes. He denied inserting a rubber tube in her or accepting 100 from her. His medical witness further testified that it was impossible to induce a rubber tube into the vagina unless a speculum was used. In Fulton, the court found, as we do here, that there was considerable corroborating testimony that the complainant, accompanied by a witness went to defendant for the purpose of procuring an abortion, which was accomplished, and money was paid for his services. See also People v. Gomez (1963), 29 Ill. 2d 432, 194 N.E.2d 299. For the foregoing reasons, we find the abortion statute constitutional as applied to defendant, and that he was proven guilty beyond a reasonable doubt of performing a criminal abortion. Consequently, we affirm the judgment of the trial court. Affirmed. SULLIVAN, P. J., and MEJDA, J, concur.

=== CASE 9738807 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:03:22.148151+00 ===

SUPPLEMENTAL OPINION ON DENIAL OF REHEARING Mr. JUSTICE WILSON delivered the opinion of the court: In his petition for rehearing, defendant asks us to reconsider our holding that the 1973 Abortion Control Act did not apply to him and to consider the question of when his sentence should commence. Although we find defendant’s arguments with regards to the first issue lacking in merit, we will consider the second issue because, subsequent to hearing oral arguments, we entered an order that this issue would be taken with the case. A brief history is necessary to understand the sentencing question. On February 21, 1977, defendant was convicted of criminal abortion in an Illinois State court and on May 23, he was sentenced to serve a term of one to three years. Defendant filed a timely appeal and was permitted to remain at liberty pending appeal after posting a bond. On April 14,1978, he was convicted in an Illinois Federal district court for his violations of various Federal drug and firearm statutes on or about July 22, 1977. He was sentenced to two concurrent terms of 10 to 15 years and a separate 5-year term to run concurrently with the first two sentences; he arrived at the Leavenworth Federal Penitentiary to begin his imprisonment on July 6,1978. On July 31, we issued an order revoking defendant’s appeal bond. Defendant contends that his Illinois sentence began no later than July 31, when we revoked his appeal bond. He argues that our order of revocation amounts to a judicial decree committing him to the Illinois Department of Corrections. We disagree.  If we were to agree with defendant’s argument that our order of revocation amounts to a judicial decree which starts his imprisonment on the criminal abortion offense, we would be ruling, in effect, that the sentence for that offense would run concurrently with the sentences for the Federal offenses. This we cannot do since it is the prerogative of the court issuing the second sentence to determine the effect of the already imposed sentence. (People ex rel. Fleming v. Pate (1971), 48 Ill. 2d 426, 270 N.E.2d 4; People v. Clark (1977), 46 Ill. App. 3d 240, 360 N.E.2d 1160.) This rule applies whether the court issuing the second sentence is another state’s court (People v. Clark) or a Federal court. (People ex rel. Fleming.) Furthermore, when two sentences have been issued, the first by a State court and the second by a Federal court, there is a presumption that the sentences run consecutively unless the order of the Federal court expressly states otherwise. People ex rel. Fleming; People v. Boney (1970), 128 Ill. App. 2d 170, 262 N.E.2d 766. In the instant case, there is no indication that the Federal court’s order states that the sentences are to run concurrently. Absent such an express statement, we conclude that defendant’s Illinois’ sentence does not begin until the completion of his Federal sentence. The petition for a rehearing is accordingly denied. SULLIVAN, P. J., and MEJDA, J., concur.

=== CASE 2217755 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:34.150658+00 ===

7 Mass. App. Ct. 233 (1979)
387 N.E.2d 156
LOIS B. BLOKSBERG
vs.
LEONARD M. BLOKSBERG.
Appeals Court of Massachusetts, Norfolk.
November 20, 1978.
March 20, 1979.
Present: HALE, C.J., GRANT, & ARMSTRONG, JJ.
Julian T. Houston for the defendant.
Edward M. Mahlowitz for the plaintiff.
ARMSTRONG, J.
The parties were granted a decree nisi of divorce on November 1, 1973, the decree making provision for alimony and child support by incorporating in the decree, by reference, a separation agreement which had been previously executed by the parties. The agreement contained a clause which we shall assume, for purposes of decision, required submission to arbitration of any dispute arising out of or in connection with the agreement.[1] In November, 1977, the wife brought the present *234 action for the purpose of having the husband found to be in contempt of the decree, alleging in part that the husband had terminated alimony and child support payments altogether after August, 1977. The husband filed a complaint for modification of his support and alimony obligations and a motion to stay both the contempt action and the modification action until the disputes involved in both actions should be resolved by arbitration. The judge denied the stay but reported to this court (see Mass.R. Dom. Rel.P. 64 [1975]) the question of the correctness of that ruling.
The judge did not err in denying the motion for a stay. The decree nisi, by virtue of its incorporation of the terms of the separation agreement, imposed on the husband obligations for the payment of alimony and child support parallel to those of the agreement, Knox v. Remick, 371 Mass. 433, 434 (1976), and the contempt and modification actions were both concerned solely with the obligations imposed by the decree and not those imposed by the agreement. The decree provided that its provisions relative to alimony and child support were to stand "until the further order of the court," and the Probate Court had continuing power under G.L.c. 208, § 37, to modify those provisions. Salvesen v. Salvesen, 370 Mass. 608, 610-611 (1976). The portion of the decree which called for arbitration was thus subject to modification or elimination by the court; and it is settled that the court's power of modification under G.L.c. 208, § 37, may be exercised as to both future and past obligations and may be exercised not only *235 in a proceeding for modification but also in a proceeding for contempt. Watts v. Watts, 314 Mass. 129, 133 (1943). See Cohen v. Murphy, 368 Mass. 144, 147 (1975). It follows that the provision for arbitration of disputes, assuming it to have been validly incorporated in the decree nisi, could not have the effect of precluding resort to the Probate Court for enforcement or modification of the alimony and child support provisions of the decree. Any other result would enable a judge, by inserting or incorporating an arbitration provision in the judgment, to divest the court of the power given it by G.L.c. 208, § 37, to modify orders for alimony and child support as conditions necessitate.
In view of the judge's refusal of the stay, we need not consider whether a decision to enforce an arbitration provision in circumstances such as those here presented would constitute error of law or abuse of discretion.
The case is remanded for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
So ordered.
NOTES
[1]  The clause read in part: "In the event of any dispute or misunderstanding arising out of or in connection with this [a]greement, as between the [h]usband and [w]ife, a readjustment in payments, either temporary or permanent, appears to either party to be warranted, such dispute, misunderstanding or proposed readjustment shall be referred to and settled by the [t]rustee, and if the [t]rustee cannot settle the matter, it may be referred by him to some properly qualified and experienced third party acceptable to him, and the decision of the two shall be binding and conclusive on the parties." As something is wrong with the syntax, the clause is subject to differing interpretations by the parties. It is unnecessary to determine the correct interpretation at this time, although it may be necessary later should either of the parties commence litigation to enforce the agreement.

=== CASE 2217759 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:34.219583+00 ===

7 Mass. App. Ct. 301 (1979)
387 N.E.2d 181
NUMBER THREE LOUNGE, INC.
vs.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES CONTROL COMMISSION.
Appeals Court of Massachusetts, Suffolk.
February 21, 1979.
March 28, 1979.
Present: BROWN, GREANEY, & KASS, JJ.
Francis J. DiMento for the plaintiff.
Kathleen King Parker, Assistant Attorney General, for the defendant.
GREANEY, J.
By its appeal the Number Three Lounge, Inc.,[1] challenges a judgment which affirmed, after review *302 under G.L.c. 30A, § 14, a decision and orders of the Alcoholic Beverages Control Commission (commission). The plaintiff raises three primary issues on appeal: that the decision of the commission is not supported by substantial evidence, that it is undermined by an error of law, and, if the decision is found not to be so flawed, that the commission's remedy of revoking the plaintiff's license[2] was too severe in all the circumstances. The commission based its action on findings that the plaintiff had violated rule nine of the commission's rules and regulations[3] seven times by submitting in a license transfer petition and two license renewal applications to the Licensing Board for the city of Boston (board) false information concerning the identity of the true owners of the lounge,[4] the identity of its actual treasurer,[5] and the fact that the capital stock of the lounge had been pledged to *303 secure repayment of a corporate debt.[6] The suspension order was predicated upon the plaintiff's false report with reference to the pledge of its stock, while the license revocation order was based upon the commission's findings that the information reported as to the lounge's ownership was false, and that persons other than those identified as the owners in the forms in fact held a substantial indirect interest in the lounge. We hold that the judge was correct in affirming the commission's decision and orders.
Judicial review of a decision of the commission is "confined to the record, except that in cases of alleged irregularities in procedure before the agency, not shown in the record, testimony thereon may be taken in the court." G.L.c. 30A, § 14(5), as amended by St. 1976, c. 411. The judge may set aside the agency's decision only if it is "[u]nsupported by substantial evidence," G.L.c. 30A, § 14(7)(e), as so amended, substantial evidence meaning "such evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion," G.L.c. 30A, § 1(6), as amended through St. 1978, c. 552, § 13. On the record we find substantial evidentiary support for the conclusions reached by the commission. The nub of the problem before the commission was to determine which of two branches of a family tree really owned or controlled the lounge.[7] The commission concluded that the Tecci family in fact controlled the lounge, that Patrick Vidette was merely a straw, and as a result, an indirect interest of some substance in the lounge had gone unreported. We summarize the evidence that impelled the commission to this conclusion in some detail.[8]
*304 Late in 1973, George E. and Catherine Tecci learned of the availability of a business opportunity to purchase all of the outstanding capital stock (consisting of 200 shares) of the lounge then owned by Alfonso Aucella (Aucella). Ownership of the stock carried with it ownership of an on-premises liquor license.[9] Pursuant to this opportunity, Catherine Tecci, on February 25, 1974, concluded a purchase and sale agreement with Aucella to purchase all of the lounge's capital stock for a total purchase price of $125,000. The terms of the agreement called for payment of the price by way of a $10,000 cash deposit when the contract was signed, a payment of $65,000 in cash at the closing, and payment of the balance through a $50,000 note secured by a pledge of the stock. Catherine bound the deal with her $10,000 personal check. Her husband, George E. Tecci, was present when the agreement was signed.[10] Catherine and Aucella then applied to the board on February 26, 1974, to request approval for the transfer of all of the stock from Aucella to Catherine, for approval of the pledge of the stock as security for the balance of the purchase price, and for a change of officers from Aucella as president and treasurer to Catherine as president and treasurer. The board was concerned with the role of Catherine's husband George E. Tecci in the new corporate scheme and requested information from Catherine on that point. She replied in a letter to the board that her husband would be the "host" at the lounge. On March 6, 1974, the Teccis were informed by the board that the transfer would not be approved, primarily because of the presence of George E. Tecci in the background.[11] After the *305 rejection, George E. Tecci approached his son-in-law Patrick Vidette and persuaded him to become the purchaser of the lounge, at least on paper, with the funds necessary to complete the purchase to be loaned by the Teccis to Patrick. Catherine then assigned her rights under the agreement to Patrick.[12] A new corporate structure was assembled in which Patrick was named president and treasurer and his wife Margaret clerk. At the same time the lounge opened a corporate checking account at a local bank and named George J. Tecci (George E. and Catherine's son) as the treasurer and as the only person authorized to sign checks. A new transfer petition was filed with the board naming Patrick Vidette[13] as transferee.
The board became concerned over this quick turnabout and pressed Patrick at the hearing conducted on the resubmitted transfer petition on the questions of the actual ownership of the lounge and the source of its capitalization. Patrick testified before the board that he was the sole stockholder, that his own money was used to purchase the stock, that George E. Tecci would not be employed as a host if Patrick "could help it," and that he (Patrick) "would be responsible for everything." Specifically relying on these representations, the board approved the transfer.
The transaction then went to closing with Aucella, Catherine, George E. and Patrick present as principals. Catherine paid the remaining $65,000 due on equity with her own personal funds. Patrick, George E. and Catherine signed a $50,000 note to Aucella for the balance of the purchase price,[14] and Patrick endorsed the stock certificate *306 delivered to him at the closing back to Aucella in blank, together with a security agreement pledging the stock as collateral for the note. Thereafter, the lounge again certified to its bank that George J., not Patrick, was the corporate treasurer and the only person authorized to deal with the corporation's funds, and permitted its accountant to set up the $75,000 in cash disbursed to Aucella at, and prior to, the closing on the corporate books as loans payable by the corporation to George E. and Catherine Tecci respectively.[15]
*307 There was evidence before the commission that after the lounge commenced business Patrick did not receive compensation in hand from it. From the date of the closing until at least June, 1976, the salaries paid out by the corporation, insofar as material to the issues before the commission, were disbursed to George E., Catherine, and their son George J. Tecci. Patrick was ascribed a "salary" of $25,000 by George J. Tecci, but that entire amount was remitted directly by the corporation through the son, George J. to Catherine and her husband to repay the $75,000 in cash advanced by them prior to and at the closing. George J. also directed checks from the corporation's account on a weekly basis to Aucella to liquidate the balance due on the $50,000 note.
There was additional evidence to indicate that George J. Tecci in the main managed and controlled the daily operations of the lounge, and that he did all of the hiring, interviewing, firing, writing of checks, and depositing and withdrawing of funds for the corporation. Patrick admitted he spent little time at the lounge and when he was at the premises he just walked around.
Several financial investigators and officers from the Suffolk district attorney's office, the Department of Public Safety, the Boston police department, and the commission testified that on various occasions they had questioned Patrick, George E., and George J. about the ownership of the lounge and had been told by George J. that his father had recently purchased the lounge, that he (George J.) was the "owner" but only his attorney could supply information as to why his name did not appear on the records filed in the State Secretary's office. The investigators were informed by George E. Tecci that he had "taken over" the lounge, that it was "his place" but that "the records don't reflect that." Patrick indicated to the investigators that he was previously employed by the city of Boston and had an interest only in a barbershop and a restaurant in Cambridge, and did not mention his interest in the lounge. Patrick also admitted in testimony that *308 his brother-in-law George J. Tecci was the "treasurer."[16]
Against this background, Patrick and Margaret Vidette filed renewal applications in 1974 and 1975 with the board, swearing in the applications under the penalties of perjury that no person or persons other than the two of them held a "direct or indirect interest" in the license, that Patrick alone was "the Treasurer"[17] and, in the 1974 renewal application, that there had been "no pledge of the capital stock" of the corporation.[18]
The commission, based on this evidence, concluded that Patrick had been effectively excluded from managerial control, that George E. and Catherine Tecci in fact held an indirect beneficial interest in the lounge, that Patrick was used as a "straw" to evade the revelation of the Teccis' involvement, that Patrick acted under the control of the Teccis and subject to their instructions, and that as a result false statements had been knowingly made on the various transfer and renewal applications filed with the board.
1. The plaintiff asks us to enlarge the traditional scope of review prescribed by the substantial evidence standard for the evaluation of agency decisions since it maintains that the commission's findings were adopted nearly verbatim from a set of proposed findings submitted to the commission by the district attorney.[19] When this occurs, *309 the plaintiff argues, we should look especially closely to be sure that the commission's findings have evidentiary support in the record. If this route is taken, the plaintiff indicates that it will become apparent to us that its activities constituted lawful business conduct and that in substance Patrick is the sole owner of the corporation's stock and actually indebted to his father and mother-in-law for the payment of loans made by them to him. Facing a sisyphean task in establishing this proposition in view of the evidence, the plaintiff proceeds to urge also that any statements by family members in the form of admissions to the contrary should be cast aside as "fragments" of the record, and as the product of an "unsophisticated, nonlegal" definition of ownership "in the eyes of the Teccis."
In our view this amounts to an argument that we should make independent findings on our own initiative from the record more in accordance with the plaintiff's theory of the case in place of making a determination as to whether substantial evidence exists to support the commission's findings. "A court may not displace an administrative [agency's] choice between two fairly conflicting views, even though the court would justifiably have made a different choice had the matter been before it de novo." Labor Relations Commn. v. University Hospital, Inc., 359 Mass. 516, 521 (1971). School Comm. of Chicopee v. Mass. Commn. Against Discrimination, 361 Mass. 352, 354 (1972). Bartlett v. Contributory Retirement Appeal Bd., 6 Mass. App. Ct. 948 (1978). The agency is the sole judge of the credibility and weight of evidence before it during the administrative proceeding. Maddocks v. Contributory Retirement Appeal Bd., 369 Mass. 488, 495 *310 (1976). We are satisfied that the commission's findings were amply supported by the evidence before it, that the Teccis under the guise of a closely held corporation effectively controlled the lounge to the exclusion of Patrick, and that the Teccis acted in a much more substantive role than that of creditors or high level management. The commission was not bound to accept the intra-family transactions at face value, and it could determine from the considerable direct and circumstantial evidence before it that the real indicia of ownership pointed to the Teccis as the persons in control of the lounge since they advanced the money for its acquisition, ran it on a day-to-day basis, and drew the bulk of the funds it produced.
2. The plaintiff also contends that the commission misinterpreted the meaning of the phrase "indirect interest in this license" as it appears on the board's forms, requiring disclosure of such interests, by construing that term to embrace the interests possessed by the Teccis as creditors or as management employees. The argument proceeds on the basis that the word "interest" must be read to encompass only such interests as are possessed by the owners of the corporation's stock.[20] Put another way, the plaintiff maintains that the record owner of the capital stock and the officers and directors of the corporation are the only persons that can have a direct or indirect interest in the corporation. We do not think it is appropriate in this context to mold the term "indirect interest" into the rigid definition suggested by the plaintiff.
The concept of an ownership interest can vary from an absolute proprietary interest to a mere possessory right. See Animal Rescue League v. Assessors of Bourne, 310 Mass. 330, 333 (1941); Northgate Constr. Co. v. State Tax Commn., 377 Mass. 205, 208 (1979). But the concept can *311 also have other meanings between these two poles. The commission viewed the term "indirect interest," on the facts before it, as a concept reasonably similar to that reflected by the possession of a beneficial interest in, or control over, property, and recognized that in attempting to ascertain the identity of the persons who in effect control a corporation and its assets the fact finder must of necessity pierce labels, look beyond form, and come to grips with the substance of the corporate relationship and the economic realities that are present. The commission applied the concept as embracing interests that are possessed "in the broad or equitable sense rather than in the narrow or technical sense," Grand Union Co. v. Sills, 43 N.J. 390, 408-409 (1964), and concluded, we think rightly, that a straw titleholder can be used to obfuscate the beneficial interests of others.
The commission's methodology in assessing the term "indirect interest" is also supported by the analysis in the decisions that have construed the requirements of G.L.c. 138, § 15. The provisions of that statute limit a person or a combination of persons from directly or indirectly holding more than three package store licenses. In approaching the problem whether a combination of persons holds a license the decisions under the statute have followed a path similar to the one tramped by the commission in this matter by looking to the substance of the ownership interests involved apart from the form employed to hold title. Thus, the decisions have stated on the topic of license control that such factors as "[i]nterlocking stockholders, directors and officers, family relationships, guidance, assistance and financial support, and joint activities" (emphasis supplied) are relevant criteria to be considered. Powers v. Sixty Broadway, Inc., 371 Mass. 296, 300 (1976). See also Cleary v. Cardullo's, Inc., 347 Mass. 337, 348-350 (1964); Johnson v. Martignetti, 374 Mass. 784 (1978). The principles set forth in these decisions are analogically supportive of the commission's unraveling of the identity of the persons involved with the *312 license under consideration here. The commission could properly find that the phrase "indirect interest" means an "indirect beneficial interest," see Johnson v. Martignetti, supra at 789, and that the Teccis held such an interest, so as to require disclosure. Nor does the record support the plaintiff's argument that the commission erroneously blurred the distinction between stock ownership and managerial authority.
Finally, on this question, the commission's application of the term has to be viewed also in light of the fact that businesses selling intoxicating liquors are heavily regulated. Ziffrin, Inc. v. Reeves, 308 U.S. 132, 138 (1939). Connolly v. Alcoholic Beverages Control Commn., 334 Mass. 613, 619 (1956). Arno v. Alcoholic Beverages Control Commn., 377 Mass. 83, 85-86 (1979). Because of this the licensing authorities have the legitimate right to expect full disclosure of holdings in the nature of substantial indirect as well as direct beneficial interests in an entity which seeks to own a license, particularly where specific inquiry is made on the issue, so that the agencies will be able properly to discharge their obligations of ensuring that the applicant meets the requirements imposed upon a prospective licensee. We are not prepared to say that the commission, based on the evidence before it and the facts it found, made an error of law in its interpretation and application of the term in this case.
3. On a last point we do not find that the remedy imposed by the commission was "draconian" under all the circumstances. Section 64 of G.L.c. 138 specifically authorizes the commission to revoke a license if it finds that a licensee has violated a commission regulation. An agency sanction requires the exercise of a certain amount of discretion, Wright v. Health Commr. of Boston, 322 Mass. 535, 540 (1948); Olde Towne Liquor Store, Inc. v. Alcoholic Beverages Control Commn., 372 Mass. 152, 154-155 (1977), which is open to challenge only if that discretion is seriously abused. The commission explained in detail the importance of rule nine and the importance of the commission's *313 need to receive truthful information about interests involved directly or indirectly in the control of a liquor license. In this case the purpose of masquerading the ownership interest in the lounge was to induce the agencies to take a course of action that had been previously rejected. The commission based its sanction on the findings of deliberate deception on the part of the plaintiff and the conclusion that the deception struck at the root of the obligations imposed on the board and the commission to regulate the ownership of licenses. It cannot be said that "the remedy selected has no reasonable relation to the unlawful practices found to exist." Jacob Siegel Co. v. F.T.C., 327 U.S. 608, 613 (1946). On the record we rule that there was no abuse of discretion as to the sanction imposed, and that its use was amply supported by the facts pointing to purposeful violations of the commission's regulation with regard to the contents of the forms filed with the board.
Judgment affirmed.
NOTES
[1]  The plaintiff does business as the "Teddy Bear Lounge," and is sometimes referred to herein as the lounge.
[2]  The commission also suspended the plaintiff's license for 120 days to run concurrently with the revocation of the license. The plaintiff on appeal focuses principally on the revocation of the license as the more severe of the two remedies and concentrates its arguments on it.
[3]  Rule nine reads as follows: "All applications shall be made under the penalties of perjury and any false statement contained in any application shall be a cause or ground for refusing to grant the license or permit or for suspending, cancelling or revoking a license or permit already granted." A transfer application filed with the Licensing Board for the city of Boston requires a statement warranted under the penalties of perjury, as to the names of the corporate officers and the number of shares they hold in the corporation. It also requires a further warranty to the effect that no person, other than the officers and stockholders named in the transfer papers, has a direct or indirect interest in the license. The license renewal applications which must be filed annually with the same board require similar information, and also require an additional disclosure as to whether any of the corporate stock is pledged, and if so, to whom.
[4]  The forms as filed indicated Patrick Vidette as the owner of all of the corporation's outstanding capital stock; the commission found that he was in substance a straw for the interests of the George E. Tecci family.
[5]  The forms as filed indicated Vidette to be the treasurer; the commission found that George J. Tecci was in fact the treasurer.
[6]  Certain of the forms as filed stated that the stock was unencumbered; the commission found that it was in fact pledged to Alfonso Aucella to secure a $50,000.00 indebtedness.
[7]  The branches consisted on the one hand of the Tecci family, George E. Tecci, his wife Catherine Tecci, and his son George J. Tecci, and on the other, George E. and Catherine's daughter Margaret Vidette and son-in-law Patrick Vidette.
[8]  The evidence was presented to the commission through seventeen witnesses and forty-seven exhibits, pursuant to a complaint filed with the commission by the district attorney for the Suffolk district.
[9]  The license was issued under the terms of G.L.c. 138, § 12.
[10]  There was testimony that George E. Tecci had made the proposal regarding the purchase to Aucella.
[11]  There was no challenge made to the board's rejection of the transfer petition on this basis.
[12]  Patrick and Margaret Vidette admitted before the commission that they did not have sufficient cash to even begin to meet the $75,000 cash payment obligations required by the agreement.
[13]  The first falsification occurred here when Patrick listed himself as treasurer, not reporting the content of the resolution appointing George J. Tecci as the treasurer and the person with sole control over the corporation's bank account.
[14]  Aucella apparently had misgivings about the financial stability of Patrick and as a result insisted on the assurances of George E. and Catherine as comakers on the note.
[15]  There was a considerable amount of accounting testimony produced before the commission. The lounge's first accountant testified that the original cash equity in the venture was established as corporate liabilities due to the Teccis, that he did not know anything about the "Tecci's lending that money to Mr. Vidette," and that he never dealt with Vidette. Corporate checks were issued after the closing in April, 1974, to liquidate a large portion of the liabilities carried on the books as owed to the Teccis. In June, 1976, after an investigation into the affairs of the lounge had been commenced by the Suffolk district attorney's office, the corporation changed accountants. The second accountant changed the designation of the money due to the Teccis on the corporation's books from corporate loans payable to loans receivable owed by Vidette to the corporation. An expert presented before the commission by the district attorney testified that he had examined all the accounting papers and records of the corporation and that despite contrary labelling by the lounge's second accountant, the lounge had treated the money advanced by the Teccis as a corporate liability due to them and liquidated it in that manner. The commission took this as additional evidence of an indirect interest in the lounge by the Teccis, and that the second accountant's efforts were designed primarily to get the Teccis' names off the books and to make the substantial amount of corporate funds paid to the Teccis look less suspect. The plaintiff strenuously objects to the commission's interpretation of the accounting evidence. While we recognize that accounting theory and practice are subject to many interpretations, there was sufficient evidence before the commission to justify the inferences and conclusions it drew from the accounting aspects of the case. Both accountants had also filed certificates of condition annually with the State Secretary's office, as required by G.L.c. 156B, § 109, listing the Videttes as the corporation's sole officers and Patrick as the sole stockholder.
[16]  George J. denied that he was the treasurer, and the lounge attempted to reconcile the inconsistency by contending that it may have had two treasurers.
[17]  Within three weeks of representing these facts to the board in the 1975 renewal application, the lounge caused to be filed with its bank through Patrick and Margaret an additional certification that George J. was the treasurer.
[18]  By the time the 1975 renewal application was filed the note to Aucella had been paid and the pledge of stock accompanying the note had been extinguished.
[19]  As a basis for this contention the plaintiff points to several Federal circuit cases which have been critical of a trial judge's wholesale adoption of one counsel's proposed findings of fact submitted to the judge under the Federal equivalent of Mass. R.Civ. P. 52(a), 365 Mass. 816 (1974). See Dreyfus & Cie. v. Panama Canal Co., 298 F.2d 733, 737 (5th Cir.1962); Roberts v. Ross, 344 F.2d 747 (3d Cir.1965); In re Las Colinas, Inc., 426 F.2d 1005, 1010 (1st Cir.1970), cert. denied, 405 U.S. 1067 (1972); Flowers v. Crouch-Walker Corp., 552 F.2d 1277, 1284 (7th Cir.1977). But in all of these cases, the findings were viewed in the context of the clearly erroneous standard imposed by rule 52(a), irrespective of their source.
[20]  It appears that no attack was ever made before the board, the commission, or the court as to the validity of the requirement that indirect interests in a license be disclosed or as to the validity of rule nine of the commission. We do not in any way intimate that such an attack would be successful.

=== CASE 2217765 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:34.335586+00 ===

264 Minn. 393 (1963)
119 N.W. (2d) 713
EARL J. NELSON AND ANOTHER
v.
B & B INVESTMENT COMPANY, INC., AND OTHERS.
No. 38,749.
Supreme Court of Minnesota.
January 4, 1963.
James B. Lund, for appellants.
Richard Siegel, Robins, Davis & Lyons, and Robert J. Tweedy, for respondents.
NELSON, JUSTICE.
Plaintiffs appeal from an order of the District Court of Hennepin County granting defendants' motion for summary judgment under Rule 56, Rules of Civil Procedure. Defendants move to dismiss the appeal.
Rule 56.03 of Rules of Civil Procedure provides in part as follows:
"* * * Judgment shall be rendered forthwith if the pleadings, depositions, * * * and admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that either party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law."
The appeal in the instant case was taken on April 19, 1962, from the order of March 28, 1962, granting the summary judgment.
The clerk's file in Hennepin County District Court indicates that the judgment roll was filed and judgment docketed on April 24, 1962. Service of notice of taxation of costs was admitted by plaintiffs' attorney on April 13, 1962, prior to the entry of judgment.
*394 Where, as here, summary judgment is granted on all issues the aggrieved party may, upon entry of judgment, proceed with his appeal from the judgment.
We have held that this court's jurisdiction as to appeals is limited to those instances set forth in Minn. St. 605.09. We have also held that an order granting summary judgment is an intermediate order which requires a subsequent judgment to give it effect and is not appealable. Shema v. Thorpe Bros. 238 Minn. 470, 57 N.W. (2d) 157.
We have further held that on an appeal from a judgment "any intermediate order involving the merits or necessarily affecting the judgment appealed from" may be reviewed. § 605.09(1); Shema v. Thorpe Bros. supra.
No appeal having been taken from the judgment entered April 24, 1962, this court is without jurisdiction to proceed further in the matter and the motion and application for permission that the appeal be heard from the judgment entered must be denied and the appeal dismissed. See, General Elec. Co. v. Anchor Cas. Co. 251 Minn. 305, 87 N.W. (2d) 639, and In re Estate and Guardianships of Williams, 254 Minn. 272, 95 N.W. (2d) 91.
Appeal dismissed.

=== CASE 2217776 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:34.563791+00 ===

119 N.W.2d 147 (1963)
174 Neb. 689
The STATE of Nebraska ex rel. John R. BROGAN, Appellant,
v.
Harold F. BOEHNER, Appellee.
No. 35314.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
January 25, 1963.
*148 Ginsburg, Rosenberg & Ginsburg, Norman Krivosha, Lincoln, for appellant.
Waring & Gewacke, Geneva, for appellee.
Heard before SIMMONS, C. J., and CARTER, MESSMORE, YEAGER, SPENCER, BOSLAUGH, and BROWER, JJ.
*149 BOSLAUGH, Justice.
This is an action in quo warranto brought by John R. Brogan as relator against Harold F. Boehner as respondent. Both the relator and the respondent were candidates at the 1960 general election for the office of district director of Consumers Public Power District, District No. 5. The canvassing board declared the respondent elected. The relator then brought this action to oust the respondent from the office and to declare the relator to be entitled to the office. The trial court found generally for the respondent and dismissed the action. The relator's motion for new trial was overruled and he has appealed.
By various pleadings filed in the trial court the respondent questioned the right of the relator to maintain the action without filing a surety bond as provided in section 25-21,122, R.R.S.1943. This section, which was a part of the original Code of Civil Procedure, was amended in 1921 to provide that where the action is instituted by a person other than the county attorney, a bond shall be filed with the information.
The relator contends that the action is brought under section 25-21,146, R.R.S. 1943. This section was originally enacted as a part of a separate statute by the Territorial Legislature in 1858. Laws 1858, p. 232.
The distinction between the two sections was recognized in Thompson v. James, 125 Neb. 350, 250 N.W. 237. In that case this court said: "By section 20-21,137, Comp.St.1929, a citizen of the state claiming an office that is usurped or invaded by another may maintain this form of action in a district court with or without the consent of the prosecuting attorney, upon his own relation. * * * Relators are given capacity to maintain this action by the above cited section of the statute upon their own relation, and are not required to comply with section 20-21,113, Comp.St.1929, which provides for such an action by an elector, upon refusal of the prosecuting officer to bring the action and upon the giving of bond for costs, attorney's fee and prosecution without delay."
The relator in this case was authorized to bring the action upon his own relation and was not required to file a bond for costs, attorney's fee, and prosecution without delay.
The principal controversy concerns the validity of certain ballots cast by absentee or disabled voters and the effect to be given to invalid ballots. The ballots in question may be grouped into several categories, each of which will be discussed separately.
The first category consists of 11 ballots, cast by absentee voters, which were counted by the canvassing board and the trial court. The relator contends that these ballots should not have been counted because in each case the certificate of the official who administered the oath to the voter fails to state where the oath and certificate was executed. The statute provides that the certificate shall state "* * * the date of the execution of the oath and certificate and the place of such execution, if the voter is not in the military or naval service of the United States * * *." Section 32-810, R.R.S.1943. None of the voters were in the military or naval service of the United States.
The form of the oath and certificate is printed in blank upon the reverse side of the identification envelopes in which the ballots were returned to the county clerk. Above the oath is printed: "State of _____, County of _____." In each case these blanks were filled in to indicate that the oath was executed in a county in Nebraska. However, the postmark on 10 of the envelopes shows that they were mailed from outside of the State of Nebraska.
Each of the certificates was executed by a commissioned officer in the armed forces of the United States. Section 32-813, R.R. S.1943, authorizes any commissioned officer in the armed forces of the United States *150 to administer oaths, make certificates, and perform such other acts as are necessary to enable a voter to exercise his absent voting privilege. The trial court held that there had been a substantial compliance with the statute, and that any failure of the certificates to state the place of execution was not a material defect because there was no territorial restriction upon the authority of the officers who executed the certificates. We arrived at the same conclusion and hold that the 11 ballots were properly counted.
The second category consists of 8 ballots, cast by sick and disabled voters of York County, Nebraska, which were not counted by the canvassing board and the trial court. The relator contends that these ballots should have been counted.
The parties stipulated that these ballots were rejected by the canvassing board because the venue shown on each of the identification envelopes was "State of York, County of York" and in each instance they were notarized in York County, Nebraska. The trial court found that these ballots should not be counted for the same reason.
The certificate on one of the identification envelopes is not dated, and there is no other evidence showing when the ballot contained therein was voted. We find that this ballot should not be counted.
As to the remaining 7 ballots, the evidence shows a compliance with the statute in all respects except that the venue is shown to be "State of York." The respondent concedes in his brief that there is no State of York and we take judicial notice of that fact.
So far as these ballots are concerned, the situation is the same as if the venue had been left blank so that the venue would have read: "State of ______." Where no venue is shown, there is a presumption that the officer acted within his jurisdiction. Merriam v. Coffee, 16 Neb. 450, 20 N.W. 389; Crowell v. Johnson, 2 Neb. 146.
The respondent relies upon Miller v. Mersch, 152 Neb. 746, 42 N.W.2d 652, and McMaster v. Wilkinson, 145 Neb. 39, 15 N.W.2d 348, 155 A.L.R. 667. In Miller v. Mersch, supra, the venue was shown to be Thayer County, Nebraska, but the jurat indicated the oath had been administered in the Province of Saskatschewan, Canada, and no seal was affixed. In McMaster v. Wilkinson, supra, the venue was shown to be Adams County, Nebraska, and Saunders County, Nebraska, but the seal of the notary public indicated that he was a notary public of Sarpy County, Nebraska. In each of these cases the record on its face indicated that the authority of the officer administering the oath and executing the certificate did not extend to the county where the oath was administered and the certificate executed.
The evidence here is that the oaths were administered and the certificates executed by an officer who was duly authorized to act. The certificates on the identification envelopes for these ballots were executed by C. T. Moline. The evidence, including the seal affixed to the certificates, shows that C. T. Moline was a notary public of York County, Nebraska, at the times the certificates were executed. The evidence supports a finding that these ballots were voted, the oath taken, and the certificates executed in York County, Nebraska. We find that these 7 ballots should have been counted.
The third category consists of 7 ballots, cast by absentee voters, which were counted by the canvassing board and the trial court. The relator contends that these ballots should not have been counted because it does not appear that the oaths were administered and the certificates executed by a duly authorized officer.
Section 32-813, R.R.S.1943, provides that the oath of an absentee, sick, or disabled voter may be subscribed and sworn to before any commissioned officer, noncommissioned officer not below the rank of sergeant, or petty officer, in the armed forces *151 of the United States, and that any such official may make the certificate and do and perform such other acts as are necessary to enable a voter to exercise his absent, sick, or disabled voting privilege.
The certificate on the identification envelope for one of the ballots shows that it was executed by an "Executive Officer, USWB." This description does not identify the officer as one of those authorized by section 32-813, R.R.S. 1943, and this ballot should not have been counted.
The certificate on the identification envelope for one of these ballots was executed by "Lt/Col Sara C. Hall, Chief of Nursing Service." The voter is identified by the oath as being a member of the Nursing Corps, United States Air Force. Although the identification of the officer executing the certificate is not as complete as it could have been, there was a substantial compliance with the statute, and we find that this ballot should have been counted.
The officers who executed the certificates on the identification envelopes for the other 5 ballots were identified as follows: "1/Lt. USMC"; "Captain, Inf."; "Captain United States Air Force"; "Lieutenant, USNR"; and "1/Lt. USAF." This was a substantial compliance with the statute and these ballots should have been counted.
When the 7 ballots, cast by sick and disabled voters of York County, Nebraska, are counted and added to the number of votes cast for each of the parties as declared by the canvassing board, the relator is found to have received 7,833 votes and the respondent 7,835 votes.
In the district court the relator contended that 109 invalid ballots had been counted. The trial court found that 90 invalid ballots had been counted. On appeal, the relator has contended that 18 ballots held valid by the trial court were invalid and should not have been counted. Of the 18 ballots questioned on appeal, we find that 17 were valid. We therefore conclude that 91 invalid ballots were counted. The remaining question is how these ballots affect the result of the election.
The ballots cast by absentee and disabled voters are separated from their identification envelopes when they are counted by the canvassing boards. Section 32-817, R.R.S. 1943. After the ballots have been removed from the identification envelopes and counted, there is no way to identify a ballot as having been contained in a particular identification envelope.
There is no evidence as to how the 91 invalid ballots were cast. There is no showing as to how many of these ballots were voted for each of the candidates. It is probable that some of the invalid ballots were not cast for either candidate.
The general rule is that a party who wishes to dispute an election upon the basis that illegal votes were cast has the burden of proving for which candidate the illegal votes were cast. It is a necessary incident to proving that the illegal ballots affected the result of the election. The requirement is statutory in election contests. Section 32-1001, R.R.S.1943. In Mehrens v. Election Canvassing Board, 134 Neb. 151, 278 N.W. 252, this court held: "In an election contest on the ground that, through `ignorance and mistake' of election officers, enough illegal votes were cast in a voting precinct to change the result of the election, the burden is on contestant to prove the casting of the illegal votes and also the candidates for whom they were cast."
In a recent decision, Arends v. Whitten, 172 Neb. 297, 109 N.W.2d 363, this court followed the rule of the Mehrens case and held that where no attempt was made to show how allegedly unqualified voters had actually voted, the appellant's contentions in regard to such illegal ballots would be disregarded.
The relator relies upon McMaster v. Wilkinson, supra, and contends that the invalid ballots should be deducted proportionately from the total votes received by *152 the relator and the respondent. In the McMaster case this court held: "When illegal ballots have been cast, the loss due to such ballots should be so apportioned that each candidate shall have deducted a share of them, proportioned according to the whole number of votes received by him."
In the McMaster case, which was an election contest between two candidates for the office of city councilman in the city of Lincoln, Nebraska, the court found that 5 illegal absentee and disabled ballots had been counted. The court found in that case that the contestant had a plurality of 9 votes. The result of the election would not have been affected if the entire 5 votes had been deducted from the total vote of the contestant.
The relator contends that the formula set out in the McMaster case should be used in this case on a county-by-county basis. If that were done, the result would be that the relator would have a plurality of approximately 2 votes. However, if the invalid ballots are deducted on the basis of the "entire vote" or "whole number of votes" received by each candidate, the result is unchanged.
The authority cited in the opinion in the McMaster case is McCrary on Elections (4 Ed.), s. 495, p. 364. The rule is stated there as follows: "In purging the polls of illegal votes, the general rule is that, unless it be shown for which candidate they were cast, they are to be deducted from the whole vote of the election division, and not from the candidate having the largest number. Of course, in the application of this rule such illegal votes would be deducted proportionately from both candidates, according to the entire vote returned for each."
In discussing the rule stated above, Judge McCrary further states ss. 496, 497, pp. 365, 366: "This is probably the safest rule that can be adopted in a court of justice, where there is no power to order a new election, and where great injury would result from declaring the office vacant; but it is manifest that it may sometimes work a great hardship, inasmuch as the truth might be, if it could be shown, that all the illegal votes were on one side, while it is scarcely to be presumed that they would ever be divided between the candidates in exact proportion to their whole vote. * * * Let it be understood that we are here referring to a case where it is found to be impossible by the use of due diligence to show for whom the illegal votes were cast. If in any given case it be shown that the proof was within the reach of the party whose duty it was to produce it, and that he neglected to produce it, then he may well be held answerable for his own neglect; and because it was his duty to show for whom the illegal votes were cast, and because he might, by the use of reasonable diligence, have made this showing, it may very properly be said that he should himself suffer the loss occasioned by deducting them from his own vote."
In Paine on Elections, s. 513, p. 433, the author states: "Where illegal votes have been cast the true rule is to purge the poll, by first proving for whom they were cast, and thus ascertain the real vote; but, if this cannot be done, then to exclude the poll altogether. This is safer than the rule which arbitrarily apportions the fraud among the parties."
The author further states on p. 434: "In the total absence of proof tending to show for whom illegal votes, sufficient in number to affect the result, were cast, the duty of the court would seem to be to choose, as wisely as possible, between a disregard of the illegality and a rejection of the entire precinct vote. There ought to be no arbitrary presumption of law, either that all the illegal votes were cast by the political party in the majority, or that they were cast by different parties in proportion to their numbers. To take the illegal votes all from one candidate, or pro rata from several candidates, would be, not to decide, but to make a case for the parties." See, also, Hamilton v. Marshall, 41 Wyo. 157, 282 P. 1058, 66 A.L.R. 1154.
*153 We do not believe that courts should adopt and apply arbitrary rules which will determine elections upon the basis of chance. This court will not substitute its judgment for that of the electorate as declared by the proper authorities unless the record shows clearly what the result of the election should be. The record in this case fails in that respect.
To the extent that McMaster v. Wilkinson, supra, conflicts with this opinion, it is overruled.
The judgment of the district court declaring the respondent elected and dismissing the action of the relator is affirmed.
Affirmed.
SIMMONS, C. J., not participating.

=== CASE 9738808 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:03:31.07767+00 ===

Knutson, Chief Justice.
Harold N. Rogers was elected Judge of the District Court of the Fourth Judicial District at the general election in 1956. His term of office normally would expire on the first Monday of January 1963. He filed for reelection in the 1962 primary election and was nominated without opposition. One week before the 1962 general election was to be held, on October 31, 1962, Judge Rogers died. On November 2, the governor appointed Douglas K. Amdahl to fill the vacancy created by the death of Judge Rogers. Purporting to act under Minn. St. 202.14, Donald T. Barbeau filed by petition for the office held by Judge Rog*351ers for the term commencing on the first Monday of January 1963. No one else filed for the office. It is conceded that Amdahl’s appointment is effective until the first Monday of January 1963. This is a proceeding in quo warranto to determine who shall be entitled to hold the office on and after January 7, 1963.
Prior to 1956, Minn. Const, art. 6, § 10, read:
“In case the office of any judge become vacant before the expiration of the regular term for which he was elected, the vacancy shall be filled by appointment by the governor, until a successor is elected and qualified. And such successor shall be elected at the first annual election that occurs more than thirty days after the vacancy shall have happened.” (Italics supplied.)
An amendment to article 6 of our constitution was adopted by the people on November 6, 1956. Article 6, § 11, of the amendment reads:
“Whenever there is a vacancy in the office of judge the governor shall appoint in the manner provided by law a qualified person to fill the vacancy, to hold office until his successor is elected and qualified. The successor shall be elected for a six year term at the next general election occurring more than one year after such appointment.” (Italics supplied.)
Inasmuch as both claimants to the office appear here as respondents, we will refer to them by their surnames to avoid confusion.
Respondent Barbeau first contends that the language of art. 6, § 11, is not self-executing and that no vacancy in a judicial office can be filled by appointment until this constitutional provision is implemented by an act of the legislature. Ordinarily, language such as we have here might be so construed. However, the office of judge is of such vital importance that we cannot believe that the people of the state ever intended that a vacancy in such office should remain unfilled simply because the legislature has failed to act. Since the adoption of this constitutional amendment, three sessions of the legislature have been held. Numerous judicial appointments have been made during that time. Numerous opinions of the attorney general have been issued recog*352nizing the appointive power of the governor, and up to this time no one has questioned the right of the governor to fill such vacancies by appointment. To permit such office to remain vacant until the legislature acts, or at least until there is an election, is simply unthinkable. A construction of our constitution must be given that will not defeat the obvious will of the people.
State ex rel. Lull v. Frizzell, 31 Minn. 460, 18 N. W. 316, involved the construction of amendments to our constitution providing, among other things, for biennial elections instead of annual elections and fixing the term of judges at . 6 years instead of 7 years. In construing a provision relating to the election of judges, we said (31 Minn. 465, 18N.W. 318):
“* * * There is no provision in the constitution for filling by appointment a vacancy in the office of a judge caused by the expiration of the regular term for which he was elected. * * * Hence, if no judicial officer can be elected in 1884, the office of probate judge in about half of the counties in the state, and possibly that of at least one district judge, might remain vacant for the space of two years, without their being any constitutional means of filling the vacancy. It is true that the present incumbents might resign before the expiration of the terms for which they were elected, and thus enable the governor to fill the vacancies by appointment. But as there is no law to compel them to resign, and they might either refuse or neglect to do so, it is not to be presumed that the legislature intended to leave the very existence of any part of the judicial branch of the government dependent on any such contingency. We might also add that if no judicial officer can be elected at the general election in 1884, it would almost seem to follow that none could be elected at any subsequent general election; for the fair inference from the whole clause is that only such classes of officers should be elected at subsequent general elections which can be elected at the first one. We must therefore reject this construction,. both because of its unreasonableness, and the injury to the public which would result from it.” (Italics supplied in part.)
Maynard E. Pirsig, discussing the proposed judiciary article which was adopted in 1956, said, among other things:
*353“Vacancies in a judicial office are to be filled by appointment by the governor as under the present constitution.”1
It is therefore essential that we hold that the controlling language of our constitution grants to the governor the power to fill vacancies by appointment and that the language “in the manner provided by law” is permissive in that it grants to the legislature authority, if it sees fit, to provide the manner in which the appointment shall be made. Until the legislature takes some action to exercise the power so granted to it, the fundamental power of appointment exists as it did prior to the amendment.
The history of the adoption of the new judiciary article can lead to no other conclusion. The article finally proposed and adopted by the people was the result of agitation for judicial improvement running over many years. In 1941, the Judicial Council appointed a committee, headed by former Chief Justice Charles Loring, to make a study of needed revision in the judicial system of this state. It made a report in 1942 for sweeping changes in our whole judicial system.2
No legislative action was taken on the proposals of this committee. In 1947, the legislature created a constitutional commission3 to study and report on needed revisions to our whole constitution. The commission created several subcommittees to study and report on suggested changes in various articles of the constitution. One of such subcommittees dealt with the judiciary article.4 Section 14 of its preliminary report dealt with the filling of vacancies and read:
“If the office of a judge becomes vacant, the governor shall appoint *354some qualified person to fill such vacancy, who shall hold office until his successor is elected and qualified. Such successor shall be elected at the first election occurring more than one year after the vacancy occurred for a term of six years and until his successor is qualified. * * *” (Italics supplied.)5
As an alternative to this section, the committee recommended the adoption of the so-called American Bar Association merit plan for appointment and election of judges, sometimes called the “Missouri Plan.”6 The report further provided in § 14:
“* * * If the legislature provides for the appointment of such judge in the manner prescribed in section 11, subdivision (b), this section shall be inoperative.”
The report of the commission failed to receive legislative approval and was never submitted to the people. However, the Minnesota State Bar Association became interested in the proposal for an amendment to the judicial article alone. It was given wide publicity among the members of the bar and was approved by the association at its annual meeting in 1953.7 Section 11, as approved by the State Bar Association, read:
“Appointment. Whenever there is a vacancy in the office of a judge, the governor shall appoint in the manner provided by law a qualified person, to fill the vacancy to hold office until his successor is elected and qualified.”
It is apparent that the words “in the manner provided by law” were inserted when the alternative proposal to adopt the American Bar Association plan was dropped in order that the legislature might provide some method whereby candidates for appointment could be controlled by some kind of selection. It was not intended to destroy the power of the governor to make the appointment.
After this approval of the judiciary article by the State Bar Association, a committee was appointed to conduct an active campaign *355for the adoption of the article.8 Members of the bar were urged to work for its adoption.9
The crucial question here is what the drafters and the legislature intended by the language of the amended constitution that “[t]he successor shall be elected for a six year term at the next general election occurring more than one year after such appointment” (italics supplied), and what the people understood this language to mean when they adopted the proposed amendment.
In State ex rel. Babcock v. Black, 22 Minn. 336, decided December 21, 1875, we held that, where a vacancy in the office of probate judge occurs less than 30 days before a general election in a year when that office normally would be filled by election, appointment to fill the vacancy would not prevent a successor from being elected. We there said (22 Minn. 338);
“Section 10 was put in the constitution to provide for the exceptional case of a vacancy — for a case where the regular order of terms, and of elections for such terms, is broken in upon by a vacancy before the end of a regular term for which the judge was elected, and by the necessity to elect before the election would come on under the general rule. The election mentioned by the section is not one which comes in the regular course of such elections, as provided for by § 7, but an election which becomes necessary by the happening of the vacancy; and in order that such an election, thus coming on at a time different from that at which a judge would, in the regular and natural course of things, be elected, shall not be had without adequate notice to the people, it is provided that a successor shall be elected at the first annual election that occurs more than thirty days after the vacancy shall have happened. This means the successor whose election is made necessary by the vacancy.
“* * * The election in 1875 was not made necessary by the happening of the vacancy, nor was it appointed by § 10. It came in the regular course, and would have been held had there been no *356vacancy. It was not, therefore, such an election as is contemplated by that section, and was regular.”
In State ex rel. Baxter v. Brown, 22 Minn. 482, decided April 15, 1876, without any mention of the Babcock case which was decided only a few months earlier, we held that, where a vacancy occurs less than 30 days before an election in a year when the office normally would not be filled by election, an appointee to fill the vacancy would hold over until the next election. We there said (22 Minn. 484):
“* * * While the general purpose of the constitution is to make judicial offices elective, this purpose is qualified by the provisions of § 10. As a part of the qualification the last sentence of the section is evidently inserted, in appreciation of the great importance of judicial offices, and of the consequent necessity that the electors, before being called upon to fill them, shall have such time for enquiry and consideration as will enable them to act with reasonable prudence and good sense in the premises. The evil sought to be provided against was, therefore, such as would result from an election occurring too soon after the happening of a vacancy, rather than such as would follow from deferring an election too long.
“If, as respects the question of computation of time, the language of the constitution were, per se, so ambiguous as to admit of two constructions equally plausible, it is, upon the foregoing considerations, clear that the construction should be adopted which will, beyond a peradventure, accomplish this purpose of the constitution. This will require the construction which would give the electors the longest time for deliberation — that is to say, which would give them thirty clear days between the day when the vacancy happened and the day of the election.” (Italics supplied.)
The Babcock case was followed by Enger v. Holm, 213 Minn. 154, 6 N. W. (2d) 101. That case involved a vacancy which occurred when Mr. Justice Stone, who was one of the nominees in the primary, died more than 30 days before the general election. We simply held in that casé that the candidate who stood fifth in number of votes received in the primary election would move up to fourth place to *357take the place of Mr. Justice Stone. The case did not involve the question now before us.
All of these cases were decided prior to the amendment of the constitution. The Babcock and Baxter cases were decided before there was a primary election. Candidates simply filed for election, and about the only requirement respecting notice of the election was that the township or city clerk should post the notice in three public places. G. S. 1866, c. 1, § 4. Many changes have occurred in our election laws since those two decisions. Judges and others are now elected on a nonpartisan ballot. While numerous candidates conceivably can file at the primary election, only two for each office are considered at the general election. The complexity of modern society makes it imperative that ample opportunity be given the people to evaluate the qualifications of candidates for judicial positions. Clearly, that is what the new judiciary article intended to accomplish.
In the report of the constitutional commission, we find the same alternative recommendations as in the report of the subcommittee on the judiciary. Article 6, § 9, as proposed by the commission, contains this language (Report of the Constitutional Commission of Minnesota, p. 43):
“The legislature may provide that a vacancy in the office of justice of the supreme court shall be filled by appointment by the governor from a list of three persons nominated by a non-partisan judicial commission created by law. A person so appointed shall serve until his successor is elected for a six-year term at the first general election held more than one year after the occurrence of the vacancy, and when a justice once has been elected and is a candidate for reelection for the next and succeeding terms, the vote shall be on the question whether he shall be continued in office.”
Section 13 of the commission’s proposal provided (Id. 45):
“If the office of a justice or judge becomes vacant, except as otherwise provided by section 9, the governor shall appoint a qualified person to fill the vacancy to hold office until his successor is *358elected and qualified. This successor shall be elected at the first general election held more than one year after the occurrence of the vacancy and his term of office shall be six years and until his successor is qualified.”
In its comments on § 13 the commission said (Ibid.):
“This section increases the spread between appointment and the appointee’s subsequent candidacy for election from 30 days to one year. The 30-day period, as provided in the present Section 10, has proved too short. Complications arise when a vacancy occurs after the primary election but more than 30 days prior to the final election. In addition, the short period does not give sufficient time to enable observation of the competence developed by the appointee prior to the election.” (Italics supplied.)
Similar language is found in Pirsig’s article in 40 Minn. L. Rev. 839, where he said:
“* * * a desirable change has been made in increasing from 30 days to one year the period of time which must elapse between the appointment and the next general election at which the appointee’s successor is elected. This will enable the public to become better acquainted with the appointee, who usually is a candidate to succeed himself, and it will avoid the embarrassing situations which arise when a vacancy occurs after the primary election has taken place but more than 30 days remain before the next general election.” (Italics supplied.)
It seems quite obvious to us that these references to the embarrassing situations that arise when a vacancy occurs between the primary and general elections pertain to a situation such as is illustrated by Flakne v. Erickson, 213 Minn. 146, 6 N. W. (2d) 40. In that case, Judge Mathias Baldwin was elected for a 6-year term in Hennepin County in November 1940. If he had lived, his term would have expired on the first Monday of January 1947. He died October 1, 1942, after the primary election but more than 30 days before the general election. Fifteen candidates filed for the office by peti*359tion.10 We held that there was no limit to the number of candidates that can file by petition, under our former constitutional provision. The same would be true here if such filings are permitted at all. If one candidate can file by petition a few days before election, an unlimited number could file, and the people would have no way of evaluating the qualifications of such candidates. It seems clear that it was to obviate that situation that the length of time between the-appointment and the election of a successor was extended.
Throughout the discussions and advocacies for adoption of the amendment, the people and bar were informed that if the amendment were adopted any judge appointed to fill a vacancy would not have to run for election until more than one year after the appointment. We have already quoted Pirsig’s comment in his discussion of the proposed article appearing in 40 Minn. L. Rev. 815. In a report by the State Bar Association committee as to the changes that would result from the adoption of the amendment, we find the following in The Bench and Bar of Minnesota, Vol. 12, No. 6, May 1955, p. 77:
“No judge required to run for re-election until one year after appointment instead of thirty days.”
In an editorial in The Minneapolis Star, October 24, 1956, p. 18A, col. 1, we find the following:
“* * * No appointive judge would stand for election until he had served at least a year.”
In a circular distributed to the people by the League of Women Voters of Minnesota, we find similar language.
In a statement made by the attorney general as required by Minn. St. 3.21, explaining the effect of the adoption of the amendment, we find the following:
“The effect thereof [adoption of the amendment] will be that no judge appointed to fill the vacancy will be required to run for election until 1 year after his appointment, instead of 30 days as at present.” Statement Attorney General, No. 86a-34, June 12,1956.
*360It could be argued that the same rule applies to the new provision of our constitution, as construed by our former cases, as applied to the old. If that had been the intention of the drafters of the proposed amendment as explained to the legislature, they would hardly have said that complications arise when a vacancy occurs after the primary but more than 30 days prior to the general election. Obviously, no primary would be held if the office would not expire during the year of the election. This language could hardly have any meaning except that the new provision was intended to eliminate a situation such as we had in the case of the death of Judge Baldwin in Flakne v. Erickson, supra.
More convincing probably is the fact that it was possible for a vacancy to occur after the primary and more than 30 days prior to the general election under the former constitution. That was the situation in Enger v. Holm, supra. It is not possible for a vacancy to occur after the primary and more than one year before the general election under the present constitution.
Respondent Barbeau has suggested many hypothetical situations which may arise if we hold that one appointed to fill a vacancy occurring in a judicial office between the primary and general elections in a year when that office normally would be filled by an election would hold until the next election more than one year after the appointment. We must admit that the constitutional amendment is not as clear as we would like to have it and that no matter what construction we place upon it some problems will be created. Probably the worst would be the possibility of an unseemly scramble for judicial office by self-nominated persons and the possibility of their election when the people have no opportunity to evaluate the relative qualifications of such candidates. In the case before us, both respondents are without doubt qualified to hold the office. However, that may not be true in another case of this kind, and it is easily conceivable that one wholly unqualified to hold the office could be elected in this manner without giving the people an opportunity to evaluate the relative qualifications of numerous candidates at all. Primary elections are intended to reduce the number of candidates to not *361more than two for each office. This is particularly important in dealing with judicial office, where the qualifications of an incumbent are of such great importance. If numerous candidates can file between the primary and general elections without allowing time for the electorate to evaluate their qualifications, much harm can be done.
One of the possibilities mentioned is where a vacancy occurs after a general election in which a candidate other than the incumbent is elected. If the primary and general elections are regularly held, and the people have had a chance to exercise their free choice, undoubtedly the election should be upheld. The main purposes of our constitution and election laws have in that case been accomplished. On the other hand, suppose that during a year when an incumbent normally would run for reelection a vacancy occurs shortly before the time for filing for the office and the vacancy is filled by appointment. We think no one would contend that such appointee, under our present constitution, would have to stand for election during the year of his appointment. There are so many possibilities that could be conjured up by a fertile imagination under this constitution that all we can do is to meet these situations as they arise, giving effect to the language of the constitution when that can be done without destroying the purpose intended to be accomplished by its adoption. The test ought to be whether there has been a fair opportunity for the voters to make an intelligent choice.
In State ex rel. Dosland v. Holm, 202 Minn. 500, 506, 279 N. W. 218, 221, a situation somewhat similar was under consideration. We there said:
“The facts here appearing are such as must convince any fair-minded person that there was no ‘election’ in fact because, clearly, there was no choice. * * * Nowhere and in no manner was any effort made to bring before the voters of the district the choice of a successor to Judge Roeser. What the court said in State ex rel. Kleist v. Donald, 164 Wis. 545, 553, 160 N. W. 1067, 1070, correctly states the rule and is decisive of this issue: ‘(1) Where there is in fact an election at the time and place designated by law, such election is valid although the statutory notice is not given. (2) Where the failure to comply *362with the law results in a few out of a large number of electors exercising the right to vote at the time and place designated by law, there is no election.’ * * *
“* * * Too obvious for further comment, no one can reasonably claim that there was a ‘choice’ on the part of the electors to fill this important office.”
State ex rel. Wells v. Atwood, 202 Minn. 50, 51, 277 N. W. 357, 358, involving an election to the office of railroad and warehouse commissioner, is illustrative of the approach that should be made to a construction of the constitutional provision before us. We said there:
“In view of our elaborate and detailed enactments relating to both special and general elections, the nominations of candidates at primaries for the general election, the filing by petition of candidates, and the preparing and publishing of the official ballot by the secretary of state showing the offices for which votes may be cast, it is entirely clear that a reasonable time must elapse between the vacancy and the election at which the vacancy may be filled. In this instance it was only eight days — a time wholly insufficient to give the electors in all the election districts notice, to say nothing of having ballots furnished for the occasion, or having that publicity of candidates which an election contemplates. In relation to a judicial office, the constitution (art. 6, § 10) provides that in case of vacancy the successor shall be elected at the first annual election ‘that occurs more than thirty days after the vacancy shall have happened.’ ”
It is said that Minn. St. 202.14 covers judicial office as well as other nonpartisan offices. It is true that the statute speaks in general terms of all nonpartisan offices and does permit the filling of a vacancy created between the primary and general elections by petition. The statute cannot override the express provisions of our constitution with respect to judicial positions. Our constitution contains no provision with respect to other nonpartisan offices similar to that relating to judicial offices. Obviously, the people have seen fit to differentiate between candidates for judicial office and for other nonpartisan offices with regard to the necessity of having an opportunity to evaluate their qualifications. We must hold that in so far as *363§ 202.14 purports to authorize filing for a judicial office upon a vacancy between the primary and general elections it is in contravention of Minn. Const, art. 6, § 11, and therefore cannot stand.
There were other significant changes in the draft of the judiciary article as it was formulated and finally submitted and adopted. In the preliminary report of the committee the language of § 14 (which with modifications became § 11 of the article as adopted) read in part as follows:
“* * * gucjj successor shall be elected at the first election occurring more than one year after the vacancy occurred * * (Italics supplied.)11
In the report of the constitutional commission, this language was changed to read:
“* * * This successor shall be elected at the first general election held more than one year after the occurrence of the vacancy * * (Italics supplied.)12
This language was again changed by the state bar committee13 and, as finally submitted to the legislature, adopted by it, and adopted by the people, reads (Minn. Const, art. 6, § 11):
“* * * The successor shall be elected for a six year term at the next general election occurring more than one year after such appointment.” (Italics supplied.)
It would seem that the change was intended to fix definitely the time from which the year should run.
Another change made was that in art. 6, § 4, of the constitution, dealing with the term of office of district judges. We there find the following language:
“* * * In each judicial district, one or more judges, as the legislature may prescribe, shall be elected by the electors thereof, whose term of office shall be six years, * *
*364In the amendment, art. 6, § 8, provides in part:
“The term of office of all judges shall be six years and until their successors are qualified, * * *.” (Italics supplied.)
Obviously the addition of the words “until their successors are qualified” might be construed to mean that the term under certain conditions could exceed 6 years.
Our attention has been called to a number of decisions of foreign courts. It seems that decisions can be found supporting either view, but these decisions are of little value without comparison of the constitutional provisions upon which they are based. We have found no constitutional provision identical with ours, although there is much similarity between some of them. French v. Jordan, 28 Cal. (2d) 765, 172 P. (2d) 46; Hillman v. Boone, 190 Md. 606, 59 A. (2d) 506; State ex rel. Foughty v. Friederich (N. D.) 108 N. W. (2d) 681; State ex rel. Davis v. Brown, 161 Ohio St. 346, 119 N. E. (2d) 277; and Budge v. Gifford, 26 Idaho 521, 144 P. 333, are of interest in supporting the views of respondent Amdahl, and People ex rel. Jackson v. Potter, 47 N. Y. 375; McDonnell v. State ex rel. Jones, 199 Ala. 240, 74 So. 349; and Simpson v. Willard, 14 S. C. 191, could be said to support the opposite view. However, we are construing our own constitution in the light of the purposes sought to be accomplished by this amendment as we see it, and none of the cases from foreign jurisdictions that we have found is controlling to the point that we feel obliged to follow it. It follows that the appointment of Amdahl holds over until the next general election more than one year after his appointment.
Pirsig, The Proposed Amendment of the Judiciary Article of the Minnesota Constitution, 40 Minn. L. Rev. 815, 839. The author acted as consultant to the committee that drafted the amendment to the judiciary articles of our constitution.
See, Reports of the Judicial Council, Report of the Committee on Unification of the Courts; Pirsig, The Proposed Amendment of the Judiciary Article of the Minnesota Constitution, 40 Minn. L. Rev. 815.
L. 1947, c. 614.
See, Preliminary Report on Revision of the Judiciary Article of the Minnesota State Constitution, 32 Minn. L. Rev. 458.
32 Minn. L. Rev. 467.
See, 32 Minn. L. Rev. 466, § 11.
The Bench and Bar of Minnesota, Vol. 11, No. 6, May 1954, p. 92.
Id. Vol. 12, No. 6, May 1955, p. 77; Id. Vol. 12, No. 10, September 1955, p. 36.
Id. Vol. 13, No. 11, October 1956, p. 15.
See, 1943 Legislative Manual, p. 453.
See, 32 Minn. L. Rev. 467.
Report of the Constitutional Commission of Minnesota, p. 45.
See, Minutes of Meeting of the Constitutional Revision Committee, State Bar Association, October 23, 1954.

=== CASE 9738809 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:03:31.083455+00 ===

Thomas Gallagher, Justice
(dissenting).
1. At the time of his death, Judge Rogers held the position of sole nominee for the position of judge of the District Court, Fourth Judicial District, for a 6-year term commencing January 7, 1963. His death accordingly created a vacancy in such nomination which the legislature had previously made provision for filling. Thus, Minn. St. 202.14, subd. 1, provides:
“A vacancy in a nomination exists when after the primary election *365any person who was nominated to a nonpartisan or political party office dies, withdraws or for any reason ceases to be the nominated candidate for that office. When a vacancy in a nomination occurs a nomination to fill the vacancy may be made in the manner provided in subdivisions 2, 3, and 4.”
Subd. 2 of this statute provides for partisan offices and is not applicable here.
Subd. 3 provides:
“If there is no proper committee to fill the vacancy as provided in subdivision 2, or if a vacancy occurs in a nonpartisan office, then the person receiving the next highest number of votes for the office at the primary election shall be the candidate for the office.”
This subdivision is not applicable here, where Judge Rogers was the only candidate for the nomination.
Subd. 4 provides:
“If there is no proper committee to fill the vacancy as provided in subdivision 2, or if there is no person who may be nominated under subdivision 3 and a vacancy exists by reason of this fact, the vacancy may be filled by the proper officer placing upon the ballot the name or names of candidates as are nominated by nominating petition in the manner provided in sections 202.09 to 202.12. Every voter is eligible to sign a petition choosing a nominee to fill the vacancy.”
With respect to nominations by nominating petitions referred to in § 202.14, subd. 4, the statutory provisions are as follows:
§ 202.09, subd. 1. “A petition for nomination of a candidate may be signed by electors resident within the district or political division from which the candidate is presented, as follows:
$ # $ ‡ $
“(b) If for a congressional or judicial district office, by five percent of the entire vote cast in the district at the last preceding general election, or 1,000, whichever is the lesser.”
Section 202.12 provides:
“After the signature of each signer there shall be written his post *366office address. Following the facts required to be stated in each petition signed by the voter shall be an oath in the following form: T solemnly swear (or affirm) that I know the contents and purpose of this petition, that I do not intend to vote at the primary election for the office for which this nominating petition is made, and that I signed the same of my own free will.’ No signature shall require notarization or certification before any officer, but each signer in so signing shall be guilty of perjury for making a false oath therein.”
Since here it is not disputed that under the foregoing statutes Judge Barbeau was nominated for the judicial position commencing January 7, 1963; and was likewise duly elected thereto at the general election on November 6, 1962, it is my opinion that at no time was there a vacancy in such position calling for a gubernatorial appointment under Minn. Const, art. 6, § 11.
2. This court appears to have arrived at a like conclusion in Enger v. Holm, 213 Minn. 154, 6 N. W. (2d) 101. The constitutional provision then in effect, Minn. Const, art. 6, § 10, was similar to the present art. 6, § 11, except that under its provisions appointees to judicial vacancies were required to be elected at the first annual election occurring “more than thirty days after the vacancy” rather than at the next general election occurring “more than one year after such appointment” as presently provided. There, Royal A. Stone held one of the positions of associate justice of the supreme court for the terra expiring January 4, 1943, and a like position was held by Andrew L. Holt. By virtue of the primary election held September 8, 1942, in which ten persons were candidates, Mr. Justice Stone and three others (Mr. Justice Holt was not a candidate) became nominees for the two judicial terms described. Five days after the primary election and prior to the general election, Mr. Justice Stone died. Shortly thereafter, Clifford E. Enger submitted a nominating petition to fill the vacancy in the nomination created by the death of Mr. Justice Stone, contending that his death had nullified all primary nominations for his position and eliminated the right of the fifth highest primary candidate therefor to be advanced as a nominee for one of the terms commencing January 4, 1943. Governor Harold E. Stassen then appointed Maynard E. *367Pirsig to fill the vacancy caused by the death of Mr. Justice Stone. In denying Enger’s contentions, this court stated (213 Minn. 156, 6 N. W. [2d] 102):
“A successor to Mr. Justice Stone would be elected at the forthcoming election in the regular course of things. If he had lived and would have been elected, he would have been his own successor. If the relator’s contention that the election of a successor can be held only under the provisions relating to filling vacancies is correct, the election of a successor in the regular course of things is not only prevented, but the election machinery which has been set in motion for that purpose is arrested.
* # ifc * #
“Here, a successor to fill the vacancy in question will be elected at the November election for the full constitutional term of six years. Whether a successor be elected in regular course or to fill a vacancy under § 10, the election is for the constitutional term. * * *
* * * * *
“We said in Flakne v. Erickson, 213 Minn. 146, 6 N. W. (2d) 40:
“ ‘So, we think it is clear that if and when the governor makes an interim appointment to fill the mentioned vacancy the appointee would hold the office until a successor is elected and has qualified, and that the one elected at the next general election cannot qualify except for the regular term beginning in January 1943.’
“It follows as a matter of course that the successor to Mr. Justice Stone is to be elected at the forthcoming election in November in the regular course. Under art. 7, § 9, the successor cannot qualify and take office until the first Monday in January 1943. The vacancy is filled by the appointment of Mr. Justice Maynard E. Pirsig, who is entitled to occupy the office until the first Monday in January 1943, the date on which the terms of the judges elected in November shall begin. Likewise, Mr. Justice Streissguth is entitled to fill the vacancy caused by Mr. Justice Holt’s resignation until the same time.”
The foregoing clearly indicates that, where a vacancy in a judicial office occurs after there have been nominations for the next term *368of such office, a gubernatorial appointment to fill such vacancy is an interim appointment only, and expires with the expiration of the regular term of the judicial office to which the appointment is made. Accordingly, it is my opinion that Judge Amdahl’s appointment would expire with the expiration of the regular term of the position, held by Judge Rogers at the time of his death; and that Judge Barbeau was duly nominated for and elected to the judicial position commencing January 7, 1963. See, People ex rel. Jackson v. Potter, 47 N. Y. 375; see, also, McDonnell v. State ex rel. Jones, 199 Ala. 240, 74 So. 349; Simpson v. Willard, 14 S. C. 191.
3. To me, this conclusion appears consistent with the intent of the people expressed in Minn. Const, art. 6, §§ 8 and 11, that judicial offices be filled by elective rather than appointive processes; and that the power of the chief executive to fill vacancies therein be limited to situations where elective processes are not available. State ex rel. La Jesse v. Meisinger, 258 Minn. 297, 103 N. W. (2d) 864; Enger v. Holm, supra; State ex rel. Baxter v. Brown, 22 Minn. 482. A contrary construction could well result in the nullification of such intent in many possible situations. Thereunder, if an incumbent judge were a candidate for election to the term succeeding that of his present position and were defeated therefor in the general election he could then resign to permit a gubernatorial appointment to fill the vacancy thus created and thereby completely nullify the will of the electorate. Or an incumbent judge might refrain from being a candidate for the term succeeding that of his position, and subsequent to the nomination of another qualified person therefor, resign so that by gubernatorial appointment to his vacated position the elective processes would be thwarted. Or situations might arise where incumbents by resignations at convenient times before election would thereby insure continued, if not perpetual, judicial service through appointive rather than elective procedures.
By reason of all of the foregoing, I am firmly convinced that the constitutional provision having reference to filling vacancies in judicial position by gubernatorial appointment (art. 6, § 11) has no application where there are candidates duly qualified and nominated for the *369succeeding term of such positions and a general election is available to finally determine whom the electorate selects therefor.

=== CASE 2217783 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:34.711978+00 ===

264 Minn. 378 (1963)
119 N.W. (2d) 703
MURL E. CRUM AND ANOTHER
v.
ANCHOR CASUALTY COMPANY.
No. 38,648.
Supreme Court of Minnesota.
January 4, 1963.
Murnane, Murnane, Battis & deLambert, for appellant.
Rudolph E. Low, for respondents.
KNUTSON, CHIEF JUSTICE.
This is an appeal from a summary judgment entered in favor of *379 plaintiffs on the issue of liability. The present action was brought to recover attorney's fees, expenses, and an amount paid in settlement of a lawsuit which plaintiffs contend defendant was obligated to defend.
Prior to February 2, 1958, plaintiffs purchased from one William Heinsch certain real property used as an apartment house or rooming-house. While Heinsch was the owner, on January 14, 1956, defendant issued to him an owners', landlords', and tenants' liability policy covering the period from January 14, 1956, to January 14, 1959. When plaintiffs purchased the property from Heinsch, this liability policy was assigned to them and the assignment approved by defendant. There is no dispute that the policy was in force on February 2, 1958, and that plaintiffs were the insureds thereunder.
When plaintiffs purchased the property, one Inga Matheson was a tenant living in one of the apartments. On February 2, 1958, she sustained injuries when she fell down a stairway in the building. Thereafter she commenced an action against the Crums to recover damages due to their alleged negligence in maintaining the premises.
The policy contains the following exclusionary provisions:
"Exclusions
"This policy does not apply:
* * * * *
"(i) under Coverages A and D, to any obligation for which the insured or any carrier as his insurer may be held liable under any workmen's compensation, unemployment compensation or disability benefits law, or under any similar law;
"(j) under Coverage A, to bodily injury to or sickness, disease or death of any employee of the insured arising out of and in the course of his employment by the insured."
Originally, Mrs. Matheson paid $60 rent for the apartment she occupied. After plaintiffs became the owners, they entered into an arrangement with Mrs. Matheson whereby her rent would be reduced  originally to $45 and later to $40 per month  in consideration of which she would keep the hallways clean, collect the rents, receive complaints, show apartments to prospective tenants, and rent apartments, *380 making reports to Crum thereon. The original action commenced by Mrs. Matheson alleges that her injuries were the result of the negligence of the Crums in maintaining the premises. The complaint was forwarded to Anchor, and it undertook the defense of the action. Contrary to the contentions of the Crums, Anchor inserted as a defense the following paragraph:
"As a further defense, defendants allege that at the time and place of the accident alleged in plaintiff's complaint, the plaintiff herein was an employee of these answering defendants and was subject to the provisions of the Workmen's Compensation Law of Minnesota, M.S. A. 176 and by reason thereof, her exclusive remedy at law is as provided therein."
There was no mention in Mrs. Matheson's complaint of any employment relationship between her and the Crums nor of the circumstances under which she was present on the premises at the time of her alleged injury.
On September 4, 1958, Anchor's counsel sent the Crums a letter advising them that the policy did not cover the accident because of exclusions (i) and (j) set forth above and that, since Mrs. Matheson had not alleged in her complaint that she was an employee of the Crums, Anchor was required to defend against her suit but "that in the event that the evidence and testimony of this case discloses that Inga Matheson was an employee, that the Anchor Casualty Company will not be liable for any verdict or judgment which may be rendered against you and in her favor."
The Crums' attorney replied to this letter on September 30, 1958, saying:
"In order that there might be no misunderstanding, the position of my clients in this matter is that exclusions `I' and `J' in the policy have no application. There is first a question that the plaintiff could be classed as an employee, and second, if she is so classed, then there is a question that the alleged injury arose out of and in the course of her employment.
"As mentioned in your letter, paragraph numbered `V' of your *381 answer pleads, as a defense, that the plaintiff's claim is covered by the Workmen's Compensation Act. Mr. and Mrs. Crum do not concur in the asserting of that defense in the action. I believe that under Condition 11 of the policy they would be precluded from asserting a position independent of the Insurance Company's in the pending action. Mr. and Mrs. Crum will not be bound by any result of your asserting of this defense which might be adverse to their personal interests."
On December 29, 1958, depositions were taken from Mrs. Matheson and Mr. Crum. Counsel representing both Anchor and the Crums were present, but it appears from the depositions that counsel for Anchor was in full charge of the defense. In the deposition of Mrs. Matheson, he asked all the questions but four, the deposition covering some 40 pages. Practically all the questions were directed toward procuring an admission from Mrs. Matheson that she was an employee of the Crums and engaged in the scope of her employment at the time she sustained the alleged injury. However, her answers conclusively established the contrary. She testified that one of the other tenants of the building was in the process of redecorating her apartment; that this tenant, a Miss Larson, had picked out the paint herself; and that Mrs. Matheson had never seen this apartment so Miss Larson invited her to come in and look at it, which she did. It was on the return to her own apartment from this visit that Mrs. Matheson fell and sustained the injuries complained of. With respect to her employment, Mrs. Matheson testified as follows:
"Q. Are there any other things you did around the building, except take complaints from the people and collect the rents and show the apartments and keep the apartments clean and for the first year take the rubbish out?
"A. Yes.
"Q. Was there anything else you did around the building?
"A. No. There isn't anything else to do."
In Crum's deposition he stated that about 2 months after acquiring the premises an arrangement was made with Mrs. Matheson that she was to take care of the halls by vacuuming them, take in the rents and *382 rent the apartments, and receive complaints and refer them to Crum. Counsel for Mrs. Matheson then attempted to procure from Crum an admission that he did not carry workmen's compensation insurance. This was objected to by counsel for Anchor, and the question was not answered.
Thereafter, on February 16, 1959, Anchor made a motion for summary judgment based on the files and proceedings and the depositions of the parties. On the same date Mrs. Matheson made a motion to require the Crums to answer an interrogatory as to whether Crum had workmen's compensation insurance on the date of the accident. The trial judge ruled that the interrogatory should be answered, and counsel for the Crums stated that they did not have workmen's compensation insurance and had not elected to self-insure. Thereupon counsel for Mrs. Matheson advised the court that she elected to bring her action under the Workmen's Compensation Act, as more particularly provided in Minn. St. 176.031.[1] She was given 10 days to amend her complaint, and the Crums were allowed 20 days in which to answer.
The amended complaint was filed on March 31, 1959, and service *383 was admitted by counsel for the Crums on February 24, 1959. The amended complaint alleges a cause of action based upon the provisions of the Workmen's Compensation Act. It does not allege, as had the original complaint, that the injury was due to the negligence of the Crums. An amended answer was interposed to this complaint by the Crums' private attorney, admitting their ownership of the premises but denying all other allegations of the complaint. Thereafter, on March 9, 1959, counsel for Anchor sent the following letter to counsel for the Crums:
"I again enclose the original amended complaint of the plaintiff, upon which you admitted service on February 24th, 1959. This was sent to us by yourself by letter dated February 27th, which letter we received February 28th.
"You have previously been advised, as have Mr. and Mrs. Murl Crum by letter dated September 4th, 1958, that the policy of insurance issued to the Crums by the Anchor Casualty Company does not extend coverage, because of exclusions `I' and `J' in the policy, for any employee who is injured and who has rights under the Workmen's Compensation Act. It is apparent from the amended complaint of the plaintiff herein that the plaintiff is alleging that she was an employee at the time of the accident, and that her injury arose out of and in the course of her employment, and that specifically by paragraphs 3, 5 and 6, the plaintiff is alleging a cause of action under the Workmen's Compensation Act. By reason thereof, it is the position of the Anchor Casualty Company that the loss claimed by this complaint is not covered by the Anchor Casualty policy issued to the Crums. For that reason, we herewith return to you the amended complaint so that if you so desire you may interpose an answer to protect the Crums. If there is any question on this, we would be more than happy to meet with you and further discuss our views with you."
Anchor then withdrew from the defense of the action. On March 11, 1959, the attorney for the Crums sent Anchor's counsel a letter in reply, the relevant portions of which read:
"I call your attention to my letter of September 30, 1958 addressed *384 to you which sets out the position of Mr. and Mrs. Crum with reference to the alleged injuries to plaintiff and the coverage under their insurance policy issued by the Anchor Casualty Company, which is your client. The position of Mr. and Mrs. Crum with reference to the accident having happened under circumstances not covered by the Workmen's Compensation Act, and, therefore, falling within the provisions of Anchor Casualty Company Policy No. SGL 100588, is strengthened and supported by the deposition of the plaintiff taken in your office with which you are familiar.
"In our telephone conversation of this morning I tendered again the defense of the above case to you on behalf of your client, the Anchor Casualty Company. You declined the defense. Therefore, I will take such action as is necessary to defend Murl E. Crum and Lillian M. Crum in this action and if successful will hold the Anchor Casualty Company responsible for all costs, charges and expenses of Mr. and Mrs. Crum which arose by reason of the claimed accidental injury to Inga Matheson and the bringing of this action and its defense."
The attorney for the Crums then assumed the defense of the action, which was subsequently settled for $600. The record does not show the basis for this settlement. This action was then commenced by the Crums to recover attorney's fees and expenses of defending the action brought by Mrs. Matheson and the amount paid in settlement of the action. Motions for summary judgment were made both by plaintiffs and defendant. The court denied the motion of defendant and granted that of plaintiffs on the issue of liability, leaving for trial and determination the amount of damages which plaintiffs were entitled to recover.
The present appeal presents essentially two issues: (1) Was Anchor under a duty to defend the action brought by Mrs. Matheson as she alleged it in her amended complaint? (2) Is Anchor estopped from denying its duty to defend the action if it be found that there was no such duty? The lower court held in the affirmative on both issues in granting summary judgment to plaintiffs.
The order denying defendant's motion for summary judgment is not appealable and the appeal therefrom must be dismissed. Similarly, the order granting summary judgment is not appealable, but the appeal *385 is also from the judgment entered pursuant to such order, which is appealable, so the issues raised by all the appeals are before us.
At the outset it may be stated that we are in accord with the trial court's determination that the record conclusively establishes that at the time Mrs. Matheson fell and sustained her injuries she was not acting within the scope of her employment. She was on an errand of her own, paying a visit to a fellow tenant to satisfy her own curiosity, which had nothing to do with her part-time duties as an employee. There is no evidence in the record to contradict her admissions to that effect, and we have not been shown how any other evidence could be adduced on this fact issue. Her admissions in her deposition negate the allegations of her amended complaint and bring her action, if any she had, within the coverage of the insurance policy. Neither can there be any doubt that Anchor had full knowledge of the admissions of Mrs. Matheson when it withdrew from the defense of that action. The pertinent question then resolves itself into this: Where a complaint in an action brought against an insured alleges a cause of action excluded from a liability insurance policy but the insurer has knowledge that the actual facts are such as to bring the cause of action  if it can be established at all  within the insurance coverage, may the insurer ignore the knowledge it has and refuse to defend simply because the complaint alleges a cause of action excluded by the policy?
1. Minnesota is in accord with the general rule that, at least absent knowledge to the contrary, an initial determination that an insurer is not obligated to defend a cause of action against its insured may be made from the facts alleged in the complaint.[2]
Anchor relies largely on our recent decision in Bobich v. Oja, 258 Minn. 287, 104 N.W. (2d) 19. In that case actions were brought to recover for the death of two employees of Oja's, Inc., as a result of injuries sustained while using a car owned by Oja's, Inc., within the scope of their employment. The complaints alleged that the automobile was owned by Frank E. Oja, the president of the corporation. The *386 insurance policy involved excluded liability for damages arising out of the use of an automobile owned by Oja. Unless plaintiffs could establish that the automobile was owned by Frank E. Oja personally, their right to recover was limited by the Workmen's Compensation Act. We held that the insurer was under no obligation to defend because, no matter which position plaintiffs took, the liability of the insurer was excluded by the policy. We said (258 Minn. 295, 104 N.W. [2d] 25):
"* * * The two actions brought by the trustees for the heirs and next of kin of the employees of Oja's, Inc., are predicated upon the claim that Frank E. Oja, personally, was the owner of the automobile involved. Obviously it was necessary to so allege because plaintiffs were employees of the corporation and all rights of recovery for their death arising out of and in the scope of their employment are limited by workmen's compensation acts. The cause of action must fail as far as vicarious liability is concerned unless ownership of the automobile can be established in Frank E. Oja. If, on the other hand, it can be established that Frank E. Oja, rather than Oja's, Inc., is the owner of the automobile, then clearly liability on the part of third-party defendant is expressly excluded by the policy. In either event, the third-party defendant insurer is not liable. It must follow that it is under no obligation to defend the action."
The case did not involve a situation such as we have here, where the amended complaint alleges a cause of action excluded by the policy but the insurer has knowledge independent of the complaint that the true facts, if established, may bring the cause of action within the policy coverage. In the Bobich case, it was impossible for plaintiffs to bring the cause of action within the insurance coverage no matter what position they took.
2. Weis v. State Farm Mutual Auto. Ins. Co. 242 Minn. 141, 64 N.W. (2d) 366, 49 A.L.R. (2d) 688, involved a situation nearly opposite from that now before us. In that case the complaints alleged a cause of action within the coverage of the insurance policy. The policy excluded liability for intentional acts. The complaints alleged that defendant, the insured, had negligently, carelessly, recklessly, deliberately, *387 and unlawfully run into the rear of plaintiffs' automobile and that he had done so wantonly, maliciously, willfully, and repeatedly. The insured stated to an adjuster for the insurance company that he had had no accident but that he had deliberately run into the rear of plaintiffs' automobile. Inasmuch as a deliberate act of this kind was excluded by the policy, the insurer refused to defend. We held that it was proper for it to do so, saying (242 Minn. 145, 64 N.W. [2d] 368, 49 A.L.R. [2d] 692):
"* * * It is therefore our opinion that, where it appears clear from the record that no accident occurred and where the owner himself, by his own statements and admissions, indicated that the incidents complained of were not accidents but intentional and deliberate acts on his part while operating his own automobile, there was no coverage under the policy involved. * * *
* * * * *
"* * * Here, Weis was sued for deliberately and negligently running into the rear end of the James automobile. According to the record on this appeal, he admits that he did run into the James automobile and that he did so intentionally and deliberately. In the face of this admission, there is no room to draw implications from the verdicts and judgments in the suits by Mr. and Mrs. James against Weis. We cannot draw implications from such verdicts and judgments which would have to be inconsistent with Weis's own admissions.
* * * * *
"* * * Here, again, we are faced with the admissions of plaintiff, from which it is only possible to conclude that his acts giving rise to the suit were outside the coverage afforded by the policy." (Italics supplied.)
Obviously, the admissions of the insured, upon which we based our decision that there was no obligation to defend, was no part of the complaint in the action. If, then, the insurer may refuse to defend when the complaint states a cause of action covered by the insurance because it has knowledge dehors the complaint that would exclude liability, we see no good reason why it should not be obligated to defend *388 where it has knowledge dehors the complaint that the true facts, if established, will bring the cause of action within the insurance coverage.
We realize that the authorities on this question are in conflict. The cases, pro and con, are collected in Annotation, 50 A.L.R. (2d) 458, 497. It would unduly extend this opinion to attempt to review them here, and it would serve no useful purpose. They have been adequately reviewed in the annotation.
In Hardware Mutual Cas. Co. v. Hilderbrandt (10 Cir.) 119 F. (2d) 291, the facts are quite similar to those now before us, and the objections of the insurer were the same. In rejecting the rule that the insurer may rely on the complaint and ignore knowledge it has of the true facts, the court said (119 F. [2d] 299):
"* * * In the brief of the insured it is said:
"`A simple illustration will demonstrate the unsoundness of the position taken by opposing counsel: A owns two automobiles, a Ford and a Nash. The Ford is covered by the policy of the company but the Nash is not. A, while driving the Ford, negligently injures a third party and this party brings an action for damages alleging that A was driving the Nash. A notifies the company of the accident, furnishes it a copy of the petition, and explains to it that the car actually involved in the accident was the Ford and not the Nash. The company shuts its eyes to the information given to it by A as to the car actually involved in the accident, relies solely upon the allegations of the petition, makes no investigation of the facts and circumstances, denies liability and refuses to defend except upon a nonwaiver which A declines to give. A undertakes the defense of the action with counsel of his own and negotiates a prudent settlement for a stipulated sum which he pays, and then makes demand upon the company to reimburse him which it declines to do, taking the position that there is no coverage as reflected by the allegations of the petition.'
"The hypothetical case appropriately illustrates with emphasis the scope and effect of the contention of the company. Upon further consideration, we think the contention must fail."
In Bituminous Cas. Corp. v. Travelers Ins. Co. (D. Minn.) 122 F. Supp. 197, one of the questions was whether an injury occurred while *389 a truck was being loaded. The complaint did not so allege. One of the insurance companies involved claimed, among other things, that inasmuch as the complaint did not disclose that the injury was occasioned by loading operations it was under no duty to defend. In rejecting this claim, the Honorable Gunnar H. Nordbye said (122 F. Supp. 201):
"* * * It is not readily apparent from the complaint * * * that the injury to Williams was incurred in the process of loading the truck. But in the tender that was made to Travelers to defend, Travelers was specifically informed that Williams was injured in the process of loading the Williams truck by the negligence of Wegman, and that under the Travelers policy there was, therefore, coverage. The fact that the complaint did not set forth in detail a factual basis for Travelers' coverage did not relieve Travelers of its duty to defend when notice of the actual facts in the tender indicated that the injury to Williams was one covered by its policy. If the rule were otherwise, then in order to be defended by his insurer, the insured would be required to move the court for an amendment of the pleading against him. Surely, such procedure would not be required when the insurer is possessed of all of the facts which bear upon the coverage of its policy."
Under our modern system of pleading and practice the amendment of pleadings is liberally allowed even after judgment has been entered.[3] In Journal Pub. Co. v. General Cas. Co. (9 Cir.) 210 F. (2d) 202, 209, the court said in that respect:
"We hold therefore that even although it may be considered that the pertinent complaint stated a case necessarily outside of the policy coverage, and that in consequence when this complaint was handed to General it owed no duty to defend, yet we think that a policy of this kind will not stand a construction which would permit General to escape its obligation under paragraph I merely because of an allegation of employment made by a third party claimant for whose acts and allegations the insured can hardly be held responsible. The contract drawn and sold by it ought not thus to be construed so strongly in its *390 own favor. One of the outstanding facts of modern litigation is the diminishing importance of initial pleadings in the light of the ease of amendment and the use of pretrial proceedings to lay the pleadings on the shelf."
3. Whether an insurer is under an obligation to defend is not always free from doubt until the case is actually tried. Such doubts should be resolved in favor of the insured. This question was considered in Lee v. Aetna Cas. & Surety Co. (2 Cir.) 178 F. (2d) 750, 752, where the court, speaking through the Honorable Learned Hand, said:
"Whether the insurer ought to defend such an action at least until it appears that the claim is not covered by the policy is not free from doubt; but it seems to us that we should resolve the doubt in favor of the insured. In most cases  the case at bar was one  it will not be difficult for the insurer to compel the injured party to disclose whether the injury is within the policy; and, if it transpires that it is not, the insurer need go on no longer. There may be cases, however, in which that question will remain uncertain even until the end of the trial, and, if the defendant is right, the insured will be obliged to conduct the defence of a claim which it turns out the insurer has promised to pay. We do not believe that, had the question been presented to the parties in advance, they would have agreed that the promise to defend did not include all occasions in which the insurer eventually becomes liable to pay. The only exception we can think of is that the injured party might conceivably recover on a claim, which, as he had alleged it, was outside the policy; but which, as it turned out, the insurer was bound to pay. Such is the plasticity of modern pleading that no one can be positive that that could not happen. In such a case of course the insurer would not have to defend; yet, even then, as soon as, during the course of the trial, the changed character of the claim appeared, we need not say that the insured might not insist that the insurer take over the defence."
This case is again illustrative of a situation that arises where an insurer undertakes the defense of an action for its insured and a conflict exists between the insurer and the insured as to its obligation to defend.[4]*391 Where such conflict exists, an attorney who is provided by the insurer to represent the insured is placed in an exceedingly awkward position when he is expected to interpose, in the defense of the insured, a claim on the part of the insurer which, if established, will render the insured liable to an injured third party. Here, the insured denied that the injured person was their employee or that, if she was, she was engaged in the scope of her employment when injured. The issue of workmen's compensation liability was injected by Anchor into the case brought by Mrs. Matheson solely for the purpose of absolving itself from liability to the Crums. In the depositions taken, in which the examination was conducted mainly by counsel for Anchor, the main thrust was directed, not at establishing a defense for the Crums to the cause of action alleged by Mrs. Matheson, but at establishing a defense to Anchor's liability to the Crums. The injection of this element into the case, and the deposition taken by Anchor's counsel, induced Mrs. Matheson to amend her complaint to allege a cause of action under the Workmen's Compensation Act, obviously for the purpose of escaping any claim of contributory negligence or assumption of risk. Not only did the Crums deny that Mrs. Matheson was their employee and that she was engaged in the scope of her employment when injured, but the deposition of Mrs. Matheson conclusively established the latter fact. In spite of the insured's denial, the answer interposed by counsel furnished by the insurer asserted that the injured person was such employee and engaged in the scope of her employment when injured. Establishment of that claim could mean only that the insured, instead of having a defense to the cause of action, would become personally liable to the injured plaintiff. It is obvious that the only purpose of inserting the claim in the answer and attempting to establish it by the deposition was to absolve the insurer of liability to its insured.
How can an attorney be expected to defend an insured while asserting a claim that will, if established, make the insured liable to the injured party? As long as we follow the practice under which an insurer in this type of action may not be joined as a party defendant, *392 an attorney retained by an insurer to defend its insured, as long as he represents the insured, is under the same obligations of fidelity and good faith as if the insured had retained the attorney personally.[5] The relationship of client and attorney exists the same in one case as in the other. The attorney may not be permitted to take a position adverse to the interest of his client. If a conflict exists between the insurer and the insured as to its obligation to defend, that conflict can be resolved in an appropriate proceeding without jeopardizing the rights of the insured. Here, it is clear that even though the insurer was unsuccessful in establishing what it attempted to do by the depositions of Mrs. Matheson and Crum it still withdrew, knowing full well that the Crums denied that the injury arose out of the employment and that Mrs. Matheson had admitted that it did not. Under these circumstances, we are of the opinion that the obligation to defend this action continued.
It must be kept in mind that in situations of this kind the insured who is sued has no control over the allegations of the complaint. We think the better rule is that, if the insurer is advised by the insured what he claims the facts to be or the insurer by an independent investigation ascertains that the facts are in conflict with the complaint and, if established, will present a potential liability on the part of the insured covered by the insurance contract, the insurer is obligated to undertake the defense. That rule does not prevent the insurer from seeking an independent determination of its liability to defend in an appropriate proceeding between the insurer and the insured.
Both parties moved the court for summary judgment based on all the files and proceedings herein, including the depositions and files in the action brought by Mrs. Matheson. From these depositions it conclusively appears that Inga Matheson was not engaged within the scope of her employment when injured. Applying the rules stated above to these facts, it was proper for the trial court to grant summary judgment on the issue of liability. The amount of damages plaintiffs are entitled to recover remains for trial.
Affirmed.
NOTES
[1]  "The liability of an employer prescribed by this chapter is exclusive and in the place of any other liability to such employee, his personal representative, surviving spouse, parent, any child, dependent, next of kin, or other person entitled to recover damages on account of such injury or death. If an employer other than the state or any municipal subdivision thereof fails to insure or self-insure his liability for compensation to his injured employees and their dependents, an injured employee, or his legal representatives or, if death results from the injury, any dependent may elect to claim compensation under this chapter or to maintain an action in the courts for damages on account of such injury or death. In such action it is not necessary to plead or prove freedom from contributory negligence. The defendant may not plead as a defense that the injury was caused by the negligence of a fellow servant, that the employee assumed the risk of his employment, or that the injury was due to the contributory negligence of the employee, unless it appears that such negligence was wilful on the part of the employee. The burden of proof to establish such wilful negligence is upon the defendant. For the purposes of this chapter the state and each municipal subdivision thereof is treated as a self-insurer when not carrying insurance at the time of the injury or death of an employee."
[2]  7A Appleman, Insurance Law and Practice, § 4683; Annotation, 50 A.L.R. (2d) 458, 465, 507. See, Christian v. Royal Ins. Co. 185 Minn. 180, 240 N.W. 365.
[3]  See, Rules of Civil Procedure, Rules 15.01 and 15.02.
[4]  See, Newcomb v. Meiss, 263 Minn. 315, 116 N.W. (2d) 593.
[5]  29A Am. Jur., Insurance, § 1464.

=== CASE 9738811 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:03:33.885181+00 ===

Givan, J.
This is an appeal from a conviction under an affidavit in two counts wherein the appellant was charged in the first count with entering the business house of Hook Drugs, Inc., located at 1642 East New York Street in the City of Indianapolis with the intent to commit a felony therein, to-wit: the unlawful and felonious obtaining of unauthorized control over the property of said corporation.
*38The appellant was charged in the second count of the affidavit with the unlawful possession and control of narcotic drugs, to-wit: morphine and dilaudid, derivatives of opium.
Trial was by the Court without the intervention of a jury resulting in a finding of guilty on each of the two counts. Defendant was thereafter sentenced to the Indiana State Prison for two terms: one for one to ten years, and one for not less than two nor more than ten years.
Appellant’s timely motion for a new trial was overruled and after appointment of counsel for the purpose of perfecting an appeal, a belated, amended motion for new trial was filed and overruled.
The appellant assigns as error in this Court the overruling of the belated motion for new trial, which motion presents the questions that the decision of the Court is not sustained by sufficient evidence, and that the decision of the Court is contrary to law.
Appellant first contends that there is no evidence in this case that he unlawfully entered the business house of Hook Drugs, Inc., with the intent to commit a felony therein. There was no evidence of any external damage to the building indicating a forceful entry on the part of the appellant; in fact, the uncontraverted evidence concerning his entry is that he did, in fact, enter the building during the regular business hours. It is, therefore, a question of whether or not there is sufficient evidence in the record to support the Trial Court’s finding that he did, in fact, enter with the intent to commit a felony. The manager of the Hook Drug Store testified that he personally closed the store at 10:00 o’clock P.M. on the day in question. He stated that he followed his normal closing routine by locking all the doors and checking the store to see if any person might be remaining. He further testified that he saw no one in the store; he checked the telephone booth in the store where the appellant claims he had fallen asleep during the time the store was open. No one was in the tele*39phone booth. He further testified that the drawer containing narcotic drugs was locked at the time he left the store.
The appellant took the witness stand in his own behalf and testified that he had entered the store in question at about 11:00 o’clock and went to the telephone booth at the back of the store. He testified that he had taken some dilaudid at about 8:00 or 9:00 o’clock that evening and at the time he entered the phone booth he was feeling woozy or drowsy. He stated that while he was in the phone booth he went to sleep. When he woke up about 11:30 he was in the phone booth and feeling so bad that he went over to the narcotics drawer to get some medicine to take, and while he was searching for the medicine the police came.
The police officers testified that when they entered the store in response to an alarm at approximately 11:48 P.M. the appellant was hiding between some bottle racks in the prescription booth in the drug store, and that the narcotics drawer had been pried open and was lying on the floor. Upon searching the appellant various tablets were found in the appellant’s sock. The officer testified that State’s Exhibits 2 and 4 were bottles which the officer removed from the appellant’s sock. The testimony of the lab technician was that State’s Exhibit No. 2 contained a derivative of opium, namely: morphine, and that State’s Exhibit 4 contained a derivative of opium, namely: dilaudid. These exhibits were further identified by the manager as being in the narcotics drawer in the drug store prior to the alleged offense.
Further evidence disclosed that a ladder had been moved in the back room of the drug store so as to permit access to a loft on top of the trash room, and that there were cigarette butts on top of the trash room. There was also a door which at closing time was locked between the back room and the main part of the store, which door had an obvious alarm system attached thereto. Someone, following the. closing of the store that evening, had knocked a hole in the wall which *40hole would permit access from the back room into the main part of the store.
It is thus apparent that there was ample evidence from which the Court could find that the appellant had, in fact, entered the store while it was still open, entered the back room, moved the ladder so as to gain access to the loft on top of the trash room, and hid awaiting the closing of the store. There was further evidence that while he hid he had smoked several cigarettes, and after determining that all authorized persons had left the store he descended the ladder, knocked a hole in the partition into the main store, went to the narcotics drawer, broke the lock on the drawer, and while in the process of removing narcotic drugs from the drawer police officers entered and found the appellant attempting to hide. Upon searching his person, they found that he was, in fact, in the unauthorized possession of narcotic drugs. Having so found, the Court was entitled to infer that the appellant did, in fact, have a felonious intent at the time he entered the store. This Court has held that the issue of intent is a question of fact to be determined by the trier of fact from all of the evidence. Tait v. State (1963), 244 Ind. 35, 44, 188 N. E. 2d 537. Intent may be inferred from circumstances which legitimately permit it. Luther v. State (1912), 177 Ind. 619, 625, 98 N. E. 640; Kondrup v. State (1968), 250 Ind. 320, 235 N. E. 2d 703.
The appellant next alleges that there is no evidence in the record to establish that appellant unlawfully and feloniously had morphine and dilaudid in his possession and control. He further alleges that there is no evidence that morphine and dilaudid are derivatives of opium. As above set out, it is clearly shown in the record that State’s Exhibits 2 and 4 were removed from the person of the appellant by the arresting officer, and that Exhibit 2 contained a derivative of opium, namely: morphine, and that Exhibit 4 contained a derivative of opium, namely: dilaudid.
*41Appellant further claims the State did not prove that the appellant was not authorized by any law of the United States to have morphine and dilaudid in his possession or under his control, and that there is a total lack of evidence of such lack of authorization. This same general question has been raised many times in criminal prosecutions where the alleged crime is the doing of a thing or the possessing of a thing which under certain circumstances may be lawful, but which is alleged in the particular case to be unlawful. This Court has previously stated that when an offense is created by statute and the same or other statutes make exceptions thereto it is not necessary for the State to negate the exceptions by stating and proving that the defend-at does not come within the same. It is, therefore, not incumbent upon the State in a prosecution for the unlawful possession of narcotics to prove all possible exceptions or to by affirmative evidence negate every conceivable hypothesis by which the appellant might have gained his possession lawfully. See Day v. State (1968), 251 Ind. 399, 241 N. E. 2d 357, 359.
In the instant case it could hardly be conceived that lawful possession could have been established in view of the fact that there is evidence that the appellant obtained the drugs in question by hiding in the store, and then breaking open the narcotics drawer to obtain the drugs found in his possession by the arresting officer.
The appellant also maintains that the statute under which the second count of the offense was charged, namely: Acts of 1935, ch. 280, § 2(a), as amended, and found in Burns’ 1967 Supp. § 10-3520(a), is too indefinite and uncertain to give notice of what constitutes an unlawful act. This section reads as follows:
“(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, possess, have under his control, sell, prescribe, administer, dispense, compound or use any narcotic drug or drugs except as authorized in the laws of the United States or the *42state of Indiana, or for any person to be found in a public place under the influence of narcotic drugs....”
We find nothing indefinite or uncertain in the above quoted language. By this statute every person is put on notice that the possession of a narcotic drug is unlawful except as authorized by the laws of the United States or the State of Indiana. Every person is, therefore, put on notice that any possession of such a drug must be authorized, and that they are required to obtain such authorization before acquiring possession. If they in fact have acquired such authorization, they may readily demonstrate the same to any official making lawful inquiry concerning their possession. We do not see how the language of this statute could mislead or confuse any possessor of narcotics. Any such person could draw no other conclusion than that to possess narcotics without express authorization under the law is a crime, and certainly any individual is in a position to know whether or not he possesses such authorization. We, therefore, find no merit to appellant’s contention that the statute is unconstitutional because it is indefinite and uncertain and fails to give notice of what constitutes an unlawful act. This Court has previously held that a statute is not unconstitutional by reason of indefiniteness if it is capable of intelligent construction and interpretation by persons who possess but ordinary comprehension, if its language conveys an adequate description of the evil intended to be prohibited. Ule v. State (1934), 208 Ind. 255, 264, 194 N. E. 140; Hunt v. State (1924), 195 Ind. 585, 588, 146 N. E. 329.
The decision of the Criminal Court of Marion County, Division I is affirmed.
Arterburn and Hunter, J.J., concur.
Jackson, J., concurs in result.
DeBruler, C.J., concurs in affirming conviction on count 2, dissents to affirming of conviction on count 1 with opinion.

=== CASE 9738812 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:03:33.889358+00 ===

*43Concurring and Dissenting.
DeBruler, C. J.
I concur in affirming the conviction on Count 2, charging Appellant with unlawful possession of narcotics, but I dissent from the majority opinion wherein it affirms the conviction on Count 1, charging Appellant with entering a Hooks Drugstore with intent to commit theft.
The statute alleged to have been violated in Count 2 states in part:
“Whoever enters any . . . business house . . . with the intent to commit a felony therein. . . .” (Emphasis added.) Burns’ Ind. Stat. Ann. § 10-704.
The facts showed that Appellant entered the Hooks Drugstore between 8:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m., during which time the drugstore was open to the public for business. At 10:00 p.m. the manager closed the store after checking to see that everyone had left. There was sufficient evidence to show that sometime between Appellant’s entry and 11:48, when the burglar alarm sounded, the Appellant initiated and completed a plan to conceal himself in the storeroom of the drugstore, to wait until everyone had left the store and then to break into the narcotics drawer. The police caught the Appellant in the store in possession of the narcotics he had taken from the drawer.
I agree with Appellant’s contention that there was no evidence to support an inference that he entered the drugstore with the intent to commit a theft. Undoubtedly Appellant is guilty of theft and trespass besides unlawful possession of narcotics. However, the fact that the Appellant perpetrated a scheme to conceal himself in the storeroom and committed a theft is not evidence that at the time he entered the store he had the intent to commit a theft. One to two hours prior to closing time Appellant entered the drugstore which was open for business to the public and also contained a pay telephone for public use. There is no evidence of when Appel*44lant formed the plan to steal the drugs. Under the statute the entry and the intent to commit a theft must be concurrent. In Goodloe v. State (1967), 11 Ind. Dec. 164, 248 Ind. 411, 229 N. E. 2d 626, this Court said:
“. . . There is no evidence showing exactly when the Appellant entered the building or the Heart Association office, and there is no evidence from which it can be inferred that he entered at a time other than when the building and office were open to the general public.
“. . . it is well settled that the felonious intent must exist at the time of the entry if there is to be a conviction.” 11 Ind. Dec. at 168.
fn full accord see: People v. Kelley (1916), 274 Ill. 556, 113 N. E. 926; Conrad v. State (1950), 154 Tex. Crim. R. 624, 230 S. W. 2d 225; State v. Moore (1841), 12 N. H. 43; Hall, J., Principles of Criminal Law 185-190 (2d Ed.).
The judgment on Count 1 should be reversed.
Note.—Reported in 245 N. E. 2d 149.

=== CASE 9738813 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:03:34.12944+00 ===

Murphy, Justice.
Upon petition of the relator, Robert J. Odegard, we issued a temporary injunction and order to show cause directed to Joseph L. Donovan, secretary of state of the State of Minnesota, requiring *440that he appear and answer the relator’s petition, which seeks to enjoin and restrain the secretary of state from issuing a certificate of election to the respondent, Alec G. Olson, who was the apparent winner of an election contest for the office of representative to United States Congress from the Sixth District of Minnesota in the November 6, 1962, election. On the return date the secretary of state appeared, together with the candidates and their counsel; and after hearing arguments we made an order vacating the injunction or restraining order and denying the relief asked for by the relator.
Before giving the reasons for our decision a preliminary statement of the issues should be made. The relator, the Republican candidate for representative from the Sixth Congressional District, received at the November 6, 1962, general election 76,962 votes — 348 votes less than the 77,310 votes cast for the respondent, the Democratic-Farmer-Labor candidate. It is conceded that the relator has duly commenced proceedings to contest the election pursuant to 9 Stat. 568 (1851), Rev. Stat. § 105, 2 USCA, § 201, the exclusive avenue open to him to contest the seating of his opponent in Congress. The contest proceedings by the appropriate congressional committee either have begun or will shortly begin. The relator asks that pending the final determination of the outcome of this contest the secretary of state should be restrained from issuing to the respondent a certificate of election as provided by Minn. St. 204.32, subd. 2. Our decision must turn upon the interpretation of this particular provision, which reads as follows:
“The auditor of any county and the secretary of state may not issue a certificate of election to any person declared elected by the canvassing board of the county or the state canvassing board until 12 days after the canvassing board has canvassed the returns and declared the result of the election. In case of a contest, the certificate may not be issued until the proper court has determined the contest.”
The relator ably contends that the secretary of state is prevented from issuing the certificate because a contest has been instituted and that the issuance must await the result in the House of Representatives, *441which he asserts is, within the meaning of the statute, “the proper court” to determine the contest.
1. It is unnecessary to set out the various grounds upon which the relator seeks to prevail in the contest before the House of Representatives. The issues thus raised are not before us. While the state legislature may regulate the conduct of elections subject to the limitations expressed in U. S. Const, art. I, § 4, it should be conceded that under the provisions of art. I, § 5, each house of Congress is the sole judge of the election returns and qualifications of its members, exclusive of every other tribunal, including the courts. Youngdale v. Eastvold, 232 Minn. 134, 44 N. W. (2d) 459; State ex rel. 25 Voters v. Sel-vig, 170 Minn. 406, 212 N. W. 604; Williams v. Maas, 198 Minn. 516, 270 N. W. 586; Danielson v. Fitzsimmons, 232 Minn. 149, 44 N. W. (2d) 484. See, also, 54 Am. Jur., United States, § 17; Annotation, 107 A. L. R. 205.
2. The relator does not quarrel with the foregoing authority. By his brief he argues, “This proceeding seeks only to prevent the Secretary of State from performing a ministerial act, issuing a certificate, of election, in a case where he is, by Minnesota statute, specifically forbidden so to do.” He further argues that, since he has duly instituted the proceedings to contest the election of his opponent, the secretary of state must under the provisions of Minn. St. 204.32 refrain from issuing the certificate of election until that contest is resolved.
In considering the merits of the relator’s argument, it is necessary to view § 204.32 with other sections of our statute which relate to the mechanics of determining the election of the successful candidate. Section 204.31, subd. 3, provides in part:
“After the general election, the canvassing board shall canvass the certified copies of the statements made by the county canvassing boards, and they shall prepare therefrom a statement of the following information:
“(a) A statement of the whole number of votes counted for candidates for state offices, congressional offices, and such other *442candidates as shall be voted for in more than one county, specifying the several counties in which they were cast.”
Subd. 4 thereof provides:
“All members of the state canvassing board shall subscribe their names to the statement and certify to its correctness; and within three days after the completion of the canvass, the board shall declare the result.”
Section 204.32 prescribes the duty of the county auditor, or the secretary of state in the case where the candidate for office is voted for in more than one county, to issue the certificates of election to the candidates certified by the state canvassing board to be the victors. Subd. 1 reads in part:
“The auditor of each county, and the secretary of state where the candidates for office are voted for in more than one county, shall make for every person elected a certificate of his election and deliver the certificate to the person entitled thereto upon demand, and without fee.”
Subd. 2 thereof,1 previously quoted, operates as a limitation upon the general provision enunciated in subd. 1.
After carefully examining these statutory provisions, we must come to the conclusion that § 204.32, subd. 2, has no application to a contest in the United States Senate or House of Representatives. Our courts are divested of jurisdiction by U. S. Const, art. I, § 5, which provides: “Each house shall be the judge of the election returns and qualifications of its own members, * * The determinative fact in the mechanics of this particular election is the act of the state canvassing board in declaring the election of the respondent pursuant to *443authority of that board under Minn. St. 204.31, subds. 3 and 4. The certificate of election as provided by § 204.32 has no greater significance than a publication by the secretary of state of the official action taken by the canvassing board. The effect of any order of this court enjoining the secretary of state from performing the ministerial function of furnishing respondent a certificate of election would be gratuitous and of no force as bearing upon the merits of the election contest pending in the House of Representatives. It would, as expressed in State ex rel. 25 Voters v. Selvig, 170 Minn. 406, 408, 212 N. W. 604, be “officious and nugatory.” The contest is pending in a forum, the jurisdiction of which this court is bound to respect. The House of Representatives may seat members elected without a certificate, just as it might refuse to seat members who have a certificate, if it chooses to do so.2 Since the House of Representatives is the final and exclusive judge of the legality of election or qualification of its members, this court should not gratuitously issue a prerogative writ which might be considered a tactical advantage for one or the other candidate.
That the term “contest” as used in the last sentence of § 204.32, subd. 2, does not comprehend a contest pending in the United States House of Representatives is further apparent from an examination of c. 209, which deals with the subject of election contests. It is significant that in providing for the ground rules for election contests in this state the legislature has provided authority in § 209.02, subd. 1, to contest elections to “a state, county, legislative, or municipal, or district court office, or the declared result of a constitutional amendment * * The law as it now exists does not include a contest for the office of a member of the United States Congress.3 '
*444We are accordingly of the view that the provision relating to “contest” incorporated in § 204.32 refers solely to contests initiated pursuant to the general election laws of this state and is not applicable to a contest in the House of Representatives in Congress. We are of the further view that the term “proper court” in the same section applies to the state court which is given jurisdiction under c. 209 and does not include the Congress of the United States.
The relator’s petition for writ or order restraining the secretary of state from issuing a certificate of election to the respondent was properly denied by the order of this court dated December 4, 1962.
Writ vacated.
L. 1945, c. 229, § 3, added: “In case of a contest, the certificate shall not be issued until the district court has determined the contest.” (Italics supplied.) The law was repealed by L. 1959, c. 675, art. 13, § 1. If was reenacted by art. 5, § 32, subd.-2, of that act to read proper court instead of district court. There is no legislative history to enlighten us as to why that change was made. There is no doubt as to the meaning prior to the 1959 act since until then it specifically related to contests in the district court.
Keogh v. Horner (S. D. Ill.) 8 F. Supp. 933.
The legislative interim commission on election laws commented (Report of the Interim Commission on Election Laws, 1961, p. 15, Minnesota Election Laws, 1962 ed. p. 155):
“Under existing law there are at least three different procedures applicable to commencing an election contest by court action. The way to begin a contest depends largely on the grounds for contest and the kind of office in question. A prospective contestant who chooses the wrong procedure *444finds that he is prevented from carrying on the contest. The amendment [Minn. St. 209.02] provides one uniform way of commencing a contest which is applicable whether the grounds relate to misconduct on the part of the candidate or his agents, or to a question over who received the most votes, and also to all kinds of offices. The notice of contest, manner of service, time of commencement, place of action, as well as what is sufficient to confer jurisdiction upon the court to determine the contest, are all provided for in the amendment. It is important to keep in mind that while one procedure would govern all contests, in the case of contests over legislative offices the courts are limited by a subsequent section because by provision of the constitution, the legislature is the final judge over the election of its members. The contest law does not apply for similar reasons to-final elections in the case of congressional offices.'’ (Italics supplied.)

=== CASE 9738814 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:03:34.134231+00 ===

Knutson, Chief Justice
(concurring specially).
I concur in the result.
Inasmuch as I was the author of the court’s opinion in Youngdale v. Eastvold, 232 Minn. 134, 44 N. W. (2d) 459, which stated among other things that (232 Minn. 139, 44 N. W. [2d] 462) “our courts have no jurisdiction over the election of representatives to congress,” I feel that some explanation of my present views are in order. That statement was taken largely from Williams v. Maas, 198 Minn. 516, 270 N. W. 586, and State ex rel. 25 Voters v. Selvig, 170 Minn. 406, 212 N. W. 604. Read literally, it is too broad a statement.
U. S. Const, art. I, § 4, which provides that the “times, places and manner of holding elections for senators and representatives shall *445be prescribed in each state by the legislature thereof,” clearly grants to the states the power to prescribe the manner of electing Senators and Representatives to Congress. This right, however, is circumscribed by art. I, § 5, which reads in part: “Each house shall be the judge of the election returns and qualifications of its own members.” By legislation, Minnesota, as well as every other state of the Union, has provided the machinery for electing members of Congress. In view of that fact, it is not accurate to say that we have no jurisdiction over elections. It is more proper to say that the states have been given the authority to prescribe all steps necessary to complete the elective process, subject to the overriding power of Congress to determine who has been properly elected and to refuse to seat one who is determined not to have been properly elected. Within the scope of the elective process, our legislature could have provided for a recount of the votes under supervision of our courts when the original tabulation was questioned by one of the candidates. If it had done so as part of the elective process, as many of the other states have done, we do not doubt that Congress would accept the final tally of the vote after a recount as well as it would accept the original tally without a recount.
In the Youngdale case we said (23.2 Minn. 139, 44 N. W. [2d] 462):
“The authority of courts to entertain election contests is purely statutory. Absent statutory authorization, the courts are without jurisdiction to determine election contests. * * * If the statutes do not authorize the courts to entertain election contests for the office here involved on the ground and for the reasons alleged in contestant’s petition, the court has no jurisdiction over the subject matter.”
What we really held in the Youngdale case may be found in the following part of our opinion (232 Minn. 144, 44 N. W. [2d] 464):
“We come therefore to the conclusion that there are no statutory provisions authorizing our courts to entertain contests involving the nomination or election to the office of representative in congress for mere errors in counting the ballots, and that the petition before us is insufficient to bring the contest within the scope of § 208.01. Consequently, the court is without jurisdiction, * *
*446It is correct to say that our courts have no jurisdiction over an election contest involving such offices under our laws as they now stand. This does not mean that the legislature, if it saw fit, could not confer upon the court the right to supervise an election contest or recount of the ballots in order to determine who was legally elected. As long as the recount is part of the election process, it would be just as much within the constitutional power granted to the state as any other step in the elective process. The difficulty here is that our legislature has not included a recount of the votes, with or without supervision of the courts, as part of the election process with respect to a Representative in Congress.
In State ex rel. 25 Voters v. Selvig, 170 Minn. 406, 212 N. W. 604, we held that the House of Representatives had exclusive jurisdiction to determine whether a person elected as a Representative in Congress was disqualified from becoming a member of that body. In Williams v. Maas, 198 Minn. 516, 270 N. W. 586, we went one step further and held that the state had no power to conduct a recount of the votes. Some of the statements made in these cases were followed in the Youngdale case, and those statements are too broad if taken out of context with the facts involved in those cases. I think the correct rule is that the state does have the power to provide for a recount of the votes as part of the elective process but that final determination of who is elected, or whether a candidate receiving the most votes is disqualified from holding office, lies with Congress.

=== CASE 9738815 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:03:34.13893+00 ===

Rogosheske, Justice
(concurringspecially).
I agree with the result. However, I do not believe this state is constitutionally divested of jurisdiction to provide a means whereby a candidate for Congress could contest an election in the courts of this state. This seems to be implied in the opinion. While there is language in our prior decisions, especially in Williams v. Maas, 198 Minn. 516, 270 N. W. 586,1 which supports this implication, in my opinion such a holding neither is, nor should be regarded as, the basis for this decision. Moreover, I believe it is an inaccurate declaration *447of the constitutional limitation on the state’s power and duty to prescribe the time, place, and manner of electing members of Congress.
It is true that U. S. Const, art. I, § 5, vests final power in each house to determine who shall be seated as a member of Congress. However, U. S. Const, art. I, § 4, by express language not only grants power but imposes a duty on the legislatures of the several states to enact laws governing the election process. This process surely includes laws by which it can be determined who received the highest number of votes legally cast. An election contest which permits a recanvass of the votes cast, under court supervision designed to insure accuracy and fairness, is as much a part of the election process as the initial counting of the votes by the election judges. That it is so regarded by the legislature for all save the congressional office is demonstrated by the provisions of oúr Election Law. In fact, our courts are given jurisdiction to entertain an election contest over a state legislative office even though Minn. Const, art. 4, § 3, contains language of identical import with that contained in U. S. Const, art. I, § 5. With respect to an election contest to determine who received the highest number of legal votes, these constitutional provisions should not be regarded as a limitation on legislative power but only as an overriding constitutional prerogative vesting in each house of Congress, as well as in each branch of the state legislature, the final judgment as to who shall be seated as a member. It does not logically follow that, because each house of Congress has plenary power to disregard a judicial determination, providing statutory machinery for such a contest would be “officious and nugatory.” Whether followed or not, the primary objective of such election-contest machinery is to ascertain the true expression of the will of the voters. The primary objective sought by the exercise of a final judgment by either Congress or the state legislature is identical. Practical considerations alone could demonstrate that any results from an intermediate court review would be of inestimable aid to Congress in arriving at a final judgment no less than such reviews have aided the state legislature. In the broad sense, state laws granting authority to courts to review the election process would not interfere with or encroach upon either the constitutional *448power of the legislature or of Congress because such constitutional powers are plenary and, when exercised, final.2
Our construction of Minn. St. 204.32, subd. 2, should be based only upon the absence of any statutory authorization to judicially determine who received the most legal votes for the congressional office and not upon the proposition that this state and its courts are constitutionally divested of jurisdiction to provide for proceedings to contest an election.
See, also, State ex rel. 25 Voters v. Selvig, 170 Minn. 406, 212 N. W: 604; Youngdale v. Eastvold, 232 Minn. 134, 44 N. W. (2d) 459..
See, Wickersham v. State Election Bd. (Okla.) 357 P. (2d) 421.

=== CASE 9738817 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:03:34.386371+00 ===

MR. JUSTICE SEIDENFELD delivered the opinion of the court. Plaintiff appeals from an order dismissing her complaint for wrongful death. The complaint alleges an action under the laws of Iowa. The order dismissing the complaint states that the right of action of the plaintiff is to be determined by reference to the law of Illinois rather than the law of Iowa. The plaintiff urges procedural error as well as error in the determination of the applicable law. The complaint contains four separate counts in which the plaintiff alleges the right to recover from the defendants for the death of Wayne Ingersoll, which occurred by drowning on January 12th, 1963, in the Mississippi River. Count I of the complaint alleges a violation of chapter 321.494 of the Iowa Code.1 This count charges the defendant, Walter Robert Klein, with “reckless operation” of an automobile in driving on the ice on the surface of the Mississippi River, alleged to be frozen over and safe for driving, except where there were air pockets. It is further alleged that at a point near the Iowa bank of the river, the exact location of which is not known to the plaintiff, there was an air pocket under the ice which was known to the defendants. A second count of the complaint charges the same defendant, Walter Robert Klein, with driving a vehicle under the influence of intoxicating liquor in violation of the same Iowa statute referred to in count I. The third count of the complaint is directed against William C. Klein, the father of Walter Robert Klein, on the theory that he was liable for his son’s acts causing the death. This count is based upon chapter 321.493 of the Iowa Code.2  Count four of the complaint is also directed against the defendant, William C. Klein, and based upon allegations contained in other counts. Defendants first filed an answer denying that Iowa law was applicable to the case and also filed interrogatories to be answered by the plaintiff. There was no further activity in the case until almost two years later when plaintiff filed a notice and motion to obtain leave to answer interrogatories and requesting that the court strike the answer of the defendants for the reason that it was not verified and contained general issues. Plaintiff was given leave to file an answer to interrogatories, and defendants’ answer was ordered stricken with leave to file an amended answer. Several days later, on oral motion of the attorneys for the defendants and without notice to the plaintiff, the order was modified to provide that the defendants might answer or plead within the time granted. The defendants filed a request for admissions of facts and the plaintiff admitted the following facts: “1. That the plaintiff and all that may benefit from the law suit reside in Illinois. “2. That the deceased Wayne Ingersoll at the time of his death and immediately prior thereto was a resident of Illinois. “3. That the deceased Wayne Ingersoll met his death by drowning in the Mississippi River.” Thereafter, defendants filed a motion to strike and dismiss the complaint. In that motion the defendants requested that the court strike the paragraphs of the complaint making reference to Iowa law, alleging that the State of Iowa had no significant interest in the suit and alleging that the State of Illinois had significant interests. Thereafter, defendants amended their motion to set up the restrictions contained in chapter 70, section 2 of the Ill Rev Stats 1961,3 providing generally that no action shall be brought or prosecuted in Illinois to recover damages for death occurring outside of the State of Illinois. The court subsequently entered an order holding that the cause of action might be prosecuted in the State of Illinois, but also .finding that the laws of the State of Illinois, rather than the laws of the State of Iowa, determine the rights of the parties. An order dismissing the complaint was entered and the plaintiff was given leave to file an amended complaint. Before the time allotted, plaintiff moved and obtained an order to amend the complaint by substituting the personal representative of the defendant, William Klein, as a defendant in the suit, suggesting the death of Klein; and plaintiff further elected to stand on her complaint as amended. We will approach the procedural question first. Plaintiff argues that by filing an answer to the complaint the defendants have admitted the sufficiency of the complaint. They further argue that since the order as originally entered gave leave to file an amended answer, it was not proper to get leave from the court to plead rather than answer without having given notice in advance to the plaintiff. (A further portion of the procedural argument is directed at defendants’ amended motion referring to chapter 70, section 2, supra, but defendants have conceded that this portion of the statute is unconstitutional under the full faith and credit clause of the U. S. Constitution, under a U. S. Supreme Court ruling on a similar provision. The defendants state that they no longer rely upon that portion of their amended motion to strike.)  Plaintiff’s argument that the defendants by first answering have irrevocably admitted that the complaint states a cause of action is not persuasive. The Civil Practice Act expresses a purpose to construe pleadings and amendments liberally with a view to doing substantial justice between the parties and determining cases according to the substantive rights of the parties, consistent with fair and orderly procedures. See Ill Rev Stats 1965, c 110, §§ 4, 83, 46. The trial court acted within its discretion under the Civil Practice Act, in permitting the defendant, after the answer had been stricken on the motion of the plaintiff for technical deficiencies, to further plead by way of motion. The question of the nonapplicability of the Iowa law set forth in the complaint was raised in the answer and the plaintiff has not shown in what manner she has been damaged or has lost any rights by allowing the motion to dismiss to be filed. Morris v. Goldthorp, 390 Ill 186, 189, 60 NE2d 857 (1945); Kovalik v. Baldwin, 3 Ill App2d 210, 212, 121 NE2d 53 (1954). While in the authorities cited the court granted defendant leave to withdraw his answer, and in the instant case the answer was stricken on motion of the other party, we can make no meaningful distinction based on those differences.  Plaintiff has properly complained of the action of the defendants in securing a change in the language of the order dismissing the answer by ex parte application to the court below. We most strongly disapprove of such conduct. However, under the circumstances of this case we can find no such damage to the plaintiff by this conduct that would justify the striking down of the motion. An issue has also been raised as to whether the motion to dismiss was sufficient to properly raise the dispute of applicable law. While the motion is not labeled, defendants contend that the motions made under section 45 of the Civil Practice Act could equally be considered proper under section 48(1) of the Civil Practice Act, and. that their request for admissions of fact can be used as an affidavit in connection with such motion. Plaintiff argues that the matters relied upon by the defendants to contest the applicable law do not appear on the face of the complaint and that, therefore, the motion that defendants have made is under section 48. Plaintiff continues that such motion is incorrect as the ground contested does not fall under any of the enumerated sections of section 48, supporting his position with the case of Hansen v. Raleigh, 391 Ill 536, 63 NE2d 851 (1945).  That case lends support to the proposition that affidavits cannot properly be considered on the motion made under the provisions of section 45. But section 48 is intended to supplement section 45. (See Smith-Hurd Illinois Annotated Statutes, chapter 110, section 48, page 354.) Both sections presuppose that the moving party considers a pleading attacked to be so insufficient as to obviate further pleading (Barrett v. Continental Ill. Nat. Bank & Trust Co. of Chicago, 2 Ill App2d 70, 118 NE2d 631 (1954)), and a motion to dismiss may be properly sustained whether it be regarded as filed under section 45 or under section 48 where the motion points out particular defects which render the complaint insufficient. See Greenberg v. Waukegan-Caldwell Bldg. Corp., 27 Ill2d 620, 624, 190 NE2d 335 (1963).  It is noted that section 48, subsection (i) of the Civil Practice Act was added subsequent to the decision in Hansen v. Raleigh (supra). Section 48 provides for a motion to be pleaded where “the claim or demand asserted against defendant is barred by other affirmative matter avoiding the legal effect of or defeating the claim or demand.” (Subsection i.) We believe this to be sufficiently broad to encompass the basic issue as to which state’s law is to apply to the action. We consider next the merits of the judge’s ruling on the motion. We consider the well pleaded facts admitted by the motion to be as follows: The plaintiff as administratrix is a resident of Illinois and the Estate is pending in Illinois; the deceased was a resident of Illinois at the time of his death; the accident occurred in that part of the Mississippi River in the territorial jurisdiction of the State of Iowa (a disputed fact but well pleaded and therefore presumed to be true) ; the suit has been brought in the Hlinois court for wrongful death of the decedent; the defendants are Illinois residents. The request for, and the admissions of fact add the additional circumstance that all persons who may obtain any benefit from the lawsuit are residents of Illinois. It further appears from the answer to interrogatories that the sole eyewitness, Walter Robert Klein, is a resident of Illinois, the people arriving on the scene were Illinois residents, the photographer was an Illinois resident, the people having knowledge of the defendant’s intoxication were Illinois residents, that places where defendant drank prior to the incident were Illinois establishments, that deceased worked in Illinois and that all of the next of kin of decedent were Illinois residents.  We are of the opinion that the record establishes that Illinois has the most significant relationship with the occurrence and with the parties to the occurrence, while the only contact with the State of Iowa is the alleged situs of the decedent’s death; and that the application of the Illinois Wrongful Death Act with reference to its residents should not offend the comity of interstate relationships between the states of Illinois and Iowa. While we are urged by plaintiff to apply the mechanical rule of the lex loci delicti, for the reasons which we have indicated in the majority opinion in Graham v. General U. S. Grant Post No. 2665, 97 Ill App2d 139, 239 NE2d 856 (1968), we are not so inclined. We believe that the choice influencing considerations which we there referred to, when applied to the admitted facts in the case, dictate that the cause of action here should be determined under Illinois law. The parties are all residents of Illinois and no citizen of Iowa is involved so that no harm is involved to the interests of Iowa by the selection of applicable law. The law of the forum differs from that of Iowa in the areas of recovery limits, nature of the proof and owners’ liability, and Illinois therefore advances its interest in applying its policy determinations to its residents appearing in its courts. Only the last event occurred in Iowa while it is apparent that much of the conduct leading to that event occurred in Illinois, and was witnessed by Illinois residents. Illinois, as both the forum state and the domicile of potential beneficiaries, has a more significant interest in the recovery of damages for wrongful death than does Iowa, whose only interest arises from the fortuitous occurrence of the accident in that state. We, therefore, affirm. Affirmed. DAVIS, J., concurs.   “The owner or operator of a motor vehicle shall not be liable for any damages to any passenger or person riding in said motor vehicle as a guest or by invitation and not for hire unless damage is caused as a result of the driver of said motor vehicle being under the influence of intoxicating liquor or because of the reckless operation by him of such motor vehicle.”    “In all cases where damage is done by any car by reason of the negligence of the driver, and driven with the consent of the owner, the owner of the car shall be liable for such damage.”    “2. Plaintiffs in action—Beneficiaries—Amount of damages— Distribution—Limitation of actions—Right of action outside of state—Next of Kin—Contributory negligence.) § 2. Every such action shall be brought by and in the names of the personal representatives of such deceased person, and, except as otherwise hereinafter provided, the amount recovered in every such action shall be for the exclusive benefit of the widow and next of kin of such deceased person and in every such action .... “. . . Provided, further, that no action shall be brought or prosecuted in this State to recover damages for a death occurring outside of this State where a right of action for such death exists under the laws of the place where such death occurred and service of process in such suit may be had upon the defendant in such place. . . . “As amended by act approved July 8, 1957. L 1957, p 1939.”

=== CASE 9739760 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:20:31.69913+00 ===

Riley, J.
Because we find that MCL 129.201 et seq.; MSA 5.2321(1) et seq. imposes upon a governmental unit1 the duty to verify the validity of a payment bond furnished by a general contractor of a public works project, we reverse the Court of Appeals affirmance of summary disposition with regard to plaintiff’s negligence count. Similarly, because we find that defendant may have inequitably received the benefit of plaintiff’s labor and materials, we reverse the Court of Appeals affirmance of summary disposition with regard to plaintiff’s unjust enrichment and constructive trust counts. Finally, we affirm the Court of Appeals affirmance of summary disposition with regard to the third-party beneficiary count because plaintiff is not a third party within the meaning of MCL 600.1405; MSA 27A.1405._
*179I
Because plaintiff’s complaint was dismissed on summary disposition, we view the facts in the light most favorable to plaintiff. Stevens v McLouth Steel Products Corp, 433 Mich 365, 370; 446 NW2d 95 (1989).
On April 23, 1987, defendant, East China Township Schools, entered into a general construction contract with a general contractor, Dougherty Construction, Inc., for the construction and renovation of athletic facilities in the district.2 As required by the public works act,3 Dougherty furnished defendant a performance bond4 and a payment bond.5 The bonds were standard, preprinted, American Institute of Architects forms, with the name of the surety, American Seaboard Indemnity & Insurance Company of Peachtree City, Georgia, printed across the top of each bond.
Dougherty entered into a contract with plaintiff, subcontractor Kammer Asphalt Paving Co, for certain base and paving work. In consideration of plaintiff’s services, Dougherty agreed to pay Kammer $217,906. In October of 1987, plaintiff notified Dougherty, as well as the school district, of its intended performance and its reliance upon the payment bond.
In accordance with the general contract, the project’s architect, DiGeronimo Associates, disbursed progress payments to Dougherty as the project advanced. Dougherty, however, was not as *180consistent in paying the project’s subcontractors. When various subcontractors, including plaintiff, repeatedly expressed concern over Dougherty’s failure to compensate them, defendant, DiGeronimo, and Dougherty all indicated that they need not worry because the payment bond protected the subcontractors’ interest.
On August 15, 1988, defendant discovered that the furnished bonds were invalid and unenforceable — American Seaboard Indemnity & Insurance Company did not exist. Dougherty ignored defendant’s subsequent demands for valid bonds. On October 21, 1988, defendant issued a notice of termination to Dougherty because of its failure to furnish the required bonds, at which time plaintiff first became aware of the fraudulent nature of the bonds.
Defendant then filed suit in St. Clair Circuit Court against Dougherty Contractors and William Dougherty. In a separate action, plaintiff filed suit against Dougherty, DiGeronimo, defendant, and various members of the East China School Board. Four other subcontractors separately filed similar actions. In response to defendant’s motion, the trial court consolidated the subcontractors’ five separate suits with defendant’s action against Dougherty.
Following consolidation of the lawsuits, defendant filed a countercomplaint and third-party complaint for interpleader, naming all of Dougherty’s subcontractors as parties. Defendant sought to deposit the remaining contract funds6 with the trial court for a determination regarding its proper distribution. Defendant proposed that the *181fund first be applied to pay for completion of the project, with any remaining funds to be distributed to the unpaid subcontractors on a pro-rata basis.7
On March 16, 1989, defendant filed a motion for summary disposition pursuant to MCR 2.116(C)(8) and (10) with regard to the subcontractors’ claims against the school district. The circuit court granted defendant’s motion, finding no legal duty for governmental units to ensure the validity of the bonds, which foreclosed the subcontractors’ negligence claim.8 Furthermore, the court found that the subcontractors’ unjust enrichment, constructive trust, and breach of contract to a third-party beneficiary claims were unsupportable. The Court of Appeals affirmed in an unpublished per curiam opinion. This Court granted plaintiff’s application for leave to appeal on December 8, 1992.9 441 Mich 894.
II
Because materialmen and contractors may not obtain a mechanics’ lien on a public building,10 the Legislature requires the posting of performance and payment bonds by a general contractor before construction on a public building may commence. *182MCL 129.201 et seq.; MSA 5.2321(1) et seq.11 Payment bonds are "solely for the protection of claimants . . . supplying labor or materials to the principal contractor or his subcontractors in the prosecution of the work provided for in the contract.” MCL 129.203; MSA 5.2321(3).12 The bond, therefore, must be "executed by a surety company authorized to do business in the state.” MCL 129.204; MSA 5.2321(4). The Legislature further protects subcontractors by mandating that public units provide subcontractors a certified copy of a submitted bond if they submit an affidavit that they are unpaid for services or materials. MCL 129.208; MSA 5.2321(8). Furthermore, such a certified copy "shall be prima facie evidence of the contents, execution, and delivery of the original.” Id.13
The Court of Appeals, relying on prior author*183ity,14 held that "[t]here is no duty imposed on the contracting governmental unit to insure that payment bonds are kept current or to warn subcontractors or material suppliers of the expiration of a bond.”15 The Court, therefore, granted defendant’s motion for summary disposition with regard to the negligence count.16
The dissent, however, fails to examine the current statute as a whole. "In every exposition of a statute, the intention of the Legislature is undoubtedly the end to be sought . . . .” Leoni Twp v Taylor, 20 Mich 148, 154-155 (1870). Thus, when legislative intent is clearly revealed in an unambiguous statute, the plain language of the statute must be enforced. Farm Products Co v Jordan, 229 Mich 235, 239; 201 NW 198 (1924). Nevertheless, because "a clause which, standing by itself, might seem of doubtful import, may yet be made plain by comparison with other clauses or portions of the same law,” a fundamental principle of statutory interpretation is that "the whole is to be examined with a view to arriving at the true intention of each part . ...” 1 Cooley, Constitutional Limitations (8th ed), p 127.17 If judicial construction is necessary, the Court must discern the Legislature’s intent by examining "the object of the statute, the harm which it is designed to remedy, and apply a reasonable construction which best accomplishes the statute’s purpose.” In re Forfeiture of $5,264, 432 Mich 242, 248; 439 NW2d 246 (1989).
*184Utilizing these principles, an examination of MCL 129.208; MSA 5.2321(8) reveals that it unambiguously provides that a government entity verifies the validity of a payment bond when it provides a certified copy of the bond at the request of a subcontractor.18 In the instant case, therefore, the statute imposes the risk of the invalidity of such bonds upon the government entity.19 This interpretation of the statute is aligned with its avowed purpose to protect subcontractors in the absence of mechanics’ liens for public works. Furthermore, the statute’s requirements that the bond be submitted to the government entity,20 the bond be executed by a validly licensed company,21 and filed in the office of the government entity,22 all strongly confirm that the statute imposes upon the government entity the duty to verify the validity of such bonds.23 To hold otherwise would be to *185render the statutory requirement of payment bonds meaningless.
In the instant case, plaintiff requested and was provided copies of the bonds nearly a year before the termination of the project, at which time defendant certified that the bonds were properly executed. Plaintiff, therefore, is entitled to proceed on the negligence count because defendant’s provision of the certified copies was prima facie evidence that the bonds were valid, and defendant is liable for the resulting damages stemming from its failure to verify the bonds’ validity.24
III
Even though no contract may exist between two parties, under the equitable doctrine of unjust enrichment, "[a] person who has been unjustly enriched at the expense of another is required to make restitution to the other.” Restatement Restitution, § 1, p 12. The remedy is one by which "the law sometimes indulges in the fiction of a quasi or constructive contract, with an implied obligation to pay for benefits received” to ensure that " ’exact *186justice’ ” is obtained. Detroit v Highland Park, 326 Mich 78, 100; 39 NW2d 325 (1949), quoting Cascaden v Magryta, 247 Mich 267, 270; 225 NW 511 (1929). Because this doctrine vitiates normal contract principles, the courts "employ the fiction with caution, and will never permit it in cases where contracts, implied in fact, must be established, or substitute one promisor or debtor for another.” In the instant case, the Court of Appeals held that summary disposition was correct with regard to this count because "even though the School District received a benefit from the subcontractors, it is not unjust under the circumstances that the benefit be retained.”25 Viewing the facts in the light most favorable to plaintiff, if reasonable minds could differ over the legal conclusion of the instant case, summary disposition was inappropriate. DiFranco v Pickard, 427 Mich 32, 54; 398 NW2d 896 (1986).
A
The Court of Appeals analysis must be rejected because defendant failed to notify plaintiff of the fraudulent nature of the bonds after it had assured plaintiff the bonds would secure its interests. Defendant was aware over a year before the termination of the contract that Dougherty was failing to compensate plaintiff and other subcontractors, and plaintiff repeatedly informed defendant of its reliance upon the bonds to secure compensation. Indeed, defendant indicated that there was no need to worry because the payment bond protected the subcontractors’ interest. However, defendant knew for approximately seventy-five days that the bonds were fraudulent, and never notified plaintiff until after it terminated its contract with Dough*187erty. Standing alone, these facts sufficiently support a claim of unjust enrichment. Furthermore, as soon as difficulties arose — nearly a year before the termination of the contract — defendant verified the validity of the bonds by supplying plaintiff with certified copies of the bonds. In these circumstances, regardless of its fulfillment of the contract to the general contractor, once defendant possessed actual knowledge of the invalidity of the bonds and failed to inform plaintiff, reasonable minds could find that defendant was unjustly enriched. Cf. City of Ingleside v Stewart, 554 SW2d 939, 945 (Tex Civ App, 1977).26
B
Whether defendant was unjustly enriched before actual knowledge of the invalidity of the bonds is a closer issue. Although plaintiff indirectly provided defendant a benefit, its contract was with Dougherty, and the benefit it provided was in exchange for compensation. The risk of nonpayment could be understood to rest with plaintiff.27 Moreover, defendant paid the general contractor $1,3 million *188for the work performed. Plaintiff, however, was permitted to assume the submitted bonds were valid once it received copies of the bonds, and defendant repeatedly assured plaintiff of payment because of the bonds. Hence, equity demands plaintiff be permitted to go forward with this count for those damages that arose after certification of the bonds and verbal assurances of protection by the bonds were given by defendant.
IV
A constructive trust may be imposed "where such trust is necessary to do equity or to prevent unjust enrichment . . . .” Ooley v Collins, 344 Mich 148, 158; 73 NW2d 464 (1955). Hence, such a trust may be imposed when property " 'has been obtained through fraud, misrepresentation, concealment, undue influence, duress, taking advantage of one’s weakness, or necessities, or any other similar circumstances which render it unconscionable for the holder of the legal title to retain and enjoy the property ....’” Potter v Lindsay, 337 Mich 404, 411; 60 NW2d 133 (1953), quoting Racho v Beach, 254 Mich 600, 606-607; 236 NW 875 (1931).28 Accordingly, it may not be imposed upon parties "who have in no way contributed to the reasons for imposing a constructive trust.” Ooley, supra at 158. The burden of proof is upon the person seeking the imposition of such a trust. MacKenzie v Fritzinger, 370 Mich 284; 121 NW2d 410 (1963). The Court of Appeals held that plaintiff failed to allege sufficient facts necessary to establish such a cause of action.29
*189Plaintiff alleges that defendant " 'misrepresented’ the existence of a payment bond to satisfy subcontractor claims.” Examining the evidence in the light most favorable to plaintiff, defendant verbally assured plaintiff that it was protected by the bonds and certified their validity when it provided certified copies of them. Plaintiff may prove at trial that it would not have continued construction without relying upon this representation. If so, defendant received the benefit of plaintiff’s labor, and a constructive trust could have been established. Hence, the Court of Appeals decision is reversed with regard to this count.
V
Plaintiff further suggests that the Court of Appeals erred in denying its third-party beneficiary claim. MCL 600.1405; MSA 27A.1405 defines third-party beneficiaries and the rights they possess:
Any person for whose benefit a promise is made by way of contract, as hereinafter defined, has the same right to enforce said promise that he would have had if the said promise had been made directly to him as the promisee.
(1) A promise shall be construed to have been made for the benefit of a person whenever the promisor of said promise has undertaken to give or to do or refrain from doing something directly to or for said person.
The Court must objectively determine "from the form and meaning of the contract itself” whether a party is a third-party beneficiary as defined in MCL 600.1405; MSA 27A.1405. Guardian Depositors Corp v Brown, 290 Mich 433, 437; 287 NW 798 (1939).
*190In the instant case, plaintiff may not recover as a third-party beneficiary because defendant was the promisee of the bonds, not the promisor. The contract between Dougherty and defendant did not contain promises on behalf of plaintiff. In fact, contract provision 1.1.2 explicitly states that "[n]othing contained in the Contract Documents shall create any contractual relationship between the Owner or the Architect and any Subcontractor or Sub-subcontractor.” Quite simply, "plaintiff is asserting the claim against the wrong party.” Reed & Noyce, Inc v Muni Contractors, Inc, 106 Mich App 113, 119; 308 NW2d 445 (1981).
At best, plaintiff is an incidental beneficiary of the general contract. As noted by this Court in Greenlees v Owen Ames Kimball Co, 340 Mich 670, 676; 66 NW2d 227 (1954), plaintiff has no remedy under the contract between Dougherty and defendant:
"An incidental beneficiary has no rights under the contract. A third person cannot maintain an action upon a simple contract merely because he would receive a benefit from its performance or because he is injured by the breach thereof. Where the contract is primarily for the benefit of the parties thereto, the mere fact that a third person would be incidentally benefited does not give him a right to sue for its breach.”
The Court of Appeals dismissal of the third-party beneficiary claim, therefore, is affirmed.
VI
Because we find that MCL 129.201 et seq.; MSA 5.2321(1) et seq. imposes upon a governmental unit the duty to verify the validity of a payment bond furnished by a general contractor of a public *191works project, we reverse the Court of Appeals affirmance of summary disposition with regard to plaintiff’s negligence count. Similarly, because we find that defendant may have inequitably received the benefit of plaintiff’s labor and materials, we reverse the Court of Appeals affirmance of summary disposition with regard to plaintiff’s unjust enrichment and constructive trust counts. Finally, we affirm the Court of Appeals affirmance of summary disposition with regard to the third-party beneficiary count because plaintiff is not a third party within the meaning of MCL 600.1405; MSA 27A.1405.
Levin, Brickley, Boyle, and Mallett, JJ., concurred with Riley, J.
To avoid confusion, this opinion will utilize the terms governmental unit or entity to encompass not only the contracting governmental unit but also its representatives.
The contract price, adjusted for additional work and change orders, was $1,504,195.36.
MCL 129.201 et seq.; MSA 5.2321(1) et seq.
A performance bond assures completion of a project in the event of default by the general contractor. This type of bond protects the owner of the property.
A payment bond assures payment to subcontractors who furnish supplies, labor, or equipment.
The total general contract price was $1,504,195.36. Before terminating the general contract, defendant disbursed $1,224,370.80 to Dougherty, leaving $279,824.56 remaining.
In a separate proceeding, the trial court implemented defendant’s proposed plan. As a result of the interpleader action, plaintiff received $37,923.64, reducing the amount owed it to $140,000.
The plaintiff’s challenge, regarding its negligence claim, focuses solely on the potential statutory duty delegated by the public works act. Plaintiff has not alleged that defendant acted in a manner that would require application of an exception to the doctrine of governmental immunity. See Richardson v Jackson Co, 432 Mich 377, 387, n 11; 443 NW2d 105 (1989); Ross v Consumers Power Co (On Rehearing), 420 Mich 567; 363 NW2d 641 (1984). We will not address this issue because it is not properly before the Court.
The other subcontractors did not appeal the Court of Appeals holding, therefore, they are not parties to the instant appeal.
See Knapp v Swaney, 56 Mich 345, 347; 23 NW 162 (1885); Ford v State Bd of Ed, 166 Mich 658, 660; 132 NW 467 (1911).
The Court of Appeals has explained:
The necessity for providing some means of protecting contractors, subcontractors, laborers, or materialmen, who perform labor or furnish materials for improvement of real property has • been recognized in this state prior to the time that it was a state. See 2 Territorial Laws 331 (1827). . . .
To [fulfill] the state’s basic policy to protect laborers and materialmen in construction work contracts . . , the Legislature adopted the forerunner of [MCL 129.201 et seq.; MSA 5.2321(1) et seq.]. The purpose of that statute was to provide protection in the construction of public buildings where protection is not afforded by the mechanics’ lien law .... [Milbrand Co v Dep’t of Social Services, 117 Mich App 437, 440; 324 NW2d 41 (1982).]
See also Adamo Equipment Rental Co v Mack Development Co, Inc, 122 Mich App 233, 236; 333 NW2d 40 (1982).
MCL 129.206; MSA 5.2321(6) defines "claimant” to include subcontractors such as plaintiff. MCL 129.207; MSA 5.2321(7) outlines the procedure by which a claimant may recover funds under a payment bond.
MCL 129.203; MSA 5.2321(3), however, mandates that payment bonds need only be posted "in an amount fixed by the governmental unit but not less than twenty-five percent of the contract amount . . . .”
Fischer v City of Negaunee, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of Appeals, decided June 9, 1989 (Docket No. 109102).
Unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of Appeals, decided April 28, 1992 (Docket No. 126596), p 2.
Id.
See also Collins v Secretary of State, 384 Mich 656, 666; 187 NW2d 423 (1971); Joslin v Campbell, Wyant & Cannon Foundry Co, 359 Mich 420, 426; 102 NW2d 584 (1960).
The dissent suggests that the language simply permits a subcontractor to "verify the validity of the payment bond furnished,” post at 201, but MCL 129.208; MSA 5.2321(8) provides that the certified copy is "prima facie evidence of the contents, execution, and delivery of the original.” If the statute was simply furnishing a mechanism for verification of the existence of a bond, it would not mandate that the certified copy was prima facie evidence of its execution and delivery, but would merely ensure that a copy be provided.
On the other hand, if plaintiff had never requested the copies, then it would possess no recourse because the risk of the invalidity would not have been imposed upon defendant. This is a sensible reading of the statute. After nonpayment by a general contractor, if subcontractors are willing to work without at least requesting copies of the bonds, then they assume the risk that no bonds (or invalid bonds) exist. If, however, subcontractors do take steps to ensure a bond exists, MCL 129.208; MSA 5.2321(8) permits subcontractors to presume that the bonds are filed and validly executed.
MCL 129.201; MSA 5.2321(1).
MCL 129.204; MSA 5.2321(4).
MCL 129.205; MSA 5.2321(5).
After noting that MCL 129.201 et seq.; MSA 5.2321(1) et seq. fails to include language from its predecessor, enacted by 1905 PA 187 and codified at MCL 570.101 et seq.; MSA 26.321 et seq., that explicitly provided that "it shall be the duty of the board of officers or agents, contracting on behalf of the [governmental unit], to require sufficient security by bond,” the dissent concludes that the current statute does *185not impose a statutory duty "to verify the validity of the payment bond furnished by a general contractor of a public works project.” Post at 201. Not only does the dissent fail to examine the current statute as a whole, its heavy reliance upon legislative history is misguided. The Legislature’s failure to provide explicitly for a duty to ensure the validity of the bonds is not controlling. First, the predecessor statute was entirely replaced by the current act. Contrary to the assertions of the dissent, the Legislature did not "remove the words imposing such a duty,” post at 193, but enacted a wholly different statutory framework to supersede the predecessor statute. As acknowledged by the dissent, "the former statute was repealed and 1963 PA 213 [was] enacted in its place . . . .” Post at 194, n 4. Second, the reforms appear to be focused upon eliminating individual liability for the breach of the duty in question. Third, the language, purpose, and structure of the statute reveal that such a duty was intended to exist.
In the instant case, the extent of damages is limited to the facial value of the invalid bond. If no bond existed, then damages would be limited to "25% of the contract amount . . . .” MCL 129.203; MSA 5.2321(3).
Slip op, p 2.
[T]he record clearly reflects that the City was aware that contractor Smith did not have a bond and chose to allow him to continue under his contract. It is entirely reasonable for a subcontractor to assume that the governmental agency, in executing a construction contract . . . will follow the law and require the general contractor to provide a bond. However, if such governmental agency should choose not to require the bond, then it should also not be heard to claim that a subcontractor’s only remedy for nonpayment is against the general contractor on the bond it did not require and that it knew he did not have.
Contrary to the assertions of the dissent, this analysis is independent of the status of the governmental entity, i.e., the city need not step into the shoes of the general contractor ,to be held liable for its failure to ensure a validly executed bond protects the subcontractors.
See Michigan Ass’n of Psychotherapy Clinics v Blue Cross & Blue Shield of Michigan (After Remand), 118 Mich App 505, 518; 325 NW2d 471 (1982).
See also Grasman v Jelsema, 70 Mich App 745, 752; 246 NW2d 322 (1976) ("[a] constructive trust may be based upon a breach of fiduciary or confidential relationship, misrepresentation, concealment, mistake, undue influence, duress or fraud”).
Slip op, p 2.

=== CASE 9738818 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:03:34.391176+00 ===

MOEAN, J., dissents: In the case of Graham v. General U. S. Grant Post No. 2665, 97 Ill App2d 139, 239 NE2d 856 (1968), the majority opinion gave the Illinois Dram Shop Act (Ill Rev Stats 1965, c 43, § 94 et seq.) extraterritorial life by applying its provisions beyond our state border to an accident occurring in the State of Wisconsin. After doing so, it then became necessary to depart from the lex loci delicti commissi rule followed by our Supreme Court, and the majority did so. In the instant case, although the question of extraterritorial jurisdiction of the Wrongful Death Act (Ill Rev Stats 1961, c 70, §§ 1 & 2) was not raised, still the question of whether the Act is applicable is present. In effect the trial court extended the Act into Iowa where the incident took place. It should be noted that this holding took place before this Court decided the Graham case, supra. Eegardless, the application of the rule of lex loci delicti is the main question presented herein. While I concur with the opinion as it relates to the procedural holdings, I must dissent from the majority’s view as it pertains to the question of the substantive law involved. Where the issue is one of procedure, the law of the forum will apply; however, if the issue is one of substantive rights of the parties, then the lex loci delicti or law of the place of the wrong generally governs, except where to do so would be contrary to the public policy of the forum. Marchlik v. Coronet Ins. Co., 40 Ill2d 327, 329-330, 239 NE2d 799 (1968); Millsap v. Central Wisconsin Motor Transp. Co., 41 Ill App2d 1, 8, 239 NE2d 285 (1963). Further, if the foreign law sought to be enforced is different than the law of the forum, this in and of itself does not make it unenforceable as against public policy, Marchlik case, supra, page 333. The defendant has not shown the Iowa law, upon which the plaintiff seeks recovery, to be against the public policy of Illinois; therefore, the Iowa law should be enforced. For the reasons stated above, I would reverse and remand.

=== CASE 2217793 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:34.886591+00 ===

106 Ill. App. 2d 55 (1969)
245 N.E.2d 497
Anita J. Heuer and William Heuer, Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v.
Manuel E. Goldberg, d/b/a M. Goldberg Cartage, and Stanley J. Ziober, Defendants-Appellees.
Gen. No. 51,626.
Illinois Appellate Court  First District, Third Division.
February 13, 1969.
*56 Brunon J. Komosa and Joseph J. Jares, Jr., of Chicago, for appellants.
Hinshaw, Culbertson, Moelmann & Hoban, of Chicago (John L. Kirkland and Donald J. O'Meara, of counsel), for appellees.
MR. PRESIDING JUSTICE SULLIVAN delivered the opinion of the court.
*57 Plaintiffs appeal from a judgment rendered against them in a personal injury and property damage case.
Plaintiffs contend that the verdict was against the weight of the evidence and it was the duty of the trial court to grant a motion for a new trial; that because of improper conduct of counsel, a new trial should have been granted; and that the verdict of the jury was contrary to the manifest weight of the evidence.
Anita J. Heuer was driving her husband's automobile west on Madison Street. Madison Street is 58 feet, 3 inches wide east of Pulaski Road and 80 feet, 10 inches wide west of Pulaski Road. Pulaski Road is 52 feet wide. Madison Street has three east and three westbound lanes for traffic east of Pulaski Road. There is a center line separating the east and west lines of traffic. The accident occurred shortly after 8:00 a.m. on November 1, 1957. Mrs. Heuer was proceeding in the inner lane closest to the center line for several blocks and first observed the defendant's vehicle when it was about one-half a block ahead of her. She was then approximately one-half of a block east of Pulaski Road. The defendant's vehicle was a tractor-trailer combination which was 40 feet long. It carried a load of steel including two I beams, which extended approximately 10 feet beyond the rear of the trailer. The overall length of the tractor-trailer and protruding steel beams was approximately 50 feet. Three red flags were attached to the protruding steel beams. The flags were either 12 inches by 12 inches or 24 inches by 24 inches. The tractor was equipped with two sideview mirrors and turn signals. When Mrs. Heuer was approximately one-half block east of Pulaski Road she saw the truck which was near the corner of Pulaski Road. She testified the traffic light for westbound traffic was red when she first saw it and shortly after that, it turned green. The tractor-trailer was in the middle westbound lane of Madison Street. That would be the lane immediately to her right. She was traveling at a speed of *58 approximately fifteen to twenty miles per hour and there was no vehicle immediately ahead of her in her lane. She saw no signals operating on the truck and she did not recall seeing red flags or markers attached to the steel. According to her testimony the impact occurred when she was east of Pulaski and the automobile which she was driving was somewhere near the back end of the load which was protruding, with most of the truck to her right and ahead of her. She suddenly heard a loud "bang" and felt a rush of air and had a sensation of being thrown through the air. That was all she could remember of the impact. She did not see any hand signal being given by the operator of the truck prior to the impact. She testified that just before the rush of air, the front of the truck was about halfway across Pulaski Road and that at no time did she have any indication or notice of the truck's turning before the impact.
The defendant Stanley J. Ziober testified that he was the driver of the tractor-trailer unit and that he had inspected his tractor-trailer on the morning of the accident and that everything was satisfactory. He was traveling westbound on Madison Street in the middle lane next to parked cars at the curb. As he approached the intersection of Pulaski Road the lights were red. There was a traffic lane to his left and to his right. There were cars parked in the right lane commencing about 15 feet east of the curbline of Pulaski Road. He stopped for the red light and put on his red signal flasher. He remained stopped for approximately one minute until the light turned green. He started to make a right turn and a policeman guided him around the corner. His maximum speed while making the turn was about five miles an hour. He intended to proceed north on Pulaski. While making the turn, the collision occurred. The rear of the steel beams which he was carrying were involved in the collision. At the moment of impact the tractor was facing north on Pulaski and the trailer was facing northwest *59 at a forty-five degree angle. He had sideview mirrors on both sides of the cab through which he could see traffic behind and to the side of his vehicle. However, he testified that he never saw plaintiffs' vehicle before the collision. He did see the steel beams protruding before he made the turn by looking into his left sideview mirror. After the collision he checked the position of the I beams and observed that the top beam had moved two to two and a half feet to the right. He had moved approximately fifteen feet before the collision. His right turn signal was on while he was stopped waiting for the light to change. After the impact he saw plaintiffs' vehicle in the lane next to the center line on Madison Street. The steel beams on the trailer were protruding into that lane.
A police officer of the City of Chicago was called as a witness for the plaintiffs. He testified that he had been stationed at the intersection of Pulaski and Madison Street for the past ten years and that he was at the intersection on the morning of November 1, 1957. He recalled being present at the time of the accident involving a tractor-trailer truck and a passenger automobile although he said he did not see the actual occurrence.
He stated that he did not see the passenger automobile involved in the accident until after the impact and that it was straddling the second and third lanes close to the center of the street and facing west. He further testified that he had on numerous occasions directed tractor-trailer units making a north turn from Madison Street onto Pulaski Road but that he did not recall having directed the tractor-trailer involved in this accident as it turned.
The question presented to us is whether or not the trial judge employed the proper standard or rule of law in deciding the motion for new trial. At the conclusion of that hearing the court said:
"... and I suppose that it's (verdict) not against the manifest weight of the evidence. On that basis *60 I am going to deny the motion for a new trial, although I will state again I disagree with the verdict and I don't approve of it, and I would have decided differently, but I suppose my duty is to follow the case law and ignore what I would have done."
In Read v. Cummings, 324 Ill. App. 607, 609-610, 59 NE2d 325, the court said:
"It is then the duty of the trial judge to consider the weight of the evidence and if he is of opinion that plaintiff has not proven his case by a preponderance of the evidence, taking into consideration the fact that the jury has found otherwise, it is his duty to set aside the verdict and grant a new trial. And if the court does not do so but overrules the motion and enters judgment and the case is then brought to this court, we are not authorized to disturb the verdict on this ground unless the verdict and judgment are against the manifest weight of the evidence. This court in passing on the question must take into consideration not only the verdict of the jury but the fact that the trial judge saw and heard the witnesses, overruled the motion for a new trial and entered judgment. It requires much more for this court to set aside a verdict and judgment than is required of the trial judge. It is his duty to set aside the verdict if he is of the opinion that the plaintiff has not sustained his case by a preponderance of the evidence, while the question of the preponderance of the evidence does not arise at all in this court. (Citing cases.) We are not authorized to disturb the verdict and judgment unless we are of opinion that it is against the manifest weight of the evidence."
[1-3] In Morella v. Melrose Park Cab Co., 65 Ill. App. 2d 175, 212 NE2d 106, the court held that it requires much more for the reviewing court to set aside a verdict *61 and judgment than is required of the trial judge. It is the duty of the trial judge to set aside the verdict if he is of the opinion that the plaintiff has not sustained his case by a preponderance of the evidence. The question of the preponderance of the evidence does not arise in a case such as this in the reviewing court. The trial judge therefore in passing upon the motion for a new trial is afforded greater latitude than is the reviewing court. In Payne v. Kingsley, 59 Ill. App. 2d 245, 207 NE2d 177, the court held that the trial court in considering a motion for a new trial may weigh the evidence for the purpose of determining whether the verdict is contrary to the weight of the evidence and if the court so finds, a new trial should be granted. See also Tihay v. Aurora City Lines, 79 Ill. App. 2d 107, 223 NE2d 171.
[4, 5] The standard or rule of law to be applied in the trial court is whether the verdict is against the weight of the evidence or, as has been said many times, against the preponderance of the evidence. Once the trial judge has passed upon a motion for a new trial and has properly employed that standard, a reviewing court may then reverse only when the verdict is found to be contrary to the manifest weight of the evidence. The trial court in passing on the motion for a new trial in this case, having failed to consider the weight of the evidence or the question of the preponderance of the evidence, the cause must be remanded.
We have thoroughly examined the other alleged trial errors set forth in plaintiffs' brief and find no reversible error among them.
[6] The plaintiffs also contend that the verdict of the jury was contrary to the manifest weight of the evidence. A reviewing court will not pass upon that point in a case unless and until the trial court determines whether or not the verdict is against the preponderance of the evidence. The trial court, in passing on the motion for new trial having failed to consider the weight of the evidence or *62 preponderance of the evidence, the judgment cannot stand and since this court may not pass upon that question in this case, the judgment entered herein is reversed and the cause remanded to that court with directions to pass on this question.
Reversed and remanded with directions.
SCHWARTZ and DEMPSEY, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 2217806 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:35.116561+00 ===

355 Mass. 479 (1969)
245 N.E.2d 429
COMMONWEALTH
vs.
ANIVEL J. GOMES.
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Suffolk.
February 3, 1969.
March 11, 1969.
Present: WILKINS, C.J., SPALDING, WHITTEMORE, CUTTER, KIRK, & REARDON, JJ.
Reuben Goodman (Robert A. Novick with him) for the defendant.
Thomas J. Mundy, Jr., Assistant District Attorney, for the Commonwealth.
WHITTEMORE, J.
The defendant presents exceptions in respect of proceedings under G.L.c. 123A, § 6, which resulted in an order, on December 20, 1967, committing him to the treatment center for sexually dangerous persons at Bridgewater for a period from one day to life.
On February 1, 1962, the defendant was found guilty in the Superior Court of Suffolk County of assault with intent to rape. The trial judge on his own motion then committed *481 the defendant, pursuant to c. 123A, § 4, to the treatment center for sixty days for examination and diagnosis. A hearing was held before the trial judge on May 25, 1962, pursuant to c. 123A, § 5. Two psychiatrists who had examined the defendant testified. At the close of the hearing, the trial judge declined to commit the defendant to the treatment center as the statute permits and sentenced him to serve a term of three to ten years at the Massachusetts Correctional Institution at Walpole (Walpole). The defendant's sentence expired on November 15, 1967.
The present proceedings began on March 15, 1967, when the superintendent of the Massachusetts Correctional Institution at Norfolk, to which the defendant had been transferred, filed a motion under § 6 to commit him to the treatment center for sixty days for examination and diagnosis. The motion was forthwith allowed without a hearing. The defendant as a result was examined at the treatment center by the same psychiatrists as before. Their report diagnosed him as a sexually dangerous person. The present petition based on that report was filed on May 16, 1967, counsel was appointed for the defendant on May 22, 1967, and the hearing was held on November 30 and December 15 and 20, 1967. At the hearing, the same psychiatrists testified that in their opinion the defendant was a sexually dangerous person.
Prior to the hearing, the defendant filed (with substantially the same allegations of fact in each) a motion to dismiss, an answer in bar, and an answer in abatement, all of which were denied. Certain of his requests for rulings were also denied. Exceptions were taken to all these denials. We deal with all the substantive issues raised by the exceptions.
1. The defendant contends that it was error to permit the two psychiatrists to testify to their opinion that he was a sexually dangerous person and to receive in evidence the report filed by them under the statute stating that conclusion. Although exceptions were saved when this evidence was received, there is in the bill an applicable stipulation: *482 "The parties agree that the evidence in this case is substantially the same as the evidence at the hearing before ... [the sentencing judge] on May 25, 1962. The evidence before ... [the sentencing judge] warranted a finding that the ... [defendant] was a `sexually dangerous person' within G.L.c. 123A, § 1." No reservation is implicit that this was evidence that should not have been received. The question at the 1967 hearing was whether there was evidence before the committing judge that permitted the finding that the defendant was within the statutory category. The stipulation may reasonably be taken to answer that question. We discern, in any event, no error in the judge's rulings bringing before him the report and the opinion. The statute provides for wide latitude in the use of the observations and conclusions recorded by others. Commonwealth v. McGruder, 348 Mass. 712, 715, cert. den. 383 U.S. 972.
The defendant urges that allowing experts to give their opinion on the ultimate issue substitutes them for the judge. In Commonwealth v. DeSalvo, 353 Mass. 476, 481 we noted the importance of a full description of the affliction and its effect on conduct, so that the conclusion of the expert in the terms of the test itself will not usurp the fact finder's function. See also Washington v. United States, 390 F.2d 444, 453-454 (Ct. App. D.C.); Goldstein, The Insanity Defense, 97-105; Strickman, The Insanity Defense in Massachusetts: Some Unresolved Problems, 53 Mass. L.Q. 195, 201-203. Careful and full instructions in jury trials and, in cases under c. 123A, the judge's understanding of his responsibility provide additional safeguards.
In our recent cases we have reaffirmed that, at least in the presence of such evidence, the expert may give his own conclusions in the terms of the test  whether the fact finder is a judge (Commonwealth v. Peterson, 348 Mass. 702, 705, cert. den. 384 U.S. 909 [case under c. 123A, § 6]), or a jury. Commonwealth v. Chapin, 333 Mass. 610, 625, cert. den. 352 U.S. 857. Commonwealth v. McHoul, 352 Mass. 544, 554. See Commonwealth v. Gardner, 350 Mass. 664, 666; Commonwealth v. Francis, ante, 108.
*483 In the case before us there was sufficient evidence of what underlay the physician's conclusions and this was evidence on which the judge could act.[1]
The defendant, in effect, asks for reconsideration of our holdings in the light of the Washington case, supra, in which the Federal court, moving from the full effect of its so called Durham rule, now declines to allow the expert to state his ultimate conclusion. The defendant urges also that the concept "sexually dangerous person" is inexact and without medical significance for psychiatrists. See Lindman and McIntyre, The Mentally Disabled and the Law, 305-306. It is our view that the conclusions of expert physicians who have observed the conduct of emotionally afflicted persons having a history of aggressive, sexual misconduct can be of help to the judge within the rule of the Chapin and McGruder cases, supra.
2. We turn to the defendant's contention that the absence of notice and of counsel in connection with the temporary commitment of the defendant to the treatment center denied him due process.
The defendant contends, in effect, that c. 123A proceedings, however denominated, must be regarded as criminal (Specht v. Patterson, 386 U.S. 605), at least to the extent that counsel is required at every stage under the rule of Gideon v. Wainwright, 372 U.S. 335, and later cases. See, for example, In re Gault, 387 U.S. 1, 34-42.
In the Specht case the court held that a hearing with counsel present was necessary for a proceeding instituted after Specht's conviction for a sexual crime which resulted in his being sentenced under the Colorado Sex Offenders Act. The proceedings were like those held by the sentencing *484 judge after Gomes' conviction in 1962[2] and the characterization by the court of the proceedings as criminal does not, as we read the opinion, imply that the preliminary psychiatric examination must be subject to the rule stated in the Gideon line of cases that counsel is required at every stage.[3] In any event, the § 6 proceedings in this case deal with what is to be the defendant's status after he has fully served his sentence of punishment.
The only justification for such proceedings is society's concern for the protection of all its members, including the former convict, from the effects of his dangerous conduct under substantially uncontrollable impulses. There may be no punitive aspects to such confinement. For the most recent statement of this emphatic rule, see Commonwealth v. Major, 354 Mass. 666, 668. The statute (c. 123A, § 9) provides for hearings at least as often as every twelve months to determine fitness for discharge and at any time on the recommendation of two psychiatrists.
We have consistently construed the proceedings to be civil in nature. Commonwealth v. Page, 339 Mass. 313, 316-317. Commonwealth v. Ackers, 343 Mass. 63. The due process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution of the United States is applicable in any event. Unquestionably there must be a hearing with notice and counsel to support an order of indefinite commitment. Rohrer, petitioner, 353 Mass. 282, 285-286 (c. 123, civil insanity commitment). We there said as to temporary commitments: "We have no occasion now to consider the validity of the original temporary commitment. See, however, Bumpus v. French, 179 Mass. 131, 133-134; Gardiner v. Jardine, 245 Mass. 274, 277-278; Lindman & McIntyre ..., The Mentally Disabled and the Law, pp. 37-40; *485 Kadish, Institutionalizing the Mentally Ill, 9 Western Pol. Q. 93, 113-114."
The defendant while imprisoned was, as an incident of his imprisonment, subject to examination and tests to determine among other things when and under what circumstances, within statutory limits, he would be paroled and how he could be expected to conduct himself when released. The provision for a sixty-day examination of a prisoner under c. 123A, § 6, and a formal report, is a reasonable extension of society's right to such custodial examination. See Commonwealth v. Major, 354 Mass. 666, 668. Inasmuch as the examination under c. 123A was entirely within the term of imprisonment, the issue before us is not whether some temporary restraint may be allowed without notice and hearing, but, as stated, it is only whether the appointment of counsel and a hearing are required. We hold they are not. There is no more opportunity for the eliciting of incriminating statements than in the course of any examination by psychiatrists preliminary to any civil commitment or within the term of such commitment. Contra, People v. Potter, 85 Ill. App. 2d 151, 154-156. The statute and our rule reasonably protect the examined person inasmuch as no indefinite commitment can be made without notice and hearing and the opportunity for the aid of counsel. The preliminary examination, like all the other relevant recorded data, is available to aid the court at that hearing to determine if the defendant is a sexually dangerous person.
3. The defendant contends that the 1962 decision by the trial judge not to commit the respondent as a sexually dangerous person is res judicata as to the present petition. It was, as noted, shown by stipulation that the evidence at both hearings was substantially the same except that the defendant had not engaged in any sexual misconduct while imprisoned.
This contention overlooks the circumstance that the issue presented in 1967 was not the issue presented in 1962. In 1962 the judge had the option, not now open, of punishing *486 the defendant and at the same time protecting society for the time being by confining the defendant in prison. The trial judge might have thought the defendant would be better off at Walpole while such alternative was available. See Nason v. Superintendent of Bridgewater State Hosp. 353 Mass. 604, 612-613. A criminal sentence given subsequent to a § 5 hearing is not an adjudication that a person is not sexually dangerous. Such a determination establishes only that a criminal sentence was the better alternative at that time. It does not establish the requirements of the public interest under c. 123A after the sentence is served. Compare Buyarsky, petitioner, 322 Mass. 335, 339. We rule that the 1962 proceedings did not adjudicate the question before the court in 1967.
4. The defendant contends that he has been subjected to double jeopardy. That there is no merit in this contention is shown by Commonwealth v. Dagle, 345 Mass. 539, 541, cert. den. 375 U.S. 863. "The defendant is not being subjected to a second, or any, penalty for the offences for which he was convicted." Id. at 541.
5. We hold that commitment pursuant to § 6 does not deny equal protection of the laws even though the defendant has not engaged in any misconduct in sexual matters while in prison. "It is not unreasonable for the Legislature to prescribe procedures leading to reasonable investigation of suspected persons within the group [of prisoners] and to segregation and cure, if possible, of those found to be afflicted." Commonwealth v. Major, 354 Mass. 666, 668. The general justification of § 6 does not require that, in the particular case, evidence of sexual misconduct be adduced. Commonwealth v. Peterson, 348 Mass. 702, 703-704.
Exceptions overruled.
NOTES
[1]  The report stated the Massachusetts sex offense, a like conviction in Connecticut in 1954, and the defendant's hospitalization in a mental hospital in connection with that sentence. Also "Sexual History. Two serious crimes involving sex and both fused with aggression. Otherwise, there is a normal heterosexual status.... [W]e have previously stated that he was mentally ill, and in the interim he has spent a good deal of time in mental hospitals. Currently he is in a state of remission, but he remains so only because he is receiving tranquilizing medication.... Mental Deficiency. I.Q. 73 ... Treatment in this case will be difficult because of his mental status."
[2]  There is no suggestion that counsel was not actively participating at all stages of the 1962 proceedings.
[3]  The distinctions between our procedures under G.L.c. 123A, and the Colorado procedures in the Specht case were fully considered in Peterson, petitioner, 354 Mass. 110, 112-114. We there observed that c. 123A, § 6, provides for notice, a hearing, and the assistance of counsel, who is entitled to the reports of the examining psychiatrists. We said: "This is vastly different from the procedure condemned in the Specht case."

=== CASE 9738819 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:03:39.315965+00 ===

Dieterich, J.
The record reveals the following facts: The common council of the city, pursuant to ch. 275, Laws of 1931, and amendments thereto, known as the Kline Law, commenced condemnation proceedings for the taking of property owned by Schober, located at 1235-37-39 West Walker street in the city of Milwaukee for public school playground purposes. The award of damages was confirmed by resolution of the common council on April 28, 1961. Title to the property under the act vested in the city on May 25, 1961. On May 16, 1961, Schober served a notice of appeal on the city alleging that the award of damages made by the common council was inadequate and did not constitute full compensation for the condemnation of the Schober premises. On March 9, 1962, a jury was sworn to hear testimony in the trial of the Schober appeal. The real estate involved on the date of condemnation proceedings consisted of two buildings facing Walker street, each building containing four apartments, a seven-room house in the rear, together with a two-*593car garage. The city issued building, remodeling, and repair permits for the property in question in 1940, 1947, 1948, and 1949. The property was zoned for Residential C (multiple family use) which requires 1,200 square feet per family. The Schober property was 40x150 or 7,000 square feet, which would allow five family units or six apartments with a 200-square-foot variance. Schober became an owner of the property in about 1928. Schober testified that in 1930, the flats were converted into four family units. No building permit was issued at that time. From 1930 until 1961, the Schober property was taxed by the city on the basis that it consisted of nine living units.
Schober’s two expert witnesses testified as to the fair market value of the real estate. Mr. Dooley testified that the real estate was worth $42,000, and Mr. Klapinski testified that the property was worth $43,000.
The city also called two expert witnesses. Mr. Holzhauer arrived at a fair market value of $32,000 as a nine-unit property. He testified that the fair market value of the Schober property as a five or six-unit property would be $26,300. The second witness, Mr. Lederer, arrived at a fair market value of $33,000 as a nine-unit property and $26,000 as a five or six-unit property.
The trial court did not determine whether the Schober property was a valid nonconforming use or whether the city was estopped from claiming that it was an illegal use because the, city collected taxes and issued building permits knowing that the property was being used as a nine-unit property.
The only question submitted to the jury was, “What was the fair market value on May 25, 1961, of the property ... ?” The jury in its verdict determined that $41,000 was the value of the property as of May 25, 1961.
The city contends that certain testimony by Schober and remarks by her counsel were inflammatory and unduly in*594fluenced the jury on Schober’s behalf. Certain portions of the testimony which the city claims were prejudicial are as follows:
Counsel for Schober: “Q. Now you tell us how you figure this property is worth $50,000? A. Well, the depression set in, my husband I worked so hard to save this place, we worked steady, ride streetcar, my children almost go hungry during depression, where you going to get money, and we were struggling, we — I sell all children’s insurance policy to keep up the city tax and later on we borrowed money from finance company to pay another city tax because the rent was just — you can’t rent places, my husband work and I work to keep up the place and when we have tenants we can’t get no rent during depression, then depression, when war started — ”
Counsel for city: (Interposing) “If the Court please, I don’t like to do this, very untimely to object to testimony being given in this regard, but I wish that the testimony would be only as to the value. . . .”
Counsel for Schober: “Q. Go ahead. A. And then I lost my — my son in 1945, he was killed in Germany, so then I got sick and my husband got sick, we — all that we figured this is our income. I don’t even let my husband go to work after my son was killed. I say this is our income, we never go hungry as long as we keep up this place so we keep our place up to date with everything and my husband got sick and die 1954 from cancer and I really think was everything causing because we are worry and work too hard and my property today be worth $50,000, be worth even more but if I sell to city, I don’t have to sell, I don’t want to sell, I want my property to my old age today when I wasn’t able to work. We never figure to sell our property. I told that to Mr. Kalvelage and everybody. We buy this place — ”
Counsel for city: (Interposing) “I object to that testimony.”
A majority of the members of the court are of the opinion that a fair reading of the above testimony leaves no doubt that *595it is inflammatory and highly prejudicial. This testimony, considered together with other statements appearing in the record, such as the artless characterization of Schober’s occupation by counsel as a “scrubwoman,” creates a cumulative effect which can be calculated as sufficient to influence the jury. That although the trial court was diligent in its efforts to exclude prejudice from the proceedings by sustaining objections by counsel for the city and further by instructing the jury at the close of the trial to disregard certain improper testimony, this was not sufficient to negate the total cumulative effect of prejudicial evidence on the minds of the jurors. The writer disagrees with the majority of the court on this point, for the reason that, as evidenced by the transcript, objections were not always made promptly; in fact the objections interposed by the city appear to have been made reluctantly, and further the award made by the jury comes within the range of values put on the property by the expert witnesses.
The instant action is in the form of a trial de novo in the circuit court based upon an appeal from the award of damages made by the city pursuant to a determination by the board of assessments under the Kline Law. The only issue for the jury is damages. However, the jury, in order to arrive at its determination of fair market value, had to decide whether or not the Schober property constituted a valid nonconforming use. Allied with this issue there was also the question of whether the city was estopped from claiming an unlawful use because it permitted the nonconforming use over a period of thirty years, collected taxes on the Schober property on the basis that it contained nine units, and in addition issued building permits for remodeling and repair for the years 1940, 1947, 1948, and 1949.
On a new trial the proper procedure for the trial court to follow under the Kline Law is to decide questions of law and equity and then submit to the jury only the question of damages.
*596By the Court. — Judgment reversed, and cause remanded for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.

=== CASE 9738820 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:03:39.31995+00 ===

Currie, J.
(concurring). On this appeal appellant city advanced two grounds why there should be reversal and a new trial. The first of these was that plaintiff interjected improper matters in her testimony and her counsel made certain remarks which tended to prejudice the jury against the city and incite the jury’s sympathy. The court’s opinion grants a new trial on this first ground. There were further incidents other than those recounted in the opinion of which the city complains and I believe rightly so. Although some of these incidents standing alone might not be cause for a new trial, their cumulative effect in this case was disastrous from the city’s standpoint and constitutes ample ground for the new trial which has been directed.
The second ground advanced by the city for a new trial relates to the illegal nonconforming use of the premises in violation of the city zoning ordinances. The question was raised on trial whether the city was estopped to raise the issue of illegal nonconforming use. Instead of ruling on this question of estoppel, the trial court left it to the jury to decide in determining the amount of damages in the verdict and permitted expert testimony on value based on the illegal nonconforming use to go intp the record. The city rightfully contends that this was error and that the trial court should have disposed of the issues of illegal nonconforming use and estoppel as a matter of law- Because these issues will undoubtedly arise on the new trial that has been directed, their resolution on this appeal would appear proper for the benefit of the trial court in conducting the new trial.
Plaintiff’s property could legally have been divided into five or six family units or apartments under the zoning ordinances. This zoning restriction on the number of family units or apartments was in effect in 1930 when the two double *597flats were converted without the securing of a building permit from two to four family units each. Subsequently, however, in 1940, 1947, 1948, and 1949, building permits were issued for some remodeling and repairs. Thus the question arises, Is the city estopped to assert in this action the illegality of the nonconforming use' of the property by its acts of issuing these building permits and collecting taxes based on an assessed valuation of the property as a nine family unit instead of a five or six family unit ?
In eminent-domain cases, the damages awarded for the taking of property are to be based on its most-advantageous use. Muscoda Bridge Co. v. Grant County (1929), 200 Wis. 185, 190, 227 N. W. 863; Carazalla v. State (1955), 269 Wis. 593, 598, 70 N. W. (2d) 208, 71 N. W. (2d) 276; and Utech v. Milwaukee (1960), 9 Wis. (2d) 352, 358, 101 N. W. (2d) 57. Nevertheless, this rule of most-advantageous use, sometimes referred to as “highest and best use,” is subject to the limitation that an illegal use cannot be considered in fixing such damages. 4 Nichols, Eminent Domain (3d ed. rev. 1962), p. 187, sec. 12.3143. Thus the illegal division of the property into nine family units cannot be considered in determining fair market value for purposes of eminent domain unless the city is estopped from raising the illegal use.
We start with the premise that zoning ordinances are enacted pursuant to the police power for the health, safety, and general welfare of the public. State ex rel. Saveland Park Holding Corp. v. Wieland (1955), 269 Wis. 262, 69 N. W. (2d) 217; and State ex rel. Carter v. Harper (1923), 182 Wis. 148, 196 N. W. 451, 33 A. L. R. 269. In Park Bldg. Corp. v. Industrial Comm. (1960), 9 Wis. (2d) 78, 88, 100 N. W. (2d) 571, this court quoted with approval from the annotation entitled, “Applicability of doctrine of estoppel against government and its governmental agencies,” 1 A. L. R. (2d) 338, 340, as follows:
*598“As a general rule the doctrine of estoppel will not be applied against the public, the United States government, or the state governments, where the application of that doctrine would encroach upon the sovereignty of the government and interfere with the proper discharge of governmental duties, and with the functioning of the government, or curtail the exercise of its police power; . . .”
In the Park Bldg. Corp. Case, we held that estoppel might not be invoked against the industrial commission to waive the stairwell requirements in the state building code on the ground that the commission knowingly permitted the Milwaukee building inspector to waive such requirements many years prior to the time that the commission sought to enforce the code provision. Although this court has not specifically decided whether a municipal corporation such as a city may be estopped from enforcing a zoning ordinance, the same principle ought to apply. A municipality should not be precluded by the acts of any municipal officers from enforcing any ordinance enacted pursuant to the police power for the promotion of the general welfare. Authorities so holding are: Fass v. Highland Park (1949), 326 Mich. 19, 39 N. W. (2d) 336; The Alexander Co. v. Owatonna (1946), 222 Minn. 312, 24 N. W. (2d) 244; Yonkers v. Rentways, Inc. (1952), 304 N. Y. 499, 109 N. E. (2d) 597; and Universal Holding Co. v. North Bergen Tp. (1959), 55 N. J. Super. 103, 150 Atl. (2d) 44. The Nebraska court has applied this rule against estoppel with respect to an ordinance establishing setback lines. Beatrice v. Williams (1961), 172 Neb. 889, 112 N. W. (2d) 16. The New York court in the Yonkers Case stated (p. 505):
“A municipality, it is settled, is not estopped from enforcing its zoning laws either by the issuance of a building permit or by laches. (See Rollins v. Armstrong, 251 N. Y. 349, affg. 226 App. Div. 687; Village of North Pelham v. Ohliger, 245 N. Y. 593, affg. 216 App. Div. 728.)”
*599See also 19 Am. Jur., Estoppel, p. 820, sec. 168; 31 C. J. S., Estoppel, p. 421, sec. 142.
There is a broad area, apart from matters of the police power in which the rule against estoppel should be applied, in which estoppel may be raised against a municipal corporation such as when it engages in a proprietary as distinguished from a governmental function, or when its financial operations such as in tax matters and claims for damages are involved. In dealing with matters of police power, however, the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the municipality are at stake. Thus the power of the city to act effectively to enforce ordinances which guard such safety, health, and welfare should never be precluded on the ground that some municipal officer, in plain disregard of the provisions of a zoning ordinance, may have issued a building permit many years before which authorized the improvement of the property for a use prohibited by the ordinance.

=== CASE 2217810 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:35.184271+00 ===

119 N.W.2d 792 (1963)
Sue A. McCOMBER, Appellee,
v.
IOWA EMPLOYMENT SECURITY COMMISSION and Davenshire, Inc., Appellants.
No. 50856.
Supreme Court of Iowa.
February 12, 1963.
*793 Don G. Allen, Des Moines, and Doerr, Dower & Rehling, Davenport, for appellants.
H. T. Lewis, Davenport, for appellee.
THOMPSON, Justice.
This appeal is unusual in that all parties rely upon and cite authorities supporting the same governing rule. It is the thoroughly established principle that the fact findings of the Employment Security Commission are binding upon the courts on appeal when supported by substantial evidence. Code of Iowa, section 96.6, subd. 10, I.C.A.; Spence v. Iowa Employment Security Commission, 249 Iowa 154, 157, 158, 86 N.W.2d 154, 156; Johnson v. Iowa Employment Security Commission, 239 Iowa 816, 828, 32 N.W.2d 786, 792; Wolfe v. Iowa Unemployment Compensation Commission, 232 Iowa 1254, 1257, 7 N.W.2d 799, 800, 801.
It is evident that the parties differ as to what facts were actually found. The defendants Iowa Employment Security Commission and Davenshire, Inc., make common cause in attempting to uphold the decision by the administrative body, which was adverse to the plaintiff and favorable to the employer. The Iowa Employment Security Commission will hereafter be known as the Commission, and the same term will refer to both defendants who file a joint brief and argument. The trial court held that under the record here it was not bound by the decision of the Commission, and entered its decree and judgment that plaintiff is entitled to employment security benefits under Chapter 96 of the code. From this the defendants appeal.
The controversy, as indicated above, concerns the claimed right of the plaintiff to benefits based on wages earned by her as an employee of the defendant Davenshire, Inc., from April 1, 1960 through September 5, 1961. There is no denial that she was such employee, and that she quit her employment on or about the latter date. She contends, however, that her quitting was for good cause attributable to her employer. Section 96.5, subd. 1, par. d, Code of 1962, I.C.A. It is her claim that she was required to work with woolen garments, the manufacture of which was apparently the employer's chief or perhaps only business; and that she had or developed an allergy to wool which caused her to suffer a dermatitis on her arms. She consulted with Dr. Lester Kimberly, a skin specialist, who was *794 unable to say what caused the breaking out. She then consulted Dr. Joseph J. Kehoe, a Doctor of Chiropractic, who according to her testimony told her the condition was caused by nervousness and the contact with the wool, and "he figured it was something in the dye of the wool that was causing it, the friction from the wool and being nervous caused it too." She also said Dr. Kehoe told her her nervous condition should not bother her if she did not work with woolens in such manner as to cause friction on her arms. In May of 1961 she was granted a leave of absence; she returned to work on July 10 next, but her arms again suffered the dermatitis, and she was compelled to quit, and was given an indefinite leave of absence. She again returned to work on August 28, but in a few days the breaking out reappeared. She asked the supervisor if she could be transferred to the cutting room, where her arms would not come in contact with the wool; but was told they could not be transferring her all over the shop. She then left her employment.
I. It is evident the crucial point in the case is primarily whether the plaintiff quit her employment for good cause attributable to her employer. But it is also evident that if the fact findings of the Commission were adverse to her on this point, the courts are powerless to interfere. We are not concerned whether there was evidence in the hearing before the appeal tribunal which might have supported its conclusion; it is the findings and decision of that tribunal actually made with which we must deal. The Commission, on appeal to it from the appeal tribunal, merely said: "The Commission, having reviewed the record in its entirety and being fully advised in the premises, finds and holds that the record in this case supports the findings of fact and decision of the referee, and the decision must be affirmed." The fact findings and decision of the appeal tribunal therefore became the findings and decision of the Commission.
II. We therefore turn to the findings of fact and decision of the appeal tribunal. Here the reason all parties rely upon the rule that the fact findings of the Commission are binding upon the courts becomes evident. Section 96.6, subd. 10, supra, says: "Any order or decision of the commission may be modified, reversed, or set aside on one or more of the following grounds and no other: * * * 3. If the facts found by the commission do not support the order or decree."
These substantial facts were found by the appeal tribunal and adopted by the Commission: "She suffered from extreme nervousness which apparently aggravated a sensitivity to woolen materials resulting in a skin allergy. The employer changed her work assignment in an effort to relieve the condition, and the claimant was granted a leave of absence, but the condition returned, and on the advice of her doctor, Dr. Joseph J. Kehoe, she left to seek another type of work. She testified that there was nothing inherent in the job itself that caused her nervousness, but the materials with which she worked aggravated her allergy."
After quoting Section 96.5, subd. 1, par. d of the code, I.C.A., to which later reference will be made, the fact findings and ruling of the appeal tribunal concluded: "This is not a case in which a substance or material used by an employer is of such a nature as to be toxic or harmful to a considerable number of its workers. It is a case of the claimant being so constituted that her allergy condition reacts unfavorably to a very common materialwool. The employer is a garment manufacturer, and this material, of course, could not be eliminated from its operations in order to alleviate the condition of the claimant. The referee, therefore, holds that the claimant's separation was not for a good cause attributable to the employer, and she did not meet the requirements of paragraph (d) of the above section of the Iowa Law, and must, therefore, be disqualified for benefits."
Except for a statement that the employer testified the plaintiff was the first employee to develop an allergy as the result of working with the materials used by the employer, *795 the foregoing contains the entire fact findings of the appeal tribunal and so of the Commission. The decision is contained under one heading, "Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law" and the facts and law are not in terms separated. It is evident, however, that the only legal conclusions are found in the last sentence quoted above: "The referee, therefore, holds that the claimant's separation was not for a good cause attributable to the employer, and she did not meet the requirements of paragraph (d) of the above section of the Iowa Law, and must, therefore, be disqualified for benefits."
The question before us is, therefore, did the facts found by the appeal tribunal, and by the Commission in turn, support the conclusion reached and the order and decree? The final sentence of the decision, quoted last above, is clearly not a finding of fact, but the conclusion drawn from the facts found. The findings of fact are that the plaintiff's condition was caused, in part at least, by materials with which she worked. It is specifically found that "She suffered from extreme nervousness which apparently aggravated a sensitivity to woolen materials resulting in a skin allergy"; and "It is a case of the claimant being so constituted that her allergy condition reacts unfavorably to a very common material wool."
It was further found that "The employer changed her work assignments in an effort to relieve the condition, and the claimant was granted a leave of absence but the condition returned; and on the advice of her doctor, Dr. Joseph J. Kehoe, she left to seek another type of work."
We agree with the trial court that the facts found do not permit the conclusion drawn from them by the Commission in its order and decree. Section 96.5, subd. 1, par. d provides that disqualification for benefits does not result if the claimant left his work because of illness or injury and upon the advice of a physician and upon knowledge of the necessity for such absence immediately notified the employer who consented to the absence. These things were done; but the difficulty here is that, according to the facts found by the Commission, the work itself was responsible for the illness. Of course the quitting of the employment was in a sense voluntary on the part of the plaintiff; but we conclude that the facts found by the Commission show such quitting was for good cause attributable to the employer.
III. The facts found by the Commission here bring the case squarely within the rule laid down in Raffety v. Iowa Employment Security Commission, 247 Iowa 896, 76 N.W.2d 787. In that case an employee had been injured in the course of his employment, which rendered him unable to work for several weeks. When he returned he had been advised by his doctor that the regular work he had been doing before the injury would be too heavy for him, but he could do lighter work. He advised the employer of this, but no lighter work was offered and he sought other employment. We held these facts justified a holding that the employee was qualified for benefits under the Iowa Employment Security Law, Chapter 96, supra.
In so doing we cited with approval the case of Fannon v. Federal Cartridge Corp., 219 Minn. 306, 307, 312, 18 N.W.2d 249, 250, 252, 158 A.L.R. 389, 392, 394. The facts in the Fannon case were in practical effect identical with those in the case at bar. There a woman employee was allergic to gunpowder and was compelled to leave her employment for that cause. The Minnesota statute at this point is substantially the same as ours. The Minnesota Supreme Court held that, while the employee in a sense left her work of her own volition, her quitting was in fact involuntary, because continuance would endanger her life; and further, the separation was for good cause attributable to the employer. We quoted with approval: "* * * we feel the legislature intended that, where factors or circumstances directly connected with employment result in illness or disease to an employee *796 and make it impossible for him to continue therein because of serious danger to his health, termination of employment for this reason may correctly be said to be involuntary and for `good cause attributable to the employer,' even though the employer be free from all negligence or wrongdoing in connection therewith." Raffety v. Iowa Employment Security Commission, supra, loc. cit. 247 Iowa 899, 900, 76 N.W.2d 789.
Such is the situation under the facts found by the Commission here. The material with which the plaintiff must work, as the gunpowder in the Fannon case, caused or aggravated an allergy and a dermatitis. After a leave of absence, when she returned to work the condition recurred. On the advice of her doctor she was compelled to find other employment. The trial court properly found that upon the facts found by the Commission the plaintiff is entitled to benefits under the provisions of the Iowa Employment Security Law.
Affirmed.
All Justices concur.

=== CASE 9738821 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:03:42.243374+00 ===

*365Otis M. Smith, J.
Appeal is taken from an order denying motion for a new trial in this automobile accident case. A jury verdict was returned in favor of defendant and judgment entered accordingly.
Proceeding in her car westerly on US-112, a 2-lane highway, in the city of Coldwater at approximately 10 p.m. on September 22, 1958, plaintiff, Melba Yinger, decelerated her ear to a minimal speed and started to make a left turn into a private drive. When her car had advanced approximately halfway into the eastbound lane of the highway, a collision occurred between cars driven by plaintiff and defendant. Defendant was traveling in the opposite direction. Defendant testified that he observed plaintiff’s car slowing down and assumed that its driver would stop and wait for him to pass. He says that she suddenly turned in front of him and that, therefore, he was unable to avoid the collision. Defendant’s negligence allegedly consisted of driving his car at such a reckless and excessive speed that he could not stop within the assured cleared distance ahead.
Of the several grounds urged by appellant for reversal, 1 requires discussion. It concerns actions of the trial judge in the evening and night of the second day’s deliberations by the jury. The jury retired for deliberations at 2:30 p. m. on February 23, 1960, and continued for the balance of that day. The jury resumed deliberations on the morning of the next day and, except for time out for lunch, was confined to the jury room the entire day. At or about 5:30 p.m. on this, the second, day of deliberations, the trial judge called the members of the jury into the courtroom and advised them that his calendar required him to be in another county in his circuit on the following morning. He asked, there*366fore, the jury to continue their quest for a verdict after the evening meal. At 10:55 p.m. the jury was summoned to the courtroom and the foreman was asked if he felt there was any possibility that the jury could arrive at a verdict. He replied, “I doubt it.” The judge then asked the foreman what was the present jury vote. In this connection the foreman was advised that he was not to disclose whether the vote was in favor of plaintiff or defendant. The foreman advised the judge that the vote stood at 9 to 3, and, in response to a question, indicated that it had changed twice since the evening meal. The judge then advised the jury as follows: “Well you go back and take 1 vote, then come back and report and I will decide what to do.” At 11:05 p.m. the jury returned to the courtroom. The foreman was asked how the vote stood at that time. He replied, “10 to 2.” The colloquy between the court and the jury foreman was then as follows:
“The Court: Do you feel that that is progress in view of your deliberations you have had heretofore ?
“The Foreman: Well I don’t know.
• “The Court: Well if there is something I can say to you that might be of help I am perfectly willing to do it.
“The Foreman: Well if we could hear the testimony of the plaintiff and defendant it might help.
“The Court: Well the difficulty with that is it would be improper to hear a portion of the testimony of any witness, or the testimony of any witness, to the exclusion of other witnesses, because you must consider all of the testimony of all of the witnesses in determining the questions of fact which have to be decided. Even if I should ask the reporter, which of necessity would require considerable time, to transcribe the testimony of those 2 witnesses, there is other testimony which bears on their testimony and you would have recalled to your recollection a part of the testimony of a witness, or witnesses, *367and not have the testimony of all of the witnesses recalled to yonr recollection. Under onr method of trial it is the jury’s function to recall the testimony as they heard it, and if I were to give you all the testimony it would he quite an undertaking. I am afraid, with this handicap, your request is such that it cannot be granted. Is there anything else -I can say that might be helpful to you as to the law?
“The Foreman: Whether or not you said a juror should surrender his honest conviction to reach a verdict?
“The Court: No, I did not say that. I said, on several occasions, that the verdict must be the conscientious verdict of each juror. If you cannot conscientiously agree then there is a disagreement. I also said, however, that a minority — -and it is obvious from what you say there is a minority — they ought to give serious consideration as to whether the facts which the minority holds are the result of careful conscientious consideration of the evidence in view of the fact, inasmuch as they do constitute a minority view. But you must not be misled by my statement to presume that there is anything wrong with the minority view. If the minority is firmly convinced that they are right, then they have a right to continue to believe that.
“The Foreman: That seems to be the situation, Your Honor.
“The Court: Well, you changed 1, at least there has teen 1 change. The majority has increased ty 1. (Emphasis supplied.) Because of the time this case has taken to try, and because of the expense involved — these people have a right to have this lawsuit decided — and I have already mentioned, upon a retrial there is no reason to expect that the 12 people in the box will be any more qualified than those of you who are now here, there is no reason to expect that the evidence will be any clearer than it has been in this case, and if you can possibly come to a decision, considering everything that I have said thus far, the litigants have a right to ask you to decide *368the case. If you can, that ends it. I want to be entirely sure that you cannot before I discharge you. In view of the fact that the tally is 1 different than it was when you came in a feiu minutes ago, I think there may be a possibility and I will have to ask you to go back and deliberate for a little longer. You may retire.” (Emphasis supplied.)
At 11:55 p. m. the jury returned to the courtroom. At this point, the court, apparently upon request, read again the instruction regarding procedure to be used in answering special questions which had been submitted. The jury was then asked to retire and resume deliberations. At 12:20 a. m., the date now being February 25th, the jury returned to the courtroom to render its verdict. The foreman advised the court that the jury had found for the defendant, after which the following colloquy ensued:
“The Clerk: Have you answered the 3 special questions ?
“The Foreman: Yes.
“The Clerk: Will you please read the first special question and answer?
“The Foreman: ‘Was plaintiff injured as a result of any negligence on her part?’ The answer: 10 yes, 2 no.
“The Court: They are not all answered the same way?
“The Foreman: No.
“The Court: The question must be answered all the same way. Ho I understand that you are in disagreement as to the answers to question No 1?
“The Foreman: Yes.
“The Court: I apparently did not make myself plain. With respect to the special questions they must all be answered alike. If they are not all answered alike it constitutes a disagreement. I am quite sure I made that statement earlier today. Do you feel it is possible, Mr. Foreman, to come to an *369agreement as to the answers to the special questions?
“The Foreman: I do.
“The Court: All right, you may retire then and reconsider yotir answers to the special questions.” (Emphasis supplied.)
The jury returned in about 10 minutes and the foreman advised the court that the jury had answered the 3 special questions, all in favor of defendant, this time 12 to 0.
Appellant strongly urges that the foregoing portions of the record indicate that the trial judge coerced the jury’s verdict. It is difficult to avoid this conclusion even though it must be noted that, in the main, the conduct of the trial was unassailable. This Court has often indicated its reluctance to upset a jury verdict, and we do so only when error is so prejudicial that it amounts to a miscarriage of justice. First we must assume that members of the jury having deliberated all day, save at mealtime, must have begun to experience fatigue in the eleventh hour of the day. The circumstances disclose that members in the minority on the jury were forced to deliberate in an atmosphere of undue pressure, possibly at the expense of their own personal convictions. Merely to be in a minority position, stubbornly holding out for what one considers right, must be a difficult position to maintain as the hour grows later, and the judge’s need to be in the next county by morning seems to loom in large proportion. Then as physical endurance must be nearing an end, it is revealed that the majority may try, once again, as the hour grows even later, to win the consent of the minority. A verdict is returned and then the problem with the special questions arises. We are asked to speculate that this may have been a mere mistake in tabulation. This is certainly possible. It is also possible that this was the last clear evidence of what the jury minority maintained as their per*370sonal-verdicts, that is, that appellant was not guilty of contributory negligence. We cannot sanction this procedure.
This case is comparable to Peavy v. Clemons, 10 Ga App 507 (73 SE 756). After ascertaining that the jury vote stood 10 to 2, whereas it previously had been 7 to 5, the trial judge remarked, “That it is encouraging. You seem to be making progress towards a conclusion of the case, and I am glad that yon are.” In remanding the case for new trial, the Georgia court cited 2 prejudicial effects of such a comment. Not only does it tend to impress the jury that the court approves the conduct of those jurors who leave the minority to join the majority, but it also discourages the dissenting jurors in holding to their conviction as to what is really the truth as they view evidence in the case. Although in the instant case, the trial judge reminded the jurors that they had a duty to stick by their convictions, it is difficult to see how the pressure of having to wind up the case at such a late hour when fatigue must have set in, can erase the conclusion that the verdict was coerced.- Under the circumstances we are obliged to order a new trial.
Reversed and remanded for a new trial. Costs to appellant.
Carr, C. J., and Dethmers, Kelly, Black, Kavanagh, and Souris, JJ., concurred with Otis M. Smith, J.

=== CASE 9738822 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:03:42.248318+00 ===

Black, J.
(concurring in reversal). I agree with Justice Otis M. Smith’s analysis of the case and the conclusions reached by him. Specifically, I would reverse on account of jury instruction as follows:
“The Court: I apparently did not make myself plain. With respect to the special questions they must all be answered alike. If they are not all *371answered alike it constitutes a disagreement. I am quite sure I made that statement earlier today. Do you feel it is possible, Mr. Foreman, to come to an agreement as to the answers to the special questions?”
This was patent error. For elucidation, see Cole v. Boyd, 47 Mich 98; Maclean v. Scripps, 52 Mich 214; Mechanics’ Bank of Detroit v. Barnes, 86 Mich 632; Taylor v. Davarn, 191 Mich 243; and Tober v. Pere Marquette R. Co., 210 Mich 129. When and if special questions are framed properly for the presented issues of fact and are duly submitted to the jury for answer, the jury should be.left free to answer such questions according to its view of the facts and should not be instructed that all questions must- b,e answered “alike” on penalty of “disagreement.”
■ A mistrial may of course result from conflicting "answers. But that is a matter for judicially exclusive determination after the jury has returned its general verdict, has handed" in its uninfluenced answers to the special questions, and has been discharged from duty to the case.
The. results reported to the. court by the jury were begotten of reversible error and unintentional yet prejudicial coercion. Plaintiff on that account is entitled to an order for retrial.
O’Hara, J., took no part in the decision of this case.

=== CASE 9738823 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:03:42.915319+00 ===

Hays, J.
— Plaintiff, as bargaining agent for employees of the defendant, and defendant entered into a collective bargaining agreement which contained the following provision, being paragraph 33-C(5) thereof:
“In the event a dispute shall arise between the Company and the Union with reference to the proper interpretation of (sic) application of the provisions of this contract and such dispute cannot be settled by mutual agreement of the parties, such dispute shall be referred to a board of arbitration upon the request of the Union. * * * Said Arbitration Board shall have authority only to interpret and apply the provisions of this contract. Its award * * * shall be binding upon the Company and Union and upon the employees involved.” (Italics added.)
The agreement, paragraph 9, provided: “It is agreed that during the period of this agreement the employees shall not engage in and the Union shall not call or sanction any slowdown, work stoppage or strike, and no lockout shall be inaugerated (sic) by the Company.”
This equitable action brought by the Union seeks to spe*884cifically enforce arbitration by the Company of certain grievances filed by the Union and which the Company refuses to arbitrate. Generally, the facts as set forth in the pleadings are — In May 1961 the Company discharged an employee, such discharge being arbitral as to whether it was for just cause, as authorized by paragraph 8(a) of the bargaining agreement. Following such discharge 190 employees left their jobs and have refused to return until the question of just cause for the discharge of the one employee has been adjusted. The Company contends that by walking out the employees breached paragraph 9 of the bargaining agreement and that the same is no'longer in force and effect. It is not seriously contended in this court that the 190 workers did not walk off the job and are still refusing to return thereto. Also, by counterclaim the Company asks substantial damages on account of the walkout. The Company made application to the court to rule upon three points of law, as provided for under rule 105, R. C. P.. to wit: (1) Plaintiff not entitled to relief since Iowa law denies specific enforcement of an executory agreement to arbitrate. (2) Plaintiff not entitled to relief since it has waived the right to enforce arbitration provision, by the walkout and by filing complaint before the NLRB to enforce its claim. (3) No grievance filed within time required by agreement and the right to arbitrate has expired. The trial court sustained defendant’s contention as stated in Nos. (1) and (2) above and rejected No. 3, leaving for further determination the damage issue presented by the counterclaim. Plaintiff was granted permission to appeal under rule 332, R. C. P.
I. Error No. 1 is to the effect that the issues raised in the ease must be determined under Federal law, not the state. It is conceded that the questions here come within the purview of section 301(a), U. S. Stat. at L., 1947, 29 U. S. C., section 185(a), which provides as follows: “Suits for violation of contracts between an employer and a labor organization representing employees in an industry affecting commerce as defined in this chapter, or between any such labor organizations, may be brought in any district court of the United States having jurisdiction of the parties, without respect to thé amount in controversy or without regard to the citizenship of the parties.”
*885The United States Supreme Court, while holding that State Courts may hear and determine controversies coming under section 301(a), held that in so doing they must apply and follow the Federal law. Dowd Box Co. v. Courtney, 368 U. S. 502, 82 S. Ct. 519, 7 L. Ed.2d 483. In the leading ease of Textile Workers Union of America v. Lincoln Mills of Alabama, 353 U. S. 448, 455, 77 S. Ct. 912, 917, 1 L. Ed.2d 972, 979, the court said “Plainly the agreement to arbitrate grievance disputes is the quid pro quo for an agreement not to strike. Viewed in this light, the legislation [section 301] does more than confer jurisdiction in the federal courts over labor organizations. It expresses a federal policy that federal courts should enforce these agreements on behalf of or against labor organizations and that industrial peace can be best obtained only in that way.” (Italics ours.) See also Local 174, Teamsters, Chauffeurs, Warehousemen & Helpers v. Lucas Flour Co., 369 U. S. 95, 82 S. Ct. 571, 7 L. Ed.2d 593; Atkinson v. Sinclair Refining Co., 370 U. S. 238, 82 S. Ct. 1318, 8 L. Ed.2d 462.
Appellee concedes in argument that Federal law must be applied so we need spend no further time on this assigned error except to say that under Federal law agreements to arbitrate may be specifically enforced. United Steelworkers of America v. American Mfg. Co., 363 U. S. 564, 80A S. Ct. 1343, 4 L. Ed.2d 1403; United Steelworkers of America v. Warrior and Gulf Navigation Co., 363 U. S. 574, 80A S. Ct. 1347, 4 L. Ed.2d 1409; United Steelworkers of America v. Enterprise Wheel and Car Corp., 363 U. S. 593, 80A S. Ct. 1358, 4 L. Ed.2d 1424.
II. Error is claimed on the court’s ruling that right to arbitration was waived by the walkout. The appellant cites and relies upon the three steelworker cases, last above cited. In those eases arbitration was ordered but in none of them was the breach of a no-strike clause involved as it is in the instant ease. We do not find that the exact question before us has been determined, however there are cases dealing with the no-strike clause. Atkinson v. Sinclair Refining case, supra, is an action by the Refining Company to recover damages for a breach of a no-strike clause in bargaining agreement. Defendant moved to stay proceedings pending arbitration. The stay was denied, *886the court saying the agreement expressly provides that arbitration may be invoked only at the option of the Union. At no place in the contract does the Union agree to arbitrate at the behest of the Company. The Company is to take its claim elsewhere, which it has now done. In Drake Bakeries Inc. v. Local 50, American Bakery & Confectionery Workers International, AFL-CIO, 870 U. S. 254, 265, 82 S. Ct. 1346, 8 L. Ed.2d 474, decided the same date as the Sinclair case, supra, the court ordered a stay of action for damages on account of a breach of a no-strike clause pending arbitration. It bases its holding upon the all-inclusive provision in the agreement to arbitrate, saying that the arbitration agreement “obligated the Company to arbitrate its claim for damages from forbidden strikes by the Union”.
While in the Drake Bakeries case the Company contended, under the “quid pro quo” rule (see Lincoln case supra), there was a waiver of right to arbitrate, the court states no such action was taken by the Company and no decision was made thereto. In the instant case we are squarely faced with issue of a waiver of right to arbitrate because of breach of no-strike clause.
In the Warrior and Gulf case, supra, the court said, page 583 of 363 U. S.: “A collective bargaining agreement may treat only with certain specific practices, leaving the rest to management but subject to the possibility of work stoppages. When, however, an absolute no-strike clause is included in the agreement, then in a very real sense everything that management does is subject to the agreement * *
Whether the “quid pro quo” rule will be followed to the extent of declaring a breach of a no-strike clause constitutes a waiver of rights to arbitrate under the agreement depends upon the view to be taken of section 301(a), supra. Clearly, under said rule, work stoppage by strikes, etc. is not conducive to economic tranquillity and progress. If the view is taken that a strike is merely another incident or grievance which should be decided as are other contract violations, it would seem the Company has relinquished many valuable rights and received nothing in return and arbitration agreements will be' shied away from. In fact the purpose of section 301(a) will be entirely emasculated. If, on the other hand, the view is taken that a no-strike *887clause means what it says and that if the Union has- the right to require arbitration of differences arising between it and the Company then the Company has a similar right to have the Union abide by its agreement we are well along the road to labor and management tranquillity. It “should not have its cake and eat it too.” We think the “quid pro quo” view advanced in the Lincoln ease, supra, is the sound and sensible rule to adopt. This is the view in effect taken by the trial court and though Iowa laws were being applied we see no conflict with the Federal laws and think that actually it was Federal law that was used. We think the trial court was correct in holding the Union had waived its right to arbitrate the grievances filed by its walkout.
Two other matters are urged but we find no merit therein and make no comment thereon.
The order of the trial -court .is affirmed and cause remanded for further proceedings pending therein. — Affirmed and remanded.
Garfield, C. J., and Larson, Thompson, Peterson, Snell and Moore, JJ., concur.
Thornton, J., dissents.
Stuart, J., takes no part.

=== CASE 9738824 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:03:42.919846+00 ===

Thornton, J.
(dissenting) — I respectfully dissent. The pleadings in this case should not be construed to hold that a violation of the no-strike clause is admitted or stands undenied. The question is not ready for decision under rule 105, Rules of Civil Procedure.
Further, the parties have agreed on a tribunal for the determination of questions arising, “with reference to the proper interpretation or application of the provisions of this contract.” This provision is not a narrow one. It includes the no-strike clause. The fact that arbitration may be instigated only at the request of the union should not be determinative. The company has so agreed. Whether or not there has been a violation of the no-strike clause is proper for the arbitrators to consider in *888determining the grievance. A waiver would go to tbe merits of that question.
What I believe to be the error in the majority opinion is holding that once an evidence of a violation of a no-strike clause appears the parties are no longer required to arbitrate. Under the broad provision for arbitration violations by both parties must be considered by the arbitrators.
Under the provisions of this contract where the union has requested arbitration in accordance with the contract that proceedings should he compelled. The company is denied no rights. It has agreed to be hound by the award of the arbitrators. If after that proceedings is complete it has a damage claim it may proceed in the courts. That is no concern of ours at this time. I would reverse.

=== CASE 9738825 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:03:45.482458+00 ===

Black, J.
Plaintiff Saur and defendant Rexford took legal title, as trustees,* to the subject matter of this equity case. It consists of 120 acres of woodland in Marquette county. The tract was acquired by the 2 for themselves and 8 others, all being residents of Kent county, for hunting and fishing purposes. Over the years most of the 10 ceased using the tract for any purpose. Finally, in 1959, Saur filed this bill against Rexford and the latter’s wife, praying in the alternative for partition of or judicial sale of the subject premises; also for general relief.
The ease upon bill and answer went to due hearing. In the course of such hearing it was made to appear that all members of the club, except Saur and Rexford, had assigned and transferred their interests to Saur and, accordingly, that the legal and equitable rights.of all concerned parties were before the court for disposition by decree in personam.
The chancellor, finding himself “unable to appreciate the equities or to sympathize with either side of this ease”,. concluded nevertheless that the pleaded controversy should come to an end and that title to the tract should be made clear by judicially ordered sale to the party of greatest monetary interest. It was accordingly decreed that defendant Rexford should have “the privilege of purchasing the outstanding interest” by deed to be executed by the 2 trustees to himself as individual grantee, upon payment of the determined sum of $270 to plaintiff: *340Saur. The decree made due provision for the possibility that either Saur or Eexford might refuse to proceed as directed, but such provisions require no discussion. From such decree, plaintiff appeals.
The only question of importance brought here is whether plaintiff Saur is entitled to partition, under the statute, on theory that the parties in interest are tenants in common.
They are such tenants since neither the deed of 1930 nor any other instrument or agreement, oral or written, is shown as having imposed any duties upon the “trustee” grantees. Our statute of uses and trusts (CL 1948, § 551.1 et seq. [Stat Ann 1957 Rev §26.51 et seq.]) abolished passive or naked trusts and, therefore, upon delivery of the 1930 deed each member of the club, being entitled to possession and use of the lands, acquired a legal estate therein equal to his beneficial interest free of any active trust and subject to partition as was effectively decreed by the chancellor. See Burdeno v. Amperse, 14 Mich 91, 97 (90 Am Dec 225); Rothschild v. Dickinson, 169 Mich 200; and Woolfitt v. Histed, 208 Mich 308.
Finding no reason for disagreement with the chancellor’s findings and decree of disposition, same should be confirmed and affirmed. It is so ordered. No costs.
Carr, C. J., and Dethmers, Kelly, Kavanagh, Souris, and Otis M. Smith, JJ., concurred.
O’Hara, J., took no part in the decision of this case.
Saur and Rexford acquired such title by deed dated July 14, 1930. The granting clause named them as “L. F. Saur and L. C. Kexford, Trustees.” The record discloses that title was taken by Saur and Rexford as trustees for the benefit of all 10 members of an informal fishing and hunting club.

=== CASE 9738826 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:03:45.486316+00 ===

On Application por Rehearing.
The publie sale provisions of past and present statutes relating to partition,* even when such provisions are invoked properly before a court of equity, are permissive rather than mandatory. They do *341not for regularly expressed reasons control the shape or nature of the decree which by equity’s maxims should be entered when the time for decree arrives. See collection of authorities in Carlson v. Williams, 348 Mich 165, 168. Here the trial chancellor, of abundant reason considering the wild and remote nature of the realty subject matter and its insignificant land value, decided that a decree for sale to the tenant of greatest monetary interest — the builder of the cottage or cabin on the tract — should be entered as the best available solution. On application for rehearing this Court finds no reason for disagreement with such decision.
Rehearing denied.
Carr, C. J., and Dethmebs, Kelli, Black, Kavanagh, Soüris, and Otis M. Smith, JJ., concurred.
O’Hara, J., took no part in the decision of this application.
CL 1948, § 631.1 et seq. (Stat Ann § 27.2012 et seq.) ; RJA 1961, § 3301 et seq. (CL 1948, § 600.3001 et seq., Stat Ann 1962 Rev § 27A.3301 et seq.).

=== CASE 2217838 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:35.715453+00 ===

105 Ill. App. 2d 228 (1969)
245 N.E.2d 47
People of the State of Illinois, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
Hammitt Hampton, Defendant-Appellant.
Gen. No. 52,399.
Illinois Appellate Court  First District, Second Division.
January 28, 1969.
*229 Gerald W. Getty, Public Defender of Cook County, of Chicago (James J. Doherty, Assistant Public Defender, of counsel), for appellant.
John J. Stamos, State's Attorney of Cook County, of Chicago (Elmer C. Kissane and Richard Trais, Assistant State's Attorneys, of counsel), for appellee.
MR. JUSTICE BURKE delivered the opinion of the court.
The defendant was charged with the crime of Attempt Theft from the person. He appeals from a judgment on a verdict wherein he was sentenced to the penitentiary for a term of not less than three years and not more than three years and one day.
The indictment charged defendant with the offense of attempt but failed to cite the statutory section allegedly violated as required by Ill Rev Stats 1967, c 38, § 111-3 (a). Instead, the indictment cited the statutory section for Theft (16-1). Defendant objected to this statutory violation in a pretrial motion to dismiss and preserved it *230 with a motion in arrest of judgment. Both of these motions were overruled.
[1] Defendant urges that the failure of the court to order the defect of the indictment remedied or to dismiss the indictment constitutes reversible error. The defendant calls attention to the requirement of section 111-3 (a)(2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure that a charge shall be in writing and allege the commission of an offense by citing the statutory provision alleged to have been violated. We conclude that the failure to cite the correct provision of the statute is not an error which vitiates the indictment. The indictment clearly charged the offense of Attempt Theft. We are of the opinion that the indictment is not vulnerable to a motion to dismiss or to a motion in arrest of judgment, nor subject to attack upon the charge that it is void. The incorrect citation of the statute is a formal defect. Under section 111-5 an indictment may be amended on motion by the State's Attorney or the defendant at any time because of formal defects. The amendment of the indictment to include a reference to section 8-4 of the Criminal Code could have been done but was not requested. The defendant was fully informed of the charge and he has no solid ground to complain. People v. Delafosse, 36 Ill. 2d 327, 330, 223 NE2d 125; People v. Blanchett, 33 Ill. 2d 527, 212 NE2d 97; People v. Hill, 68 Ill. App. 2d 369, 375-76, 216 NE2d 212; People v. Petropoulos, 59 Ill. App. 2d 298, 208 NE2d 323, affd 34 Ill. 2d 179, 214 NE2d 765.
As his second point the defendant maintains that the court's refusal to admit the defendant's drawing of the scene was error. The People's case consisted of the testimony of two Chicago Transit Authority police officers. Officer William Pishotta testified that while boarding the front door of a CTA subway car at State and Jackson at approximately 11:30 p.m., October 23, 1966, he felt a hand on his wallet in his left rear pocket, whereupon he *231 seized the hand and turning, announced his office and arrested the defendant. His partner, Officer Zito, testified that at this time he entered the rear door of the same car and immediately heard Officer Pishotta speak. Zito testified that he looked towards the front of the train and saw the defendant with his hand under the left side of Officer Pishotta's coat. Zito further testified that he knew the defendant from several past contacts and had arrested him at least once.
The defendant testified that three days before the alleged incident he had met Officer Zito at a station stop. He said that Zito frisked him and threatened to arrest him at that time. The defendant further testified that Zito told him the next time he saw the defendant in the subway he was going to jail. Defendant stated that on the night in question he ran to catch the train and when he boarded the train Officers Zito and Pishotta were sitting on either side of the door. Officer Zito asked the defendant what he was doing on the train and the defendant said he was going home. Defendant testified that he got off at the Monroe Station, where Officer Zito arrested and handcuffed him and subsequently took him to the station. The defendant denied ever putting his hand in Officer Pishotta's pocket.
[2, 3] The defendant, who made a drawing of the car in which the alleged incident took place, testified that it was a fair and accurate representation of what he saw on October 23, 1966. The introduction of the drawing by the defendant was objected to on the ground that there was not a proper foundation, that it was a self-serving document, that it presented a conclusion of the witness and that it did not accurately portray the condition of the car. The defendant points out that the drawing was not being introduced as a piece of substantive evidence offered for the truth of the contents but as an illustration of the defendant's testimony. The parties agree that the admissibility of a drawing of this nature is a matter *232 within the discretion of the trial judge who may accept or reject it. Department of Public Works and Buildings v. Chicago Title & Trust Co., 408 Ill. 41, 52, 95 NE2d 903; Smith v. Ohio Oil Co., 10 Ill. App. 2d 67, 134 NE2d 526. It is doubtful that the drawing would aid the jury in deciding the case. The trial judge pointed out that the motorman was placed on the wrong side of the car, thus rendering a distorted view; certain marks and writings on the drawing were not self-explanatory and tended to confuse the picture and the objects in the drawing were depicted out of their natural proportion, thus yielding a very faulty perspective for the viewer. The record reveals that one of the principal factual issues in the case was whether Officers Pishotta and Zito were seated in the car when defendant entered or whether they all entered the car at the Jackson and State station. There was no conflict in the witnesses' descriptions of the scene. We find that the trial judge did not abuse his discretion in refusing to admit the drawing.
For these reasons the judgment is affirmed.
Judgment affirmed.
LYONS, P.J. and McCORMICK, J., concur.

=== CASE 9738828 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:03:51.692387+00 ===

*114HOMEYER, J.
(concurring specially) I agree with the opinion that the invasion of the right of privacy as a cause of action should be recognized in South Dakota, and also concur in the reversal of the judgment. The majority opinion calls attention to plaintiff's employment in the postal department and that the photograph was taken at the post office after arrangements had been made with the postmaster under whose supervision the plaintiff worked. I consider this as the determinative factor on reversal. For many years plaintiff had been a public employee, and although his duties were such as to subject him to little public attention, still the retirement of postal employees, and public employees in general, is a matter of legitimate news comment and public interest, and plaintiff should have recognized this fact as an incident of his employment. If the article and photograph had been published in the same manner of a person not in public employment, I feel that there would have been a fact issue presented for determination.

=== CASE 9738830 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:03:52.825446+00 ===

Black, J.
Numerous errors are assigned as supporting plaintiff-appellants’ appeal for retrial of this jury-decided suit for wrongful death. That the case was not tried as it might have been is fairly concludable. That the brand of reversible error should be stamped on 1 or more of such assigned errors does not necessarily follow.
When collateral matters of no relevance are voluntarily injected into a jury-tried civil case, and the ultimate loser finds himself objecting to that which his collateral venture has inevitably drawn before the jury, his objection usually forms no base for an allegation of reversible error. Trouble for these appellants started when they elected to join as parties plaintiff in prosecution of the cause which allegedly arose when the decedent expired. That such parties, *50agreeing together, were possessed of the right to so proceed is expressly declared in the first paragraph of the so-called third-party amendment of 1952 (CLS 1956, § 413.15 [Stat Ann 1960 Rev § 17.189]). That they might better have left the fiduciary to prosecute the suit as sole plaintiff, with damage inquiry directed exclusively to the true measure of what if anything was legally recoverable in behalf of the decedent’s estate and his dependents, is now but doleful hindsight.
The decedent was a veteran rigger employed by plaintiff Leitelt Iron Works. He was Leitelt’s “lead man,” that is, he was in charge of “outside work” when Leitelt undertook to do rigging and overhead metal construction for others. Leitelt was engaged by the city of South Haven to remodel an elevator designed to carry coal to and from 2 coal silos, 72 feet high, on the premises of the city’s power plant. The job undertaken by Leitelt required the services of a heavy crane and crane operator. Leitelt engaged defendants for such purpose on an hourly basis.1 When the crane with operator arrived, and was finally set up for work with boom 110 feet in length, the decedent advised the defendant operator that he “wanted to ride the hook to the top” in order that he, decedent, might check the working height of the boom.
The “hook” is a weight-lifting assembly connected by steel cable — over the end of the boom — with a cable-winding drum. The drum is a part of the crane and is controlled by the crane operator from his seat in the cab of the crane. The hook assembly consists of a steel hook and a steel casting, weighing-together about 100 pounds. The hook is attached to the casting- by means of a crossbolt linking an *51“eye” bored through the upper portion of the hook with 2 “eyes” bored through the lower flanges of the casting. The casting provides an opening, at the top, through which the far end of the crane’s cable is threaded down, around, and out again at the top. A steel wedge is inserted, inside the casting, in such manner as to press such looped end of the cable firmly between the wedge and the upward converging inner walls of the casting, thus fastening the hook assembly to such end. Looking at the exhibit drawings, it is readily perceivable that, the cable having been properly threaded through and wedged inside the casting, the greater the lifting pull the more secure becomes the fastening of cable to hook assembly. See sketch at the margin, furnished by agreeing counsel.
The threading and fastening of the cable to hook assembly was done by the decedent, 2 of his fellow employees, and the defendant crane operator. For plaintiffs it is claimed that the crane operator was responsible for what turned out to be a defective job of securing defendants’ cable to their hook assembly. For defendants it is claimed that decedent and his coemployees were exclusively responsible therefor. The proofs on that score presented, for jury determination definitely, the issues of negligence and contributory negligence as charged by the respective parties. Thus we pass summarily plaintiffs’ contention that the trial judge should Have directed a verdict of liability.
The hook assembly and cable having been linked as indicated, decedent stepped into the hanging hook and, holding to the taut cable, signalled “lift” to the crane operator. Standing thus with weight bearing on the hook, the decedent was carried to a height near the top of the silos. Then, the lift having been stopped, the hook assembly suddenly slipped free from the cable. The assembly and the decedent *52plunged to the ground. Death ensued shortly after.
The initially posed question is whether Judge Vander Ploeg erred reversibly when he permitted the defendant crane operator to testify, over objection, to certain matters of which the decedent is said to have had like knowledge. Two phases of the operator’s testimony are questioned as incompetent under the statute.  The first dealt with operation by him of the crane from start of the lift to the time of tragedy. The second was testimonial relation of the fact and result of a “test” made by him during the trial. The “test” disclosed effort to ascertain— by repeating the process of lifting a like hook with like equipment—-how long in point of estimated time it took to lift the decedent and the hook assembly up to the height where the cable slipped free.
The first of these phases presents the question directly. The second depends upon solution of the first since both arise from that part of the crane operator’s testimony which, in sum, described how he manipulated the crane’s operating mechanism and lifted decedent and the hook assembly to the height and point of calamity. It was shown that decedent was “watching” the crane operator during the lift. Upon that premise and the assumption that decedent knew the lifting- speed as well as did the operator, and knew as well whether there was anything unusual about the lift and its stop, it is contended that certain questions propounded to the operator drew forth incompetent testimony. 3
As a sort of prelude to discussion and determination of the posed question, we observe that trial judges have no easy task when called upon to rule *54that question after question, addressed to an opposite party survivor in a tort case, call or do not call for answers which as to actual fact are equally known to the decedent. The point came to initial full treatment in Noonan v. Volek, 246 Mich 377, 381, 382, a typical suit for negligence. The Court said that the statutory bar, in its application to tort cases, “is fraught with difficulty in determining what knowledge the deceased had of a particular event, for the bar is not up until it affirmatively appears that the fact, if true, was known to the deceased.” Noonan was followed and applied in the cases of Hanna v. McClave, 271 Mich 133, 140; In re Boyer’s Estate, 281 Mich 618, 620; Kalbfleisch v. Perkins, 282 Mich 27, 29; Benaway v. Pere Marquette R. Co., 296 Mich 1, 5, and, while it is not too easy to reconcile some of them with Case v. Klute, 283 Mich 581, 584, 585 ; Quick v. Western Michigan Transportation Co., 294 Mich 402, 407, 408; Davis v. Jermstad, 350 Mich 439, 442; and Gabrish v. Morse, 361 Mich 39, 41, 42, two dependable conclusions stand forth. They are that knowledge of the decedent cannot be “inferred” (Noonan at 382; Hanna at 140; Lapachin v. Standard Oil Co., 268 Mich 477), and that the objector carries the burden “of showing that the fact, if true, was equally within the knowledge of the deceased.” (Noonan at 382.)
*53[[Image here]]
*54Human knowledge becomes a matter of esoterics when the person charged therewith is not around to relate its extent and has left no aidful word, or writing, or symbol. And when such knowledge is said to have been imparted during emergent circumstances immediately preceding violent death, the difficulty of ascertainment of the extent or nature thereof increases unto conjecture. Moreover, when the judicial inquiry is directed to the senses of sight or hearing of such departed person, doubt grows, *55usually to that degree which dictates submission of the issue of knowledge to the jury.
The trial judge was probably right in resolving the issue as one for jury consideration, yet we prefer to rest decision upon the mature rule that error in the admission or rejection of testimony, even if technically established, is not reversible unless it is “of such a character as naturally to prejudice the jury against the party objecting to its admission.” (McKinnon v. Gates, 102 Mich 618, 621; Miskiewicz v. Smolenski, 249 Mich 63, 74; Edison Illuminating Co. v. Misch, 200 Mich 114, 124.) As in Belmer v. Boyne City Tanning Co., 160 Mich 669, 677:
“We have examined the portions of the record referred to by counsel and are not satisfied that if the rules of evidence were violated, which is doubtful, defendant was prejudiced thereby.”
No witness, sworn by any party, testified to facts— distinguished from opinions — which stood at variance with or contradicted the questioned testimony of the defendant crane operator. No witness testified that the rate of speed of the lift, or the manner or nature of the stopping of the lift when the decedent reached the desired height, or anything else done by the operator after plaintiff’s decedent signalled “lift,” was unnatural, or unusual, or indicative of negligence. We are left in these circumstances with the inescapable conclusion that the cause of tragedy lay either (a) with poorly fitting-hook assembly parts, or (b) faulty assembly by some one or several, decedent possibly included, of properly fitting parts. Thus there is no good reason for holding that the testimony of the crane operator, as to what was done by him after he was seated in the crane cab, hurt or prejudiced the plaintiffs’ case. The error of admission thereof, if it was error, was harmless under the quoted rule; also under the stat*56nte (CL 1948, §650.28 [Stat Ann § 27.2617]). As in Tregonning v. Castantini, 243 Mich 233, 238, all such questioned testimony “pertained to matters about which there was no substantial dispute and it was not prejudicial.”
The last mentioned statute should be applied here as in Metcalf v. Peerless Laundry & Dye Co., 215 Mich 601, 613, 614:
“[CL 1929,] § 14565 [now said section 650.28] provides that no case shall be reversed on the ground of the improper admission of evidence, ‘unless in the opinion of the court, after an examination of the entire cause, it shall affirmatively appear that the error complained of has resulted in a miscarriage of justice.’ We have recently applied this rule in both criminal and civil cases. In the case of Link v. Fahey, 200 Mich 308, 312, a similar question was considered and it was said:
“ ‘A careful reading of the record impresses us with the belief that no different result would have been reached by the jury if the alleged objectionable testimony had been rejected. Independent of such testimony, plaintiff had sustained his theory of the case, by what appears to us to be a clear preponderance of the evidence. Assuming, then, that the declarations of the driver of the automobile, made soon after the collision, should have been excluded as hearsay or mere narrative of a past event, we are still of the opinion that its admission, even if erroneous, was not prejudicial.’
“We think that language applicable to the situation here. We cannot say that the error here complained of has resulted in a miscarriage of justice.”
That such testimony of the crane operator may have been barred by the dead man’s statute does not form an exception to the foregoing general rule. The error of admission thereof, if it was error, was fully as harmless as that which the Court considered in Kangas v. Champion Iron Co., 228 Mich 237, 240; *57In re Orr’s Estate, 297 Mich 37, 40, and Edwin S. George Foundation v. Allen, 320 Mich 552, 562.
The remaining and stressedly most important specifications of error are that the trial judge erred reversibly in permitting cross-examination of the plaintiff fiduciary as to the fact, amount and duration of social security allowances which had been paid and would be paid “for me and my son, my young son gets that also” (at trial time the total was shown to be $156 per month); in permitting defense counsel to inject into the case “the workmen’s compensation payments she was receiving,” and in permitting defense counsel to jury-argue the injected subject of payment of, and future availability of, workmen’s compensation benefits.
That all such matters should have been kept out of the case; that the evidentiary inquiry into the subject of damages should have been confined to proof or disproof of the pecuniary loss which in consequence of the death was suffered by the decedent’s estate and his dependents (see Chicago & N. W. R. Co. v. Bayfield, 37 Mich 205 [16 Am Neg Cas 87], and Staal v. Grand Rapids & Indiana R. Co., 57 Mich 239); that the fact and extent of life insurance, social security allowances and workmen’s compensation benefits, all such having been paid for by the decedent, or his employer, or both, should not have been dragged in before the jury (see Lebel v. Swinciki, 354 Mich 427; Wright v. Delray Connecting R. Co., 361 Mich 619; McCullough v. Ward Trucking Co., 368 Mich 108); that such insurance, allowances, and benefits weie “not intended to operate to the benefit of anyone negligently or otherwise wrongfully causing the death” (quotation from Lebel at 433, 434), and that no reversible error resulted from the proof and jury argument of such proof, are conclusions we must reach by force of principles governing review of law cases.
*58In the first place, plaintiffs having elected to sne in the names of the employer, the employer’s insurer, and the decedent’s fiduciary, they by such act brought forcibly to jury attention what should not have distracted the jurors from the presented issues of negligence and contributory negligence and the true measure of damages which, if liability be adjudged for wrongful death, became recoverable by the plaintiff fiduciary under section 2 of the death act (CL 1948, § 691.582 [Stat Ann 1959 Cum Supp § 27.712]). But for such act defendant would not have received the advantage to which the Court alluded in Union Ice Co. v. Detroit & M. R. Co., 178 Mich 346, 351 (quoted and followed in Robinson v. Township of Wyoming, 312 Mich 14, 26); that of showing and arguing that an insurance company “would participate in any judgment which might be rendered.”
In the second place, and save only as to the subject of social security, plaintiffs’ counsel themselves injected all these extraneous matters into the case. Having proved the amount and expenditure of the decedent’s life insurance, the extent of participation of the compensation insurer in payment of the expenses of funeral and burial, and having questioned the plaintiff fiduciary as to the reimbursable amount which in event of recovery would become payable to the plaintiff compensation insurer,4 counsel for plaintiffs are in no position to complain that defense counsel added, to the nearly filled pot of irrelevance, the equally irrelevant subject of social security benefits, or to complain that defense counsel made effective capital of the pot during jury argument. Indeed, *59in these circumstances of windfallen manna, it would be surprising had counsel failed to argue that responsibility for the tragedy “should not be shifted from plaintiff compensation carrier to the defendants.”
Judgment affirmed. Costs to defendants.
Carr, C. J., and Dethmers, Kelly, Kavanagh, and Smith, JJ., concurred with Black, J.
Defendants’ crane arrived with all of its equipment, including the presently mentioned hook assembly and all cable necessary to connect the crane’s cable winder with such assembly.
The trial judge did not overrule all of plaintiffs’ objections to such testimony. Some were sustained and some were overruled. As to those overruled the question of competency was submitted to the jury for determination in accordance with instructions which were eminently proper if, of course, such overrulings were proper.
Plaintiffs’ counsel, questioning tlie plaintiff fiduciary:
“Q. You understand also that under the law, any amount you recover here must first be paid back to the Michigan Mutual Company to reimburse them for what they have paid you?
“A. Yes.
“Q. That amounts to something like $8,200-8,800 up to date?
“A. That is right.”

=== CASE 9738831 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:03:52.829659+00 ===

Souris, J.
[concurring). I agree with Mr. Justice Black, for the reasons stated in his opinion, that plaintiffs were not entitled to a directed verdict on the issue of liability and that it was not reversible error to admit the crane operator’s testimony concerning matters claimed to be equally within the knowledge of the decedent. However, for reasons set forth in my opinion in McCullough v. Ward Trucking Co., 368 Mich 108, and for other reasons indicated below, I cannot join in those portions of Justice Black’s opinion which relate to evidence of and jury argument on decedent’s widow’s receipt of workmen’s compensation benefits.
This record discloses plaintiffs made no objections in the trial court to the admission of such evidence. In fact, both counsel examined the administratrix with reference to her receipt of such benefits with only 1 presently immaterial objection, — and that by defendants’ counsel. Defendants’ counsel elicited from the administratrix the amount of the weekly workmen’s compensation benefit she received as decedent’s widow. Plaintiffs’ counsel then put in evidence the amount paid to date of trial and the period during which benefit payments would continue.
As in Wright v. Delray Connecting R. Co., 361 Mich 619, 628, 629, the evidence regarding workmen’s compensation benefits got into the case through the active efforts of both counsel. In Wright, both conn*60sel took the case as they found it at the conclusion of proofs and argued to the jury with reference to the workmen’s compensation benefits within the limits of the evidence. Here, however, at conclusion of proofs, in the absence of the jury and at defense counsel’s request, the trial judge ruled it would be improper for plaintiffs’ counsel to refer to the amount of compensation paid to the widow in his argument to the jury. Plaintiffs’ counsel was permitted to argue that workmen’s compensation benefits had been paid the widow, that she was not precluded thereby from suing to recover her damages, and that the compensation benefits were not adequate. However, when he mentioned the amount of the weekly benefit (put in evidence by the defense), he was prevented from pursuing the matter further by defense counsel’s objection, which the trial judge sustained.
Notwithstanding my belief that this ruling was erroneous, for reasons expressed in McCullough v. Ward Trucking Co., supra, I do not believe it justifies our reversal. The jury returned a verdict of no cause, a verdict well within its right on the proofs in this record. I am not prepared to say on this record that barring, even erroneously, jury argument on the amount of weekly benefits prejudicially affected the jury’s verdict against plaintiffs on the issue of liability.
Affirmed. Costs to defendants.
O’Hara, J., took no part in the decision of this case.

=== CASE 9738832 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:03:53.806731+00 ===

*244Black, J.
This case was regularly assigned to former Justice Adams. Prior to his leaving the bench the following opinion, which I adopt, was prepared by him and submitted to other members of the Court.
Plaintiff, a passenger in an automobile, suffered serious injuries when the car in which she was riding collided with one owned by defendant Henry Peuler, Sr., and operated by defendant Henry J. Peuler, his minor son.
The declaration alleged specific acts of negligence and violations of the motor vehicle code on the part of defendant Henry J. Peuler. Liability on the part of Henry Peuler, Sr., was claimed solely on the basis of imputation of the driver’s negligence under the ownership liability statute.
The pretrial statement indicated that the pleadings were complete and the case was at issue.
Subsequently the plaintiff procured the driving record of the minor son and thereupon moved to amend her declaration to incorporate a specific charge of actionable negligence on the part of Peuler, Sr., defendant-owner, in entrusting his vehicle to a driver known by him to be incompetent by reason of his past bad record. The court denied the motion, stating:
“I am usually of the opinion that a motion such as this, to amend the pleadings should be granted, providing it does not prejudice the rights of defendant, even though the case is at issue, and pretrial has been held. It appears that any amendment at this stage of the proceedings would usually permit opposing counsel to adequately prepare to meet the amended pleading. However, in this case, the purpose of the proposed amendment appears to be solely that of introducing a driving record which would influence the jurors’ decision in connection with the alleged negligence of defendant driver. *245■CLS 1956, § 257.731 (Stat Ann 1960 Eev § 9.2431), specifically provides that no evidence of the conviction of a driver for a violation under that chapter or of a local ordinance shall be admissible in any court in a civil action.
“The proposed amendment goes only to the liability of defendant-owner who will be liable as owner if defendant-driver was negligent in the operation of his automobile. It appears, therefore, that the sole purpose of the proposed amendment is only to bring in the driving record of defendant-driver and thereby influence the jury. Since defendant has admitted that the car was being driven with the knowledge and consent of defendant-owner, the defendant-owner will be liable if defendant-driver is negligent.”
In Elliott v. A. J. Smith Contracting Co., Inc., 358 Mich 398, it was held in an action against a contracting company that the company might have been ■guilty of negligence in entrusting a motor vehicle to an employee unfit to be at the wheel. In that ■case the plaintiff was allowed to go to the jury on this theory, the action being solely against the employer and not against the employee truck driver. We do not conceive the rule there laid down to be ■confined solely to the employer-employee relationship. The negligence therein alleged might also occur between a parent and child if the child was unfit to be at the wheel. If the present action had been directed solely against the parent, and the child had not also been joined as a defendant, there would be no distinction between Elliott and this case.
The problem arises when we consider the provisions of CLS 1956, § 257.731 (Stat Ann 1960 Eev § 9.2431), which reads as follows:
“No evidence of the conviction of any person for .any violation of this chapter or of a local ordinance *246pertaining to the use of motor vehicles shall be admissible in any court in any civil action.”
Is the language of the statute so broad as to bar all evidence with regard to a driver’s past actions? We think not. The statute directs itself to “evidence of the conviction” and nothing further. Conviction implies, and, in fact, is a judgment with regard to an occurrence that has taken place. This is undoubtedly the reason for the statutory prohibition. However, the facts of past occurrences are not barred by the statute. Neither would the results flowing therefrom such as revocation of a driver’s license, Elliott v. A. J. Smith Contracting Co., Inc., supra, but only “evidence of the conviction.”
Conceivably, a whole series of past accidents or other events might be shown if they were of such a nature as to lead to the conclusion that the son was unfit to be at the wheel and the father allowed him to drive, having knowledge that this was so. Liability under such a situation is no more unusual than the liability that might result from entrusting a car to a drunken man or a loaded pistol to an infant.
"We think it clear that the prohibition of the statute is not as broad as it was construed to be by the trial judge. This is not a case where the motion to amend is denied simply because, in the opinion of the trial judge, the case has progressed so far that, as a matter of fairness, the motion should be denied. In such a situation we ordinarily would not interfere with the trial judge’s discretion. Here, however, it was conceded at the time the motion to amend was made that the case was in such a posture that the motion would ordinarily be granted. The motion was denied due tó a mistaken construction of the substantive law which led to the conclusion that the rights of one of the defendants would be prejudiced. We have seen that this is not the case. Moreover,. *247-the rights of the plaintiff were prejudiced in that the plaintiff was prevented from presenting to the jury all of his theories of the case consonant with the facts that could he developed upon trial. The trial court was in error. Its decision denying the motion to amend is vacated. The motion is granted. The matter is remanded for further proceedings in accordance with this opinion. Costs to appellant.
Kavanagh, Souris, and Otis M. Smith, JJ., concurred with Black, J.

=== CASE 9738833 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:03:53.811101+00 ===

Kelly, J.
(dissenting). Appellant’s contention that the trial judge’s ruling is contra to Elliott v. A. J. Smith Contracting Co., 358 Mich 398, is without merit, and Justice Black’s opinion (hereinafter referred to as the “opinion”) would allow the introduction of evidence of the defendant driver’s participation in previous accidents contrary to the statute. I, therefore, dissent.
After the case was at issue and after the pretrial conference, plaintiff sought leave to amend her declaration by adding the following paragraph:
“That a further proximate cause of said collision was the negligence of defendant Henry Peuler, Sr., in permitting defendant Henry J. Peuler to operate his aforesaid vehicle, when he knew that said Henry J. Peuler had been guilty of repeated traffic violations, had been involved in prior accidents, and had, shortly prior thereto, undergone a temporary suspension of his operator’s license for habitual negligence.”
The statute (CL 1948, § 616.1 [Stat Ann § 27.838]) provided that the trial court may permit amendments “for the furtherance of justice, on such terms as shall be just.”
*248Appellant contends that the court’s failure to follow Elliott v. A. J. Smith Contracting Co., supra, constitutes a clear failure to exercise discretion, if not, in fact, an abuse of discretion.
The majority opinion in Elliott (the writer of this opinion wrote the dissenting opinion) was based on servants, agents, and employment of improper persons, and the majority opinion discloses that it was not an opinion deciding a question such as is presented in this appeal, as is evidenced by the following-quotation from that opinion (pp 413, 414):
“Appellant claims that the admission of evidence concerning its employee’s past driving record violated the following Michigan statute:
“ ‘No evidence of the conviction of any person for any violation of this chapter or of a local ordinance pertaining to the use of motor vehicles shall be admissible in any court in anv civil action.’ (CLS 1956, § 257.731 '[Stat Ann 1957 Cum Supp § 9.2431].) The above statute has not been previously construed by this Court.
“Even though we were to assume, without deciding, that in a negligence action against the driver himself, evidence of the type mentioned, supra,, is ‘evidence of the conviction’ of the driver and thus within the proscription of the legislature, such an assumption would not answer the problem here presented.
“The principal evils sought to be cured by the statute arise in this way: A driver has been convicted of a criminal offense in connection with a traffic accident. In addition, he is sued civilly with respect to the same accident. There is a danger that the civil jury might, if permitted, consider the criminal conviction as evidence of negligence in the civil action, or, in civil cases, that negligence in a prior case will be regarded as evidence of negligence in a later case. These, principally, are what the *249statute seeks to prevent. 3 Wigmore, Evidence (3d ed), § 987.
“We do not have such a case. Here the suit is brought not against the driver himself but against his employer on a totally different theory: his personal negligence in entrusting the operation of a truck to a person totally incompetent to handle it. See Tanis v. Eding, 265 Mich 94. Section 213 of the Restatement of Agency (2d), states the principle relied upon in the following terms:
“ ‘A person conducting an activity through servants or other agents is subject to liability for harm resulting from his conduct if he is negligent or reckless : * * *
“ ‘ (b) in the employment of improper persons or instrumentalities in ivork involving risk of harm to others.’ ”
The majority finding in Elliott that there is danger that “negligence in a prior ease will be regarded as evidence of negligence in a later case,” and is a danger “the statute seeks to prevent,” is in sharp contrast with appellant’s untenable position that “following the introduction of such evidence in this case, the jury should be instructed that the past record of the driver has no bearing upon his negligence in this particular accident, but that it is to be considered solely in determining whether or not the owner was negligent in entrusting the vehicle to him. This would allow the evidence for its proper purpose, but uphold the statute making such evidence inadmissible against the defendant driver.”
Such an instruction would not accomplish the purpose appellant claims for it, namely, insuring that the jury will not “consider the past record of the driver” as “bearing upon his negligence in this particular accident.”
We did not rule on the question presented in this appeal in Elliott, and the “opinion” I dissent from *250does not contradict this statement, as is disclosed by the paragraph in the “opinion” calling attention that Elliott merely allowed the jury to determine an employer’s negligence in employing an unfit truck driver; that the action was “solely against the employer and not against the employee truck driver,” and with a conclusion that we should go further in the present case now before us than we did in Elliott by the statement that “We do not conceive the rule there laid down to be confined solely to the employer-employee relationship.”
Appellant failed to disclose any reason why we should reverse the trial judge and the denial of the motion should be affirmed.
The “opinion” seeks to have this Court carry on from Elliott’s “employer-employee relationship” rule and for the first time include facts and relationships such as are presented in this appeal.
Before commenting upon the inadvisability of adopting such a course, I want to make it clear that if the majority so decide, I believe it would be unfair to claim the trial court erred in not anticipating in advance such a departure from the past.
The “opinion” endeavors to reconcile such action with the provisions of the statute by adopting a different interpretation of the statute than we did in Elliott, as is disclosed by the following from the “opinion”:
“Is the language of the statute so broad as to bar all evidence with regard to a driver’s past actions! We think not; The statute directs itself to ‘evidence of the conviction’ and nothing further. Conviction implies, and, in fact, is a judgment with regard to an occurrence that has taken place. This is undoubtedly the reason for the statutory prohibition. However, the facts of past occurrences are not barred by the statute.”
*251I cannot subscribe to a construction that the legislature deemed it necessary to prevent proof of a “judgment with regard to an occurrence that has taken place” by a duly authorized judicial officer after a fair hearing but saw no clanger in allowing the jury in a subsequent civil case to review all of the facts connected with a previous accident, and I contrast the new construction in the “opinion” with the more logical interpretation in Elliott, namely, that the statute seeks to prevent the possibility that evidence in a prior case will be considered as evidence in a later case.
The “opinion” grants to appellant the right to introduce proofs requested in her amendment and that includes proof that defendant driver “had been involved in prior accidents.” What is meant by this word “involved?” Does it mean the driver was at fault, or can it mean he was driving 1 of the automobiles that collided with another automobile? Are we approving a new type of trial where we call upon a jury to decide in 1 hearing responsibility for 2 or more accidents separated by 1 week, 1 month, or a period of time?
The legislative mandate,  using terms “any person,” “any' court,” “any civil action,” is very definite and very broad. Any change in this mandate should come from the legislature and not by judicial legislation. The trial court’s denial of plaintiff’s motion to amend did not constitute a failure to use discretion or an abuse of discretion.
The order should be affirmed. Costs to appellee.
Carr, C. J., and Dethmers, J., concurred with Kelly, J.
O’Hara, J., took no part in the decision of this case.

=== CASE 2217858 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:36.114254+00 ===

264 Minn. 84 (1962)
119 N.W. (2d) 809
VILLAGE OF EDINA
v.
THOMAS G. JOSEPH AND ANOTHER.
ESTHER HARDY AND OTHERS, INTERVENORS.
No. 38,522.
Supreme Court of Minnesota.
October 26, 1962.
*86 Dorsey, Owen, Barber, Marquart & Windhorst, Henry E. Halladay, and Edward J. Schwartzbauer, for appellant.
Preus, Maag & Abdo and E. John Abdo, for respondents.
*87 NELSON, JUSTICE.
Appeal by the village of Edina from a judgment in the district court entered January 9, 1961, and orders denying a motion for amended findings or a new trial.
Following the adoption of a special assessment by the village council on September 15, 1958, for widening and otherwise improving France Avenue, respondents Thomas G. Joseph and Ralph J. Johnson, owners of property abutting thereon, appealed to the district court pursuant to Minn. St. 1957, § 429.081, in their own behalf and purportedly in behalf of all abutting property owners affected by the assessment. The notice of appeal was duly served and was filed September 30, 1958. Sixty-five other owners filed a motion to intervene in the appeal September 21, 1960, nearly 2 years later. Pursuant thereto the court below permitted them to join in the appeal after the limitation period prescribed by § 429.081 had run, and they also are respondents here.
France Avenue is one of the main north-south traffic arteries of the village of Edina, a southwestern suburb of Minneapolis. It was made a county road in 1891 and remained such until 1934 when it was designated a county state-aid road known as Highway No. 17. A county road is established as a highway and maintained by county funds. A state-aid road is maintained by state revenue from license fees and gasoline taxes.
The portion of France Avenue involved here runs from 54th Street to one-tenth mile beyond 62nd Street. The right-of-way has been 66 feet wide since 1891. The traveled portion of the road was 22 to 24 feet of blacktop surfacing prior to 1957. It was then merely an oiled surface on an old gravel road, and the area of the road outside of the traveled portion was used primarily for parking, as it was unimproved and not suitable for traffic. The record indicates that the road was extremely difficult to maintain. Moving traffic generally confined itself to the blacktop. It served one lane of traffic in each direction with a speed limit of 30 miles per hour.
Officials of the village and Hennepin County began considering the improvement of France Avenue in 1955. The portion from 51st Street to 54th Street had been improved in 1952, and the new improvement *88 was considered to be a natural extension of the 1952 improvement. Consequently the roadway on France from 54th Street to a point one-tenth of a mile south of 62nd Street was widened to 44 feet and paved with concrete, and curbs and gutters were installed. Storm sewers were also installed. The improvement, which also included the rebuilding of a bridge, was begun on June 6 and completed September 14, 1957.
Hearings were duly held by the village council to discuss the improvement and the proposed special assessment to finance it. A reduction was made in the proposed assessment as a result of the hearings, the cost of installation of the storm sewers and the rebuilding of the bridge being eliminated from the proposed assessment. On September 15, 1958, after the hearings and further consideration of objections, the council levied an assessment on the abutting properties in an amount equal to one-sixth of the actual paving cost. It had been the longstanding policy of the village to assess the properties abutting on a street like France Avenue only in the amount equal to the cost of the improvement of a normal residential street. The assessment here challenged was less than that cost, since the cost in 1960 of blacktop with curb and gutter on residential streets was $6.50 to $7 per front foot while the assessment against the abutting residential property for this improvement was reduced to $5.60 per front foot for paving and for curb and gutter. This was the first special assessment for street surfacing on this portion of France Avenue.
The district court found that as a result of the improvement of France Avenue the flow of traffic moved 11 feet closer to the houses on each side of the street; that the posted speed limit has been increased to 35 miles per hour for a portion of the area and 40 miles per hour in the remainder and that at times traffic exceeds those limits; that the per-axle road limit for trucks has been increased to 9 tons per axle; and that there has been an increase in the number, and a change in the nature, of trucks using the street; that many trucks which previously used 66th Street for travel now use France Avenue; that traffic generally has more than doubled; that vibration from it has become noticeable so that it is felt within some of the houses; that *89 trash is thrown from car windows and items of rubbish fall from uncovered trucks and trailers; that residents have complained of beer and pop cans, paper bags, napkins, garbage, and other litter accumulating on their property as a result of the increased traffic; that exhaust fumes are now noticeable and irritating; and that noise has substantially increased and some of the adjacent property owners are disturbed thereby.
The expert witnesses for the village testified that the residential property used for single-family dwellings along France Avenue has received many substantial benefits from the improvement and that the benefits were at least equal to the cost of the assessment. Dewey Newcombe, called as an expert witness by respondents, said that in his opinion the property affected had not been benefited. He conceded, however, that reasonable men might reach a different conclusion. The experts called by the village testified that the property put to commercial use was benefited and Newcombe agreed. There has been a significant increase in the construction of multiple dwellings since the improvement, indicating that property was benefited for multiple-dwelling use, and one of the owners agreed.
Respondents contended in the district court that the detriment they suffered was substantially more than any benefits which accrued to them by the improvement. The court agreed, finding that even though respondents' property was benefited in some respects by the improvement, nevertheless, the accumulation of rubbish, the increased traffic, vibrations, and noise were a detriment which exceeded any special benefits.
Prior to the improvement the roadway was comprised of minimum specification blacktop with a minimum amount of base. The edge of the road was sandy and loose. There were chuckholes in the road and when it rained, water would collect in low spots. There were drainage problems which caused the water to flow onto abutting property carrying with it sand, gravel, and roadside debris. Due to the uneven surface of the street, snow removal was difficult.
One of the main contentions of respondents was that the improvement has caused a substantial increase in the traffic on France Avenue. *90 One respondent testified that in his opinion traffic had increased from 10,000 to 100,000 cars per day. This opinion, however, has no reliable basis. The village introduced a traffic census record made by the Hennepin County Highway Department. It indicates that at a point just south of 54th Street on France Avenue the traffic increased between 1953 and 1957 from 6,334 to 7,828 cars per day, an increase of 1,494. This record was based upon a traffic count made annually by the department for a period of a week. In 1959 the count was 7,912 and in 1960 was 10,967 per day. Witnesses for both sides admitted that the opening of Southdale Shopping Center was a major factor in the increase in traffic along the avenue. Walter J. Petrowski, who supervised the preparation of traffic counts taken by the State Highway Department, testified that some streets running parallel to France Avenue occasionally carried more vehicles than France Avenue. There was also testimony that the rapidly mushrooming population in Edina has had a direct bearing on the increase in traffic.
Howard Shenehon, called as an expert witness by the village, testified that suburbanites constantly demand improvements and it was his conclusion that the improvement has had a desirable effect on property values. Based upon his personal study of properties on France Avenue, it was his opinion that the values of single-family dwellings had increased from 4 to 7 percent since the improvement was made. He testified that it benefited the residential property and had the effect of increasing its value in an amount at least equal to the cost of the improvement. Mr. Newcombe's admission that the property had been benefited for some uses to which it might be put tends to support this opinion.
The village argues here that the trial court exceeded its proper scope of review by making the following findings, which it contends are contradicted by the evidence: (1) That there is no probability that the zoning in the area in question will be changed in the reasonably foreseeable future; (2) that traffic has greatly increased, with attendant hazard and inconvenience to residents on the avenue;[1] (3) that due *91 to the improvement there has been a substantial increase in the number, nature, and speed of the trucks; that such trucks use it earlier in the morning than they did prior to the improvement; (4) that the increased traffic has caused noticeable vibration and irritating exhaust fumes; (5) that trash of various kinds is thrown from car windows and items of rubbish fall from uncovered trucks and trailers accumulating on residents' properties and in the street in front of their homes; and (6) that noise along the avenue has at least tripled, interfering in many ways with the residents' enjoyment of their property.
The village also attacks as contradictory to the evidence the portion of finding XII which states: "Notwithstanding the hurt to the properties which overshadowed any personal benefits to residents in common with all other citizens of Edina using the avenue," and all of finding XIII, which reads as follows:
"The real basis for making the one-third assessment against these properties was that practically the same measurement had been used by the village in assessing premises adjacent to the roadway on some other avenue or avenues, the circumstances and nature of which are not well known to the court. The measure thus used is not a proper one for the imposition of a special assessment. Insofar as any claim may be made that the affected properties may have been benefited by the paving, it is based upon demonstrable mistake of fact; and the assessment is unjust and unfair as to these appellants."
The village claims also that the court erred in holding that the assessment was invalid except as it applied to the installation of concrete *92 curb and gutter; in making its conclusions of law applicable to the 65 intervenors as well as to the other respondents; in limiting the consideration of benefits to the present principal use of the property  for single-family dwellings  and in basing its decision solely on the fact that it felt there were no benefits for such use; in failing to follow Rule 81.02 of the Rules of Civil Procedure and Minn. St. 480.051 in deciding whether Rule 23.01 modifies and supersedes Minn. St. 1957, § 429.081, under which these appeals from the special assessment were taken; and in determining that it was impracticable for all of the property owners to join in the appeal in the first instance.
The village asserts that the trial court exceeded its proper jurisdiction in setting aside the assessment and contends that the permissible scope of judicial review of a special assessment levy where the statutory requirements have been met is very narrow. The respondents contend that the determination by the council is not conclusive and that the court's function is to determine de novo, not by review.
1. We have said that the assessment and collection of taxes is fundamentally an administrative function; that the confirmation of the assessment and the rendition of judgment for the amount are not "judicial" in the strict sense. They are the steps in an administrative proceeding in which judicial assistance is invoked as a matter of convenience, because with its assistance the rights of the parties and the interests of the public can be best protected and conserved. 13A Dunnell, Dig. (3 ed.) § 6882. The assessment in the instant case is limited to the special benefits found to exist. The fact that there may have been some general benefit from the improvement does not render the final assessment invalid because such general benefit may have been largely ignored. It is presumed that the council will do its duty and assess only to the extent of the special benefits and not for such general benefits as accrue to the public at large. That the improvement and the assessment therefor were such as the statute contemplates the council may make in their legislative and administrative capacity is without question.[2]
*93 2. We have repeatedly said with respect to the decisions of municipal and other governmental bodies having the duty of making decisions involving judgment and discretion that it is not the province of the court to substitute its judgment for that of the body making such a decision, but merely to determine whether that body was within its jurisdiction, was not mistaken as to the applicable law, and did not act arbitrarily, oppressively, or unreasonably, and to determine whether the evidence could reasonably support or justify the determination. See, In re Wilson, 32 Minn. 145, 148, 19 N.W. 723, 725; Zion Evangelical Lutheran Church v. City of Detroit Lakes, 221 Minn. 55, 58, 21 N.W. (2d) 203, 205; The Alexander Co. v. City of Owatonna, 222 Minn. 312, 24 N.W. (2d) 244; State ex rel. Dybdal v. State Securities Comm. 145 Minn. 221, 225, 176 N.W. 759, 761; 13A Dunnell, Dig. (3 ed.) § 6525c.
3. Minn. St. c. 429 sets forth procedural requirements relative to local improvements and special assessments. Section 429.081 provides that any person aggrieved may appeal after the adoption of a special assessment. It states:
"Within 20 days after the adoption of the assessment, any person aggrieved[3] may appeal to the district court by serving a notice upon the mayor or clerk of the municipality. * * * All objections to the assessment shall be deemed waived unless presented on such appeal."[4]
Property owners are not entitled to an appeal from an assessment as a matter of right, but the right of appeal is almost universally allowed by statute or charter. Conditions permitting appeals, their *94 course, and the time and manner in which they are to be allowed and perfected are of statutory origin, as such appeals were unknown to the common law. Statutes allowing appeals from assessments against property for special improvements are mandatory and their requirements must be strictly complied with. These terms will not be extended by construction. 14 McQuillin, Municipal Corporations (3 ed.) § 38.231; Board of Park Commrs. v. Bremner, 190 Minn. 534, 252 N.W. 451, 253 N.W. 761.[5]
4. The respondents make no charges of fraud, nor do they claim that the statutory requirement of notice to the abutting owners was lacking. It is undisputed that the village council also held hearings as required by statute, at which interested property owners were heard, resulting in a reduction in the proposed assessment. It is clear, then, that the owners had the benefit of every statutory safeguard, and the opportunity to be heard, long before the appeal to the district court was taken.
5. As early as State ex rel. Burger v. District Court, 33 Minn. 295, 304, 23 N.W. 222, 226, this court said:
"* * * Amid the conflict of opinions it is easy to see that there may have been errors of judgment on the part of the assessors. This is necessarily incident to the performance of such duties; but we think the assessment is not shown to have been fraudulent, or to have proceeded upon the wrong rule in including, excluding, or valuing property; nor does it appear that there was any lack of diligence in considering the nature of the interests of owners, or the condition or situation of the property assessed. The decision of the board on these questions is therefore conclusive."
Again, in State ex rel. Minnesota Transfer Ry. Co. v. District Court, 68 Minn. 242, 245, 71 N.W. 27, this court said:
"* * * the judgment of the board of public works [of St. Paul] *95 as to what property is benefited, and how much it is benefited, is final and conclusive, and cannot be reviewed by the courts unless it is shown to be fraudulent in fact, or to have been made up upon demonstrable mistake of fact, or that in making it the board of public works applied an illegal principle or an erroneous rule of law."
To the same effect are State ex rel. Wheeler v. District Court, 80 Minn. 293, 83 N.W. 183; and State ex rel. Hughes v. District Court, 95 Minn. 70, 103 N.W. 744.
It was held in In re Assessment for Improving Superior Street, 172 Minn. 554, 216 N.W. 318, that when an assessment for a local improvement has been made by the proper municipal board or officers under due legislative authority and in the regular course of procedure such assessment is prima facie valid, and the burden rests upon the objector to prove its invalidity. This court also held in that case that an assessment so made, in the absence of fraud, mistake, or illegality, is conclusive upon the courts, except that the questions of whether the property assessed received any special benefit from the improvement and whether the assessment made exceeds to a substantial amount the special benefits received are open for review. This decision was followed in Qvale v. City of Willmar, 223 Minn. 51, 25 N.W. (2d) 699. In In re Assessment for Paving Concord Street, 148 Minn. 329, 181 N.W. 859, and again in the Qvale case we said that the principle that the apportionment of assessments is a legislative function is to be given effect.
6. Mr. Justice Magney, speaking for the court in the Qvale case, said (223 Minn. 59, 25 N.W. [2d] 704):
"* * * Where reasonable men differ, the determination of the assessing officer will be upheld. The apportionment of assessments is a legislative function and under the facts of this case must be given effect."
7. Respondents claim that the present residential use of property is controlling as to benefits. This has never been the law in this state. The doctrine that the present use is not controlling in determining benefits in a special assessment levy has often been expressed by this court beginning with our early decisions and repeated in In re Assessment for Improving Superior Street, supra, and Qvale v. City of *96 Willmar, supra. In the Qvale case Mr. Justice Magney also quoted with approval the following statements from 48 Am. Jur., Special or Local Assessments, §§ 29 and 23:
"The question of the existence and extent of special benefit resulting from a public improvement for which a special assessment is made is one of fact, legislative or administrative rather than judicial in character, and the determination of such question by the legislature or by the body authorized to act in the premises is conclusive on the property owners and on the courts, unless it is palpably arbitrary or grossly unequal and confiscatory, in which case judicial relief may be had against its enforcement."
"In determining whether an improvement does or does not benefit property within the assessment district, the land should be considered simply in its general relations and apart from its particular use at the time; and an assessment, otherwise legal, is not void because the lot is not benefited by the improvement, owing to its present particular use. The benefit is presumed to inure not to the present use, but to the property itself." (Italics supplied.)
In Louisville & Nashville R. Co. v. Barber Asphalt Paving Co. 197 U.S. 430, 25 S. Ct. 466, 49 L. ed. 819, it was held that in determining whether an improvement does or does not benefit property within the assessment district the land should be considered simply in its general relations and apart from its particular use at the time; and an assessment, otherwise legal, for grading, paving, and curbing an adjoining street was not void under the Fourteenth Amendment because the lot was not benefited by the improvement owing to its present particular use. In this case Mr. Justice Holmes said (197 U.S. 433, 25 S. Ct. 467, 49 L. ed. 821):
"* * * The amount of benefit which an improvement will confer upon particular land, indeed whether it is a benefit at all, is a matter of forecast and estimate. In its general aspects at least it is peculiarly a thing to be decided by those who make the law."
Minn. Const. art. 9, § 1, empowers the legislature to authorize municipal corporations to levy and collect assessments for local improvements *97 upon property benefited thereby without regard to a cash valuation. In State ex rel. Stateler v. Reis, 38 Minn. 371, 375, 38 N.W. 97, 99, we held that "local improvements" includes "anything for which a tax by special assessment might, under the general rules of law, be imposed,  that is, any public purpose from which the property assessed derives a benefit special and local in its nature." See, In re Improvement of Lake of the Isles Park, 152 Minn. 29, 188 N.W. 54; Rogers v. City of St. Paul, 22 Minn. 494.
8. The record does not support the court's finding that the measure used in levying the assessment was not a proper one and that any claim that the affected properties have been benefited by the paving and improvement is based upon demonstrable mistake of fact. There was testimony indicating that the improvement resulted in special benefit to respondents' properties and that the assessment was made on that basis but calculated on the basis of frontage. We have long since decided in this state that use of a front-foot basis in making an assessment does not demonstrate, nor tend to prove, that the assessment was made without regard to benefits. In Qvale v. City of Willmar, supra, we quoted with approval the following from State ex rel. Wheeler v. District Court, 80 Minn. 293, 300, 83 N.W. 183, 184:
"* * * But the fact that the assessment was uniform per front foot as against each abutting lot does not demonstrate, nor does it tend to prove, that the assessment was made without regard to benefits. Its tendency is to show that each and every lot along the entire improvement was benefited equally and exactly the same per front foot, hence the assessment should be precisely the same."
In State ex rel. Oliver Iron Min. Co. v. City of Ely, 129 Minn. 40, 151 N.W. 545, Ann. Cas. 1916B, 189, it was held that levying special assessments according to the frontage rule does not violate our own constitution nor U.S. Const. Amend. XIV. See, also, State v. Robert P. Lewis Co. 72 Minn. 87, 75 N.W. 108, 42 L.R.A. 639.
9. We stated in Mayer v. City of Shakopee, 114 Minn. 80, 130 N.W. 77, that an assessment can be made only to the extent of special benefits and must be distributed in proportion to the benefits received; that the power delegated to a subordinate tribunal to determine these *98 questions calls for an exercise of judgment; and that when an arbitrary rule is followed, without regard to proximity, location, or conditions, the assessment is void. We upheld the assessment there challenged, concluding (114 Minn. 85, 130 N.W. 79):
"The plan as a whole seems fairly equitable. Some inequities must always exist in levying assessments and taxes."
The basis and justification of a special assessment are benefits to the property affected. Of course, an assessment may not be arbitrary, capricious, or unreasonable. The law in this state does not require that a special assessment correspond in exactness with the benefits received. Precise accuracy has never been required, and the determination of the extent of benefits has constitutionally and by legislation been committed to some tribunal, in this case the village council, as the assessment board. Benefits which may be demonstrated by a mathematical exactness are not always required in order to support an assessment. The most that any member of an assessing tribunal can do is to estimate the benefits to each tract of real estate upon as uniform a plan as can be used in the light afforded by available information.
Hearings were afforded the respondents by the council before it adopted the assessment of $5.60 per front foot. It must be presumed that the authorities arrived at this final amount with reference only to the special benefits accruing to the properties assessed and that the owners are required to contribute only in proportion as the properties benefited.
10. Since this court has adopted the rule that in determining whether an improvement does benefit property in the assessment district, the land should be considered simply in its general relations, and apart from its particular use at the time, the benefits being presumed to inure to the properties themselves, the evidence fails to support the finding as to detriment to respondents' properties or its conclusion that the assessment was invalid except for the amount levied for curbs and gutters. The inconveniences shown are simply those accompanying progress and modern development in every growing city. They can be alleviated by the methods adopted in other municipalities *99 which have been expanding and have undertaken similar developments.
Moreover, proof of the claim that the traffic increase was due to the improvement is not sufficient to invalidate the assessment. On the contrary, it stands admitted that the development and growth of Southdale may well be an important factor in the traffic increase. The record shows study and deliberation by the village council in evaluating the benefits to the abutting property from the improvement. A fair consideration of the record leads to the conclusion that only special benefits were assessed and that these were in each instance at least equal to the amount of the assessment.
In Board of Park Commrs. v. Bremner, supra, this court made it plain that too narrow a construction should not be placed upon the term "special benefits" in connection with a public improvement which in fact is found to enhance the market value of the property. We also noted the distinction between the term "special benefits" as applied to tax proceedings of the character here involved and as applied to an offset against damages when property is taken under the power of eminent domain.
This court has said that a rule for determining benefits may properly ignore both use and present value. In re Improvement of Third Street, 185 Minn. 170, 240 N.W. 355. See, also, In re Assessment for Widening East Fourth Street, 173 Minn. 67, 216 N.W. 607; In re Assessment for Improving Superior Street, supra; Louisville & Nashville R. Co. v. Barber Asphalt Paving Co. supra; 48 Am. Jur., Special or Local Assessments, § 23.
As indicated by the foregoing decisions, it is enough that the land could be turned to purposes for which the improvement would increase its value. In determining whether abutting property has been benefited by an improvement, neither this court nor the United States Supreme Court has given much consideration to improvements on the property or to its present use. The test is not whether the property is enhanced in value for the particular purposes to which it is devoted at the time of the assessment but whether it is enhanced in value for any purpose.
*100 11. The village contends that the intervenors are not properly before the court and are not entitled to the benefit of any judgment. It contends that Appendix B(2), Rules of Civil Procedure, which lists statutes superseded by the rules, clearly shows that Minn. St. 429.081 is not superseded or in any way changed by the rules. This is obviously correct. Rule 81.02 provides:
"These rules do not supersede the provisions of statutes relating to appeals to the district courts."
See, 3 Youngquist & Blacik, Minnesota Rules Practice, Authors' Comments to Rule 81.02, p. 494.
The authorities generally indicate that relief against erroneous or illegal assessments will not be granted by a court of equity, if the property owner has an adequate remedy at law. If the statute or charter provides a remedy by appeal or otherwise, such remedy is generally exclusive and will preclude any resort to equity. The appeal provisions under §§ 429.036 and 429.081 furnish adequate remedies at law. See, Rosso v. Village of Brooklyn Center, supra; Schultz v. City of North Mankato, 176 Minn. 76, 222 N.W. 518; and 14 McQuillin, Municipal Corporations (3 ed.) § 38.210.
12. The right to institute class or derivative actions is governed by the general principles of the law of procedure as is the right to intervene. No authority has been cited by the respondents supporting the order of intervention entered by the court below or sustaining the right of two property owners to institute a class action under the statute governing the appeal to the district court.
In Hansberry v. Lee, 311 U.S. 32, 41, 61 S. Ct. 115, 118, 85 L. ed. 22, 27, 132 A.L.R. 741, 746, Mr. Justice Stone, speaking for the court, discussed the basic requirements for instituting a class suit as follows:
"The class suit was an invention of equity to enable it to proceed to a decree in suits where the number of those interested in the subject of the litigation is so great that their joinder as parties in conformity to the usual rules of procedure is impracticable. Courts are not infrequently called upon to proceed with causes in which the number *101 of those interested in the litigation is so great as to make difficult or impossible the joinder of all because some are not within the jurisdiction or because their whereabouts is unknown or where if all were made parties to the suit its continued abatement by the death of some would prevent or unduly delay a decree. In such cases where the interests of those not joined are of the same class as the interests of those who are, and where it is considered that the latter fairly represent the former in the prosecution of the litigation of the issues in which all have a common interest, the court will proceed to a decree. [Citing cases.]" (Italics supplied.)
In Rockwell v. City of Junction City, 92 Kan. 513, 141 P. 299, it was held that the action to enjoin the paving of a street and the collection of a special assessment therefor brought by one property owner before the 30-day statute of limitations had run did not inure to the benefit of other owners who attempted to intervene after the expiration of the statutory period. The court quoted with approval the rule stated in Note, 15 Ann. Cas. 664, 665:
"Where no community of interest or privity of estate exists between the intervener and another party or parties to the original action, the commencement of the action before the statute of limitations has run, does not inure to the benefit of a person who intervenes after the time when an action would be barred."
The conditions outlined in the Hansberry case were not present on the appeal to the district court by respondents here. The record indicates that all parties entitled to notice of the proceedings before the village council received such notice and were given the opportunity to be heard. Each property owner affected had the right of appeal under the provisions of c. 429.
It seems clear that a class suit is no more available in a proceeding involving a special assessment levy under the provisions of c. 429 than it is in a ditch proceeding under the drainage laws of this state. The circumstance of ownership of abutting properties affected by the assessment does not give owners the right to institute a class action, nor does it permit any aggrieved party to intervene after he has let the time for appeal expire.
*102 It appears that it has been the policy of the village to assess the properties abutting on a street like France Avenue only in an amount equal to the cost of the improvement of a normal residential street. That course was followed in the instant proceeding.
Under the rules applicable to assessment proceedings in this state the record supports the contention of the village that the improvements had the effect of increasing the market value of residential properties used for single-family purposes at least by an amount equal to the assessment for the improvement and of increasing the market value of other properties to an even greater extent. Since our decisions make it clear that the present residential use of property is not controlling in determining whether it has received special benefits, the record supports the action taken by the village council. Under the circumstances their determination in the matter is conclusive, respondents not having established that the assessment was made without integrity and faithful consideration by the municipal authorities or that it resulted from the adoption of inapplicable rules of law. The judgment of the district court should be and is reversed.
Reversed and remanded with directions to vacate the judgment appealed from and to enter judgment in accordance with this opinion.
ON APPEAL FROM TAXATION OF COSTS.
On December 21, 1962, the following opinion was filed:
PER CURIAM.
On this appeal from the clerk's taxation of costs, plaintiffs and intervenors, respondents in this court, attempt to evade taxation of costs and disbursements on the ground that the question involved is public in nature. In the alternative they contend that if costs and disbursements are to be taxed against them, such costs and disbursements should be proportionately allotted among them. They state that the appeal involved the right to assess specific parcels of property owned by each of them.
The subject of costs and disbursements in this court is governed entirely by Minn. St. c. 607. Section 607.01 states in part:
*103 "In all cases the prevailing party shall be allowed his disbursements necessarily paid or incurred."
It has been held that "[t]he language of this statute plainly gives this court no discretion in the allowance, disallowance, or apportionment of disbursements necessarily paid or incurred." Molto v. Molto, 242 Minn. 112, 118, 64 N.W. (2d) 154, 158, citing Collins v. Collins, 221 Minn. 343, 22 N.W. (2d) 168, 23 N.W. (2d) 9; Krusemark v. Krusemark, 232 Minn. 416, 46 N.W. (2d) 647; Aske v. Aske, 233 Minn. 540, 47 N.W. (2d) 417. In Hess v. G.N. Ry. Co. 98 Minn. 198, 201, 108 N.W. 7, 803, we stated:
"* * * The matter of disbursements on appeals to this court between adverse parties in actions at law is purely statutory. The statutes provide that the losing party shall pay the disbursements necessarily incurred by the prevailing party. The court has no discretion either in the allowance, disallowance, or apportionment of the same, and the only question involved in this case is whether the items sought to be taxed were incurred by defendant in consequence of plaintiff's appeal." (Italics supplied.)
That statement was quoted with approval in LeMire v. Nelson, 238 Minn. 501, 507, 58 N.W. (2d) 189, 193.
There is no alternative but to allow the village of Edina as the prevailing party to proceed for its costs and disbursements against any or all of the opposing parties, in such manner as it deems fit. It is not the duty of this court to determine who of the 67 losing parties are to pay or in what amounts. One appeal was taken against all of these parties; the case was presented here on a single record; the briefs filed by the village were addressed to all plaintiffs and intervenors; the same attorneys represented all of them; and but one argument was made in this court. The controversy presented one action. The losing parties must, therefore, determine among themselves how they will divide the total cost.
We have been referred to State ex rel. Village of Orono v. Village of Long Lake, 247 Minn. 264, 77 N.W. (2d) 46, as authority for the contention that costs and disbursements should not have been taxed *104 because a public question was involved. That case, however, is not in point in this controversy as the parties involved there were municipalities, while appellants here are individual property owners appealing from assessments against private property.
Clerk's taxation of costs affirmed.
NOTES
[1]  The court found: "During patrolling by police, traffic generally conforms to the speed regulations. At other times, it moves well in excess of the limits so that residents along the avenue have come, with reason, to refer to it as a `speedway.' This has created new dangers for children, and some parents along the avenue have moved away because of these dangers. The road has become hazardous for older persons to walk on, and neighbors going to a nearby church are obliged to walk on the grass of other neighbors to get there. The attraction of the fine road to more motorists has been so substantial that residents going to work in the mornings and returning home in the evenings must wait often for as long as 20 minutes to get in or out of their driveways, whereas they had no trouble before the paving. Traffic funnelled along France Avenue has more than doubled, according to observations of adjacent property holders; and it is increasing."
[2]  Minn. St. c. 429; Williams v. City of St. Paul, 123 Minn. 1, 142 N.W. 886.
[3]  A "person aggrieved" who is entitled to a review of an assessment is one whose pecuniary interests are or may be adversely affected. An owner of property burdened with an unlawful tax comes within this description. People ex rel. Bingham Operating Corp. v. Eyrich, 265 A.D. 562, 40 N.Y.S. (2d) 33, affirming Id. 179 Misc. 197, 38 N.Y.S. (2d) 326.
[4]  The portions of this section quoted were unaffected by L. 1961, c. 525, § 9, which amended Minn. St. 1957, § 429.081, by adding that the court "shall either affirm the assessment or set it aside and order a reassessment as provided in section 429.071, subdivision 2." L. 1961, c. 525, expressly provided that it would not affect any improvement or assessment proceedings commenced prior to January 1, 1962.
[5]  This court held in Rosso v. Village of Brooklyn Center, 214 Minn. 364, 8 N.W. (2d) 219, that the statute allowing direct appeals to district court to attack general assessments or the proceedings in connection therewith applies also to special assessments.

=== CASE 9738834 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:03:55.937666+00 ===

Mr. Justice Ward delivered the opinion of the court: Ferdinand S. Begich, the appellant, in his employment as a paper cutter, suffered a traumatic amputation of his right hand at a point about the base of the palm and just below the wrist. When the stump of his hand had healed Begich was told by the attending surgeon that a further amputation would be required to permit the proper fitting of a useful prosthesis. He consented to the surgery and a substantial part of his forearm was amputated. The appellant was later fitted with a prosthetic appliance. The Workmen’s Compensation Act of Illinois provides that the employer shall furnish such an appliance “Where the accidental injury results in the amputation of an arm, hand, leg or foot, * * Ill. Rev. Stat. 1967, ch. 48, par. 138.8(a). The arbitrator and the Industrial Commission, upon considering the claim that Begich had filed, found that he had lost 100% of the use of the right arm but because of the provision of the Workmen’s Compensation Act which will be discussed here held that he was entitled to recover only for the total loss of the right hand. The award of the Commission was affirmed by the circuit court of Cook County and that court held that “* * * par. 9 of Subsection (e) of Section 8 of the Workmen’s Compensation Act of Illinois is not unconstitutional.” The question presented here is whether the provision in section 8(e)9 of the Workmen’s Compensation Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1967, ch. 48, par. 138.8(6)9) which limits recovery to compensation for the loss of a hand, though a part of the forearm has been removed for the purpose of permitting the use of an artificial member, is constitutional. The concerned section of the statute provides: “When an accidental injury sustained is limited to a hand and results in the amputation thereof, and such amputation is performed at the point of election on the forearm for the purpose of permitting the use of an artificial member, such injury shall be compensated as the loss of a hand. Nothing herein contained shall reduce the amount payable for an arm where the accidental injury sustained includes the forearm above the wrist.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1967, ch. 48, par. 138.8 (e) 9.) This section was added to the Workmen’s Compensation Act in 1947 and at the same time amendments similarly restricting recoveries concerning fingers (par. 138.8 (e)8), toes (par. 138.8(e)8), and feet (par. 138.8(e) 11) were added to the Act. In the case of fingers and toes, the amputation of the entire distal phalanx proximal to the distal joint at the reasonable point of election for amputation is to be considered the loss of one phalanx only, and in the case of amputation of a foot at the point of election on the lower leg to permit use of an artificial member the compensation is limited to the loss of a foot. The appellant contends that the limitation on recovery imposed by section 8(e) 9 of the Workmen’s Compensation Act is arbitrary and unreasonable and therefore violative of due process and equal protection guaranteed by sections 2 and 19 of article II and section 22 of article IV of the constitution of Illinois and the fourteenth amendment of the United States constitution. He argues that the legislature cannot constitutionally provide that an injured employee’s measure of recovery shall be determined according to the point of impact of the trauma rather than according to the extent of the injury actually caused by the trauma. An offensive consequence, he says, is that employees receive different awards of compensation for like injuries. The position of the appellees is that the legislature in limiting an injured employee’s compensation to the loss of a hand, despite a subsequent amputation on the forearm to permit the fitting of an artificial hand, did not create an unreasonable or arbitrary classification. Section 22 of article IV prohibits the enactment of any local or special law which grants a special or exclusive privilege, immunity or franchise. However, the legislature, to serve the public interest, may create legislative classifications, for, as this court has said, “perfect uniformity of treatment of all persons is neither practical nor desirable.” (Grasse v. Dealer’s Transport Co., 412 Ill. 179, 193.) Section 22, designed to prevent arbitrary discrimination, does not forbid legislative classification, but it does require that a classification be not arbitrary and requires that the classification be based on a rational difference of condition or situation existing in the persons or objects upon which the classification rests. (See Rudolf Express Co. v. Bibb, 15 Ill.2d 76; Gaca v. City of Chicago, 411 Ill. 146.) We expressed this requirement in People ex rel. the County of Du Page v. Smith, 21 Ill.2d 572, 578 when we said: “If there is a reasonable basis for differentiating between the class to which the law is applicable and the class to which it is not, the General Assembly may constitutionally classify persons and objects for the purpose of legislative regulation qr control, and may pass laws applicable only to such persons or objects.” An additional requirement for a valid classification is that the classification made must bear “a rational relation to the evil to be remedied and the purpose to be attained by the statute, otherwise the classification will be deemed arbitrary and in violation of the constitutional guaranties of due process and equal protection of the laws.” Grasse v. Dealer’s Transport Co., 412 Ill. 179, 194. That the legislature should have a broad latitude in creating classifications has been recognized but it has been recognized, too, that this power of creation cannot be arbitrarily exercised and if so exercised the action cannot be validated by considering or describing it as a classification. See Bagdonas v. Liberty Land and Investment Co., 309 Ill. 103, 109, 110; Michigan Millers Mutual Fire Ins. Co. v. McDonough, 358 Ill. 575, 585. The action of the legislature here operated to effect a classification of persons such as the appellant. (See Grasse v. Dealer’s Transport Co., 412 Ill. 179 at 193, 197.) The question which is posed is whether the differentiation of such persons from those who suffer traumatic amputations of the forearm is arbitrary or is based on a “rational difference of condition or situation.” We believe the differentiation, and the classification, to be arbitrary. It appears unrealistic and artificial, considering the Workmen’s Compensation Act and its purposes, to differentiate between a traumatic loss of an arm and the loss of an arm through surgical necessity because of a traumatic loss of a hand. The losses due to employment'injury-are identical in each case but the compensation awards are unequal. We said in Harvey v. Clyde Park District, 32 Ill.2d 60, 64, 65: “The determinative question under section 22 of article IV is whether the statutory classification is rational. * * * And to the extent that recovery is permitted or denied on an arbitrary basis, a special privilege is granted in violation of section 22.” (Cf. Hutchings v. Kraject, 34 Ill.2d 379.) Here, the classification of employees such as the appellant is based on the situs of the trauma without regard to the final disability or loss incurred as a result of the employment injury. We cannot find a reasonable basis for differentiating between the appellant’s class and those who lost the use of an arm solely through trauma. (See People ex rel. the County of Du Page v. Smith, 21 Ill.2 572, 578.) The attempted classification is unrealistic or, as we put it in Harvey, does not bear any “discernible relationship to the realities of life.” We hold, therefore, that the section, insofar as it limits recovery as we have described, is arbitrary and unconstitutional under section 22 of article IV of our constitution. The constitutionality of only this section is formally before us, but our expression here makes clear our view of the invalidity of those similar sections concerning fingers, toes and feet to which we have made reference. See Treece v. Shawnee Community Unit School Dist., 39 Ill.2d 136, 145. Our ruling of invalidity is limited as described above and does not invalidate the balance of the section nor the entire Act, for the legislature has specifically provided for severability where the Act is declared unconstitutional in part. Ill. Rev. Stat. 1967, ch. 48, par. 138.25; and see Lorton v. Brown County Community Unit School Dist., 35 Ill.2d 362, 366. Accordingly, we reverse the judgment of the circtiit court of Cook County and remand the cause to that court to enter an award for the loss of appellant’s right arm. Reversed and remanded, with directions.

=== CASE 9738835 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:03:55.94203+00 ===

Mr. Justice House, dissenting: I feel compelled to dissent because of the far reaching implication of the majority opinion. In effect, it sets an amount to be paid to an employee for a traumatic injury contrary to that fixed by the legislature. If the Workmen’s Compensation Act is to fulfill its manifest function, the legislative perogative in this area must be preserved without undue interference of the courts on alleged constitutional grounds. We have long recognized that the General Assembly has wide latitude in its classifications under the police power. “The legislature is not required to be scientific, logical or consistent in its classifications. In order to authorize a judicial review of such classifications it must clearly appear that there is no fair reason for the law that would not require with equal force its extension to others not included. The legislature may determine upon what differences a distinction may be made for the purpose of statutory classification, between provisions otherwise having resemblance, if such power is not arbitrarily exercised and the distinction has a reasonable basis.” (Bagdonas v. Liberty Land and Investment Co., 309 Ill. 103, 109.) We have never heretofore deviated from this view. In fact, in some instances (such as dual injuries in the same body area) we have sustained amendments permitting no recovery. For example, in Sampson v. Industrial Com., 33 Ill.2d 301, injuries resulted in both a skull fracture and a fractured vertebra. The Commission awarded compensation for the vertebra but not the skull. Although there was a fixed number of weeks fixed by an amendment, it changed the statute to read that where both such injuries occurred, compensation could be paid only for one injury, not both. The same claim of equal protection and due process was raised and we held the amendment constitutional. Again, in Wargo v. Industrial Com., 31 Ill.2d 143, where there was a fracture of the maxillary sinus and also disfigurement of that part of the face, we upheld the limitations of the Act which held there could be no compensation for disfigurement where compensation was payable for the injury to the sinus. By the adoption of this opinion, we enter a jungle where we have not heretofore tread, and will be plagued with claims of unconstitutionality on many fronts. Limitations on recovery imposed by the Act for loss of various members of the body will be under attack as arbitrary and unreasonable. How can we interfere with the legislative judgment as to the comparative seriousness of loss of a hand as compared to the loss of an arm, or loss of sight to that of hearing, or between both arms and both legs, or between sight and the extremities ? This opinion does just that. The legislature has fixed various amounts for various specific injuries, and we have heretofore refused to question the wisdom of the limitations fixed. This case is peculiarly appealing because the removal of an additional portion of a member at the point of election does not permit greater compensation than loss of a hand at the wrist only. But, since the legislature could have fixed a lesser amount for the whole member without any question of unconstitutionality, I fail to see how the point-of-election amendments do so. The immediate consequence of the majority opinion is not only to invalidate the point of election provision of section 8(e)9 (par. 138.8(6)9) but it will also void the point of election provision of section 8(e)8 (par. 138.8(e) 8) with respect to fingers and toes and section 8(e) 11 (par. 138.8(e) 11) with reference to feet. The “point of election” amendments, adopted in 1947, in my opinion, were just as much a valid exercise of legislative power as the fixing of the number of weeks compensation for various losses such as 155 weeks for a foot and 200 weeks for a leg. The case of Grasse v. Dealer’s Transport Co., 412 Ill. 179, relied on heavily by the majority, posed a question of wide general importance involving legal remedies, and did not deal with the minutiae of classification for the purpose of fixing the amounts of compensation for specific injuries. This court has never before set itself up as a super Industrial Commission and should not do so now. I would uphold the award of the Commission and the judgment of the trial court.

=== CASE 9738837 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:03:59.060705+00 ===

Knutson, Chief Justice.
This is an appeal from a judgment of the district court in an election contest.
At the November 1962 general election, respondent, C. A. (Gus) Johnson, and appellant, Donald E. Swenson, were rival candidates for the office of representative in the Minnesota Legislature for the district comprising the city of Mankato. The county canvassing board of Blue Earth County declared that the result of the election was a tie, each candidate receiving 3,598 votes. Thereupon the county canvassing board drew lots, as is required by statute, and declared Donald E. Swenson to be elected. C. A. (Gus) Johnson thereupon instituted this proceeding to contest the election. The district court found contestant to be the winner.
There are 16 voting precincts in the city of Mankato. In precinct No. 2 and precinct No. 4, for many years the judges of the election have followed the practice of numbering all ballots serially prior to handing them to the voters. Some of the officials testified at the trial that the numbering was done to avoid the risk of handing more than *450one ballot of each type to an individual voter and to enable the judges to quickly determine at any moment the number of votes cast when a press or radio source might seek information as to the progress of the voting. They acknowledged that the presence of the numbers on the ballot could conceivably permit them to determine how an individual voter had cast his vote, but denied that they in fact had used the numbers for such purpose. Two voters of the fourth precinct testified that they had noticed the number on the ballot and had questioned the propriety thereof, but in both cases they did proceed to cast their ballots. No voter testified that he could remember the number of the specific ballot he used in this contest.
The trial court, in holding that the votes of these two precincts should be counted, summarized the matter as follows:
■ “* * * jn the matter under consideration the voter was in no way identified on the records although the ballot was numbered. Tlie opportunity of remembering the particular number on a ballot given to a voter was present, however few noticed the number. The election judges were under oath as required by Section 203.25 M. S. A. to perform their duties according to law and the best of their ability. Obviously they violated the oath by placing the numbers on the ballot through ignorance or disregard of the law prohibiting such but this does not permit the Court to assume they also violated the law as to the secrecy of the ballot.”
In the two precincts involved, slightly more than 700 votes were cast. If all of these votes were discarded, contestee would win. If they are counted, contestant is the winner.
There was no record made or retained by any election official as to the number of the ballot any voter received, nor was the voter identified by numbering the registration card.
There were some 39 other ballots that were disputed, but it is conceded by both parties that the determination of the trial court, or of this court, as to the validity of such ballots would not change the result of the election and for that reason they need not be considered by us. The only question for our consideration is whether the number*451ing of a ballot by the election officials prior to handing the ballot to the voter would invalidate the ballot.
At the outset, it must be evident to everyone that the numbering of the ballots by the election officials, as was done here, was a clear violation of Minn. St. 204.11, subd. 3, which reads:
“No voter, judge, or any other person may at any time place any mark as a means of identification upon any ballot handed to or cast by any voter or upon any spoiled or discarded ballots except the proper signature and initials provided by law to be placed upon ballots.”
Violation of this provision is a gross misdemeanor. § 210.14. We cannot condemn too strongly the failure of election officials to observe this clear legislative declaration of what they may not do. Those who undertake to conduct and supervise elections should familiarize themselves with the elemental rules for conducting elections. Violation of many of these statutory provisions exposes the election official to criminal prosecution. See, for instance, § 210.06. The question before us, however, is whether a voter should be disenfranchised for the failure of election officials to follow these simple rules in the absence of any showing of fraud, collusion, or participation by the voter in the violation of the law.
Originally, some of our election laws required ballots to be numbered. Brisbin v. Qeary, 26 Minn. 107, 1 N. W. 825, involved the construction of L. 1878, c. 84, § 8 (G, S. 1878, c. 1, § 84), which provided:
“The ballots shall be folded by the voter, and delivered to one of the judges of election, who shall forthwith lay the same on the top of the ballot box, at the same time in an audible voice proclaim the name of the person offering to vote, to the board, and if the judges be satisfied, according to the evidence as herein described, that the person offering the vote is a legal voter, the clerks of election shall enter the name of the voter and his number under the proper heading in the poll book, and the judges shall endorse on the back of the ticket offered, •the number corresponding with the number of the voter on the poll book, and shall immediately put his ticket into the ballot box.”
*452We held this provision contrary to Minn. Const, art. 7, § 6, which provides:
“All elections shall be by ballot, except for such town, officers as may be directed by law to be otherwise chosen.”
In so1 doing, we said (26 Minn. 108,1 N. W. 826):
“* * * as applied to elections of public officers, voting by ballot signifies a mode of designating an elector’s choice of a person for an office by the deposit of a ticket, bearing the name of such person, in a receptacle provided for the purpose, in such a way as to secure to the elector the privilege of complete and inviolable secrecy in regard to the person voted for. This privilege of secrecy may properly be regarded as the distinguishing feature of ballot voting, as compared with open voting, as, for instance, voting viva voce. The object of the privilege is the independence of the voter.”
We long ago recognized the difference between acts done by the voter and by others without the voter’s participation or collusion. In State ex rel. Braley v. Gay, 59 Minn. 6, 60 N. W. 676, the law under consideration required that two of the judges of “opposite political parties” shall place their initials on the backs of all ballots before they are used by the voters. Some ballots were challenged because they contained the initials of two judges of the same political faith, and it was argued that this was a violation of the law that invalidated the ballot. In holding to the contrary, we said (59 Minn. 20, 60 N. W. 677):
“* * * It is not claimed that there was any willful disregard of this provision of the law, or that by failing to observe it a fraud was perpetrated upon any one, or that a wrong was intended or accomplished. The placing of initials on the ballots by judges who belonged to the same party was in ignorance of the requirement in question. There are many reasons why this provision must be held simply directory, but we need not state all. One is that if this is a positive requirement the entire vote of a precinct could be rejected by deception on the part of a person seeking the position of judge of election, as to his politics, or by a mistake on the part of the appointing power as to the *453political affiliations of a person placed by it on the board, and in many other ways. * * * With the construction contended for the minority party in any precinct could disfranchise every voter in it, and the fewer in numbers of such party the easier total disfranchisement could be accomplished.”
That decision was followed in Pennington v. Hare, 60 Minn. 146, 62 N. W. 116. In the Pennington case, certain ballots were numbered without the knowledge of the electors casting them, by the judges of the election, by reason of a misunderstanding of the law on their part. We held that the ballots should be counted, and in so doing we said (60 Minn. 147, 62 N. W. 117):
“* * * To hold otherwise would place it in the power of the election officers to disfranchise electors at their pleasure.”1
In the Pennington case there were other ballots on which identification marks were placed by the voters. In recognizing the difference between acts done by the voter and acts done by the official, we said (60 Minn. 150, 62 N. W. 118):
“* * * There is a clear distinction between the provisions and prohibitions in election laws which are personal to the elector, which, if he violates them, it is his own fault, and those which apply to elective officers, over whose conduct he has no control. In the former case they are to be construed as mandatory, as a general rule, and his vote will be rejected if he intentionally fails to comply with them, while in the latter case they are to be construed as directory, unless otherwise expressly, or by necessary implication, so declared by statute.”
Familiar examples of the failure of the voter to observe statutory rules which have been construed to be mandatory may be found in cases dealing with the voters requiring help in voting2 and those casting absentee ballots.
*454In Wichelmann v. City of Glencoe, 200 Minn. 62, 273 N. W. 638, we held that compliance with the requirements of the statute respecting voting by absentee ballot was mandatory. In so doing, we said (200 Minn. 66, 273 N. W. 640):
“The provisions of election laws requiring acts to be done and imposing obligations upon the elector which are personal to him are mandatory. He is personally at fault if he violates them. If his vote is rejected for such violations, it is because of his own fault, not that of election officials. Such provisions prescribe mandatory conditions precedent to the right of voting. * * *
í$í # # # ;jc
“* * * The obligation is on the voter to comply with the requirements of the law that apply to him personally. In holding the statute mandatory in this respect, we simply hold the voter to the requirements which the law prescribes. If he fails to perform duties required of him, he does so at his peril.” (Italics supplied.)
This difference has now been recognized by our legislature in the recodification of our election laws in 1959. While Minn. St. 204.11, subd. 3, prohibits any voter, judge, or any other person from placing any mark as a means of identification upon a ballot other than the signature and initials of the election judges which are required by law, when we come to § 204.22, which prescribes the rules for counting ballots and declares which ballots should be counted and which ones should be discarded, we look in vain for any provision disqualifying a ballot for any unlawful act of an official. Section 204.22(k), which is the crucial provision here, provides that, when a ballot is so marked by distinguishing characteristics that it is evident that the voter intended to identify the ballot, the entire ballot is defective. It says nothing about declaring a ballot defective because of the act of an official.
Finally, this difference has been recognized and the issue involved here has been decided adversely to contestant in Marshall v. Stepka, 259 Minn. 553, 108 N. W. (2d) 614, which is the only decision of this court construing the applicable statutory provisions since the re-*455codification of our election laws. In that case we said (259 Minn. 558, 108 N. W. [2d] 618):
“* * * The language * * * [§ 204.22(k)] clearly manifests a legislative intent that any ballot clearly and definitely marked and cast for a candidate should not be rejected for any technical error which would not make it impossible to determine the voter’s choice. This merely gives expression to the basic constitutional guarantees upon which our democratic system is founded. It can only mean that a voter should not be disenfranchised or a ballot disallowed when the voter’s intent can be clearly ascertained therefrom. The ‘voter’s choice’ or the ‘voter’s intent,’ when clearly ascertainable from the ballot, as in the instant case, is made of great importance by this legislative directive. Of equal importance is the protection of the right of the candidate for whom the vote was intended. Under § 204.22(k) are set forth the rules for determining when a ballot shall be defective because of identifying marks thereon. This requires evidence that the voter, rather than an election judge or some other person, shall have marked the ballot with distinguishing characteristics which evidence his intent to identify it before such ballot may be adjudged defective.
“In a series of decisions rendered when this section [Minn. St. 1957, § 206.17] was in force, this court has held that any kind of a distinguishing mark or figure placed upon a ballot nullified such ballot and disenfranchised the voter casting it, even where it was clear that the voter did not make the mark or figure which identified the ballot. Apparently to correct this injustice, the legislature enacted the portions of § 204.22 above quoted.”
While preservation of the inviolable secrecy of our ballot is of great importance, so too is the right of a voter not to be disenfranchised because of an unlawful act of an election official without his collusion, participation, or consent, and often without his knowledge. What the voter himself does, or assists or cooperates with another in doing, he is chargeable with, and then he cannot be heard to complain if his vote is not counted. It is quite another thing to refuse to count his vote on account of the act of an election official over which
*456he had no control. No one can condone the failure of election judges to carefully consider and obey the regulations prescribed by law, but the disenfranchisement of whole groups of voters by reason of conduct on the part of election judges cannot be lightly contemplated. While the record here shows that the opportunity to violate the secrecy of the ballot may have been present, it does not show that it was in fact violated.
We believe that the correct rule is that, if the voter places on the ballot any mark that can reasonably be said was intended to identify his vote, the ballot must be rejected, but if a mark is placed on the ballot by an election official without the cooperation, collusion, participation, or consent of the voter such ballot must be counted.3 It follows that the trial court here correctly held that the ballots involved in the two precincts in the city of Mankato should be counted.
Affirmed.
It does not appear from the opinion when the ballots were numbered, but an examination of the transcript on file in the office of the clerk of the supreme court shows that the numbers were placed on the ballots by the officials after voting but before depositing them in the box.
Nelson v. Bullard, 155 Minn. 419, 194 N. W. 308; Sweno v. Gutches, 191 Minn. 24, 252 N. W. 839.
We are not dealing with such a complete disregard for procedural rules that it must be held the election did not reflect the true vote of the people. Cases may arise where that situation exists. See, In re Contest of Election of Vetsch, 245 Minn. 229, 71 N. W. (2d) 652.