=== CASE 2226183 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:03.265584+00 ===

241 Ind. 587 (1961)
174 N.E.2d 52
LITTLE
v.
RITCHEY ET AL.
No. 29,973.
Supreme Court of Indiana.
Filed April 25, 1961.
*588 Samuel E. Beecher, Jr., of Terre Haute, for appellant.
Warren R. Everett and Everett & Everett, of counsel, of Terre Haute, for appellees, Earl O. and Irma Miller.
ARTERBURN, J.
The appellant, Little, brought an action for possession of certain real property, basing title upon a tax deed.
The appellees, Earl O. Miller and Irma Miller, the owners of the real estate at the time of the tax sale, filed a petition to intervene, which was granted, and thereupon filed an answer to the complaint and a cross-complaint contesting the validity of the tax sale by the auditor of Vigo County, Indiana.
A trial was had by the court without intervention of a jury and judgment was entered in favor of appellees, which set aside and held for naught the alleged conveyance by tax deed. The trial court, upon the appellees' cross-complaint, decreed them the owners in fee-simple and fixed a lien for taxes, penalty and interest paid in the amount of $777.33 in favor of the appellant.
The evidence by stipulation and otherwise shows that on March 17, 1956 the auditor of Vigo County, Indiana certified the real estate in question as delinquent for *589 non-payment of taxes for the year 1955, with certain notations thereon as to taxes for 1956; that notice by registered mail had been sent by the treasurer on March 9, 1956 to the appellees at an address in Terre Haute, Indiana, but was returned to the treasurer by the postmaster unopened. Appellees were residing at the time in Clay County, Indiana. Notice of the sale of the property for delinquent taxes was published in the Terre Haute Tribune, a daily newspaper of general circulation in Vigo County, Indiana on March 17th, 24th and 31st, 1956 and also in the Terre Haute Star, a daily newspaper of general circulation in the same county on the same dates.
The sale took place on the second Monday in April at 10:00 o'clock a.m., 1956 in the court house, there being some controversy as to whether or not it was held at the south door in compliance with the statute. At that time the appellant bid the property in for the sum of $253.27. The redemption period having expired on April 10, 1958, the appellant, Ora Little, presented his certificate of purchase for the property and received a deed after the same was recorded in the Recorder's office of Vigo County, Indiana. In January, 1959 the appellees tendered the sum of $570.00 to appellant, which was refused, and paid the same in to the office of the clerk of Vigo County for the use of the appellant for the reimbursement of taxes paid on said property, with interest and penalty.
Appellant relies upon the statute (Burns' Ann. St., § 64-2203 [1951 Repl.]), which states:
"The deed or conveyance of the land sold shall be conclusive evidence that the sale was regular and according to the requirements of law, and shall convey to the purchaser a clear and indefeasible title to the real estate sold."
*590 On the other hand, the appellees contend that the legislature may not invade the power of the judiciary by decreeing what shall be conclusive evidence and thus bar a judicial inquiry into the irregularities, if any, which took place by which the appellant acquired the deed. Appellees point to evidence of a number of alleged irregularities that took place in the procedure for the tax sale, upon which the trial court nullified the same. One of these is the contention that the property was sold for taxes which were not yet delinquent for a period of fifteen months, as provided in Burns' Ann. St., § 64-2203 (1951 Repl.), but in fact, was in part sold for taxes for 1955, payable in 1956, with the sale taking place the second Monday of April, 1956. This contention is supported by plaintiff's Exhibit I(b) which is a purported tax duplicate form by the treasurer's office which states: "FULL YEAR & DEL" and also states: "1955 TAXES DUE AND PAYABLE IN 1956." It is addressed to Earl O. and Irma Miller and also states:
"CURRENT YEAR ____________________________________ 108.94
DELINQUENT, PENALTIES, AND COST _________________ 144.33
_______
253.27"
The total is the amount (including 1955 taxes payable in 1956) for which the property was advertised and sold. The 1955 taxes, payable in 1956 were not yet delinquent.
There are a number of other irregularities in the tax sale procedure which we need not consider in view of the position we take as to appellant's contention that the tax deed which he holds under the statute is conclusive evidence of his title.
We are not concerned in this case with a rebuttable presumption (or prima facie evidence) as distinguished *591 from a conclusive presumption. The legislature may determine what shall constitute prima facie evidence or a rebuttable presumption if there is a rational connection between such facts creating such a condition and the ultimate rebuttable conclusion. Mogilner v. Metropolitan Plan Comm., etc. et al. (1957), 236 Ind. 298, 140 N.E.2d 220; 30 A.L.R. 8, 22-24 (1924); 31 C.J.S., Evidence, § 115 (1942).
We are dealing here with a conclusive presumption. In such a case the legislature cannot constitutionally declare a tax deed conclusive evidence of a fact and thus deprive the court of the right to inquire behind the instrument as to its regularity. The function of determining whether mistake, error or fraud has produced an instrument which appears correct on its face, is a judicial act. White v. Flynn (1864), 23 Ind. 46.
One of the early cases establishing this principle in Indiana occurred during the Civil War. In that case the Congress of the United States by act provided that the oath of a recruit shall be conclusive evidence of his age. A youth under the age of eighteen enlisted in the United States Army. His parents, upon a refusal of the army to release him, brought a writ of habeas corpus in the state court. Be it said in favor of the judges at that time that they did not cringe before a show of federal authority, but unhesitatingly declared such an act of Congress unconstitutional and said: "the Court is unanimously of the opinion that he can not be so held." Ordering the army to release him, the court further said:
"Now, it is difficult to see how the oath of a boy that he is eighteen years old can make him so, if, in fact, he has not been in existence eighteen years; and it has been held, and it would seem that the *592 decision must be correct, that it is not competent for the legislative power to declare what shall be conclusive evidence of a fact. See the cases in Blackwell on Tax Titles, p. 100, et seq.
"Such declaration would seem to be a judicial act in each given case." Wantlan v. White (1862), 19 Ind. 470, 471-72.[1] To the same effect see: Board of Comm'rs of Howard Co. v. State, ex rel. Michener, Att'y Gen'l (1889), 120 Ind. 282, 22 N.E. 255; 30 A.L.R. 8, 16-22 (1924); 85 C.J.S., Taxation, § 962 (1954).
The judgment of the trial court is affirmed.
Achor and Jackson, JJ., concur.
Bobbitt, C.J., and Landis, J., concur in result.
NOTE.  Reported in 174 N.E.2d 52.
NOTES
[1]  Approximately ten years later the United States Supreme Court, in United States v. Tarble (1871), 80 U.S. 397, 20 L.Ed. 597, held that a state court had no right by habeas corpus to release a soldier from the United States army where he was under eighteen and had failed to obtain the consent of his parents to enlist. That court did not pass, however, upon the effect of a legislative attempt to create a "conclusive presumption."

=== CASE 9741095 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:49:30.078766+00 ===

D. E. Holbrook, P. J.
On November 21, 1973, a jury convicted defendant of armed robbery, contrary to MCLA 750.529; MSA 28.797. On January 17, 1974, defendant was sentenced to 8 to 25 years in prison. Defendant has consistently maintained his innocence. He appeals his conviction as of right.
On August 24, 1973, several men robbed a Benton Harbor tavern at gunpoint. Neither the bartender nor any of the patrons who were in the bar at the time of the robbery were able to identify defendant as one of the holdup men. As a matter of fact, one of the witnesses testified that defendant "wasn’t one of them”. While the fingerprints *447of some of the other suspects were found in the alleged get-away car, defendant’s fingerprints were not found. The only evidence linking defendant to the crime in question was an unsigned typewritten confession. Defendant took the stand in his own behalf, entered an alibi defense, and denied ever making the statements contained in the confession. Defendant admitted having a conversation with the officer in question on the date the confession was allegedly made, but he claims that conversation was restricted to promises of leniency for defendant’s younger brother should defendant decide to make a statement. The question of the admissibility of the conversation was decided at a Walker hearing well in advance of trial; but the admissibility of the conversation is not the subject of this appeal. We are here concerned with the manner in which the purported confession was introduced into evidence.
At trial, the detective who allegedly took the statement from defendant was allowed to read it into the record verbatim under the "past recollection recorded” exception to the hearsay rule. Defendant makes several allegations of error concerning the application of the doctrine of past recollection recorded to the facts of this case. We are constrained to agree with one of defendant’s allegations, and feel that it requires reversal. Defendant correctly contends that a proper foundation was not laid to allow the admission of this statement as evidence as a past recollection recorded. The rule in Michigan is stated in Jaxon v Detroit, 379 Mich 405, 413; 151 NW2d 813, 816 (1967):
"To qualify a writing otherwise objectionable as hearsay to be admitted in evidence as a past recollection recorded, a proper foundation must be laid. That foun*448dation should consist in the following: (a) a showing that the witness has no present recollection of the facts, (b) a showing that the witness’ memory is not refreshed upon reference to the document, (c) a showing that the document is an original memorandum made by the witness from personal observation, (d) a showing that the document was prepared by the witness contemporaneously with the event and was an accurate recording of the occurrence and, (e) a showing that the substance of the proffered writing is otherwise admissible.”
Applying the rule in Jaxon, the Michigan Supreme Court in People v Rodgers, 388 Mich 513, 519; 201 NW2d 621, 624 (1972), said:
"The written memorandum was read to the jury. This constituted its admission in evidence. This was error. The writing was prepared by the Detective Taylor, out of court and was not signed by the witness King. The writing was hearsay. It was an extrajudicial statement (by Taylor) offered to prove the truth of the thing said (that King had spoken the words imputed to him).
"There was nothing to prevent Taylor from testifying verbally. He could have related his conversation with King. If he could not recall the conversation, he could have been shown the memorandum to refresh his memory. If he could not then testify without the aid of the memorandum, the written memorandum might then have been introduced in evidence and read to the jury provided a proper foundation was laid.”
Thus, the first requirement in laying a foundation for the past recollection recorded exception is that the witness have no present recollection of the facts. People v Banks, 50 Mich App 622, 625; 213 NW2d 817, 818 (1973). This was never shown in the case before us:
”Q. [by assistant prosecutor]. And do you recall each *449and every question you may have asked the defendant and each and every answer he gave?
"A. [by police officer Popp]. No, sir, not offhand.
”Q. Do you have a copy of the record you made of that conversation with the defendant with you?
[A. Yes, sir, I do.
"Q. O.K. 1 ask you do you have it with you?
"A. Yes, sir, I do.
”Q. Would you remove it, please?
"A. Yes, sir.
”Q. All right. At this time 1 will ask you to look at that record, officer, and I will ask you whether by looking at it you can recall each and every question and answer just by look at it?
’A. Not just by looking at it, sir, not enough to testify in a court of law.” (Emphasis supplied.)
Obviously, there is a big difference between having no recollection whatever and recalling "each and every question and answer”. Few humans are blessed with total recall. Fortunately, our courts do not demand total recall of witnesses; nor will they allow a document to be read into evidence merely because a witness cannot remember perfectly the conversation the document embodies.
Had it been established that the witness had no recollection of the conversation in question, the next step in laying a foundation would have been to show that a reading of the document would not refresh his memory. The question is not whether a reading of the document will, in the witness’s own opinion, refresh his memory "enough to testify in a court of law”. He should have been questioned in order to determine whether or not be could testify without the aid of the memorandum after he had read it.
Reversed and remanded for a new trial.
Bronson, J., concurred.

=== CASE 9741096 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:49:30.082736+00 ===

*450M. J. Kelly, J.
(dissenting). I disagree that reversal is warranted here.
The question of the admissibility of defendant’s confession was decided at a Walker hearing well in advance of trial. The hearing was conducted November 1, 1973, following which defense counsel made a motion to suppress evidence and a motion to quash, each of which was denied. Those orders are not challenged on this appeal. The voluntariness of defendant’s confession is not at issue. Trial commenced November 20th and concluded November 21, 1973. Before that trial commenced, a transcript of the Walker hearing was ordered and produced. Defendant had the transcript prior to trial and he and his trial counsel well knew what was coming when the police officer who conducted the interrogation took the stand.
The dispute on appeal involves Officer Popp’s reading verbatim his memorandum of the incriminating interview. The exchange quoted in the majority opinion appears to me to have been a predetermined attempt at laying the foundation required by People v Rodgers, 388 Mich 513, 519; 201 NW2d 621, 624 (1972). The prosecutor’s intent, I surmise, was to give the officer a question he could not answer affirmatively so as to lead him into the reading of the memorandum. Defendant did not object for a very good reason. He knew what was coming because of the Walker ruling. If he made an unnecessary fuss before the jury it would weigh against him when the confession was allowed either in substance or in transcript. The defense attorney knew what was coming, he chose not to fight the technical procedural battle only to lose the evidentiary war. This issue was not preserved for our review. People v Farmer, 380 Mich 198, 208; 156 NW2d 504 (1968), People v Ames, 60 *451Mich App 168, 172; 230 NW2d 360 (1975), People v Duncan, 55 Mich App 403, 408-409; 222 NW2d 261 (1974).
I also find no merit in defendant’s alternative claim of ineffective assistance of counsel. Defendant on appeal states that defense counsel’s failure to object to the reading of the memorandum without a proper foundation is a serious mistake of counsel for which he can receive relief under People v Degraffenreid, 19 Mich App 702, 715; 173 NW2d 317 (1969). The rule is:
"Where the lawyer’s mistake is of such serious proportion that it may have been decisive, where but for the lawyer’s mistake the defendant might not have been convicted, the court may, despite failure to have preserved the error by timely objection, grant a new trial.” 19 Mich App at 716.
This clearly appears to me to be no mistake at all and qualifies under People v Bottany, 43 Mich App 375; 204 NW2d 230 (1972) as a reasonable trial tactic. Defense counsel had the memo before him at the Walker hearing and he had the Walker transcript before him at trial. Perhaps he felt that the verbatim reading would more suit his purpose than the allowable paraphrasing by the officer. Sending this back for retrial serves only to give the defendant a second crack with a new jury; it does not serve to outlaw the confession. A trial lawyer is faced with difficult choices when his adversary misses procedural steps on the way toward admission of incriminating evidence. Such missteps are easily cured following objection— most often to the detriment of the objector. If we do not leave the choice to trial counsel we are substituting our judgment for his under very different circumstances. Every trial lawyer who ever *452lost a case would have done it differently. The winner made no mistakes.
Appellate counsel turns the second guess on trial counsel wherever the case has been lost. We should not countenance such practice where there has been no miscarriage of justice.
I would affirm.

=== CASE 2226185 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:03.29395+00 ===

22 Ill.2d 174 (1961)
174 N.E.2d 803
THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF ILLINOIS, Defendant in Error,
v.
WILLIE POWERS, Plaintiff in Error.
No. 35858.
Supreme Court of Illinois.
Opinion filed May 19, 1961.
JOSEPH R. CURCIO, of Chicago, for plaintiff in error.
WILLIAM G. CLARK, Attorney General, of Springfield, and DANIEL P. WARD, State's Attorney, of Chicago, (FRED G. LEACH, Assistant Attorney General, and JOHN T. GALLAGHER, and JAMES R. THOMPSON, Assistant State's Attorneys, of counsel,) for the People.
Judgment affirmed.
Mr. JUSTICE KLINGBIEL delivered the opinion of the court:
This case is before us on a writ of error to review a judgment of the criminal court of Cook County finding the defendant guilty of the crime of robbery. The sole error assigned is that the court permitted the jury's verdict to be returned while plaintiff in error was absent from the court room.
This identical contention was advanced by plaintiff in error in a petition which was filed in the trial court under the Post-Conviction Hearing Act. A judgment was entered in the Post-Conviction case denying the prayer of the petition *175 and plaintiff in error did not attempt to seek a review of that judgment. The judgment of the trial court in that case is res judicata. (People v. Byrd, 21 Ill.2d 114; Merkie v. People, 15 Ill.2d 539; People v. Lewis, 2 Ill.2d 328.) The question is therefore not now open for consideration.
The judgment of the criminal court of Cook County is therefore affirmed.
Judgment affirmed.

=== CASE 2226186 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:03.29838+00 ===

64 Mich. App. 616 (1975)
236 N.W.2d 707
ALLEN
v.
KELLEY
Docket No. 21701.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided August 29, 1975.
Boter, Dalman, Murphy & Bidol (by Richard D. Persinger), for plaintiff.
Edward C. Duckworth, for defendant.
Before: McGREGOR, P.J., and D.E. HOLBROOK and N.J. KAUFMAN, JJ.
PER CURIAM.
On August 8, 1973 plaintiffs filed a complaint in Manistee County Circuit Court seeking *617 an accounting by defendant, as trustee, of funds alleged to be contained in an inter vivos trust. This trust had allegedly been created on December 21, 1970, by Ella Kelley, the wife of defendant, and mother of plaintiff, Doris Allen, while Mrs. Kelley was undergoing hospital care for a severe illness. Mrs. Kelley executed an agreement which provided that the trust res would consist of "[a]ll the assets of settlor which have heretofore or which may be placed in joint ownership with one or more of said trustees". The agreement stated further that the assets would be used to care for the settlor during her life and that, upon her death, defendant would receive a life estate in the family homestead and plaintiffs would receive all the remaining assets.
The plaintiffs to this action are also trustees to the agreement. The conflict arose over approximately $12,000 which the settlor had received in October, 1971, as the vendor of a land contract. This money was deposited in accounts held jointly by settlor and defendant. Because the money was contained in joint accounts, plaintiffs claimed it was part of the trust res and should have been distributed to them upon the death of Mrs. Kelley.
At trial, plaintiffs contended that the trust agreement was controlling or, in the alternative, if it were not its existence was indicative of the fact that the settlor had not intended to place the money in joint accounts and thus to give defendant the right of survivorship. Defendant contended that the trust agreement was invalid because the settlor had not known what she was signing and had, thus, not validly executed it. The trial court, on September 4, 1974, dismissed plaintiffs' complaint and ordered that all of the personal property held jointly by defendant and his deceased *618 wife be the property of defendant and not be subject to any claims of the plaintiffs.
In his opinion, the trial judge stated:
"The trust agreement under which the plaintiffs seek relief has no effect upon any joint property or property owned by the defendant husband. The trust agreement would only be effective on any property owned solely by the wife in her own name and which would become part of her estate and then, in turn, go to her heirs under the trust agreement in Probate Court."
From this passage, it appears that the trial court, at once, held the trust valid, but awarded all property jointly held by the defendant and the settlor to defendant. The trial court, thus, held that, when the settlor placed funds in joint bank accounts with defendant, she intended to give defendant the right of survivorship in these funds and did not intend them to become part of the trust res. Such a holding would appear to be inconsistent with the express terms of the trust agreement. This inconsistency could be reconciled by reference to MCLA 487.703; MSA 23.303, which provides that:
"The making of the deposit in [a joint account] shall, in the absence of fraud or undue influence, be prima facie evidence, in any action or proceeding, to which either such banking institution or surviving depositor or depositors is a party, of the intention of such depositors to vest title to such deposit and the additions thereto in such survivor or survivors."
The trial court, however, did not make specific reference to this statute.
We also find that the court did not make any *619 findings concerning the presence or absence of undue influence or as to whether the trust agreement was validly executed. Such specific findings of fact are required by GCR 1963, 517.1. That section provides in pertinent part:
"In all actions tried upon the facts without a jury or with an advisory jury, the court shall find the facts specifically and state separately its conclusions of law thereon and direct the entry of the appropriate judgment. It will be sufficient if the court makes brief, definite, and pertinent findings and conclusions upon the contested matters without over elaboration of detail or particularization of facts. If an opinion or memorandum decision is filed, it will be sufficient if the findings and conclusions appear therein. The clerk shall notify the attorneys for both parties of the findings of the court. * * * Findings of fact shall not be set aside unless clearly erroneous. In the application of this principle regard shall be given to the special opportunity of the trial court to judge the credibility of those witnesses who appeared before it."
It is mandatory for a trial judge in an action tried upon the facts without a jury to make specific findings of fact. Thayer v Barber's Flying Service Inc, 40 Mich App 326; 198 NW2d 761 (1972), Nicpon v Nicpon, 9 Mich App 373; 157 NW2d 464 (1968). Cf. Burdick v Hartwig, 37 Mich App 704; 195 NW2d 334 (1972), reversed and vacated on order, 387 Mich 770 (1972). Without such findings, we are unable to properly exercise our powers of review. We, therefore, are constrained to remand this case to the trial court so that it may make specific findings of fact pursuant to GCR 1963, 517.1.
Remanded. Costs to abide the outcome. We retain jurisdiction.

=== CASE 9742125 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:07:04.487213+00 ===

BARTEAU, Judge,
concurring with opinion.
I write separately to express my dissatisfaction with the present state of Indiana law concerning the valuation of professional goodwill in dissolution proceedings. This issue has resulted in various and conflicting approaches among the states, and it is an issue that has not yet been addressed by the Indiana Supreme Court.
The Indiana Court of Appeals has held that professional goodwill is a divisible marital asset. See, e.g., Berger v. Berger, 648 N.E.2d 378 (Ind.Ct.App.1995); Cleary v. Cleary, 582 N.E.2d 851 (Ind.Ct.App.1991); Porter v. Porter, 526 N.E.2d 219 (Ind.Ct.App.1988). Goodwill has been defined as follows:
The advantage or benefit which is acquired by an establishment beyond the mere value of the capital stock, funds, or property *207employed therein, in consequence of the general public patronage and encouragement which it receives from constant or habitual customers on account of its local position, or common celebrity, or reputation for skill, or affluence, or punctuality, or from other accidental circumstances or necessities, or even from ancient partiality or prejudices.
Cleary, 582 N.E.2d at 853; Porter, 526 N.E.2d at 223. Goodwill has been further defined as the expectation of continued public patronage. Cleary, 582 N.E.2d at 853; Porter, 526 N.E.2d at 224. Based upon these definitions of goodwill, and based upon case-law borrowed from other states, the Porter court further stated:
It is generally agreed that in valuing a professional practice, or an interest therein, for equitable distribution, it should not make any significant difference whether the practice is conducted as a corporation or a professional association, a partnership, or a sole proprietorship.
526 N.E.2d at 223.
The Porter court also held that goodwill has value subject to division even if it is not readily marketable. The court illustrated this concept as follows:
The recently graduated young professional who goes into business for himself may reasonably expect the initial years of his practice to be less profitable, this expectation being attributed in part to a lack of goodwill or “that the old customers will resort to the old place.” Similarly, if Dr. Lukens were to abandon his Tacoma practice and relocate as a sole practitioner in another state, he also should anticipate a shortage of business, even though his practice consists of the same physical assets and he presumably possesses the same degree of skill. Again the difference must be attributed to his not having developed in his new locale a reputation as to skill, efficiency, and the other elements comprising goodwill.
Accordingly we do not think the disposi-tive factor is whether Dr. Lukens can sell his goodwill. His goodwill has value despite its unmarketability, and so long as he maintains his osteopathic practice in Tacoma he unll continue to receive a return on the goodwill associated with his name.
Porter, 526 N.E.2d at 225 (citing In re Marriage of Lukens, 16 Wash.App. 481, 558 P.2d 279, 281 (1976)).
In sum, the Indiana Court of Appeals has held that professional goodwill is a divisible marital asset, regardless of whether or not the professional is a sole practitioner, and regardless of whether the professional’s goodwill is readily marketable. However, these concepts are not without opposition in other jurisdictions.
Illinois courts have divided the concept of goodwill into two categories, personal goodwill and enterprise goodwill.6 See In re Marriage of Talty, 166 Ill.2d 232, 209 Ill.Dec. 790, 794, 652 N.E.2d 330, 334 (1995). Personal goodwill is the goodwill that is attributable to one’s personal efforts and characteristics, and enterprise goodwill is the goodwill that inheres in a business, existing independently from one’s personal efforts. See id. Under Illinois law, only enterprise goodwill, and not personal goodwill, is a divisible marital asset. See id.; see also In re Marriage of Zells, 143 Ill.2d 251, 157 Ill.Dec. 480, 572 N.E.2d 944 (1991).
With respect to the goodwill of a professional practice, Illinois has determined that such goodwill is personal in nature, and is therefore not a divisible marital asset. In re Marriage of Zells, 157 Ill.Dec. at 482, 572 N.E.2d at 946. In making this determination the Supreme Court of Illinois stated:
*208Although many businesses possess this intangible known as good will, the concept is unique in a professional business. The concept of professional good will is the sole asset of the professional. If good will is that'aspect of the business which maintains the clientele, then the good will in a professional business is the skill, the expertise, and the reputation of the professional. It is these qualities which would keep patients returning to a doctor and which would make those patients refer others to him. The bottom line is that this is reflected in the doctor’s income generating ability.
_To figure good will in both [valuation of the business itself and as a factor in examining the husband’s income potential] would be to double count and reach an erroneous valuation.
Id. Thus, under Illinois law, professional goodwill is not a divisible marital asset, but rather, it is more appropriately considered as a facet of the spouse’s income potential which impacts the maintenance and/or support awards. See id.
Other jurisdictions have also determined that professional goodwill is not a divisible marital asset. See, e.g., Nail v. Nail, 486 S.W.2d 761 (Tex.1972), (holding that the accrued goodwill of a medical practice based on the personal skill, experience, and reputation, as well as the expectation that the doctor would continue to practice, was not a divisible marital asset). The Wisconsin Court of Appeals has stated:
We are not persuaded that the concept of professional goodwill as a divisible marital asset should be adopted in Wisconsin.... The concept of professional goodwill eva-nesces when one attempts to distinguish it from future earning capacity. Although a professional business’s good reputation, which is essentially what it’s goodwill consists of, is certainly a thing of value, we do not believe that it bestows on those who have an ownership interest in the business, an actual, separate property interest. The reputation of a law firm or some other professional business is valuable to its individual owners to the extent that it assures continued substantial earning in the future. It cannot be separately sold or pledged by the individual owners. The goodwill or reputation of such a business accrues to the benefit of the owners only through increased salary.
Holbrook v. Holbrook, 103 Wis.2d 327, 309 N.W.2d 343, 350 (1981). The Wisconsin Court of Appeals also noted that because the professional goodwill was reflected in the spouse’s salary, and the spouse’s salary was considered to set a family support award, treating the goodwill as divisible marital asset would constitute double counting of the goodwill. Id. at 352.
Building on the analysis set forth in Hol-brook, the Supreme Court of Kansas has also held that professional goodwill is not a divisible marital asset. In Powell v. Powell, the court stated:
We are not persuaded that a professional practice such as Dr. Powell’s has a good will value. The practice is personal to the practitioner. When he or she dies or retires nothing remains. The professional’s files and lists of clients are of no use to others. The very nature of a professional practice is that it is totally dependent on the professional. We refuse to adopt the theory that good will in a professional practice is an asset subject to division in a divorce action. The issue is without merit.
231 Kan. 456, 648 P.2d 218, 222-23 (1982).
These cases illustrate the difficulties inherent in defining and valuing the goodwill of a professional practice. The personal nature of professional goodwill is especially obvious in the context of a sole practitioner. The Indiana Supreme Court has not yet addressed the issues of whether Indiana will recognize a distinction between personal/professional goodwill and enterprise/business goodwill, and, in the context of the valuation of the business of a sole practitioner, whether the sole practitioner’s business possesses any goodwill value that is subject to division as a marital asset; nor has the supreme court considered whether, if such a distinction is recognized, personal/professional goodwill is more appropriately considered, not as an asset, but as an indication of income potential which can be a factor in making an unequal division of marital assets and in making a *209maintenance award. See Ind.Code § 31-1-11.5-11..
Thus, although the reasoning previously set forth by the Indiana Court of Appeals indicates that Indiana will recognize professional goodwill as a divisible marital asset without any distinction between goodwill that is personal in nature and goodwill that is attributable to a business/praetiee itself, I disagree with such an approach for the reasons set out above. I therefore concur with the majority’s application of Indiana case-law, but urge the Indiana Supreme Court to refine the definition of goodwill and the circumstances under which it will be considered as a divisible marital asset. In all other respects I concur with the majority opinion.
. For a good discussion of the distinctions between personal/professional goodwill and enterprise/business goodwill, see Allen Parkman, The Treatment of Professional Goodwill in Divorce Proceedings, 18 Fam.L.Q. 213 (1984). In this article, Parkman states:
To the extent that a business is more profitable than it’s competitors because of the superior abilities or business connections of an individual, the profits are attributable to the individual, not the business.... It would be appropriate to view personal attributes as "reputation” rather than as "goodwill.” By using reputation and goodwill interchangeably, the courts have created a confused situation in the evaluation of professional businesses.
Id. at 214-15.

=== CASE 2226190 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:03.371737+00 ===

236 N.W.2d 834 (1975)
195 Neb. 90
STATE of Nebraska, Appellee,
v.
Fred Edward STEWART, Appellant.
No. 40144.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
December 24, 1975.
*835 John J. Battershell, Cunningham Law Office, P.C., McCook, for appellant.
Paul L. Douglas, Atty. Gen., Patrick T. O'Brien, Sp. Asst. Atty. Gen., Lincoln, for appellee.
Heard before WHITE, C.J., and SPENCER, BOSLAUGH, McCOWN, NEWTON, CLINTON and BRODKEY, JJ.
NEWTON, Justice.
The defendant was charged with breaking and entering with intent to steal. After a preliminary hearing he was held for trial. He then moved that the transcript of the preliminary hearing be suppressed, the information quashed, and the case remanded for a preliminary hearing. The information had been filed on July 25, 1974. The motions were filed on September 16, 1974, and on that date a copy of the information was served on the defendant. The defendant was out on bond and, it appears, absent until September 16, 1974. On that date defendant entered a waiver of his appearance at future proceedings until trial. On January 14, 1975, the pretrial motions were overruled. On February 13, 1975, defendant was arraigned and waived any complaint based on the lack of a speedy trial due to delays thereafter occurring. Trial commenced on April 10, 1975.
The present action is one in habeas corpus. Defendant relies on the overruling of the motions dealing with the sufficiency of the evidence and the transcript of the preliminary hearing; also, he charges he has been denied a speedy trial. We affirm the judgment denying the requested writ of habeas corpus.
Habeas corpus will not lie to challenge the sufficiency of the evidence at a preliminary hearing. See, State v. Franklin, 194 Neb. 630, 234 N.W.2d 610; Kruger v. Brainard, 183 Neb. 455, 161 N.W.2d 520. Furthermore, examination of the record of the preliminary hearing reveals ample evidence justifying the binding over of the defendant. The defendant was seen entering the premises involved and was apprehended while hiding in the basement.
Under section 29-1207, R.S.Supp., 1974, trial is to be held within 6 months after the filing of the information. The statute specifically excludes from computation the time from filing to final disposition of pretrial motions, and any delay resulting from the absence of the defendant.
It is evident that this appeal is frivolous and the judgment of the District Court is affirmed. See Rule 20.
Affirmed.

=== CASE 2226196 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:03.503917+00 ===

70 Wis.2d 977 (1975)
236 N. W. 2d 204
DRAKE, Appellant,
v.
MILWAUKEE MUTUAL INSURANCE COMPANY, Respondent.
No. 771 (1974).
Supreme Court of Wisconsin.
Argued December 2, 1975.
Decided December 19, 1975.
*978 For the appellant there were briefs by Korf, Pfeil & Graves of Elkhorn, and oral argument by Thomas Greenwald of Rockford, Illinois.
For the respondent there was a brief by Peickert, Anderson, Fisher, Shannon & O'Brien of Stevens Point, and oral argument by Maris Rushevics of Stevens Point.
WILKIE, C. J.
This is an appeal from the sustaining of a demurrer of the defendant-respondent, Milwaukee Mutual Insurance Company, to the complaint of plaintiff-appellant who has alleged two causes of action against the defendant, one for breach of her insurance contract with defendant and one for tortious conduct in its bad faith refusal to honor the claim of its insured.
We affirm the sustaining of the defendant's demurrer as to both causes of action.
*979 On or about July 9, 1971, Milwaukee Mutual Insurance Company issued to Mona Drake an automobile insurance policy which included uninsured motorist coverage. Under this coverage the company agreed as follows:
"To pay all sums which the insured or his legal representative shall be legally entitled to recover as damages from the owner or operator of an uninsured automobile because of bodily injury, sickness or disease, including death resulting therefrom, hereinafter called `bodily injury,' sustained by the insured, caused by accident and arising out of the ownership, maintenance or use of such uninsured automobile; provided for the purposes of this coverage, determination as to whether the insured or such representative is legally entitled to recover such damages, and if so the amount thereof, shall be made by agreement between the insured or such representative and the company or, if they fail to agree, by arbitration."
The standard reduction clause was also present:
"(b) Any amount payable under the terms of this Part because of bodily injury sustained in an accident by a person who is an insured under this Part shall be reduced by:
"(1) all sums paid on account of such bodily injury by or on behalf of (i) the owner or operator of the uninsured automobile and (ii) any other person or organization jointly or severally liable together with such owner or operator for such bodily injury. . . ."
On August 15, 1971, Mona Drake was injured in an automobile accident at the intersection of Highway 10 and County Trunk A in Portage county. She was a passenger in a car owned and operated by Olaf Nelson. The Nelson car collided with a car owned and operated by Maria Both. Nelson had no insurance, nor was there any liability bond or insurance policy in effect for any person legally responsible for the use of the Nelson automobile. Nelson died as the result of injuries sustained in the accident. The Both car was insured by a *980 policy from the Classified Insurance Corporation, with policy limits of $50,000.
In March of 1974, Drake began the process of suing in a single action the estate of Nelson, Both, and Both's insurer, Classified Insurance. Suit was commenced against Classified Insurance by service of a summons and complaint on March 4, 1974. Attempts were made to serve Both in Milwaukee county on March 1, 1974, and then in Dodge county on March 16, 1974. The personal representative of Nelson's estate was served on April 25, 1974. This suit alleged Nelson and the driver of the Both vehicle to be joint tort-feasors and claimed $100,000 in damages from the defendants, including Classified Insurance.
On April 24, 1974, Mona Drake commenced suit against her insurer, Milwaukee Mutual, under the uninsured motorist coverage. The summons and complaint served on this date alleged, in addition to the facts recited earlier relative to the accident and to the issuance of the policy, that the insurance company had breached its contract to pay Drake the sum of $15,000 which Drake was legally entitled to recover as damages from Nelson, the uninsured motorist. The complaint alleged that Drake was legally entitled to such damages because Nelson was negligent in specific respects in operating his car and that such negligence proximately caused the collision and the personal injuries of Drake. The complaint further alleged that on April 28, 1972, and again on March 4, 1974, Drake had made claims under this coverage, but these claims were denied by Milwaukee Mutual. Also, the complaint asserted that on or about June 12, 1972, the insurance company "reputiated" (sic) the policy and "knowingly misrepresented" to the plaintiff that Both's insurance policy would cover Nelson's liability.
In addition to the claim of $15,000 in damages, which was the limit of the uninsured motorist coverage, the *981 complaint sought $10,000 in damages for emotional distress suffered by Drake and $100,000 in punitive damages. The basis for these additional damage claims was the following allegation:
"Upon information and belief, that said refusal of coverage by the defendant Milwaukee Mutual was arbitrarily made without cause in wanton disregard of the personal rights of the plaintiff and with reckless disregard of the probability of causing emotional distress to said plaintiff. Furthermore, that said outrageous conduct and refusal was made with malice."
Milwaukee Mutual demurred to this complaint on the ground that it did not state sufficient facts to constitute a cause of action. The trial court sustained this demurrer, and a judgment of dismissal was entered.
After the demurrer in this action was sustained, a settlement was achieved between Drake end the defendants in the other action (Nelson's personal representative, Both, and Classified Insurance). According to this settlement, Nelson's estate was to pay Drake the sum of $22,500, and Classified Insurance was to pay Drake the sum of $5,500. A stipulation and order dismissing the complaint was entered in this other action. Another order approving the compromise settlement of this contingent claim against Nelson's estate was subsequently entered. Despite the fact that this settlement may have mooted this matter by the Portage county probate court, we proceed to the merits.
The first issue on this appeal concerns the first cause of action in which the plaintiff seeks recovery for the alleged breach of the insurance contract by Milwaukee Mutual. It is whether this claim is demurrable where, prior to the action against her own insurer, she has begun a negligence action against the insured other driver, this driver's insurance company, and the estate of the uninsured motorist.
*982 This factual situation fits midway between two different Wisconsin rules of law. On the one hand, the Leatherman, Scherr, and Nelson Cases[1] posited the rule that, once other liable sources have yielded up a recovery in excess of the policy limit under the uninsured motorist coverage, then the insured cannot sue his insurance company for these benefits. Uninsured motorist coverage is "backstop or last-resort protection."[2] On the other hand, in the recent case of Collicott v. Economy Fire & Casualty Co.,[3] this court held that an insured may sue his insurance company under the uninsured motorist coverage, even if there are other insured parties involved in the accident who are potentially liable but have not yet been sued.[4]
The instant fact situation is controlled by the policy set down in Leatherman, Scherr, and Nelson. It makes no sense to let Drake sue Nelson's estate, the other driver, and her insurance company, and proceed to sue her own insurance company in a subsequent suit, when a judgment or settlement in the first suit may well preclude any recovery at all in the second suit (as it will in *983 this case) and may also resolve the main question at issue in the second suit (whether Drake is legally entitled to recover from Nelson's estate for her injuries). To hold otherwise would be to approve a second suit which may ultimately prove to be completely fruitless or at least redundant in important respects.
Drake contends that her situation should be governed by Collicott, since she made her claims before she sued the other liable parties. But all that these prior claims reveal is that Drake could have sued her insurance company first without suing the other liable parties. Instead, she elected to sue Nelson's estate, Both, and Both's insurance company. This choice on her part clearly changes the facts into a situation not governed by Collicott.
Drake also seeks recovery for what amounts to a tortious breach of contract. In addition to the failure to pay benefits under the policy, she claims that the company is also liable for what she characterizes, in the alternative, as a bad faith refusal to honor her claim, or as an intentional infliction of emotional distress.
In order to decide whether or not the complaint states facts sufficient for either of these claims, we must first determine which facts were well-pleaded and, thus, admitted on demurrer.
The complaint is, to a very great extent, couched in purely conclusory language, and it is settled that by demurring a party does not admit conclusions of law or erroneous conclusions from the facts as pleaded.[5] The complaint, shorn of its conclusory language, alleges the following facts pertinent here: That the company twice denied coverage on April 28, 1972, and March 14, 1972; *984 that on or about June 12, 1972, the company stated to Drake that coverage was not available to her, and that Marie Both's insurance would cover her entire claim, including the liability of Nelson; that these denials and statements were made without heed to their effect upon Drake.
These allegations do not state facts sufficient for a claim of tortious breach of contract.
The company's claim denials were at most due to an insistence upon a then arguable interpretation of Wisconsin law, namely, that uninsured motorist coverage was unavailable when another insured party was potentially liable for Drake's damages. The holding in Collicott[6] did alter this broad rule, but all of Drake's claims and Milwaukee Mutual's denials occurred prior to Collicott. Thus there was a genuine dispute over the status of the law at the time the denials were made, and it cannot be said that the company's denials were made in bad faith. This is not a case where the validity of the claim was not even fairly debatable.
As for intentional infliction of emotional distress, it is clear that this complaint does not meet the criteria set forth in Alsteen v. Gehl.[7] There is no allegation that the company intended to cause emotional distress to the plaintiff but only an assertion that the company acted "with reckless disregard of the probability of causing emotional distress" to the plaintiff. Moreover, the actions of the company in denying the claim because of a difference of opinion over the law surely cannot be regarded as "extreme and outrageous" behavior, as required by Alsteen.
Drake urges this court to allow her the opportunity of pleading over in the event that her complaint is found wanting. Because it does not appear that any sufficient *985 factual basis exists for a claim of tortious breach of contract, we conclude that it was not an abuse of discretion for the trial court to deny plaintiff the opportunity of pleading over.
By the Court.Judgment affirmed.
NOTES
[1]  Leatherman v. American Family Mut. Ins. Co. (1971), 52 Wis. 2d 644, 190 N. W. 2d 904; Scherr v. Drobac (1972), 53 Wis. 2d 308, 193 N. W. 2d 14; Nelson v. Employers Mut. Casualty Co. (1974), 63 Wis. 2d 558, 217 N. W. 2d 670.
[2]  Leatherman, supra, footnote 1, at 651.
[3]  (1975), 68 Wis. 2d 115, 121-123, 227 N. W. 2d 668.
[4]  The accident in Collicott occurred two days prior to the accident in this case, and so Collicott, like this case and like Leatherman, Nelson, and Scherr, was unaffected by the 1973 amendment to sec. 204.30 (5) (a), Stats. Ch. 72, Laws of 1973, amended this section by adding the following sentence: "The uninsured motorist bodily injury coverage limits provided in an automobile or motor vehicle liability policy of insurance as required in this subsection shall not be reduced by the terms thereof to provide the insured with less protection than would be afforded him if he were injured by a motorist insured under an automobile liability or motor vehicle liability policy of insurance containing the limits provided in this subsection."
[5]  Sipple v. Zimmerman (1968), 39 Wis. 2d 481, 489, 159 N. W. 2d 706; Polanski v. Eagle Point (1966), 30 Wis. 2d 507, 515, 141 N. W. 2d 281; Jenkins v. State (1961), 13 Wis. 2d 503, 507, 108 N. W. 2d 924; Miller v. Welworth Theatres (1956), 272 Wis. 355, 359, 75 N. W. 2d 286, and cases there cited.
[6]  Supra, footnote 3.
[7]  (1963), 21 Wis. 2d 349, 359-361, 124 N. W. 2d 312.

=== CASE 9741097 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:49:34.445131+00 ===

Per Curiam.
At issue in these cases is the resolution of an apparent *784conflict between the guarantees of the First and Sixth Amendments to the Constitution of the United States. This court is called upon to draw an accommmodation between these two “preferred” amendments which will preserve the right to a fair trial without abridging freedom of the press. The issue is laid before us in case No. 40471, by the relators, television, newspaper, and other media organizations and personnel, who seek through an original action a writ of mandamus which will compel the respondent District Court Judge for Lincoln County to vacate a restrictive order relating to the publication of pretrial publicity in State v. Simants, case No. 40445.
On October 18, 1975, six members of a family were found dead of gunshot wounds in their home at Sutherland, Nebraska. On October 19, 1975, Erwin Simants was charged with six counts of murder in the first degree, arraigned, and counsel was appointed for him. A preliminary hearing was set for October 22, 1975. On October 21, 1975, the prosecuting attorney filed a motion for a restrictive order with the county court, requesting the court to restrict publication of testimony to be presented at the preliminary hearing. A hearing on the motion was held that same evening. Attorneys representing the State, Simants, and the media were present. Attorney for the defendant advised the court that Simants consented to the State’s motion to restrict publication of testimony from the preliminary hearing and further made an oral motion requesting that the restrictive order be broadened to close the preliminary hearing to the public and press. After arguments by counsel, the court found the State’s motion should be sustained.
On October 22, 1975, prior to the preliminary hearing, the county court entered a restrictive order. The order precluded all parties involved in the preliminary hearing as well as the “news media” from releasing “for public dissemination in any form or manner whatsoever any testimony given or evidence adduced during the prelimin*785ary hearing.” The order also contained additional restrictive provisions apart from the preliminary hearing. Finally, the court denied Simants’ motion requesting a closed hearing.
On October 22, 1975, the preliminary hearing was held on an amended complaint which charged six counts of murder in the first degree and further alleged that the murders were committed in the perpetration of or attempt to perpetrate one or more sexual assaults. After testimony from several witnesses and the introduction of other evidence, Simants was bound over to District Court to stand trial.
On October 23, 1975, attorneys representing the persons who are now the relators in the mandamus action, case No. 40471, filed an application requesting the right to be heard on a challenge to the constitutionality of the restrictive order entered by the county court. The District Court granted petitioners’ motion to intervene. On that same day, October 23, 1975, Simants filed a motion for a continuation of the county court’s restrictive order with respect to pretrial publicity. On October 27, 1975, the District Court acted on defendant’s motion. It terminated the county court’s order and imposed its own restrictions on dissemination of pretrial publicity emanating from the case. The District Court adopted, with some clarifications, the standards set out in The Nebraska Bar-Press Guidelines for Disclosing and Reporting of Information Relating to Imminent or Pending Criminal Litigation-. These standards, together with the accompanying clarifications, precluded the media from reporting on most of the testimony and some other evidence presented at the preliminary hearing.
Relators sought relief in this court from the October 27, 1975, restrictive order imposed by the District Court via two procedural routes. On October 31, 1975, relators instituted a section 25-1912, R. R. S. 1943, appeal from the District Court order and at the same time petitioned this court for leave to file an original action *786in the náture of a writ of mandamus requesting this court to' vacate the October 27, 1975, restrictive order,
While relators’ appeal and request to docket an original action in this court were pending, they petitioned Mr. Justice Blackmun of the United States Supreme Court, asking him as Circuit Justice to stay the October 27, 1975, District Court order under Title 28 U. S. C., sections 2101(f) and 1257(3). Thereafter, this court on November 10, 1975, issued a per curiam memorandum in which we noted that relators were seeking concurrent relief from both the United States Supreme Court and this court and we therefore declined to take action on the petition for a writ of mandamus so long as we were in- the position of exercising parallel jurisdiction with the Supreme Court of the United States. We continued action on the matter until the United States Supreme Court made known whether it would accept jurisdiction in the matter.
On November 13, 1975, Mr. Justice Blackmun, in his capacity as Circuit Justice, issued a chambers opinion in which he noted his desire to refrain from issuing or denying a stay on the restrictive order until this court had án opportunity to act on the same.
On November 18, 1975, this court set November 25, 1975, as the date on which we would hear relators’ arguments on their request for an original action as well as on the substantive questions surrounding the constitutionality of the restrictive order. Relators thereafter filed a reapplication for a stay with Mr. Justice Blackmun.
On November 20, 1975, Mr. Justice Blackmun handed down' a chambers opinion in which he granted relators a partial stay on the October 27, 1975, order.
On November 24, 1975, the Lincoln County attorney and defendant’s attorney filed petitions in intervention with this court requesting to be heard at the November 25,'. 1975, hearing. The petitions were granted and a full hearing (was held before this court on that date.
*787On November 25, 1975, this court, despite the intervening order of Mr. Justice Blackmun, heard oral arguments in both cases before us insofar as they pertain to the request for a stay of the restrictive order of the District Court. After Mr. Justice Blackmun issued his order the media, not being satisfied therewith, invoked the' jurisdiction of the Supreme Court' of the United States and asked it to vacate the portion of the trial court’s restrictive order not vacated by Mr. Justice Blackmun. If we were to be entirely consistent we ought now to again refrain from acting because we are now in the position of exercising concurrent jurisdiction with the United States Supreme Court for which there is no precedent. Nonetheless, despite the regrettable-possibility of collision, there are important questions of procedure and standing which need definition by us and which relate only to state procedures. In addition, the trial courts of this state are in need of some guidance from us in the matter at issue and which may not be otherwise forthcoming. Additionally, as Mr. Justice Blackmun appropriately notes, the question of the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court of the United States in this matter is “not without difficulty” because there has been no order, final or otherwise, by this court. That “difficulty” ought to be removed. So we proceed to determine the matter before us on the merits insofar as the request for the stay of the District Court order is concerned.
The first question we must decide is that of our own jurisdiction in case No. 40471, the original action of mandamus. We have jurisdiction in an original action of mandamus if the order of Judge Stuart of October 27, 1975, is in whole or in some significant part wholly void. State ex rel. Reynolds v. Graves, 66 Neb. 17, 92 N. W. 144. We conclude, for reasons hereinafter stated, that the order is in part void and so affirm or grant permission to the relators to file the original action.
The .next question before us is whether the relators *788had standing to intervene in State v. Simants, case No. 40445. No third party has any right to intervene in a criminal prosecution. The matter at issue in such cases is the guilt or innocence of the accused. In legal contemplation no third party “has or can claim an interest in the matter in litigation, in the success of either of the parties to [the] action, or against both.” This is the standard applicable to the right to intervene. § 25-328, R. R. S. 1943. See State v. Berry, 192 Neb. 826, 224 N. W. 2d 767. Accordingly, the appeal in case No. 40445 is dismissed.
The restrictive order of Judge Stuart of October 27, 1975, insofar as we need to set it forth is- in summary as follows: It applies only to pretrial publicity and terminates when the jury is impaneled to try the case of State v. Simants. It applies only to the relators. It incorporates generally as a standard for reporting certain voluntary Nebraska Bar-Press Guidelines for Disclosing and Reporting of Information Relating to Imminent or Pending Criminal Litigation. It prohibits the publication of the fact, if any, or the contents of confessions or admissions against interest or statements made by the accused to law enforcement officials. It prohibits the publication of the fact, if any, or the contents of statements against interest made to certain named individuals. It prohibits the publication of the nature of the probable testimony of certain named witnesses, and certain aspects of the testimony of another named witness. It prohibits the publication of the identity of a person or persons allegedly sexually assaulted. It prohibits the publication of the exact nature of the limiting order and prohibits reference to the contents of two specific paragraphs of the order.
We now proceed to our resolution and accommodation of the two conflicting constitutional rights and introduce that resolution with quotation from “Statement on Matters of Joint Concern to the Bench, the Bar, Law Enforcement Officers, and the News Media” contained *789in the ABA Standards Relating to Fair Trial and Free Press, p. 16: “(a) General. Freedom of speech and of the press are fundamental liberties guaranteed by the United States Constitution. They must be zealously preserved, but at the same time must be exercised with an awareness of the potential impact of public statements on other fundamental rights, including the right of a person accused of crime, and of his accusers, to a fair trial by an impartial jury.
“(b) The need to inform the public. It is important both to the community and to the criminal process that the public be informed of the commission of crime, that corruption and misconduct, including the improper failure to arraign or to prosecute, be exposed whenever they are found, and that those accused of crime be apprehended. If, however, public statements and reporting with respect to these matters assume the truth of what may be only a belief or a suspicion, they may destroy the reputation of one who is innocent and may seriously endanger the right to a fair trial in the event that formal charges are filed.
“(c) From the time of arrest or the filing of charges to the beginning of trial. A man who has been arrested, for whom an arrest warrant has been issued, or against whom a criminal complaint, information, or indictment has been filed, has only been charged with the commission of crime. He is entitled under the Constitution to a fair and impartial trial, in which he is presumed innocent until proved guilty by competent evidence. Thus during the period prior to trial, public statements originating from officials, attorneys, or the news media that assume the guilt of the person charged, that include inaccurate or inadmissible information, or that serve to inflame the community, may undermine the judicial process by making unobtainable a jury satisfying the requisite standard of impartiality. Alleged facts may be untrue, confessions obtained or evidence seized may be inadmissible in evidence, prior criminal records will be *790inadmissible except under limited circumstances and for restricted purposes, and witnesses may substantially modify their stories under oath or after confrontation ■by thé accused or cross-examination. The right to a fair trial may thus be substantially endangered by public statements or by reporting prior to trial going beyond a factual description of the person arrested and of the crime charged and a factual statement of the arrest and surrounding circumstances. The danger is especially acute when public statements or reporting extend to .such matters as confessions or admissions, prior history, or the performing of tests or refusal to submit to a test; opinions about guilt or innocence; interviews of prospective witnesses; interviews of the defendant before he has had an opportunity to consult with counsel; ;and speculation as to the plea to be entered or the evidence or testimony to be introduced at the trial. The release and publication of photographs when identification is a matter in dispute may cause particular difficulty, as may reiteration of any earlier detailed reports as the time of trial approaches.”
- The constitutional guarantees of freedom of speech and of the press and of the right of trial by an impartial jury are, in our judgment, the same under both the Constitutions of this state and of - the United States and there is no need to differentiate between the two Constitutions in this discussion.
“The First Amendment freedoms are not ends in themselves, but only means to the end of a free society. ;. . . The First Amendment freedoms are vital, but their .exercise must be compatible with the preservation of other essential rights. Application of the First Amendment can no more be governed by absolute rules than can that of other constitutional provisions.” Schwartz on Constitutional Law, § 135, p. 251. The rights which are guaranteed by the First Amendment to the United States. Constitution .and the right to trial by. .an impartial ddry;'guaranteed, .by. .the ; Sixth Amendment-..are -both *791“preferred” rights. Schwartz, op cit, § 111, p. 193. The Constitution makes no hierarchy of rights. Brinegar v. United States, 338 U. S. 160, 69 S. Ct. 1302, 93 L. Ed. 1879 (1949), Mr. Justice Jackson dissenting at p. 180.
The Supreme Court of the United States has not yet had occasion to speak definitively where a clash between these two preferred rights was sought to be accommodated by a prior restraint on freedom of the press. There are, however, some statements in various opinions which lead to the conclusion that under some circumstances prior restraint may be appropriate. In Branzburg v. Hayes, 408 U. S. 665, 92 S. Ct. 2646, 33 L. Ed. 2d 626 (1972), where the claimed right of a newsman not to be compelled to testify before a grand jury was denied, Mr. Justice White, in the majority opinion said: “The prevailing view is that the press is not free to publish with impunity everything and anything it desires to publish. . . . Despite the fact that news gathering may be hampered, the press is regularly excluded from grand jury proceedings, our own conferences, the meetings of other official bodies gathered in executive session, and the meetings of private organizations. Newsmen have no constitutional right of access to the scenes of crime or disaster when the general public is excluded, and they may be prohibited from attending or publishing information about trials if such restrictions are necessary to assure a defendant a fair trial before an impartial tribunal. In Sheppard v. Maxwell, 384 U. S. 333 (1966), for example, the Court reversed a state court conviction where the trial court failed to adopt ‘stricter rules governing the use of the courtroom by newsmen as Sheppard’s counsel requested,’ neglected to insulate witnesses from the press, and made no ‘effort, to control the release of leads, information, and gossip to the press by police officers, witnesses, and the counsel for .both sides.’ Id. at 358, 359. . .‘[T]he -trial court might well, have proscribed extrajudicial statements by any dawyer,. party, .witness, or .court official., which- di*792vulged prejudicial matters.’ Id., at 361.” The statement immediately preceding the citation of Sheppard v. Maxwell is, however, dicta as no issue of prior restraint was actually involved in the Sheppard case. There are also implications in other opinions that prior restraints may be imposed and it is also clear that the Supreme Court of the United States has never said, in the context with which we are here concerned, that such restraints may never be imposed when necessary to assure trial by an impartial jury. See Irvin v. Dowd, 366 U. S. 717, 81 S. Ct. 1639, 6 L. Ed. 2d 751, Mr. Justice Frankfurter, concurring, at p. 729. In Pennekamp v. Florida, 328 U. S. 331, 66 S. Ct. 1029, 90 L. Ed. 1295, Mr. Justice Reed said: “Free discussion of the problems of society is a cardinal principle of Americanism — a principle which all are zealous to preserve. Discussion that follows the termination of a case may be inadequate to emphasize the danger to public welfare of supposedly wrongful judicial conduct. It does not follow that public comment of every character upon pending trials or legal proceedings may be as free as a similar comment after complete disposal of the litigation. Between the extremes there are areas of discussion which an understanding writer will appraise in the light of the effect on himself and on the public of creating a clear and present danger to the fair and orderly judicial administration. Courts must have the power to protect the interests of prisoners and litigants before them from unseemly efforts to pervert judicial action. In the borderline instances where it is difficult to say upon which side the alleged offense falls, we think the specific freedom of public comment should weigh heavily against a possible tendency to influence pending cases. Freedom of discussion should be given the widest range compatible with the essential requirement of the fair and orderly administration of justice.” (Emphasis supplied.) In New York Times Co. v. United States, 403 U. S. 713, 91 S. Ct. 2140, 29 L. Ed. 2d 822, it is said in a case not *793involving personal conflicting constitutional rights that a prior restraint on the media bears “a heavy presumption against its constitutional validity.” This same statement has been made by the Supreme Court of the United States in other cases. The implication of such statement is that if there is only a presumption of unconstitutionality then there must be some circumstances under which prior restraints may be constitutional for otherwise there is no need for a mere presumption.
None of the cases in which the United States Supreme Court has used language which imports an absolutist view of the First Amendment free speech right involves a conflict between two fundamental or preferred constitutional rights. In Bridges v. State of California, 314 U. S. 252, 62 S. Ct. 190, 86 L. Ed. 192, Mr. Justice Black noted the difficulty of resolving conflicts between the rights of free speech and fair trial and said: “. . . free speech and fair trials are two of the most cherished policies of our civilization, and it would be a trying task to choose between them.” In Cox Broadcasting Corp. v. Cohn, 420 U. S. 469, 95 S. Ct. 1029, 43 L. Ed. 2d 328, the conflict was between freedom of the press and a claimed right of personal privacy which was, under the circumstance, clearly not a constitutional right. See, also, Craig v. Harney, 331 U. S. 367, 67 S. Ct. 1249, 91 L. Ed. 1546 (misconduct); Near v. Minnesota ex rel. Olson, 283 U. S. 697, 51 S. Ct. 625, 75 L. Ed. 1357 (misconduct).
It is, of course, absolutely clear that the purpose of freedom of the press is not to determine the outcome of litigation by newspaper publicity, although unfortunately on some occasions it has been so used. Sheppard v. Maxwell, 384 U. S. 333, 86 S. Ct. 1507, 16 L. Ed. 2d 600; State v. Lovell, 117 Neb. 710, 222 N. W. 625; Irvin v. Dowd, supra; Rideau v. Louisiana, 373 U. S. 723, 83 S. Ct. 1417, 10 L. Ed. 2d 663.
The relators take an absolutist position so far as freedom of the press is concerned and state that, even *794if in some cases because of the exercise’of'freedom of the press pretrial publicity was such that trial by an impartial jury became impossible, it is better that an accused go free than that freedom of the press be impinged even in the slightest degree. They say: “Petitioners would initially point out that the irreparable injury in such a situation is not that defendant will be incarcerated on the basis of an unfair trial; the injury . . . is to society as a whole, which, due to the impossibility of a defendants obtaining a fair trial, must necessarily forego a conviction of a person who may well have committed the crime for which he is charged.” (Emphasis supplied.)
In the preface of its restrictive order the District Court found “there is á clear and present danger that pre-trial publicity could infringe upón the defendant’s right” to” be tried by an impartial jury, that is, as we see it, by 12 persons who have not already made up their minds as to the defendant’s guilt or innocence. It is, of course, the constitutional right of a defendant to rely upon the’ presumption of innocence which the law gives and to require the State to prove that he (1) committed the act charged and (2) his legal culpability, if that is also an issue.
We have earlier referred to the principle that orders imposing prior restraint bear a heavy presumption of uriconstitutionality. Does the evidence in the court below support the court’s finding so as to overcome the heavy presumption of unconstitutionality of the prior restraint? The trial court in the preface to its restrictive order found that there was a clear and present danger that pretrial publicity could substantially impair the’right of the defendant to'a trial by an impartial jury unless restraints were imposed. Does that evidence clearly indicate that the obligation of this state under the Constitutions of the United States and of this state to afford the accused a trial by an impartial jury may be impaired by pretrial publicity? The -relators *795argue that there is no evidence to support the finding because there was no hearing at which they were represented and because no evidence was actually received by the county court at its hearing. Both assertions are true, but it is not the order of the county court which is under attack here.
We are confronted with two separate questions. The first is the question of the jurisdiction of the District Court over the persons of the relators. The second is the sufficiency of the evidence to support the necessity of an Order imposing some prior restraints, assuming that prior restraint in any degree is constitutional. We first deal with the question of jurisdiction.
■ The- relators, by their motion to intervene in State v. Sinlants invoked and submitted themselves to the jurisdiction of the District Court. Their motion was granted (erroneously, as we have previously indicated), nonetheless, at that time the District Court acquired jurisdiction over the persons of the relators. They were heard and evidence was received. The District Court then temporarily adopted as its own the previous order of the county court and later adopted its own modified order. It is that order which is before us for examination-. Relators point out, quite properly we believe, that “a judgment entered without jurisdiction of the person or the subject matter or in excess of the court’s power is void and may be collaterally impeached.” Woods v. Goodson, 253 Ark. 196, 485 S. W. 2d 213. It seems clear enough that the county court had no jurisdiction over the persons of the relators. The order of the county court was void for lack of jurisdiction of the person. That order purports to restrain “the news media.” The courts have no general power in any kind of case to enjoin or restrain “everybody.” Even when acting with jurisdiction in proper cases, orders must- pertain to particular persons or legal entities over whom the court has in some manner acquired jurisdiction.
The relators could have ignored the order, or, if they *796wished to avoid the possibility of some effort by the court to start contempt proceedings, could have collaterally attacked the order in some manner as by mandamus or action for a declaratory judgment. Admittedly these latter courses would have been somewhat time consuming. Perhaps for that reason the relators sought to intervene directly in State v. Simants, which they did in the District Court. Their request was granted. Their appearance was not special, but general. These relators voluntarily submitted to the jurisdiction of the court and asked not only that the order be lifted, but also opposed the request of the defendant that certain pretrial proceedings be closed to the general public.
■ We now turn to the circumstances under which the District Court entered its restrictive order. The evidence in the'hearing before the District Judge consisted principally of the testimony of the county judge who had entered the prior order and copies of numerous news articles from newspapers printed or circulated in the county where the crime occurred. The record demonstrates clearly that even before the defendant was afforded a preliminary hearing which section 29-1607, R. S. Supp., 1974, and probably the Constitution of the United States, requires (see Gerstein v. Pugh, 420 U. S. 103, 95 S. Ct. 854, 43 L. Ed. 2d 54), certain of the newspapers had printed articles which contained hearsay information and purported statements of the counsel, which, if true, tended clearly to connect the accused with the slayings and which information, if true, was likely to be, or at least some of it would be, presented at the preliminary hearing. The items to which we refer were printed within articles of the October 20, 1975, issue of the North Platte Telegraph; the October 20, 1975, issue of the Lincoln Star; the October 21, 1975, issue of the Denver Post. This information, if obtained from official sources, would not under the provisions of item 1 of the guidelines under the heading “Information Generally Not Appropriate for Disclosure and Reporting” *797be appropriate for reporting. The record shows that this was recognized by some of the media, but doubt was expressed that the voluntary guidelines would apply to a preliminary hearing. The District Court, therefore, could quite properly conclude that the evidence from the preliminary hearing, if it was in fact presented would have again been repeated by at least some of the relators. Those conclusions are reinforced by the fact that in open court at the hearing before the District Judge, counsel for the media stated that it is already doubtful that an unbiased jury can be found to hear the Simants case in Lincoln County. This statement of counsel was later reported in the October 23, 1975, issue of the North Platte Telegraph.
The concern of the prosecutor, the defense attorney, and the county judge that pretrial publicity might make it difficult dr impossible for the State of Nebraska to afford Simants a trial before an impartial jury was not ill founded. Unless the absolutist position of the relators was constitutionally correct, it would appear that the District Court acted properly in restraining publication of certain information which might or may have been adduced at the preliminary hearing.
Section 29-1301, R. S. Supp., 1975, provides: “All criminal cases shall be tried in the county where the offense was committed, except as otherwise provided in sections 29-1301.01 to 29-1301.03 or section 24-903, or unless it shall appear to the court by affidavits that a fair and impartial trial cannot be had therein. In such a case the court may direct the person accused to be tried in some adjoining county.” The laws of this state also provide that an accused must be tried within 6 months from the date of the filing of the information or be absolutely discharged. §§ 29-1205 et seq., R. S. Supp., 1974; State v. Alvarez, 189 Neb. 281, 202 N. W. 2d 604. Trial of the accused has now been set for January 5, 1976.
There are other factors which the District Court could properly take into consideration. The population of *798Lincoln County, Nebraska, according to the 1970 census was 29,538. The populations, according to the same census of the adjacent counties to which venue might be changed are as follows:
County 1970 Population
Keith 8,487
Perkins 3,423
Hayes 1,530
Frontier 3,982
Dawson 19,537
Custer 14,092
Logan 991
McPherson 623
The area in which the jury may be selected is served by several radio stations, two television stations, and several newspapers in addition to those specifically mentioned. Modern communications tend toward the saturation point in news coverage and so, as a practical matter, in some cases it is much more difficult to obtain an impartial jury than it once was. This is evidenced by the reported cases, Sheppard v. Maxwell, supra; Irvin v. Dowd, supra; Rideau v. Louisiana, supra. The mere heinousness or enormity of a crime is, of course, by itself, .no reason at all for a prior restraint of freedom of the press, but certainly it is a matter which a court may take into consideration along with all the other factors involved. One of these factors is, of course, the trial court’s own knowledge of the surrounding circumstances.
We now turn to discussion of the merits of the basic issue. That the press be absolutely free to report corruption and wrongdoing, actual or apparent, or incompetence of public officials of whatever branch of government is vastly important to the future of our state and nation cannot be denied as anyone who is familiar with recent events must be well aware. Prior restraint of the press, however slight, in such instances is unthinkable; Near v. Minnesota ex rel. Olson, supra. In these *799instances and many others no preferred constitutional rights collide.
In cases where equally important constitutional rights may collide then it would seem that under some circumstances, rare though they will be, that an accommodation of some sort must be reached. It is difficult to accept the relators’ position that the press in such cases must be completely unrestrained even if the cost is that a criminal cannot be tried. It is also difficult to accept the proposition that an accused may not be irreparably harmed by wrongful incarceration. Sheppard v. Maxwell, supra, is a case in point. Defendant’s guilt was doubtful. Defendant’s conviction was accomplished, as the opinion of the Supreme Court of the United States indicates, almost wholly because of a concededly outrageous exercise of freedom of the press. The defendant served 10 years of his sentence until his conviction was overturned and a new trial granted. The subsequent finding of not guilty can scarcely be said to have made the injuries suffered by the incarceration reparable. This comment, of course, is not to suggest that the reporting in this case was or is even likely to be anything like that referred to in Sheppard v. Maxwell, supra. The press, in fact, appears to have followed the voluntary guidelines to which they apparently were parties.
It is not, however, the accused alone who has a large stake in the constitutional right of trial by an “impartial jury.” Society as a whole has just as great a stake. This is true not only because each member of the public might some day need to exercise his own right of trial by jury, but because the United States and each state of the Union have the obligation under the Constitution to assure every accused of a trial by an impartial jury.
The extremist and absolutist position of the relators assumes too much. Society as a whole loses a great deal when a criminal has to go free because he cannot be tried. The same thing is true in the case where an innocent person may be convicted because’ an impartial *800jury cannot be obtained. In such cases the true criminal has gone free.
■ In cases where such things as this are likely to occur the constitutional right of a free press comes into direct conflict with the obligation of the state under the United States and state Constitutions to assure an accused of a trial by an impartial jury. First Amendment rights other than freedom of the press and of speech are not absolute. Freedom of religion is one of the First Amendment rights. Yet religious belief cannot be pleaded as justification for criminal action. Davis v. Beason, 133 U. S. 333, 10 S. Ct. 299, 33 L. Ed. 637. The constitutional guarantee does not permit the practice of polygamy on the basis of religious belief. Reynolds v. United States, 98 U. S. 145, 25 L. Ed. 244.
The absolutist position of relators assumes that each and every exercise of freedom of the press is equally important and significant and that any impingement whatever may be equally disasterous for our state and nation. Such a position cannot, we believe, be supported. Near v. Minnesota ex rel. Olson, supra, and Sheppard v. Maxwell, supra, are examples of the wide disparity of importance. The absolutist position assumes there can be no degree of values for the particular right in which the absolutist has a special interest. It assumes that all other constitutional rights are somehow inferior and that impingement upon his right will ultimately lead to tyranny. The fact that our awareness of recent political history makes us extremely conscious of our great debt to a free press ought not to lead us to disparage other equally cherished personal rights, merely because, in this case, the right, trial by an impartial jury, need not be exercised by all persons. Nor should it lead us to disregard the stake all have in the exercise of that right by those who choose to or must exercise it.
. We are cognizant of the possibility that this very court may be called upon in the near future to judge the fairness of Simants’ trial. We ought not to take *801action here which will in any measure jeopardize that ultimate fairness or put this court in the position of making prejudgments.
We conclude that the order of the District Court of October 27, 1975, is void insofar as it incorporates the voluntary guidelines and in certain other respects in that it impinges too greatly upon freedom of the press. The guidelines were not intended to be contractual and cannot be enforced as if they were.
The order of the District Court of October 27, 1975, is vacated and is modified and reinstated in the following respects: It shall be effective only as to events which have occurred prior to the filing of this opinion, and only as it applies to the relators herein, and only insofar as it restricts publication of the existence or content of the following, if any such there be: (1) Confessions or admissions against interest made by the accused to law enforcement officials. (2) Confessions or admissions against interest, oral or written, if any, made by the accused to third parties, excepting any statements, if any, made by the accused to representatives of the news media. (3) Other information strongly implicative of the accused as the perpetrator of the slayings.
One other aspect of this case requires our attention. Counsel for Simants asked the court below to close to the public, including the press, such of the pretrial proceedings as might be necessary to insure the empaneling of an impartial jury. This request the District Court denied. Relators point out that section 24-311, R. S. Supp., 1974, provides that all judicial proceedings shall be open. State and Simants respond that the statute, if construed to apply to all pretrial proceedings, irrespective of how disclosures during such proceedings might affect Simants’ right to be tried by an impartial jury and affect the duty of the State to assure such impartial jury, is then unconstitutional. We have a duty to construe statutes to make them constitutional if possible. ABA Standard 3.1, Fair Trial and Free Press, in *802.'our judgment supplies an applicáble. standard for such "construction. We, therefore, vacate the order in cáse No. 40471 and direct the District Court to consider any 'applications the. State, or the.accused may make for closed pretrial proceedings in future instances in accord with the following standard which we adopt. ABA Standard 3.1, Fair Trial and Free Press: “Pretrial hearings. ...
“Motion to exclude public from all or part of pretrial hearing.
“In any preliminary hearing, bail hearing, or other pretrial hearing in a criminal case, including a motion to suppress evidence, the defendant may move that all or párt of the hearing be held in chambers or otherwise "closed to the public, including representatives of the news media, on the ground that dissemination of evidence or argument adduced at the heáring may disclose matters that will be inadmissible in evidence at the trial and is therefore likely to interfere with his right to a fair trial by an impartial jury. The motion shall be ■granted unless the presiding officer determines that 'there is no substantial likelihood of such interference. With the consent of the defendant, the presiding officer may take such action on his own motion or at the suggestion of the prosecution. Whenever under this rule all or part of any pretrial hearing is held in chambers or otherwise closed to the public, a complete record of the proceedings shall be kept and shall be made available to the public following the completion of trial or disposition of the case without trial. Nothing in this rule is' intended to interfere with the power of the presiding officer in any pretrial hearing to caution those present that dissemination of certain information by any means of public communication may jeopardize the right to a fair trial by an impartial jury.”
No. 40445. Appeal dismissed.
No. 40471. Order vacated and- reinstated as 'modified. ■

=== CASE 9741098 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:49:34.455493+00 ===

*803Clinton, J.,
dissenting.
After the issuance of the order of stay by Mr. Justice Blackmun as Circuit Judge, and since this matter was set for hearing in this court, the relators, we are reliably informed, have invoked the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court of the United States in an application to that court for full court action to overturn the portion of the order of the District Court for Lincoln County, Nebraska, sustained by the order of Mr. Justice Black-mun.
There is no precedent or authority for this court and the Supreme Court of the United States to exercise concurrent jurisdiction in matters relating to construction of the federal Constitution. Either we have jurisdiction in this case, or the Supreme Court of the United States has jurisdiction.
We have supervisory jurisdiction over the trial courts of this state. State ex rel. Reynolds v. Graves, 66 Neb. 17, 92 N. W. 144. I know of no precedent and none has been cited to us which gives to the United States Supreme Court the same supervisory jurisdiction over the "trial courts of this state that it clearly has over the federal courts.
The jurisdiction of Mr. Justice Blackmun, as Circuit ■Judge, and the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court of the ■United States, as Mr. Justice Blackmun recognizes in ■his opinion, rest upon the provisions of section 1257(3), ■Title 28 U.S.C., under which “Final judgments or decrees rendered by the highest court of a State in which a decision could be had” may be reviewed “where any title, right, privilege or immunity ... is claimed under the Constitution ... of the United States.” Mr. Justice Blackmun concluded that a final order had been made because our failure to announce a decision exceeded “tolerable limits.”
' I again point out, as we did in the order which set this matter for hearing, that the application of the relators was filed in this court late on'Friday, October 31, *8041975. So far as the writer of this opinion is aware, the ■application did not come to the attention of any member of this court until Monday, November 3, 1975, at which time we were engaged in the first of 6 days of oral argument in cases pending before us and already irrevocably scheduled.
This is a collegial court and no member of this court has any constitutional or statutory power to grant a stay of the type here requested. That power must be exercised by the court as a whole. Neither may we act upon the basis of telephone calls from counsel, or telegrams. Where factual matters must be reviewed, we must have before us a bill of exceptions containing the evidence expected to be reviewed.
Although an application to file an original action would not normally be considered until we sat at a regularly scheduled weekly consultation, nonetheless, in this particular case the matter was, in accord with our standing practice, assigned to one of the judges of this court on November 4, 1975, for the purpose of preparing a report and recommendation to be considered by the full court at special consultation on Monday, November 10, 1975. While that report was in the process of preparation, the relators on November 4 or 5, 1975, had filed with Mr. Justice Blackmun in Washington, D. C., the application for a stay. This intervening, and to us unanticipated occurrence, affected the content of the report and resulted in the Per Curiam order of continuance adopted by us on November 10, 1975.
On November 13, 1975, Mr. Justice Blackmun rendered his first opinion on his expectation that we would “act forthwith and without delay.” On November 13,- 1975, there was filed by the relators the bill of exceptions in case No. 40445 and for the first time we had before us something other than ex parte representations as to what had occurred in the trial court. On November 17, 1975, we entered an order permitting the filing of the original action and set for hearing on November 25, *8051975, the application for stay both in the original action and the direct appeal and gave notice to all parties of the hearing.
Apparently both the relators and Mr. Justice Black-mun expected that we would act summarily without notice to all interested parties and without a hearing. We did not do so, I think for reasons that should be obvious.
Despite the fact that Mr. Justice Blackmun acted on November 20, 1975, we nonetheless held the hearing on November 25, 1975. All parties were heard. However, between November 20, 1975, and November 25, 1975, as I have already mentioned, the relators invoked the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court of the United States to overturn Mr. Justice Blackmun’s stay. I believé the relators are estopped to claim that we still have jurisdiction.
Mr. Justice Blackmun indicated that the problem of the jurisdiction of the United States Supreme Court under section 1257, Title 28 U.S.C., is “not free from difficulty.” We ought now to remove that difficulty. The circular state of affairs which has existed ought to come to an end.
The appeal of the relators in case No. 40445 should be dismissed on the ground they have no standing to intervene in a criminal prosecution. § 25-328, R. R. S. 1943; State v. Berry, 192 Neb. 826, 224 N. W. 2d 767.
The original action of the relators, case No. 40471, ought to be dismissed as improvidently granted because of the intervening jurisdiction in the Supreme Court of the United States.
White, C. J., joins in this dissent.

=== CASE 9741100 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:49:35.008859+00 ===

T. G. Kavanagh, C. J.
Defendant was arrested for larceny in a building, MCLA 750.360; MSA 28.592, after walking out of a store in Kalamazoo with a box containing a tape recorder, unconcealed, under his arm. Defendant testified that he saw a friend (Van Johnson) in the store who was overburdened with packages. The friend handed *475the box to defendant and asked him to carry it out to his car, and then give him a ride home. When defendant left the store, he was apprehended, could not produce a sales receipt for the tape recorder and was arrested. The friend did not testify at trial.
Defendant was convicted by a jury and sentenced to imprisonment. The Court of Appeals affirmed.
On appeal to this Court defendant alleges that it was error for the trial court to instruct the jury on aiding and abetting when neither party had requested such an instruction, that theory had not been advanced at trial, and there was no opportunity to argue the matter to the jury.
The gist of defendant’s argument is not that the instruction given on aiding and abetting incorrectly stated the law, but rather that no instruction on aiding and abetting was justified by the evidence and the trial judge did not inform counsel before closing arguments that such instruction would be given. Therefore, defendant had no opportunity to rebut that charge, or to submit instructions on aiding and abetting. Defense counsel objected to the instruction immediately, but that objection was overruled.
The prosecution argues that it was defendant’s own testimony and defense counsel’s closing argument which justified the aiding and abetting instruction. It is contended that by testifying that Van Johnson had handed him the tape recorder, defendant himself provided evidence of a concert of action.
To counter appellant’s contention that the error consisted of not informing counsel before closing argument of the court’s intention to instruct on aiding and abetting, the prosecution alleges that it *476was in fact defendant’s closing argument that necessitated the instruction. Defense counsel argued to the jury that Van Johnson might have stolen the tape recorder, if it was stolen at all, and that defendant did not know anything about it. That possibility, according to defense counsel’s argument to the jury, "should be ruled out before you can find Robert Mann guilty of anything”.
The prosecution contends that such a statement was an incorrect statement of the law, leaving the jury with the belief that if they found that Johnson stole the recorder, they would be required to acquit the defendant. This argument, the prosecution claims, required the court to correct that erroneous impression, and tell the jury that they could find that the two acted in concert and thereby still convict defendant of larceny.
MCLA 768.29; MSA 28.1052 states:
"It shall be the duty of the judge to control all proceedings during the trial * * * . The court shall instruct the jury as to the law applicable to the case * • * .”
If the instruction given correctly states the law as applied to the case, the fact that counsel objects to its being given does not control. People v Chamblis, 395 Mich 408; 236 NW2d 473 (1975). "Neither the defense nor the prosecution has the option of precluding the court from carrying out this duty [of correctly instructing on the law] in hopes of forcing an 'all or nothing’ verdict.” Id.
Michigan , has, by statute, abolished all common-law distinctions between principals and accessories. MCLA 767.39; MSA 28.979 states:
"Every person concerned in the commission of an offense, whether he directly commits the act constitut*477ing the offense or procures, counsels, aids, or abets in its commission may hereafter be prosecuted, indicted, tried and on conviction shall be punished as if he had directly committed such offense.”
A person who aids and abets is guilty as a principal.
Defendant argues that it was not the theory of the prosecution nor the defense that defendant was an accessory, but rather that defendant himself committed the offense. The same argument was made in 1892 in People v Wright, 90 Mich 362; 51 NW 517 (1892), wherein the defendant claimed that the court erred by instructing on aiding and abetting, when the information was for the offense of keeping a bawdy house. The Court held:
"Our statute * * * provides that one who aids or abets in the commission of a felony may be indicted, tried, and punished as principal * * * . The charge of keeping a bawdy-house may be supported by proof that the respondent aided or assisted others in the commission of the offense.” Id. at 364.
A case which dealt with a similar contention was People v McKeighan, 205 Mich 367; 171 NW 500 (1919). Appellant in McKeighan alleged that the information was insufficient because it charged him only as a principal, and thus he was not given notice of the exact nature of the charge, as the proofs indicated his involvement was as an accessory. The Court held that the information was sufficient to warrant conviction, stating: "He who aids and abets is now a principal”. Id. at 371.
Defendant in the instant case alleges that there was not sufficient evidence of a crime on the part of another to warrant an instruction on aiding and abetting. In People v Palmer, 392 Mich 370, 378; *478220 NW2d 393 (1974), we reaffirmed the rule that a person may be prosecuted for aiding and abetting without regard to the conviction or acquittal of the principal. "[Aiding and abetting] comprehends all words or deeds which may support, encourage or incite the commission of a crime.” The conviction of the principal is not necessary to convict an accessory. What must be proven, however, is that the crime was committed by someone, and that the defendant either committed or aided and abetted the commission of that crime.
Just as in other areas of jury instruction regarding which offenses might be considered by the jury, there must be evidence on the record to support such a charge. In this case, defendant himself hypothesized that Van Johnson might have stolen this tape recorder. If the jury believed that, they would not be required to acquit the defendant. Rather they could find that defendant and Johnson acted in concert and thus defendant would still be guilty of the offense. There was evidence on the record to support such a conclusion and thus the court properly instructed to that effect.
In People v Murray, 72 Mich 10, 16; 40 NW 29 (1888), this Court said:
"Without any requests from counsel it is the duty of the circuit judge to see to it that the case goes to the jury in a clear and intelligent manner, so that they may have a clear and correct understanding of what it is they are to decide, and he should state to them fully the law applicable to the facts. Especially is this his duty in a criminal case. In this case it was not so done. Too much reliance is often placed upon counsel by the court in this respect for requests; but this should not be done. The court must do its duty in a criminal case, whether counsel do so or not. It is to the court that the *479accused has a right to look to see that he has a fair trial.”
We also reject defendant’s contention that it was not proper to give the instruction without first informing counsel so that closing arguments might be shaped accordingly. In this case, counsel were not informed of the proposed instruction until after closing arguments were completed.
GCR 1963, 516.1 states:
"1. Request for Instructions. At or before the close of the evidence, any party may, or at any time the court reasonably directs, the parties shall, file written requests that the court instruct the jury on the law as set forth in the request. A copy of such requested instruction shall be served on the adverse parties in accordance with Rule 107. The court shall inform counsel of its proposed action on the requests prior to their arguments to the jury, and, subject to the provision of sub-rule 516.3, shall instruct the jury after the arguments are completed. The court may make such comments on the evidence, the testimony, and the character of the witnesses as in its discretion the interests of justice require.”
One method of resolving this issue is to point out that this rule speaks only to requested instructions.
"The court is required to inform counsel of its proposed action on the requests prior to their arguments to the jury. Sub-rule 516.1. The obvious purpose of this provision is to enable counsel to know which requests will be granted or denied, in order to argue the facts in the light of the law as the court will charge the jury.
"While requested instructions serve important functions in assisting the court to formulate its charge, the judge’s power to instruct the jury is not limited to the mechanical acceptance or rejection of requested instruc*480tions. The court, of its own motion, may and should formulate instructions on issues in the case which were not covered by requests. The court may reject a request as not properly stating the law and still formulate a correct charge on the same subject if it is an issue which should go to the jury.” 2 Honigman & Hawkins, Michigan Court Rules Annotated (2d ed), p 565 (emphasis added).
FR Grim P 30 is identical to GCR 1963, 516.1 concerning the question presented. The issue raised in the instant case was discussed in United States v Shirley, 435 F2d 1076, 1078 (CA 7, 1970). In Shirley, during closing arguments, defense counsel emphasized the conflict in testimony and in effect "he told the jury that if it believed the defendant’s denial of his involvement in the theft, a not guilty verdict was required”. Following the arguments, the district judge notified counsel that he intended to add a clarifying sentence to his charge. Defense counsel objected, stating that his closing argument would have taken account of the added instruction had he known it was to be given, although he did not deny that the added instruction was "technically and abstractly” correct.
The Seventh Circuit held that the giving of the instructions was proper:
"Rule 30 of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure provides in relevant part that, 'The court shall inform counsel of its proposed action upon the [instruction] requests prior to their arguments to the jury, * * * .’ Although we recognize the necessity of assuring compliance with the rule so that counsel may effectively plan their arguménts to the jury, United States v Bass, 425 F2d 161, 163 (CA 7, 1970), the rule is not so inflexible as to restrict the trial judge in giving a supplemental or modified instruction designed to prevent the jury from becoming confused and deciding the case on a false basis. Because much of the evidence concerned who *481stole the cars or arranged their theft, there was a likely chance, particularly in light of defense counsel’s argument, that the jury might not understand the offense charged in the indictment.”
We agree with that result and the reasons given therefor.
The conviction is affirmed.
Levin, Coleman, and Fitzgerald, JJ., concurred with T. G. Kavanagh, C. J.
Lindemer and Ryan, JJ., took no part in the decision of this case.

=== CASE 9741101 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:49:35.013995+00 ===

Williams, J.
(to concur). I concur with the results reached in the Chief Justice’s opinion, but I would make two points.
First, as the prosecutor argues, the record in this case does indeed show that the court’s instruction on aiding and abetting was required by the character of defendant’s final argument, and without that final argument the court’s instruction on aiding and abetting would not have been apposite. So the law of this case on the court giving instructions without notifying counsel before their final arguments is limited by the facts in this case.
Second, to review the law on counsel being advised, ordinarily counsel should be informed of instructions before closing arguments are completed in order to permit these arguments to be shaped accordingly. GCR 1963, 516.1 applies this requirement to requested instructions. The logic behind this requirement, however, is equally applicable to sua sponte instructions. Thus, the trial court may and should formulate its own instructions where the requests do not adequately cover issues in the case. However, where these issues *482were raised prior to closing argument, these too should be reviewed with counsel "in order to argue the facts in the light of the law as the court will charge the jury”. 2 Honigman & Hawkins, Michigan Court Rules Annotated (2d ed), p 565. There is no good reason why the jury should get the benefit of an argument couched in terms of, and related to, the instructions it will receive only when those instructions have been requested by counsel.
Where, however, in the course of closing argument, counsel raises a brand new issue, an exception to this principle is mandated. Thus, in United States v Shirley, 435 F2d 1076 (CA 7, 1970), cited by my Brother the Chief Justice, counsel himself inserted the theory while delivering his closing argument, thus making it necessary for the trial judge to modify his charge to the jury. Since the situation which created the need for the new instruction did not arise until closing argument, it would have been impossible for the trial judge to notify counsel prior to that argument. This is precisely the situation before us today, and the reason why I find, under the facts before us, no error was committed.

=== CASE 2226206 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:03.69282+00 ===

131 Ind. App. 640 (1961)
174 N.E.2d 344
MUNCHEL ET AL.
v.
CITY OF BATESVILLE ET AL.
No. 19,591.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
Filed April 27, 1961.
McCarty & O'Connor, of Brookville, Murray, Mannon, Fairchild & Stewart and Samuel A. Fuller, both of Indianapolis, for appellants.
Paul V. Wycoff, of Batesville, for appellees.
Ax, C.J.
This is an appeal from a judgment dismissing a remonstrance filed in the lower court by the appellants against the annexation of certain territory to the appellee, City of Batesville, Indiana.
Ordinance No. 382, which is the basis of this action, was adopted on November 11, 1957. While this appeal was pending, said ordinance was repealed by the Common Council of the City of Batesville by Ordinance No. 416, adopted March 27, 1961.
*641 On March 30, 1961, appellees filed their supplemental motion to dismiss this appeal, attaching to said motion a certified copy of the repealing ordinance, stating that under authority of Vesenmeir et al. v. City of Aurora, etc. (1953), 232 Ind. 628, 115 N.E.2d 734, this action has become moot and should therefore be dismissed at the costs of the appellants.
Subsequently, on April 11, 1961, appellants filed herein their motion to dismiss this appeal by reason of the fact that by the action of the appellees in repealing the ordinance the question sought to be presented by this appeal, has become moot. With said motion, appellants urged that the appeal be dismissed at appellees' costs.
Following the authority of the Vesenmeir case, supra, cited by appellees, the motion to dismiss this appeal is proper because the real controversy involved in this appeal has been removed by the repeal of the ordinance, and the question here for that reason becomes moot. However, since the acts of the appellees pending this appeal were responsible for this, it is only just and proper that the costs of this appeal should be paid by appellees. See Thalman et al. v. Montgomery Ward & Co., Inc. (1950), 120 Ind. App. 532, 94 N.E.2d 370, which followed the authority laid down in the case of Ogborn v. City of Newcastle (1912), 178 Ind. 161, 98 N.E. 869. See also § 2-3237, Burns' 1946 Replacement, which provides against which party costs shall go and also provides that "in all other cases, costs shall be awarded as the court may deem right, following as nearly as possible, the general regulation for awarding costs."
The motion of the appellants to dismiss this appeal and to tax costs against the appellees is now sustained.
The appeal is dismissed at the costs of the appellees.
NOTE.  Reported in 174 N.E.2d 344.

=== CASE 9741102 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:49:35.853601+00 ===

T. G. Kavanagh, C. J.
Plaintiff college was organized under the Community College Act of 1955, 1955 PA 188, the predecessor of the Community College Act of 1966, MCLA 389.1 et seq.; MSA 15.615(101), et seq. In 1958 plaintiff sought and obtained its first grant of tax authority. The electorate approved a 20-year levy not to exceed 1 mill for debt retirement and not to exceed .5 mill for operating expenses.
In 1968 plaintiff sought and obtained from the *566electorate authorization to replace the 1958 millage with an unrestricted 1.5-mill levy pursuant to § 144 of the Community College Act of 1966; MCLA 389.144; MSA 15.615(1144).
That section requires the board of trustees of each community college to seek authorization from the voters for any tax up to a maximum of 5 mills. However, that section also empowers the board of trustees to impose unlimited taxes for:
"the payment of principal and interest on bonds or other evidences of indebtedness or for the payment of assessments or contract obligations in anticipation of which bonds are issued * * * .” MCLA 389.144(1); MSA 15.615(1144)(1).
Until 1972 plaintiffs board of trustees did not authorize a levy exceeding 1.5 mills. In that year plaintiff’s board of trustees approved a levy of 1.62 mills composed of 1.30 mills for operating expenses and .32 mills for bond retirement.
On September 12, 1972, defendant Saginaw Board of Commissioners adopted a resolution disapproving plaintiffs levy in excess of 1.5 mills. Defendant then spread a levy of only 1.5 mills.
Plaintiff filed a complaint for mandamus in Saginaw Circuit Court on September 26, 1972, which alleged that the defendant board of commissioners had a clear legal duty to direct the assessing officers of Saginaw County to levy taxes as certified by plaintiff.
Defendant in its answer pled the affirmative defense of equitable estoppel alleging that plaintiff misled the voters into thinking that no millage greater than 1.5 mills would be authorized.
The case was tried on October 2, 1972. At the trial the defendant asked the trial court to take judicial notice of the fact that plaintiff had circu*567lated misleading literature. The trial court declined to do so, but denied the writ anyway finding that the word "replace” as used in the ballot proposal did mislead the voters.
Plaintiff appealed to the Court of Appeals. Eighteen days after the trial defense counsel obtained from plaintiff copies of the literature alleged to have been misleading and attached that literature to the appellate brief.
The Court of Appeals reversed the trial court and held that the trial court erred in light of West Shore Community College v Manistee County Board of Commissioners; 389 Mich 287; 205 NW2d 441 (1973). We agree.
Defendants seek to distinguish West Shore on the basis of the remedy sought. The community college in West Shore sought a declaratory judgment that it was entitled to levy .3 mill to pay debt service, whereas the instant case is a proceeding in mandamus, which requires the showing of a clear legal duty.
That clear, legal and compulsory duty is found in Michigan’s general property tax law MCLA 211.37; MSA 7.55:
"[The board of commissioners] shall direct that such of the several amounts of money proposed to be raised for township, school, highway, drain and all other purposes as shall be authorized by law, be spread upon the assessment role of the proper townships, wards and cities.”
The board’s inquiry is limited to the question of whether the levies are "authorized by law”. If the board fails to exercise this duty, mandamus is the proper remedy to compel the same. Robbins v Barron, 33 Mich 123, 125 (1876). Since the 1972 levy of plaintiff was authorized by Const 1963, art *5689, § 6 and § 144 of the Community College Act of 1966, the board of commissioners had no discretion to refuse to spread the levy.
Defendants’ asserted defense of equitable estoppel is ordinarily available in mandamus cases. However, that defense may not be used to accomplish indirectly that which may only be accomplished directly, to wit, the voiding of an election. Fulton Twp School Dist, Gratiot County, v School Dist No 4 Fractional, Essex Twp, Clinton County, 302 Mich 566; 5 NW2d 467 (1942). In West Shore, too, the board of commissioners alleged that the ballot proposal was misleading. In response this Court said:
"Where a ballot proposal is misleading, the remedy is to void the election. We are not asked to do that in this action. Therefore, we express no opinion as to whether a referendum to establish 'a maximum tax rate’ is invalid in the absence of some reference to the power to levy taxes for the payment of principal and interest on bonds 'without limitation as to rate or amount’.” 389 Mich 287, 297.
For further clarification we note § 16 of the Community College Act of 1966; MCLA 389.16;. MSA 15.615(116) mandates the proper means to challenge an election held under the act:
"Sec. 16. The general election laws, including the voting of absent voters, and all laws of the state relating to the hours for the opening and closing of the polls at elections and for preserving the purity of elections and for preventing fraud and corruption shall govern all elections under this act so far as the same are applicable and not inconsistent with the provisions of this act. ” (Emphasis added.)
And § 4545 of the Revised Judicature Act of *5691961; MCLA 600.4545; MSA 27A.4545 sets out the procedure to be followed in testing the validity of an election:
"Sec 4545. (1) An action may be brought in the circuit court of any county of this state whenever it appears that material fraud or error has been committed at any election in such county at which there has been submitted any constitutional amendment, question, or proposition to the electors of the state or any county, township, or municipality thereof.
(2) Such action shall be brought within 30 days after such election by the attorney general or the prosecuting attorney of the proper county on his own relation, or on the relation of any citizen of said county without leave of the court, or by any citizen of the county by special leave of the court or a judge thereof. Such action shall be brought against the municipality wherein such fraud or error is alleged to have been committed.
(3) After such action is brought the procedure shall conform as near as may be to that provided by law for actions for quo warranto.”
Since the procedure for voiding the 1968 election was not followed by the Saginaw Board of Commissioners their legal duty is clear. They must spread the levy as authorized by the Delta College Board of Trustees.
We remand to the trial court for determination of a levy on property not heretofore charged as authorized by the plaintiff which will produce the sum that would have been produced by payment of the levy requested in 1972, mandamus shall issue to enforce such levy.
Affirmed. No costs, a public question being involved.
Levin, Fitzgerald, and Coleman, JJ., concurred with T. G. Kavanagh, C. J.
*570Lindemer and Ryan, JJ., took no part in the decision of this case.

=== CASE 9741103 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:49:35.858184+00 ===

Williams, J.
(concurring in part, dissenting in part). This case poses two issues for the Court’s consideration. First, we must decide whether in an action for mandamus to compel the spreading of a tax authorized by statute and a vote of the electorate of the Delta College District in 1968, the affirmative defense of equitable estoppel is available to challenge the validity of the 1968 election where it appears that plaintiff misled the electorate through the wording of the ballot proposal and through its campaign literature. I concur with my Brother Kavanagh’s judgment that the defense of equitable estoppel is not available for that purpose in the circumstances of this case, and that a writ of mandamus must issue.
Second, the parties raise the issue of when the 1968 millage authorization is to terminate. The 1968 millage authorization is to terminate in 1978, as asserted by defendant-appellant Saginaw County Board of Commissioners.
I — Facts
In May of 1958, appellee Delta College won approval from the electorate of the Delta College District of a grant of tax authority allowing a levy of up to one mill for debt retirement and up to .5 mill for operating expenses, for a period of 20 years.
The stricture that no more than .5 mill of the 1.5 mills authorized be allocated to operating expenses apparently was felt to be too limiting and inflexible by Delta College as the size of the school and its operating expenses grew in the 1960’s, for in 1968, Delta launched a campaign to "replace” *571the 1958 millage authorization with an "unrestricted” millage grant of 1.5 mills which, it was said, would cost the electorate no more in taxes while providing the college the flexibility it needed iri\budgetary matters. The fact that the new grant of tax authority would "replace” the 1958 millage grant was emphasized strongly in the campaign in support of the new grant.1 Moreover, the ballot proposal specifically stated that the new authorization would "replace the authorization voted May 27, 1958”.
Similarly, the campaign literature in support of the new authorization repeatedly emphasized that the new authorization would cost no more than the 1958 authorization of 1.5 mills. These assurances went so far as to include a chart presenting sample calculations of the "Total Delta Tax” under the proposed millage authorization. These calculations of the "total” tax used a 1.5-mill levy.2 Significantly, this campaign literature also stated that the new unrestricted authorization would be used for debt retirement as well as operating expenses, and building and equipment costs.
In November of 1968, the proposition authoriz*572ing the new millage was approved by the electorate of the Delta College District, and in April of 1972, appellee Delta College gave notice to Appellants Saginaw County Board of Commissioners that that same electorate should be taxed at a rate of 1.62 mills in 1972. One and three-tenths mills was to go for operating expenses, and .32 mills for bond retirement.
In September of 1972, appellant board of commissioners adopted a resolution disapproving any levy in excess of 1.5 mills, and authorized a levy up to 1.5 mills only.
Two weeks thereafter, appellee Delta College initiated an action for mandamus to compel appellant to spread and assess a total mill tax of 1.62 upon the assessment rolls of Saginaw County. Appellant board of commissioners responded with the affirmative defense of equitable estoppel alleging that plaintiff misled the voters into thinking that no millage greater than 1.5 mills would, be levied under the 1968 authorization. On October 2, 1972, Judge Joseph R. McDonald of the Saginaw County Circuit Court refused to issue a writ of mandamus, dismissing the action by summary judgment.
The Court of Appeals reversed the lower court judgment on January 21, 1974, and ordered a remand for entry of a writ of mandamus.
This Court granted leave on June 24, 1974.
A key fact, nowhere mentioned in the ballot proposal or the 1968 millage campaign, helps illuminate the instant controversy. In 1966, under new authority granted by the Michigan Constitution of 1963, the Legislature enacted the Community College Act of 1966 which empowered the board of trustees of each community college to levy a tax as pertinently follows:
*573"Sec. 144. (1) The board of trustees of each community college district may levy * * * a tax which shall not exceed the rate which has been heretofore or is hereafter authorized by the qualified electors of the district * * * . The funds may be used for any and all purposes authorized except that the foregoing limitation shall not apply to taxes imposed for the payment of principal and interest on bonds or other evidences of indebtedness or for the payment of assessments or contract obligations in anticipation of which bonds are issued, which taxes may be imposed without limitation as to rate or amount. * * * ” MCLA 389.144; MSA 15.615 (1144). (Emphasis added.)
Appellee Delta College relies on precisely this statutory authorization to tax beyond the rate approved by the electorate where the tax imposed is for the retirement of debt, to justify its demand for a 1.62 levy.
II — Termination of the 1968 Millage Authorization
While the validity of the 1968 millage authorization is no longer subject to challenge, for reasons outlined by my Brother Chief Justice Kavanagh, we think it clear that the authorization terminates in 1978, the year that the 1958 authorization would have terminated. The voters in the 1968 election were apparently never explicitly informed either in the ballot proposition itself, or in the campaign literature whether the new authorization would terminate in 1978 or would continue indefinitely. However, an examination of the ballot language and the campaign literature indicates that the 1978 termination date is the most reasonable interpretation.
The ballot language in the 1968 election read as follows:
*574"Shall the Board of Trustees of Delta College, Counties of Bay, Midland and Saginaw, Michigan, a public community college of the State of Michigan, be authorized to levy a tax on the real and tangible personal property within the College District not to exceed the annual rate of one and one-half mills on each dollar ($1.50 on each $1,000.00) of the assessed valuation of such property as state equalized in the manner and for the purposes provided by Section 144 of Act 331 of the Public Acts of the State of Michigan of the year 1966 as amended, which authorization shall replace the authorization voted May 27, 1958?” (Emphasis added.)
The fact that the ballot language states that the new authorization "shall replace the authorization voted May 27, 1958” (emphasis added), coupled with the absence of any reference to a specific termination date, suggests that it was intended that the new authorization was to take on the termination date of the 1958 authorization.
This interpretation is certainly consistent with the impression created by Delta in the campaign literature supporting the new authorization. For example, the campaign literature invariably emphasized that the new authorization would mean no increase in the 1958 millage authorization, as the following excerpts make clear:
"5. Will this new authorization cost more than the original 1958 authorization?
"NO! This authorization only replaces the original authorization.”
* * *
"WHAT ARE WE ASKING FOR?
Replace 1958 millage with 1-1/2 mills unrestricted. THERE WOULD BE NO INCREASE FROM THE ORIGINAL AUTHORIZATION.”
"WHAT ARE WE ASKING FOR?
*575In 1958,1-1/2 mills was voted.
This amount was Restricted
1 mill for building
1/2 mill for operating.
In 1968, we are asking you to replace the restricted 1958 with 1-1/2 mills unrestricted.
This means no increase in authorization.
A YES vote means NO INCREASE in authorization.”
Yet clearly, replacing a 1.5 mill tax for a limited period of years with a 1.5 mill tax for an indefinite period of time would constitute an increase in the millage authorization.
Moreover, a reading of Delta’s campaign literature creates the impression that the new authorization would have one, and only one, effect: to increase the flexibility of Delta’s budgeting by lifting the restrictions on the 1958 authorization. Nowhere in the campaign literature before us is it indicated that a change in the 1978 termination date was desired.
Consequently, it would seem clear that Delta College said and intended that the new authorization was to take on the 1978 termination date of the 1958 authorization.
We therefore conclude that the ballot language of the 1968 referendum substituted an unrestricted 1.5-mill tax for the restricted 1958 tax, terminating in 1978.
Furthermore, if such were not the intent of the referendum, then Delta College is guilty once again of misleading the public in the 1968 election. While we have concluded that the defense of equitable estoppel is not available to challenge the validity of the 1968 election because of the exclusivity of the quo warranto procedure, no such problem arises in applying the doctrine of equita*576ble estoppel to the issue of when the 1968 authorization is to terminate.
The central principle of equitable estoppel is that one who by his language or conduct leads another to do what he would not otherwise have done, shall not subject such person to loss or injury by disappointing the expectations upon which he acted. Holt v Stofflet, 338 Mich 115, 119; 61 NW2d 28 (1953). If Delta College did not intend that the 1968 authorization take on the 1978 termination date, then its representations to the electorate were false and misleading, and the public has relied on those misrepresentations. Under the doctrine of equitable estoppel, we will not allow Delta to breach the expectations of the public on this issue.
My Brother Chief Justice Kavanagh does not resolve the issue of the termination date of the 1968 authorization, apparently because he does not feel the issue was sufficiently raised by the parties. I disagree.
In both its brief and in oral arguments, the board of commissioners clearly asserted that the termination date of the 1968 authorization was 1978. The parties’ argument on this issue centered on the meaning of the phrase "which authorization shall replace the authorization voted May 27, 1958?”, which appeared in the 1968 ballot proposal. Delta argued in both its brief and in oral arguments that this phrase meant that the 1958 authorization was repealed. This would imply that the 1978 termination date would no longer have effect. The board of commissioners argued that the phrase meant that the 1968 authorization was intended to incorporate the 1958 authorization’s termination date and 1.5-mill limitation, changing the earlier authorization only by lifting the restric*577tion on how the 1.5 mills could be spent. See appellants’ brief, pp 10-11.
The effect of avoidance of the termination date issue would be to unnecessarily require the parties to litigate this issue at some future date. The issue was raised and should be resolved.
This idea appeared on each piece of campaign literature which was presented to us. See Appellant’s Supplemental Exhibits 1 and 2.
An excerpt from one of the pieces of campaign literature supporting the new authorization reads as follows:
"4. What will it [the new authorization] cost me?
Market Value State Equalized Of Your Property Valuation Total Delta Tax
$2,000 $1,000 $1.50
$4,000 $2,000 $3.00
$6,000 $3,000 $4.50
$8,000 $4,000 $6.00
$10,000 $5,000 $7.50
$20,000 $10,000 $15.00
$30,000 $15,000 $22.50
"For the State Equalized Valuation of your property contact your county tax collector.”

=== CASE 2226208 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:03.725741+00 ===

22 Ill.2d 63 (1961)
174 N.E.2d 172
ANNA L. BRYNTESEN, Appellant,
v.
CARROLL CONSTRUCTION COMPANY, Appellee.
No. 36078.
Supreme Court of Illinois.
Opinion filed March 29, 1961.
Rehearing denied May 17, 1961.
PEABODY, WESTBROOK, WATSON & STEPHENSON, of Chicago, (LOWELL H. JACOBSON, LAWRENCE P. HICKEY, and BURTON H. YOUNG, of counsel,) for appellant.
KIRKLAND, ELLIS, HODSON, CHAFFETZ & MASTERS, of Chicago, (DAVID JACKER, and WILLIAM H. SYMMES, of counsel,) for appellee.
Reversed and remanded.
Mr. CHIEF JUSTICE SCHAEFER delivered the opinion of the court:
John Bryntesen, a welder's helper, was killed when he fell from a scaffold while working on the construction of a high school building at Libertyville. His widow brought *64 this action in the circuit court of Cook County against Carroll Construction Co., the general contractor, under section 9 of the Structural Work Act, also referred to as the "Scaffold Act." (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1959, chap. 48, par. 69.) Judgment was entered on a verdict for the plaintiff but was reversed by the Appellate Court, First District, on the ground that the action was barred by a former adjudication. (26 Ill. App.2d 307.) We granted leave to appeal.
The earlier action, which was held by the Appellate Court to bar the present one, was brought in the circuit court of Lake County by the decedent's daughter, as administratrix of his estate, against the present defendant, Carroll Construction Company, and its subcontractor, Hansell-Elcock Company. The complaint recited that the action was brought pursuant to the Injuries Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1959, chap. 70, pars. 1, 2) and the Scaffold Act. It set forth passages of the Scaffold Act and alleged that "the knowing and wilful failure" of the defendants to comply with that act caused the decedent's death. Although it alleged that the decedent was "in the exercise of due care," it did not allege negligence on the part of the defendants.
The case was tried to a jury, and the unusual nature of the complaint was discussed in chambers at the close of the evidence and before the jury was instructed. Plaintiff's attorney made an oral motion to amend the introductory paragraph of the complaint to add the names of the widow and the surviving children as parties plaintiff. What then occurred was thus described by the Appellate Court: "The court thereupon inquired of counsel for plaintiff: `What are you doing so far as the administrator is concerned' and counsel for plaintiff replied: `I am pleading in the alternative. I would rather not strike that.' The court then said: `You will have her in as administrator and also individually, is that right?' and counsel replied in the affirmative. After an objection was made by counsel for defendants, counsel for plaintiff then stated that this action was brought under *65 the Wrongful Death Act and also the Scaffold Act and that he desired to strike the ad damnum clause of $20,000 and substitute therefor the sum of $40,000 and strike the allegation of due care from the complaint. The court denied the oral motion in so far as it sought to change the designation of the plaintiff as requested but stated that the motion of the plaintiff to strike the allegation of due care would be allowed. Thereupon, counsel for plaintiff stated: `I will leave it in then.'" (14 Ill. App.2d at 209.) The case was then submitted to the jury upon instructions which required plaintiff to prove both wilful violation of the Scaffold Act and decedent's due care. Judgment was entered on the jury's verdict for the defendants.
Both the widow, as a party aggrieved by the judgment, (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1959, chap. 110, par. 74,) and the administratrix appealed from this judgment to the Appellate Court, Second District. They joined in a single brief which argued (1) that the trial court "erred in denying plaintiff's motion to amend the complaint and add the proper parties plaintiff" and that the Appellate Court should allow those parties to be added in that court; (2) that the trial court "erred in instructing the jury that the plaintiff must prove that decedent and his next of kin were in the exercise of due care," and (3) that the verdict was "against the manifest weight of the evidence." They asked that the Appellate Court allow "the amendment adding the proper parties plaintiff and reverse the judgment of the trial court and enter judgment in favor of Plaintiff as to the Defendant's liability and remand to the trial court for the ascertainment of damages only under the terms of Rule 68.2 of the Civil Practice Act, [sic] or in the alternative, that this case be reversed and remanded for a new trial."
The Appellate Court for the Second District affirmed the judgment for the defendants, and the Appellate Court for the First District held that the present action by the widow is therefore barred. The correctness of that holding *66 depends upon what was determined in the first case. We have no doubt that the present plaintiff, the widow, presented upon the first appeal a case that could have resulted in a judgment which would have barred her present action. She urged that the complaint showed unmistakably that relief was sought for a violation of the Scaffold Act, that she should be substituted as plaintiff and the presence of the administratrix as a party should be disregarded as surplusage, and that the evidence established that she was entitled to recover under the Scaffold Act. She prayed that the Appellate Court enter a judgment that would establish the liability of the defendants to her, and remand the case for the ascertainment of damages.
But we do not read the opinion of the Appellate Court in the first case as passing upon the merits of the widow's claim. The opinion pointed out that if it was counsel's intention to state a cause of action under the Structural Work Act, the administratrix was not a proper party plaintiff because section 9 of that Act "gives a right of action in case of death by reason of a wilful violation of the provisions of that Act to the widow of the person so killed." It disposed of the asserted error in denying the motion to add parties upon the grounds that the materiality of the proposed amendment was not apparent, that no proposed amendment was presented to the court, and that the trial court did not abuse its discretion in denying it. "Had the complaint been amended as counsel desired," the opinion stated, "it would not have been a good complaint based on the Structural Work Act." 14 Ill. App.2d at 211.
With respect to the alleged error in instructing the jury that the plaintiff had the burden of proving the decedent's due care, the court pointed out that the plaintiff's attorney expressly stated that he had no objection to that instruction. The opinion did not discuss the contention that the verdict for the defendants was against the weight of the evidence. It concluded, "It is useless to speculate what the verdict of *67 the jury might have been had the proper party plaintiff sought a recovery under the Structural Work Act and the jury [been] instructed upon the issues made under such a complaint and answer." 14 Ill. App.2d at 213.
It has been pointed out that "Many, if not most res judicata cases are the result of a procedural error on the part of counsel." (Cleary, Res Judicata Re-examined, 57 Yale L.J. 339, 349.) Under the existing statutory scheme, the right of action in case of death may be in the personal representative of the deceased, or in the widow. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1959, chap. 70, pars. 1, 2; chap. 48, par. 69.) The same kind of statutory interplay existed between the Injuries Act and the Coal Mining Act until 1911, when the latter statute was amended to place the right of action in the personal representative. (See McFadden v. St. Paul Coal Co. 263 Ill. 441; cf. Ill. Rev. Stat. 1959, chap. 93, par. 10.07.) But the statutory situation did not justify the confused complaint that was originally filed in the first case. That complaint did not assert alternative rights of action, and as the Appellate Court pointed out, the proposed amendment made no change in the body of the complaint, so that if it had been allowed it would only have led to more confusion.
We conclude that the right of the present plaintiff to recover for a wilful violation of the Structural Work Act was not adjudicated in the first case, despite the persistent, but misguided, efforts of the plaintiff's counsel to have that right adjudicated. So far as the Structural Work Act aspects of the first case are concerned, the final judgment was that the action was not brought by the proper party, and that is not a judgment on the merits. (People ex rel. Porter v. Minnie Creek Drainage Dist. 311 Ill. 228.) The cause must therefore be remanded to the Appellate Court, First District, with directions to pass upon the other questions raised upon the appeal to that court.
Reversed and remanded, with directions.

=== CASE 9741104 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:49:36.423178+00 ===

Allen, P. J.
Plaintiffs instituted suit in the Court of Claims against the State Highway Department and the St. Clair County Road Commission1 on June 3, 1974, seeking damages for injury sustained by William Hanger in an automobile collision on October 28, 1973 in St. Clair County allegedly occasioned by defective road maintenance. MCLA 691.1402; MSA 3.996(102). The Court of Claims granted the State Highway Department’s motion for accelerated judgment on the grounds that plaintiffs had not complied with the *575six-month notice provision of the Court of Claims Act, MCLA 600.6431(3); MSA 27A.6431(3), and plaintiffs appeal.
Plaintiffs maintain that the court erroneously based accelerated judgment on their failure to comply with an unconstitutional notice provision. Tamulion v State Waterways Commission, 50 Mich App 60; 212 NW2d 828 (1973). Alternatively, plaintiffs forcefully rely on the recent ruling in Hobbs v State Highway Department, 58 Mich App 189; 227 NW2d 286 (1975), that the notice provision within the general highway statute exclusively controls cases of the instant stature, and said notice requirement remains constitutionally void under the Supreme Court opinion in Reich v State Highway Department, 386 Mich 617; 194 NW2d 700 (1972). For reasons which will become evident, this Court opines that the six-month notice provision of the Court of Claims Act applies to the instant plaintiffs, and is not constitutionally infirm. We conclude, moreover, that the Supreme Court decision in Carver v McKernan, 390 Mich 96; 211 NW2d 24 (1973), dictates that the accelerated judgment be set aside, and the cause remanded for a hearing to ascertain whether the State Highway Department was prejudiced by plaintiffs’ failure to give notice.
The instant action was dismissed because plaintiffs failed to comply with the following notice provision in the Court of Claims Act:
"In all actions for property damage or personal injuries, claimant shall file with the clerk of the court of claims a notice of intention to file a claim or the claim itself within 6 months following the happening of the event giving rise to the cause of action.” MCLA 600.6431(3); MSA 27A.6431(3).
Plaintiffs’ theory of liability against the State *576Highway Department is based on § 2 of the sovereign immunity statute, 1964 PA 170, which reads in pertinent part:
"Each governmental agency having jurisdiction over any highway shall maintain the highway in reasonable repair so that it is reasonably safe and convenient for public travel. Any person sustaining bodily injury or damage to his property by reason of failure of any governmental agency to keep any highway under its jurisdiction in reasonable repair, and in condition reasonably safe and fit for travel, may recover the damages suffered by him from such governmental agency.” MCLA 691.1402; MSA 3.996(102).
Under § 4 of the act, one finds the following notice provision:
"(1) As a condition to any recovery for injuries sustained by reason of any defective highway, the injured person, within 120 days from the time the injury occurred, except as otherwise provided in subsection (3) shall serve a notice on the governmental agency of the occurrence of the injury and the defect. The notice shall specify the exact location and nature of the defect, the injury sustained and the names of the witnesses known at the time by the claimant.
"(2) The notice may be served upon any individual, either personally, or by certified mail, return receipt requested, who may lawfully be served with civil process directed against the governmental agency, anything to the contrary in the charter of any municipal corporation notwithstanding. In case of the state, such notice shall be filed in triplicate with the clerk of the court of claims. Filing of such notice shall constitute compliance with section 6431 of Act No. 236 of the Public Acts of 1961, being section 600.6431 of the Compiled Laws of 1948, requiring the filing of notice of intention to file a claim against the state.” MCLA 691.1404; MSA 3.996(104).
*577In Reich v State Highway Department, 386 Mich 617; 194 NW2d 700 (1972), our Supreme Court declared the prior 60-day version of § 4 unconstitutional on equal protection grounds:
"The object of the legislation under consideration is to waive the immunity of governmental units and agencies from liability for injuries caused by their negligent conduct, thus putting them on an equal footing with private tortfeasors. However, the notice provisions of the statute arbitrarily split the natural class, i.e., all tortfeasors, into two differently treated subclasses: private tortfeasors to whom no notice of claim is owed and governmental tortfeasors to whom notice is owed.
"This diverse treatment of members of a class along the lines of governmental or private tortfeasors bears no reasonable relationship under today’s circumstances to the recognized purpose of the act. It constitutes an arbitrary and unreasonable variance in the treatment of both portions of one natural class and is, therefore, barred by the constitutional guarantees of equal protection.
"Just as the notice requirement by its operation divides the natural class of negligent tortfeasors, so too the natural class of victims of negligent conduct is also arbitrarily split into two subclasses: victims of governmental negligence who must meet the requirement, and victims of private negligence who are subject to no such requirement. Contrary to the legislature’s intention to place victims of negligent conduct on equal footing, the notice requirement acts as a special statute of limitations which arbitrarily bars the actions of the victims of governmental negligence after only 60 days. The victims of private negligence are granted three years in which to bring their actions. See MCLA 600.5805; MSA 27A.5805. Such arbitrary treatment clearly violates the equal protection guarantees of our state and Federal Constitutions. The notice provision is void and of no effect.” 386 Mich App 623-624.
The Court was not confronted with the question *578whether one seeking recovery against the state under § 2 of the sovereign immunity act is nonetheless required to comply with the notice provisions of the Court of Claims Act, since all claimants in Reich had given notice before six months. This question was negatively answered in Hobbs, supra.
In Hobbs, supra, the Court of Claims dismissed plaintiffs suit for failing to file a complaint, or notice of intent, within one year pursuant to MCLA 600.6431(1); MSA 27A.6431(1) of the Court of Claims Act. On appeal, a panel of this Court ruled that the notice requirement under § 4 of the sovereign immunity statute2 is "expressly exclusive of the notice provision appearing in the Court of Claims Act”. Since the claim of plaintiff in Hobbs fell within § 2, the notice provision of 4 was deemed applicable. The Hobbs court further ruled that the legislative change of § 4 from 60 to 120 days did not prevent "the 'diverse treatment’ condemned in Reich”, and that the constitutional defect in the statute remains. Ergo, plaintiff was not barred from suit by failing to give notice within 120 days, since her complaint was filed within the two-year statute of limitations,3 judgment for the State Highway Department was reversed. The decision in Hobbs has been followed by two other panels of this Court. See Zimmer v State Highway Department, 60 Mich App 769; 231 NW2d 519 (1975), Kerkstra v State Highway Department, 60 Mich App 761; 231 NW2d 521 (1975).
We agree with our brothers in Hobbs that the *579specific notice provision of § 4 of the sovereign immunity act takes precedence over the notice provision in the Court of Claims Act with respect to personal injury claims under § 2.
Furthermore, we are compelled to concur with the Court in Hobbs, that under the pervasive ruling in Reich the legislative change in § 4 from 60 to 120 days did not breathe new life into the constitutionally void section. However, we respectfully disagree with the position of the Court in Hobbs that the § 4 notice provision is exclusive and, in effect, since void under Reich, a claimant proceeding under § 2 need not give notice short of filing a complaint within the two-year limitation period. We cannot agree that because § 4 has been declared void § 6431 of the Court of Claims Act is to be treated as void or at least overlooked.
The Legislature did not intend that parties claiming injury for highway defects be relieved of all responsibility under the Court of Claims Act. Both in § 4(2) and § 10 the Legislature expressed an intention that claims of this nature meet the requirements of § 6431 of the Court of Claims Act. This clear legislative intent is thwarted by that portion of Hobbs holding that because § 4 is void under Reich, supra, no notice of any type is required and the only limitation upon a claimant is the two-year statute of limitations. But since § 4 is void, we must treat it as if never written. However, § 10 of the Sovereign Immunity statute provides that:
"Claims against the state authorized under this act shall be brought in the manner provided in sections 6401 to 6475 of Act No. 236 of the Public Acts of 1961, being sections 600.6401 to 600.6475 of the Compiled Laws of 1948 * * * .” MCLA 691.1410; MSA 3.996(110).
*580Thus, discounting the unenforceable § 4, a claimant is required to proceed in the manner provided in § 6431 of the Court of Claims Act.
We conclude that the six-month notice requirement in § 6431(3) is applicable to instant plaintiffs. Plaintiffs filed their complaint seven months after the accident and the question still unanswered is whether the six-month provision denied plaintiffs equal protection of the laws. We note, at the outset, that the Supreme Court in Reich did not purport to nullify the notice provisions of the Court of Claims Act, but only struck down the notice provision of the sovereign immunity act. Therefore, we are not duty-bound by it. Since this Court is of the opinion that Reich is bottomed upon the false premise that the Legislature intended to place public and private tortfeasors on an equal plane,4 and no longer reflects the existing *581state of jurisprudential law as espoused by our Supreme Court, we decline to extend its ratio decidendi to invalidate § 6431(3).
Since no fundamental rights are involved, the rational basis test applies. Freissler v State Highway Commission, 53 Mich App 530; 220 NW2d 141 (1974), lv den, 393 Mich 757 (1974). Moreover, a statute is presumed constitutional and before this Court will strike § 6431(3) as violative of equal protection, plaintiffs must meet their "heavy burden of showing that the classification has no reasonable basis”. Busha v Department of State Highways, 51 Mich App 397, 400; 215 NW2d 567 (1973).
It has been recognized that "The principal purpose sought to be served by requiring notice is to provide the governmental agency with an opportunity to investigate the claim while the evidentiary *582trail is still fresh and, additionally, to remedy the defect before other persons are injured”. Hussey v Muskegon Heights, 36 Mich App 264, 267-268; 193 NW2d 421 (1971), (footnote omitted). Since we perceive these objectives as involving legitimate governmental interest, and because § 6431(3) applies to all persons similarly situated, we are obliged to sustain that provision as against plaintiffs’ constitutional challenge.
This Court is not oblivious to prior Court of Appeals decisions which invalidate § 6431(3) on the grounds that the provision offends the equal protection clause. Tamulion v State Waterways Commission, 50 Mich App 60; 212 NW2d 828 (1973), Reich v State Highway Commission,5 43 Mich App 284; 204 NW2d 226 (1972), lv den, 389 Mich 772 (1973). Both cases were based upon the Supreme Court decision in Reich I, supra, and were decided prior to the opinion in Carver v McKernan, 390 Mich 96, 100; 211 NW2d 24 (1973), wherein the Supreme Court specifically refused to declare the six-month notice requirement of the Motor Vehicle Accident Claims Act6 unconstitutional:
"By positing a legitimate purpose for the notice provision we are constrained to hold that § 18 does not necessarily violate the constitution.
"But, even though some notice requirement may be permitted, a particular provision may still be constitutionally deficient. We must consider the time specified in the notice for an extremely short period may be unreasonable. What period is reasonable in part depends on what purpose the notice serves. Because we *583cannot say with certainty what purpose the Legislature had in mind in providing for this notice, we are not prepared to say that the six month period provided by this statute is unreasonable as a matter of law.
"The failure to give notice may result in prejudice to the fund according to whatever reason justifies the notice requirement. Whenever the Secretary claims to have been prejudiced by the lack of notice, he should be afforded the opportunity to show such prejudice.
"While we decline to declare that the notice requirement of § 18 is constitutionally defective, we hold that only upon a showing of prejudice by failure to give such notice, may the claim against the fund be dismissed.”
This Court’s position is that Carver signals a retreat from the Reich /rationale, and the recent Supreme Court decision in Navarra v Board of Regents of the University of Michigan, 393 Mich 773; 224 NW2d 833 (1974),7 reveals that the Carver rule requiring the governmental agency to show prejudice before a claim is dismissed for lack of notice applies to the Court of Claims Act notice provisions in § 6431 as well.8 The judgment of the *584Court of Claims is reversed and the cause remanded for further proceedings pursuant to this opinion.
D. F. Walsh, J., concurred.
It was stipulated below that the County Road Commission be dismissed as a party defendant.
The opinion in Hobbs, supra, refers to both § 2 (MCLA 691.1402; MSA 3.996[102]) and § 4 (MCLA 691.1404; MSA 3.996[104]) as requirements of the general highway statute. Actually they are requirements of the sovereign immunity statute, 1964 PA 170. Because said sections pertain exclusively to highway matters the court descriptively referred to them as sections of the general highway statute.
MCLA 691.1411; MSA 3.996(111).
Although the question whether the governmental immunity statute itself contravenes equal protection remains unanswered by our Supreme Court, a number of panels of this Court have rejected such constitutional challenge to MCLA 691.1407; MSA 3.996(107). See Snow v Freeman, 55 Mich App 84, 86; 222 NW2d 43 (1974), Anderson v Detroit, 54 Mich App 496; 221 NW2d 168 (1974), Kriger v South Oakland County Mutual Aid Pact, 49 Mich App 7; 211 NW2d 228 (1973).
If the state has the power to shield itself from liability under a governmental immunity statute, it would necessarily follow that the state has the power to place reasonable conditions on recovery under statutory exceptions. Reich is troublesome, in that the Court appears to make exceptions to governmental immunity an all or nothing proposition. The Court reaches this result via language that the Legislature intended to place victims of private and public tortfeasors on an "equal footing”. It would seem fair to say, however, that if the Legislature so intended, it would not have enacted notice requirements. We invite the Supreme Court to reconsider its position in Reich.
Compare Reich with Busha v Department of State Highways, 51 Mich App 397; 215 NW2d 567 (1973) [two-year statute of limitations under MCLA 691.1411; MSA 3.996(111) not offensive to equal protection, although a victim of a private tortfeasor is accorded a three-year limitation period], and Freissler v State Highway Commission, 53 Mich App 530; 220 NW2d 141 (1974), lv denied, 393 Mich 757 (1974) [no equal protection violation where victim of a public tortfeasor has *581no right to jury trial in court of claims although victim of private tortfeasor has such a right in circuit court]. Also see a recent scholarly appraisal of Reich by Professor Luke K. Cooperrider, an excerpt of which follows:
"It must be clear that the legislature had no intention whatever to 'put governmental units on an equal footing with private tortfeasors’; such an intention is irreconcilable with the specific definition and circumscription of the liabilities recognized by the statute. Moreover, there are real and vital differences between the situations of governmental units and of private parties as potential tort defendants. * * * [N]° private party has a tort responsibility comparable to the governmental unit’s responsibility for injuries allegedly caused by defective or unsafe conditions of highways. The confidence expressed in the ability of the modern municipality to protect its own litigational interests may be justifiable so long as the municipality becomes aware in some fashion of the potential claim, or of the condition from which it arises, in time for an effective investigation, but if there is no requirement of notification at any time prior to the filing of suit, the unit’s efforts to uncover the facts relating to that condition as of the time of the accident may be fruitless. Taking into account the extent of the governmental unit’s liability exposure where public ways and public buildings are concerned, and of the difficulties of keeping in current touch with all those conditions that might become a source of liability, surely there is nothing constitutionally unreasonable about a notice requirement that is not applicable to other tortfeasors and other claimants.”
Cooperrider, The Court, the Legislature, and Governmental Tort Liability in Michigan, 72 Mich L Rev 187, 272 (1973).
Not to be confused with the earlier Reich decision of the Supreme Court, Reich v State Highway Department, 386 Mich 617; 194 NW2d 700 (1972), cited above. For purposes of clarification the Supreme Court decision is sometimes referred to as Reich I, and the subsequent Court of Appeals decision as Reich II. The party plaintiff in Reich //is unrelated to the party plaintiff in Reich I.
MCLA 257.1118; MSA 9.2818.
Plaintiffs in Navarra appealed from accelerated judgment in the court of claims which was grounded upon failure to comply with the one-year notice provision of MCLA 600.6431(1); MSA 27A.6431(1). A panel of this Court upheld the constitutionality of the provision against an equal protection challenge based upon the Supreme Court decision in Reich, supra, by distinguishing tort claims from the construction contract claim involved therein. The Supreme Court reversed, not on the basis of Reich, but in light of Carver: "The Court * * * hereby reverses the opinion of the Court of Appeals and remands the case to the trial court for reconsideration in light of Carver v McKernan, 390 Mich 96 (1973), where we held that 'only upon a showing of prejudice by failure to give such notice, may the claim against the [governmental authority] be dismissed.’ ”
Defendant maintains that § 6431 is jurisdictional in character, Gilliland Const Co v State Highway Department, 4 Mich App 618; 145 NW2d 384 (1966), and therefore the Carver rule which requires the governmental agency to show prejudice does not apply. Although the argument appears to possess some merit in cases where a party has failed to file a claim, or notice of intent to so file, within one year under § 6431(1), we find it inapposite to the instant case. Plaintiffs filed a complaint in the Court of Claims within one year.

=== CASE 9741105 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:49:36.428513+00 ===

O’Hara, J.
(concurring in result). In my view each state in our federated union is sovereign. It retains every incident of sovereignty not specifically delegated to the Federal government or prohibited to the state. The applicable constitutional provision states:
"The powers not delegated to the United States by the Constitution, nor prohibited by it to the States, are reserved to the States respectively, or to the people.” US Const, Am X.
Hence the state cannot be subject to tort liability unless it waives its immunity.
Because it waives its immunity for certain of its claimed torts does not mean that it cannot attach limitations to that waiver both as to conditions precedent to maintaining an action and designating the forum in which the claim against it can be litigated.
The equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment1 to the Federal Constitution or its Michigan constitutional counterpart,2 as I see it, have nothing to do with suits against the state for allegedly defectively designed, constructed or maintained highways.
However sound this may be historically and constitutionally the ultimate judicial authority in this state holds to the contrary. See Reich v State Highway Department, 386 Mich 617; 194 NW2d 700 (1972). By this holding all other courts of our state are bound.
*585Therefore when a majority of our Supreme Court says that a 60-day notice provision is not a valid condition precedent to the maintenance of a tort action against the state that is the law of this state.
It is my view, and I believe settled law, that tort claims against the state can only be maintained in the court of claims. Indisputably this case was started in the court of claims within the three years available to victims of private negligence.
The Supreme Court said in Reich, supra, at 623-624:
"Contrary to the legislature’s intention to place victims of negligent conduct on equal footing, the notice requirement acts as a special statute of limitations which arbitrarily bars the actions of the victims of governmental negligence after only 60 days [now 120 days]. The victims of private negligence are granted three years in which to bring their actions. See MCLA 600.5805; MSA 27A.5805. Such arbitrary treatment clearly violates the equal protection guarantees of our state and Federal Constitutions. The notice provision is void and of no effect.”
From the foregoing language I am forced to conclude that "equal footing” means exactly what the plain everyday universally accepted meaning of that term is. Equal is equal. It’s not pretty near equal, almost equal or practically equal. Thus I reason that "victims of governmental negligence” are entitled to the same three years in which to bring a tort action as "victims of private negligence” are granted.3 I reason further that any notice requirement which is a condition precedent to the maintenance of a tort action against the *586state, whether in the Court of Claims Act,4 the sovereign immunity statute,5 or any other legislative enactment, is as the Supreme Court said "a special statute of limitations” different from and in addition to that which is applicable to "victims of private negligence”.
Thus "it must follow, as the night the day”,6 that such a limitation by reason of any required notice not required of victims of private negligence, is, under our Supreme Court’s holding, violative of the equal protection clauses hereinbefore cited, and constitutionally infirm.
I do not discuss Carver v McKernan, 390 Mich 96; 211 NW2d 24 (1973), nor Navarra v Board of Regents of the University of Michigan, 393 Mich 773; 224 NW2d 833 (1974), because neither involves a tort claim against the state and thus is not to the decisional point here involved.
For the reasons herein set forth I feel obligated to vote to vacate the order granting accelerated judgment in favor of the defendant sovereignty and remand the case to the court of claims. No costs.
US Const, art XIV, § 1.
Const 1963, art 1, § 2.
MCLA 691.1411; MSA 3.996(111) establishes a two-year limitations period for claims brought against the state under MCLA 691.1402; MSA 3.996(102).
MCLA 600.6431; MSA 27A.6431.
For example, see MCLA 691.1404; MSA 3.996(104).
Shakespeare, Hamlet, Act I, sc 3, Line 79.

=== CASE 9741106 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:49:36.996867+00 ===

Jackson, J.
Relator has filed an original action in this court for a Writ of Prohibition and Mandate to restrain respondent from proceeding further in cause No. S-60-5156 in respondent court, and to require the respondent, Walter M. Bell, Judge of said Court, to expunge from the records the order requiring the production of certain books and records. We issued the temporary writ.
It appears from the record that the relator is a resident of Marion County, Indiana, is President and a Director of Farm and Home Insurance Company, an Indiana corporation organized and existing under the insurance and corporate laws of this state, and presumably engaged in the insurance business as defined by Acts 1935, ch. 162, §1, p. 588, being §39-3203, par. (d), Burns’ 1952 Replacement.
It further appears that relator is President and a Director of Farm and Home Agency, Inc., an Indiana corporation, allegedly exclusive general agent for Farm and Home Insurance Company. It further appears that Farm and Home Agency, Inc. owns more *24than seventy-five (75) per cent of the issued and outstanding stock of Farm and Home Insurance Company, and that the same persons are officers and directors of both corporations.
The original action entitled H. W. McKinney and Rachelie McKinney in behalf of themselves and all other stockholders of Farm and Home Agency, Inc. v. Farm and Home Agency, Inc., Philip H. Meade, et al, now pending in Superior Court of Marion County, Indiana, No. S-60-5156, asks for equitable relief, for an accounting and for the appointment of a receiver.
To this complaint the relator demurred, questioning the jurisdiction of the respondent court over the persons of the defendant, the subject matter of the action and of the case. At the same time relator filed a motion in respondent court requesting the court to expunge from its records the order requiring defendant to produce certain books and papers. Both the demurrer and the motion were overruled by the court. From such adverse ruling stems this original action.
To the temporary writ issued by this court, the respondent filed a verified return averring that the respondent judge was and is the duly elected, qualified and acting judge of the Superior Court of Marion County, Indiana, Room 1, and at all times referred to herein was so acting; that respondent court is a court of record and of general jurisdiction, pursuant to §4-1401 to §4-1421, inclusive, Burns’ 1946 Replacement, and as such is possessed with full power and jurisdiction, both inherent and statutory, to hear and decide stockholders derivative suits and receivership matters. Respondent also raises the *25question of relators compliance with Rule 2-35 of the Indiana Supreme Court.
The issues raised in, this action present two questions for our consideration:
A. The jurisdiction of the trial court to hear and determine the action there pending;
B. Whether or not relator has complied with Rule 2-35 of this court.
On the question of jurisdiction, the relator urges that the lower court can not entertain the action there pending in view of the provisions of Acts 1935, ch. 162, §270a, p. 588, being §39-5023, Burns’ 1952 Replacement, reading as follows:
“Actions prohibited. — No order, judgment, or decree providing for an accounting or enjoining, restraining or interfering with the operation of the business of any insurance company, association, or society, to which any provision of this act is applicable, or for the appointment of a temporary or permanent receiver thereof, shall be made or granted otherwise than upon the application of the department, except in an action by a judgment creditor or in proceedings supplemental to execution.”
In passing upon the above question we must of necessity determine whether or not the defendant below, Farm and Home Agency, Inc., is an “insurance company, association, or society, to which any provision of this act is applicable,”. (§39-5023 Burns’ 1952 Replacement, supra.)
We refer to the definition section of Acts 1935, ch. 162, §3, p. 588, being §39-3203, Bums’ 1952 Replacement, for assistance in ascertaining the intent of the legislature on the question here involved.
Section (a) defines “Insurance” as follows:
*26“(a) ‘Insurance’ means a contract of insurance or an agreement by which one party, for a consideration, promises to pay money or its equivalent or to do an act valuable to the insured upon the destruction, loss or injury of something in which the other party has a pecuniary interest, or in consideration of a price paid, adequate to the risk, becomes security to the other against loss by certain specified risks; to grant indemnity or security against loss for a consideration.”
Section (d) defines “Company” as follows:
“(d) The term ‘company’ means an insurance company and includes all persons, partnerships, corporations, associations, orders or societies engaged in or proposing to engage in making any kind of insurance authorized by the laws of this state.”
Section (i) defines “agent” as follows:
“(i) The term ‘agent’ means any person, firm or corporation,, not being an officer or salaried home or department office employee of a company or a duly licensed insurance broker, who solicits business in behalf of any company, corporation or association or transmits for a person other than himself an application for a policy of insurance of any kind to or from such company, corporation or association; to act in the negotiation of any such policy or in the negotiation of its continuance or renewal; to write and countersign policies and collect premiums therefor.
“A general, district, branch office, state or special agent is a person, firm or corporation acting under authority of any insurance company to supervise and appoint agents, to inspect risks and otherwise transact business for and as representative of such company.”
*27*26In view of the unambiguous language of the statute and the legislative intent as evidenced by the defi*27nition sections of the Act as above cited we are required to find, and do here so find, that the defendant below, Farm and Home Agency, Inc., does not make insurance within the purview of the Act, but merely acts as agent, broker or representative for the solicitation of insurance business. Hence the lower court had and has jurisdiction to hear and determine the issues raised by the complaint below.
In view of the decision we have reached it is not necessary to and we do not pass on the question as to compliance with Rule 2-35.
The alternative writ heretofore issued is dissolved and a permanent writ is denied.
Bobbitt, C. J., Achor, Arterburn and Landis, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9741107 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:49:37.000888+00 ===

On Petition for Rehearing
Jackson, J.
Relator has filed herein his petition for a rehearing in this cause alleging:
“1. This Court decided only that “Farm and Home Agency, Inc., does not make insurance within the purview of Burns’, Section 39-5023, no such question was presented in this Court or the Respondent trial court.
“2. Two questions arose on Realtor’s record in this case:
“(a) Does the alleged derivative suit by shareholders for a receiver and the motion to produce records (Exhibits A and C to petition for writ) constitute an interference with the business of Farm and Home Insurance Company so as to bring such an action within the prohibition of Burns’ 39-5023 and thus deprive Respondent of jurisdiction?
“(b) Does the prayer (rhetorical paragraph 1) in a derivative suit by shareholders for an accounting of the profits or losses of Farm and *28Home Insurance Company bring such suit within Burns’ 39-5023 so as to deprive Eespondent of jurisdiction when said unambiguous statute clearly provides in part that no order, judgment or decree providing for an accounting or enjoining, restraining or interfering with the operation of the business of an insurance company shall be made or granted, except upon application of the Department of Insurance?”
The relator is in error as regards proposition one as stated in his petition for rehearing, as of necessity that question was one of the determinable issues under the very statute on which relator relied, Acts 1935, ch. 162, §270a, p. 588, being §39-5023, Burns’ 1952 Eeplacement. The relator in its brief admits that it does not make insurance and therefore is not an insurance company.
Relator, at page five of its brief in support of application for rehearing, sets out that Article 7, Section 5, of the Constitution of the State of Indiana, requires this court to give a statement and decision in writing on questions presented in paragraphs 2(a) and 2(b) of the application for rehearing. The law on this point is very clear, as was decided by this court shortly after the adoption of our present Constitution. The Supreme Court held that Article 7, Section 5, referred only to such questions arising in the record and the decision of which was necessary to the final determination of the cause in the Appellate or Supreme Courts.
“. . . It has been the frequent practice of the Court, in cases where a single point would put an end to a case, to decide that point and no other.” Willets v. Ridgeway (1857), 9 Ind. 367, 370;
“Many questions are presented by the record in almost every appeal taken to the Supreme *29or Appellate Courts that are not considered or decided by the court, for the reason that their consideration and decision are unnecessary to' the determination of the appeal.” Indianapolis St. R. Co. v. Taylor (1906), 39 Ind. App. 592, 596, 80 N. E. 436.
For the reasons stated it is unnecessary for this court to decide the issues presented in paragraph 2(a) and 2(b) of relator’s application for rehearing.
We further point out that Farm and Home Insurance Company is not a party to this action.
Finally, we can not presume that a receiver of Farm and Home Agency, Inc., if appointed, would interfere with the operation of Farm and Home Insurance Company.
Petition for rehearing denied.
Landis, C. J., Bobbitt, Achor and Arterburn, JJ., concur.
Note. — Reported in 174 N. E. 2d 408. Rehearing denied 175 N. E. 2d 423.

=== CASE 9741108 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:49:37.836286+00 ===

REES, Justice.
This case had its genesis in the filing on October 31, 1974, of a petition alleging the juvenile, Harry James Meek, was a delinquent child as defined by chapter 232 of the Code of Iowa, 1973. Harry was adjudicated a delinquent by order of the juvenile court on November 15. On April 4, 1975, he was ordered committed to the Director of the Bureau of Family and Children’s Services of the Iowa State Department of Social Services for placement in the Iowa State Training School for Boys until he attained age 18 or was sooner released as provided by law. The juvenile now appeals, complaining of a number of alleged irregularities in juvenile court proceedings, of his detention during the pendency of the proceedings and of his ultimate commitment to the Iowa State Training School for Boys. We modify and affirm.
Harry James Meek was 16 years of age at the date of the filing of the petition alleging delinquency on October 31, 1974. In its order adjudicating him to be a delinquent entered November 15, 1974, the court specifically found Meek had made a telephone call to the high school in Independence on the previous September 16, informing the school authorities a bomb had been planted in the school and that the premises should be vacated within an hour. The court permitted him to remain at home with his mother and stepfather under the supervision of the county juvenile probation officer until he attained age 18 or until further order of court.
On the night of November 15, the same date on which Meek was adjudicated a delinquent, a fire seriously damaged the Middle School in Independence. On December 12 the probation officer and the county attorney met with the juvenile court and related certain alleged violations of the terms of Meek’s supervision. The court thereupon ordered Meek admitted to the Mental Health Institute in Independence for evaluation.
During his stay at the Mental Health Institute, Meek was granted furloughs to go home. He apparently had one disagreement with another patient, and received no tutoring or schooling while he was in the Institute.
A report of the evaluation of Meek at the Institute was filed with the court on January 6, 1975. Two days later the juvenile was released from the Institute and confined in the Buchanan County jail. The January 6 report embraced a recommendation that “the boy be considered for referral to the Boys Training School at Eldora where he can receive treatment in a structured program which will offer him the needed supervision and direction.” On January 13 an order was entered setting hearing on the matter for the following January 17.
On January 16 the probation officer filed a follow-up report, to which were attached statements of two witnesses, which directed the court’s attention to Harry’s involvement in the alleged arson at the Middle School on November 15, 1974, and an alleged arson at a garden near Jefferson School in Independence, on November 27, 1974. Also attached was a memorandum from the Iowa Department of Public Safety with regard to incidents in which Harry was involved while he was a resident of Linn County.
*287On the date set for hearing, January 17, no court reporter was available, and the hearing was postponed until February 7. In its order the court provided that the juvenile should be transferred to the training school in Eldora until the time for hearing. Despite such order, it appears from the record the juvenile remained in the county jail at Independence until January 26, at which time he was taken to the hospital in Cedar Rapids for surgery. He was returned to the county jail on February 3, following his hospitalization.
On February 5, 1975, the juvenile, joined by his mother and stepfather, filed a petition for a writ of habeas corpus in which they alleged Harry was being detained illegally in the county jail pursuant to the December 12 order in violation of due process of law.
Hearing was held on February 7 and on February 10. Following the first day’s hearing, the court ordered the youth held during the pendency of the then present proceedings.
Subsequent to the hearing on February 10, the court entered its order dated February 11 finding Harry did in fact participate in the breakin and arson at the Middle School, and also caused a garden fire near Jefferson High School to be set, irrespective of the fact that the latter fire did not occasion damage. The court further found that prior to a disposition of the case, further information and evaluation of Harry should be accomplished at the Iowa State Training School for Boys. Harry’s custody was then placed with the county probation officer for purposes of the evaluation at the training school and a social history was ordered prepared. Harry was temporarily placed in the custody of his mother and stepfather until an appointment could be arranged for his evaluation at the training school.
In its order, the court further found “the Juvenile is not being held under any of the Orders that were questioned under the Writ of Habeas Corpus and that at this time said
Writ is moot and [the court] makes no ruling on the same.”
Harry remained at the home of his mother and stepfather until February 27, when he was transported to Eldora for evaluation. He was later returned to his home pending a hearing to be held on April 4. Following such hearing, Harry was ordered committed to the Director of the Bureau of Family and Children’s Services of the Iowa Department of Social Services for placement in the Iowa State Training School for Boys until he attained the age of 18 years or was sooner released as provided by law.
The juvenile now appeals “from all adverse rulings of the Juvenile Court and from the Orders and Decrees of Court, rendered and entered in this proceedings, which order was dated February 11, 1975, and was entered of record on or about February 14, 1975, and from each adverse order and ruling of the Court therein.”
In this appeal the juvenile states the following issues for review:
(1) Juvenile court erred in issuing an ex parte order which deprived Harry of his liberty and provided for confinement at the Mental Health Institute and the county jail without notice or hearing, without the juvenile’s presence to confront witnesses at the hearing and without representation of counsel.
(2) Juvenile court erred in failing to give notice of the hearing to Harry’s parent prior to the juvenile’s detention for an extensive period of time.
(3) Juvenile court erred in permitting the detention of the juvenile for more time than is permitted by law, since no formal pleading was presented to the court and no determination, after hearing, was made by the court that the juvenile be required to remain in custody.
(4) The juvenile was unlawfully detained in the county jail from January 8 until January 26 and from February 3 until February 7 without the protection of complete separation from adults in an adult facility, *288without continued supervision and without competent medical care and schooling.
(5) Juvenile court was prejudiced by certain statements and reports in its hands before, during and after the hearings of February 7 and 10 and April 4.
(6) Juvenile court erred in permitting Bill Meister, a 17-year old witness at the February hearings, to testify to his own complicity in the arson at the Middle School without effectively advising the witness of his right to the benefit of counsel.
(7) The evidence adduced was insufficient and incompetent to support a finding Meek committed the arson at the Middle School.
I. In the first four issues stated for reviews, the juvenile attempts to establish error in connection with his detention under the court’s order of December 12, 1974. Issues (1) and (2) specifically question the validity of the order itself. The third issue purports to deal with the juvenile court’s finding of mootness in disposing of the petition for writ of habeas corpus. The fourth issue deals with conditions under which the juvenile was detained.
The State insists we should not reach a consideration of the merits of the first four issues, as they are not properly before us and the issue of the juvenile’s petition for a writ of habeas corpus is moot. We conclude the State is correct, at least in its assertion the issues involving Harry’s custody pursuant to the December 12 order are moot in light of the action of the court in disposing of the matter on February 7, 10 and 11, 1975.
The record indicates that on February 7 the court ordered Harry detained during the pendency of the proceedings. There is no indication that order suffered from any infirmity, nor is there any indication the resulting restraint was in violation of statute or constitutional mandate. Harry does not, in fact, raise any issue of invalidity of the February 7 order. The validity of his present commitment to the State Training School for Boys is the subject of later divisions of this opinion, but it must be viewed as a consequence of the hearings of February 7 and 10, and subsequent proceedings, and the orders entered pursuant thereto.
It is apparent from the record that on February 7 and subsequent thereto, Harry’s detention was pursuant to one or more court orders completely independent of the December 12 order. Nonetheless, Harry now asks us to review the legality of his detention between December and early February. We are forced to the conclusion the order of February 7 and subsequent orders rendered moot the question of Harry’s detention previous to February 7,1975.
An issue is moot if it no longer presents a justiciable controversy because it has become academic or nonexistent. Cf. State ex rel. Turner v. Midwest Development Corp., 210 N.W.2d 525 (Iowa 1973); Cooley v. Ensign-Bickford Company, 209 N.W.2d 100 (Iowa 1973). By the same token an issue is moot if an opinion thereon would be of no force or effect as to the underlying controversy. State ex rel. Turner, supra; see Nitta v. Kuda, 249 Iowa 853, 857-858, 89 N.W.2d 149, 151-152. Any opinion dealing with matters connected with Harry’s detention pursuant to the December 12 order would be academic in light of the independent force and effect of the juvenile court’s orders of, and subsequent to, February 7. Such an opinion Would not secure Harry’s release from the training school nor redress any possible wrongs inherent in his earlier detention.
We therefore decline to reach the merits of the issues arising from the December 12, 1974, order and Harry’s resulting detention through February 7, 1975. Similarly, the juvenile court did not err in holding the issues presented by the petition for habeas corpus moot. The sole function of the writ is to grant relief from unlawful imprisonment, and it is ordinarily effective for no other purpose. See 39 C.J.S. Habeas Corpus § 4, p. 430; McNally v. Hill, 293 U.S. 131, 55 S.Ct. 24, 79 L.Ed. 238. “A writ *289of habeas corpus should not be issued in what is a moot or practically a moot case * * *. The writ should not be granted where it would be ineffective.” 39 C.J.S. Habeas Corpus § 5, p. 436. The intervening order of February 7, 1975, constituted an independent basis for Harry’s further detention and rendered a habeas corpus challenge to the December 12, 1974, order ineffective to secure Harry’s release.
If Harry’s detention prior to February 7, 1975, was in contravention of statute or constitutional principles, it is indeed regrettable. Nonetheless, sound policy warns against the exercise of the judicial power beyond its limits of effectiveness. We therefore hold the issues raised regarding Harry’s detention pursuant to the December 12, 1974, order and prior to February 7, 1975, are now moot and are not reviewable on the merits in this appeal.
II. We note that in his third assignment of error, Harry attacks the validity of that portion of the order dated February 11, 1975, which directed that he be committed temporarily to the training school for evaluation. The record indicates he was in the custody of his mother prior to such temporary confinement and was put back in her custody following the evaluation and pending final disposition. Even assuming arguendo the invalidity of the temporary confinement, we can grant no effective relief from it. For the reasons articulated in Division I of this opinion, we decline to review the merits of the juvenile’s contention in this regard.
III. The remainder of the juvenile’s issues stated for review are. properly reviewable. Our review is de novo. Rule 334, Rules of Civil Procedure; In re Henderson, 199 N.W.2d 111, 116 (Iowa 1972); see § 232.58, The Code, and In Interest of Miller Children, 228 N.W.2d 60, 61-62 (Iowa 1975). We give weight to the trial court’s findings, but are not bound by them. Rule 344(f)(7) R.C.P.
IV. In his fifth issue stated for review, Harry contends the juvenile court was prejudiced by certain statements and reports in its hands before, during and after the hearings on February 7 and 10 and April 4, 1975. His contention is the court erred in reviewing and considering the reports, which became part of a court file, without requiring the persons making the reports to testify and to subject themselves to cross examination.
The material which the court considered, and to which Harry now objects, included a “follow-up” report dated January 16, which supplemented an earlier report prepared November 15,1974. The pertinent portions of the “follow-up” report are set out supra, but we note the report included references to “charges and information” dealing with the alleged arson at Middle School and the garden fire incident near Jefferson School, attributing responsibility for both incidents to Harry. Attached to the report was a signed statement by Bill Meister that he and Harry had broken into Middle School the night of the fire and that Harry, who had remained in the school’s bandroom some moments after Meister had left the building through a window, admitted upon leaving the building that he, Meek, had started a fire therein. Also attached was a “memorandum of violations” prepared by the Iowa Department of Public Safety purporting to list incidents of wrongdoing by Harry reflected by police records of the City of Cedar Rapids, where Harry apparently resided until early 1973.
Harry contends the information set out in the “follow-up” report should not have been accessible to the court, at least until they were accepted into evidence and not until the court had determined the juvenile had committed “infractions of his supervision” from other competent evidence. In support of his conclusion he cites In re Gault, 387 U.S. 1, 87 S.Ct. 1428, 18 L.Ed.2d 527, and In re Winship, 397 U.S. 358, 90 S.Ct. 1068, 25 L.Ed.2d 368.
Harry’s reliance on the above authority is misplaced in that he fails to rec*290ognize the inherent differences between the adjudicative and dispositional stages of delinquency proceedings. The adjudicatory stage is concerned solely with the determination of the merits of the allegations of delinquency, whereas the dispositional stage determines treatment if the claim of delinquency has been established. See In re Henderson, supra, 199 N.W.2d at 124 (concurring opinion).
The protections provided in Gault and in Winship were intended to be limited to the adjudicatory stage of delinquency proceedings. In Gault, the United States Supreme Court laid down certain due process standards applicable to juvenile proceedings to determine delinquency but expressly declined to rule upon the question of dispo-sitional action, saying at page 27 of 387 U.S., at page 1443 of 87 S.Ct., “ * * * nor do we here rule upon the question whether ordinary due process requirements must be observed with respect to hearings to determine the disposition of the delinquent child.” In Winship the Court carefully and explicitly differentiated between the adjudicatory stage and the dispositional stage, saying:
“This case presents the single, narrow question whether proof beyond a reasonable doubt is among the ‘essentials of due process and fair treatment’ required during the adjudicatory stage when a juvenile is charged with an act which would constitute a crime if committed by an adult.” 397 U.S. at 359, 90 S.Ct. at 1070.
A footnote to the last quoted paragraph adds:
“As in Gault, ‘we are not here concerned with * * * the pre-judicial stages of the juvenile process, nor do we direct our attention to the post-adjudicative or dispositional process.’ ”
Finally, at page 366 of 397 U.S., at page 1074 of 90 S.Ct., the Court added that,
“[T]he opportunity during the post-adjudicatory or dispositional hearing for a wide-ranging review of the child’s social history and for his individualized treatment will remain unimpaired.”
Harry Meek was adjudicated a delinquent by the order of court under date November 15, 1974, from which no appeal has been taken. It is clear the February and April hearings and orders entered pursuant thereto were dispositional in nature, concerned not with a re-adjudication of delinquency, but rather with the question of whether a change of circumstances required a change in disposition, looking only to the best interests of the child. Accordingly, Gault and Winship are of no benefit to Harry on this issue.
Even assuming, arguendo, that the hearings were adjudicatory in nature, the mere fact the court had before it the challenged materials would not automatically require a reversal. In Bellew v. Iowa State Highway Commission, 171 N.W.2d 284, 291 (Iowa 1969), we said:
“Where, then, improper evidence is admitted in the trial of an action at law, though the trial be to the court, prejudice is presumed and judgment will be reversed unless the record shows affirmatively that it was afterward discarded.”
However, we held in In Interest of Wheeler, 229 N.W.2d 241, 244 (Iowa 1975), that the Bellew rule is inapplicable in a proceedings under chapter 232, The Code, where our review is de novo, permitting us to arrive at a new or modified determination based on admissible evidence only.
We hold there was no error by the trial court in its reception of the challenged materials.
V. In his original brief and argument on appeal, Harry urged as a statement for review his contention the court erred in permitting Bill Meister to testify as to his complicity in the criminal action committed by Harry without effectively advising Meister of his right to the benefit of counsel. In his reply brief, however, Harry concedes his lack of standing to advance *291Meister’s constitutional rights. In light of such concession, we give no further attention to the issue so stated for review.
VI. In his final issue stated for review, Harry contends there was insufficient evidence adduced at the hearing to support a finding beyond a reasonable doubt that he committed the arson at Middle School.
We again reiterate our conclusion reached in Division IV above that the reasonable doubt standard is not mandated in dispositional proceedings. Even if such a standard were required, however, we have reviewed the record of the hearing and have concluded sufficient competent evidence is present to satisfy that high level of proof. Our de novo review of the record satisfies us the trial court was correct in its adjudication and disposition of the matters before it.
We note the juvenile court judge in his order of April 4, 1975, committed Harry to the Director of the Bureau of Family and Children’s Services for placement in the Iowa State Training School for Boys. The commitment of Harry to the Department was proper, but it was the responsibility of the Department to determine which of its facilities could best serve Harry’s special needs and problems. See In Interest of Kelly, Iowa, 236 N.W.2d 50 (filed Dec. 17, 1975). We modify the juvenile court’s order in this respect.
Modified and affirmed.
All Justices concur except McCORMICK, J., who concurs specially.

=== CASE 2226347 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:06.944545+00 ===

7 Ill. App. 3d 106 (1972)
286 N.E.2d 520
MORTGAGE SYNDICATE, INC., Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
DO AND GO EQUIPMENT, INC. et al., Defendants-Appellees.
No. 71-67.
Illinois Appellate Court  Fifth District.
August 18, 1972.
*107 W.C. Spomer, of Cairo, for appellant.
Gilbert Rosch, of Granite City, and Robert L. Lansden, of Cairo, for appellees.
Affirmed and remanded.
Mr. PRESIDING JUSTICE GEORGE J. MORAN delivered the opinion of the court:
This is an appeal from the trial court's refusal to enter a deficiency decree against the individual endorsers of a note secured by a real property mortgage in an action brought to foreclose the mortgage and for a personal deficiency decree.
In 1965, defendant, Do and Go Equipment Company, mortgaged certain real estate as security for an original indebtedness of $62,500 and concurrently executed a note in that amount which defendants Eileen P. Glick, Jerry Glick and William E. Haase signed on the back above the words "Without Recorse." Eileen P. Glick and Jerry Glick, husband and wife, were president and secretary, respectively, of defendant Do and Go Equipment Company. There is no explanation as to the identity of William E. Haase in the record or briefs. When payments were not made as provided in the note, the plaintiff-mortgagee filed a complaint to foreclose *108 the mortgage and for a deficiency judgment against all defendants. Defendants were served, all entered their appearances and filed their answers to the complaint. The trial court entered a decree of foreclosure and sale, and a deficiency decree against Do and Go Equipment Company, but it held "that plaintiff, Mortgage Syndicate, Inc., recover nothing against the defendants Eileen P. Glick, Jerry Glick, and William E. Haase, by reason of a deficiency in the sale price under mortgage foreclosure sale."
 1-3 The plaintiff contends that the trial court erred in failing to enter a deficiency decree against the individuals who signed the back of the note. Its argument is that the individual defendants signed as accommodation parties for the Do and Go Equipment Company, and as such, are sureties with primary and direct liability. In foreclosure proceedings, a surety on an underlying note secured by a real property mortgage may not be called in to make up for a deficiency resulting from foreclosure of the real property. (City of Chicago v. Chatham Bank of Chicago, 54 Ill. App. 2d 405; Walsh v. Van Horn, 22 Ill. App. 170.) Accordingly, the trial court was correct in refusing to enter a deficiency decree against the endorsers of the note. As pointed out in Conerty v. Richtsteig, 379 Ill. 360, 41 N.E.2d 476, a mortgage and accompanying promissory note constitute separate contracts, and any provision in the mortgage not found in the note itself is not part of the note and does not affect the personal liability of the maker of the note. The instant action was instituted for foreclosure only and the statutory form of complaint specified in ch. 95, sec. 23.6 (Ill. Rev. Stat., ch. 95, sec. 23.6) was followed. Although the plaintiff sought a deficiency decree against the endorsers of the note, and the statutory form seems to permit it, a deficiency decree is nevertheless not permitted under the authority of the cases above cited. Moreover, we do not regard the statutory suggested form for a mortgage foreclosure complaint to have effected a change in the law with regard to entry of a deficiency decree against endorsers of a mortgage note. As said in the case of City of Chicago v. Chatham Bank of Chicago, supra:
"Section 23.6 is a purely procedural amendment and it does not change the law in existence at the time the amendment was adopted. Had the legislature so intended they could very easily with apt words have expressed their intention to make guarantors liable for a deficiency judgment in a foreclosure action."
Defendants Jerry Glick and Eileen P. Glick contended in the trial court and also contend in this court that they were released from personal liability on the note because of an extension of payment agreement entered into between the maker of the note, defendant Do and Go Equipment, Inc., and the payee, the plaintiff. The trial court entered a decree *109 of foreclosure and sale and a deficiency decree against Do and Go Equipment, Inc., but it held "that plaintiff Mortgage Syndicate, Inc., recover nothing against the defendants, Eileen P. Glick, Jerry Glick and William Haase, by reason of a deficiency in the sale price under mortgage foreclosure sale." Under the issues presented, the trial court's order could be construed to mean only that a deficiency judgment could not be entered against the individual endorsers in the mortgage foreclosure suit. This, then, would not preclude the plaintiff from bringing suit at law to establish the endorsers' liability on the note. However, the order of the trial court could also be construed to mean that the endorsers were released from all personal liability on the note because the court believed that the renewal agreement exonerated the individual endorsers. This would preclude the plaintiff from bringing suit at law to establish the endorsers' liability on the note.
 4, 5 As we have noted above, the complaint in this case did not seek an adjudication of the liability of the Glicks upon the note. We therefore interpret the trial court's order to mean only that a deficiency judgment could not be entered against the Glicks in the mortgage foreclosure proceeding, and not to mean that the Glicks were released from personal liability on the note because of the extension' agreement. Accordingly, the plaintiff may henceforth institute an action against the Glicks seeking to impose their liability upon the debt represented by the note. It is that debt alone for which the Glicks are personally liable. A holder of a note may discard the mortgage entirely and sue on his note. (Oswianza v. Wengler & Mandell, Inc., 358 Ill. 302, 193 N.E. 123; Sturgis Nat. Bank v. Harris Trust and Savings Bank, 351 Ill. 465, 184 N.E. 589.) Because of our holding, the doctrine of res judicata would not operate to bar a subsequent action on the note.
Defendants also contend that the decree of foreclosure and sale is void in part because it failed to specifically "order, adjudge, and decree" the date upon which the owner of the equity of redemption was served with process or submitted to the jurisdiction of the court "as required by Illinois Revised Statutes, 1969, ch. 77, par. 18E." Appellant contends that this matter is not properly before this court on appeal, it being raised now for the first time, and that defendant had sufficient time to redeem and did not.
 6-8 A void judgment may be attacked at any time in any court, directly or collaterally. (Cherin v. R. & C. Co., 11 Ill. 2d 447, 453, 143 N.E.2d 235; Barnard v. Michael, 392 Ill. 130, 135, 63 N.E.2d 858; DePhillips v. DePhillips, 63 Ill. App. 2d 19, 25, 211 N.E.2d 147.) The right of redemption is a statutory right. (Illinois National Bank of Springfield v. Gwinn, 390 Ill. 345, 353, 61 N.E.2d 249.) Ill. Rev. Stat., ch. 77, par. *110 18E, requires that a decree of foreclosure set forth the date of service of process on the owner of the equity of redemption, or the date that such owner submitted to the jurisdiction of the court. Absent such requirement, the date of redemption period cannot start to run. (Drose v. Kerner, 34 Ill. 2d 495, 503, 217 N.E.2d 73.) The final decree rendered by the court below failed to provide the date of service of process on the owner of the equity of redemption, or the date that such owners submitted to the jurisdiction of the court. The court, therefore, transcended its statutory jurisdiction thereby rendering the part of the foreclosure decree as to its execution invalid, although valid as to the rights of the parties between themselves. People ex rel. Barrett v. Sbarbaro, 386 Ill. 581, 591, 54 N.E.2d 559, 563; Belford v. Woodward, 158 Ill. 122, 41 N.E. 1097.
For the foregoing reasons this case is affirmed as to that portion of the decree which provides that the plaintiff recover nothing against the defendants, Eileen P. Glick, Jerry Glick, and William E. Haase, under the foreclosure proceeding, and remanded for a supplemental decree establishing the date when the owner or owners of the equity of redemption of the premises were served with process and authorizing the sale and redemption thereof pursuant to Section 18E of the Judgments Act.
Affirmed and remanded with directions.
EBERSPACHER and JONES, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 2226348 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:06.964897+00 ===

286 N.E.2d 649 (1972)
Hughland WARDLAW, Appellant,
v.
STATE of Indiana, Appellee.
No. 571S141.
Supreme Court of Indiana.
September 5, 1972.
Rehearing Denied October 17, 1972.
Gil I. Berry, Jr., Buck, Berry, Landau & Breunig, Indianapolis, for appellant.
Theodore L. Sendak, Atty. Gen., of Ind., Stephen J. Cuthbert, Deputy Atty. Gen., for appellee.
ARTERBURN, Chief Justice.
This is an appeal from a conviction on a charge of first degree murder in which the defendant was sentenced to imprisonment for life. IC 1971, XX-XX-X-X; Burns' Ind. Stat. Ann. § 10-3401 (1972 Supp.).
The evidence indicates that the defendant and Louis Covington were homosexuals and that they became acquainted while both were doctor's assistants at Larue Carter Hospital in 1967 or 1968. It is admitted that they indulged in homosexual activities together. There came a time when there was an attempted separation; *650 however, the evidence is in conflict as to which one, or whether both, desired to make the separation. The evidence further shows that their separation was not peaceable. At one time the victim attacked the defendant with a razor, and at another time, the defendant shot the victim in the shoulder. The resulting wound was not fatal.
Shortly before midnight, on August 29, 1970, the defendant drove up in front of his brother's house and engaged in a conversation with his brother. Louis Covington drove up along side the defendant. The defendant grasped a .38 caliber pistol which he had recently purchased, threw his arm out the window and shot Covington. The bullet struck Covington in the head and he died of this wound. The defendant drove away and later gave himself up to the police. No weapons were found on the victim or in his car.
At the close of the state's evidence the defendant moved for a directed verdict on the ground that there was no evidence of premeditation. With that motion before it, the court was confronted with directing the jury to find the defendant not guilty of murder in the first degree. Having reviewed the evidence, we are of the opinion that the jury had some latitude to determine whether or not premeditation could have existed in this case.
Sargeant Cottey testified that he asked the defendant whether or not he saw Covington with a weapon and his answer was that the defendant "... stated that he didn't see him with anything, but he stated that he was just scared." He also said that the defendant told him that Covington was going to kill him. The defendant testified that it looked like Covington had something in his hand that might have been a gun. However, there is no evidence that Covington made any movement to draw a gun.
It is true that the defendant may act upon appearances that seem to be threatening his life even though he may actually be mistaken. Banks v. State (1971), Ind., 276 N.E.2d 155, 159, reh. den.; Heglin v. State (1957), 236 Ind. 350, 353, 140 N.E.2d 98, 99. However, in this case the jury could have considered the fact that the appellant and the victim were not on good terms and had quarreled and fought before; that the defendant was carrying a gun for some reason and purpose; that the defendant had stated to a police officer that he did not see any gun which the victim had; and, that no gun was found on the victim or in the victim's car after the shooting. The jury had the privilege of disbelieving the appellant's story that he thought the victim had something that looked like a gun. The jury had a right to conclude from the evidence that the defendant was really not acting on what he said was an appearance of a threat to his life, but rather upon a desire to get rid of an obnoxious individual who desired to associate with him. The jury had a right to weigh and consider these pieces of evidence and reach its own conclusion and determine that the defendant had a premeditated intention to kill the victim, even though this premeditation may have existed for some time, or only for a few seconds. Hulburd v. State (1964), 245 Ind. 672, 678, 197 N.E.2d 169, 171-172; May v. State (1953), 232 Ind. 523, 112 N.E.2d 439.
Maxwell v. State (1970), 254 Ind. 490, 260 N.E.2d 787, was a case in which the parties had quarreled and where threats of shooting each other were made. An unarmed man was shot down without apparent provocation. It was argued that the act was not done "purposely and with premeditated malice." Justice DeBruler made the following comment thereon:
There was sufficient evidence of purpose in this case. Appellant, without struggle, pointed a gun at an unarmed man's chest and shot him. Appellant is assumed to have intended the natural and probable consequence of his act... . We can think of no clearer *651 example of what it means to `purposely' shoot another person, than the facts in this case.
Malice could properly have been inferred from the intentional use of a deadly weapon in a manner calculated to cause death. Id. at 492-493, 260 N.E.2d at 789.
See also Emery v. State (1968), 250 Ind. 500, 504, 236 N.E.2d 28, 30; Schlegel v. State (1958), 238 Ind. 374, 377, 150 N.E.2d 563, 564; Sparks v. State (1964), 245 Ind. 245, 249, 195 N.E.2d 469, 471, reh. den. 196 N.E.2d 748; Barker v. State (1958), 238 Ind. 271, 280, 150 N.E.2d 680, 684; Warren v. State (1963), 243 Ind. 508, 512-513, 188 N.E.2d 108, 110; Yarber v. State (1962), 242 Ind. 616, 619, 179 N.E.2d 882, 884; Dobbs v. State (1957), 237 Ind. 119, 123, 143 N.E.2d 99, 101; Powell v. State (1970), 254 Ind. 200, 204, 258 N.E.2d 633, 635.
The appellant claims error in certain testimony which the state offered in rebuttal of the defendant's testimony regarding the times when the two separated after they had ceased to live together. The evidence is controversial as to who wanted to disassociate with whom. The evidence was indefinite as to the exact time of the separation. In rebuttal, the state placed on the witness stand the brother and sister of the victim to show certain telephone conversations and relationships between the parties during a period of time when the defendant, in his defense, had claimed he had definitely disassociated himself from the victim and from his homosexual activities.
There were a considerable number of objections from the defendant's attorney as to the rebuttal testimony, and an extended colloquy between the court and attorneys took place at one point. After objection the court asked the state, "... what is [the] purpose [of] this [testimony]?" and the prosecuting attorney replied:
MR. ENDSLEY: Rebut his testimony, he says, 19 ... I mean, I'm trying to show that there's a greater relationship here, than what he's testifying. A much more expanded relationship, and that what he's saying is not true.
* * * * * *
THE COURT: On the basis, Mr. Laswell, of the credibility of the defendant's witnesses, it would be question of fact, for the trier of fact to determine, after hearing both of them, and weighing their respective testimony herein. I will overrule your objection.
An examination of this colloquy and the testimony given does not convince us that the court committed any material error. The testimony went to the credibility of the defendant and to contradict him, and in our opinion was proper rebuttal.
Finally the appellant contends the evidence is insufficient to sustain a conviction of murder in the first degree. We have dealt to a large extent with this question in the matter of the overruling of the motion for a directed verdict. There is additional evidence from the defendant himself and his brother that the victim had threatened to kill the appellant. In this case, those are all matters of self-defense, as are the appearances at the time of killing which might have led the defendant to act with more speed and less deliberation when he shot Covington. Powell v. State (1970), 254 Ind. 200, 205, 258 N.E.2d 633, 635; King v. State (1968), 249 Ind. 699, 234 N.E.2d 465; Robinson v. State (1962), 243 Ind. 192, 184 N.E.2d 16. We can not, on this appeal, weigh those factors. Stock v. State (1966), 247 Ind. 532, 219 N.E.2d 809; Grimm v. State (1970), 254 Ind. 150, 155, 258 N.E.2d 407, 410; Gaddis v. State (1969), 253 Ind. 73, 251 N.E.2d 658. These are matters for the jury to believe, disbelieve, or to give such weight as they feel under the evidence, the facts and circumstances are entitled to have. Grimm v. State, supra, Greenwalt v. State (1965), *652 246 Ind. 608, 209 N.E.2d 254, dissenting opinion, 210 N.E.2d 373. We may only look at the evidence most favorable to the state in reviewing a conviction. Grimm v. State, supra; McGill v. State (1969), 252 Ind. 293, 247 N.E.2d 514; Smock v. State (1966), 247 Ind. 184, 213 N.E.2d 896.
The judgment is affirmed.
DeBRULER, GIVAN and PRENTICE, JJ, concur.
HUNTER, J., dissents without opinion.

=== CASE 9741149 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:50:21.023534+00 ===

*143Hoffman, C.J.
This appeal presents two issues for this court’s review. The first issue is whether an envelope was obtained from the person of the defendant, Lawrence S. Ramirez, via an unreasonable search and seizure. The second issue is whether the signed confession of the defendant was improperly-admitted into evidence.
The defendant was charged by amended affidavit with the crime of second-degree burglary. The defendant was arraigned and plead not guilty. The cause was tried to a jury which found the defendant guilty of second-degree burglary, as charged, and defendant was sentenced to the Indiana State Reformatory for a period of not less than two, nor more than five years. The timely motion to correct errors filed by the defendant was overruled and this appeal followed.
The pertinent facts may be summarized from the record before us as follows:
George Felling, a police officer for the City of Hammond, Indiana, testified that on the morning of August 15, 1970, he received a call that a burglary was in progress at a doctor’s office in his vicinity. Upon reaching the doctor’s office Felling testified that he ran to the rear of the building and saw the defendant prying the lock of the rear door with a screwdriver. Felling testified that the defendant saw him and started to run and continued until Felling “fired a warning shot in the air, and he [defendant] stopped.” Felling further testified that he placed the defendant under arrest at the scene and brought him into the police station; and that at the police station the defendant was told to take everything out of his pockets, and the defendant pulled out a yellow envelope full of change bearing the words “Couch Adjustment” and “pop money.”
An employee of the Couch Adjustment Company, Inc. testified that between five o’clock p.m. on August 14, 1970, and nine o’clock a.m. on August 15, 1970, the Couch Adjustment Company had been broken into. The president of Couch Ad*144justment Company, Inc. identified the envelope taken from the person of the defendant as being an envelope kept in a locked filing cabinet in the office of the Couch Adjustment Company, Inc. He testified that money used to replenish the supply of “pop” was kept in the envelope.
Detective Sergeant Vernon Harris of the Hammond Police Department was assigned to work on the Lawrence Ramirez case. He testified that he investigated the burglary at the Couch Adjustment Company, Inc. and then returned to the police station and had Ramirez brought into his office. He testified that he and another detective gave Ramirez “a copy of his constitutional rights and read it to him and showed it to him, to make sure that he understood it before we had any conversation.” Harris further testified that Ramirez “agreed to talk to us and he signed the waiver.”
The jury was then excused, and a hearing was held concerning the voluntariness of the waiver and confession signed by defendant-Ramirez. The jury was called back and the waiver and confession were offered into evidence. The defendant objected on the basis that the confession was not a voluntary statement. The objection was overruled by the trial court and the waiver and confession identified as State’s Exhibit No. 2 was received into evidence.
Thereafter, State’s Exhibit No. 1, the envelope previously taken from Ramirez, was received into evidence without objection. The issue raised concerning this envelope is whether it was obtained through an unreasonable search and seizure.
The circumstances surrounding the obtainment of the envelope are that the defendant was taken from the place where he was arrested to the police station for booking. At the police station he was either searched by the officers or was ordered by the officers to remove everything from his pockets. The envelope was thereby obtained and was used as evidence in the prosecution of another crime, to-wit: the burglary of the Couch Adjustment Company, Inc.
*145The justification for a warrantless search as an incident to a lawful arrest grows out of the necessities of the situation. Trupiano v. United States (1948), 334 U.S. 699, 68 S. Ct. 1229, 92 L. Ed. 1663. When an arrest is made the officer is justified in searching the person of the arrestee and the area within his immediate control — meaning the area within which he might gain possession of a weapon or destructible evidence. Chimel v. California (1969), 395 U.S. 752, 89 S. Ct. 2034, 23 L. Ed. 2d 685.
In Farrie v. State (1971), 255 Ind. 681, 266 N. E. 2d 212, the appellant was arrested for possession of narcotics and when he was booked he surrendered certain articles of personal property for safekeeping. Among these articles was a wristwatch which was subsequently turned over to another police officer and was admitted into evidence against the appellant in a prosecution for second degree burglary. Our Supreme Court, at 214 of 266 N. E. 2d, held:
“A search incidental to a valid arrest is lawful regardless of what it reveals. In the case at bar defendant does not challenge the validity of the arrest. A search is no less valid when conducted by a jailer when an accused is booked and is to be confined in a cell in the jail or station house.”
In the case at bar the seizure of the envelope was contemporaneous with the booking of the defendant. Under the authority of Farrie v. State, supra, the search was justified and the fruits thereof were admissible in the prosecution of the instant offense.
Furthermore, no error was preserved regarding the admissibility of the envelope because of the failure of the defendant to make a timely objection. Harrison v. State (1972), 258 Ind. 259, 281 N. E. 2d 98.
The next issue is whether the signed waiver and confession of the defendant were improperly admitted into evidence.
We need not dwell on the proposition that a confession is only admissible where it is free and voluntary. Smith v. *146State (1969), 252 Ind. 425, 249 N. E. 2d 493, 496. A confession is not admissible unless it is “the product of a rational intellect and a free will.” Blackburn v. Alabama (1960), 361 U.S. 199, 208, 80 S. Ct. 274, 280, 4 L. Ed. 2d 242. It has been said that the privilege against self-incrimination is the “essential mainstay” of our system of criminal prosecution. Such privilege is only fulfilled when a person is guaranteed the right “to remain silent unless he chooses to speak in the unfettered exercise of his own will.” Malloy v. Hogan (1964), 378 U.S. 1, 7, 8, 84 S. Ct. 1489, 1493, 12 L. Ed. 2d 653, 659.
In Lego v. Twomey (1972), 404 U.S. 477, 92 S. Ct. 619, 30 L. Ed. 2d 618, the petitioner did not deny having made the confession but did challenge whether it was made voluntarily. The trial judge conducted a hearing out of the presence of the jury. Conflicting evidence was heard, and the trial judge ruled the confession was admissible. The jury was instructed by the trial court as to the prosecution’s burden of proof but it did not instruct that the jury was required to find the confession voluntary. The petitioner was found guilty and the conviction was affirmed by the Supreme Court of Illinois. The United States District Court denied habeas corpus relief and its decision was affirmed by the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit. In affirming the decision of the Court of Appeals, the United States Supreme Court, at 626-627 of 92 S. Ct., stated:
“Jackson v. Denno, 378 U.S. 368, 84 S. Ct. 1774 [12 L. Ed 2d 908], (1964), an offspring of Brown v. Mississippi, 297 U.S. 278, 56 S. Ct. 461, 80 L. Ed. 682 (1936), requires judicial rulings on voluntariness prior to admitting confessions. Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436, 86 S. Ct. 1602, 16 L. Ed. 2d 694 (1966), excludes confessions flowing from custodial interrogations unless adequate warnings were administered and a waiver was obtained. Weeks v. United States, 232 U.S. 383, 34 S. Ct. 341, 58 L. Ed. 652 (1914), and Mapp v. Ohio, 367 U.S. 643, 81 S. Ct. 1684, 6 L. Ed. 2d 1081 (1961), make impermissible the introduction of evidence obtained in violation of a defendant’s Fourth Amendment rights. In each instance, and without regard to its probative value, evidence is kept from the trier of guilt or innocence for *147reasons wholly apart from enhancing the reliability of verdicts.
* * *
“[W]e are unconvinced that merely emphasizing the importance of the values served by exclusionary rules is itself sufficient demonstration that the Constitution also requires admissibility to be proved beyond reasonable doubt. Evidence obtained in violation of the Fourth Amendment has been excluded from federal criminal trials for many years. Weeks v. United States, supra. The same is true of coerced confessions offered in either federal or state trials. Bram v. United States, 168 U.S. 532, 18 S. Ct. 183, 42 L. Ed. 568 (1897); Brown v. Mississippi, supra. But, from our experience over this period of time no substantial evidence has accumulated that federal rights have suffered from determining admissibility by a preponderance of the evidence.
& #
“To reiterate what we said in Jackson: when a confession challenged as involuntary is sought to be used against a criminal defendant at his trial, he is entitled to a reliable and clear-cut determination that the confession was in fact voluntarily rendered. Thus, the prosecution must prove at least by a preponderance of the evidence that the confession was voluntary. Of course, the States are free, pursuant to their own law, to adopt a higher standard. They may indeed differ as to the appropriate resolution of the values they find at stake.” (Footnotes omitted.)
In the instant case, the advisement of rights was adequate under the guildelines of Miranda v. Arizona (1966), 384 U.S. 436, 86 S. Ct. 1602, 16 L. Ed. 2d 694. See also: Green v. State (1971), 257 Ind. 244, 274 N. E. 2d 267.
In Nacoff v. State (1971), 256 Ind. 97, 267 N. E. 2d 165, at 167, our Supreme Court stated:
“A heavy burden rests on the appellee to demonstrate that the appellant intelligently and voluntarily waived his right to remain silent and to consult with appointed counsel. Miranda v. Arizona, supra. The legal standard to be applied in determining whether an accused, who has been properly advised of his rights and has signed a waiver, has voluntarily waived his rights is the same as that used in the preMiranda coerced confession cases. The question is whether, *148looking at all the circumstances, the confession was free and voluntary, and not induced by any violence, threats, promises, or other improper influence.” (Citing authorities.)
In the case at bar, a hearing was held out of the hearing of the jury concerning the voluntariness of the waiver and confession. The testimony adduced in this hearing was conflicting. When the jury returned the waiver and confession were sought to be admitted into evidence. The defendant objected alleging the documents were not voluntary statements. The objection was overruled and the waiver and confession were admitted into evidence. At the conclusion of the presentation of the evidence the jurors were instructed that they were the “sole judges of the credibility of the witnesses and of the weight to be given to their testimony.”
The trial judge observed the witnesses and heard the conflicting evidence with regard to the voluntariness of the waiver and confession. He resolved the conflict in favor of the State. In Smith v. State, supra, (1969), 252 Ind. 425, 249 N. E. 2d 493, at 496, it is stated:
“The appellant’s testimony of what happened in regard to the actions of the police officers in advising him of his rights and their use of mental coercion is contradictory to the testimony of the police officers. When the evidence in the record is in conflict as to whether the confessions or statements were voluntarily given, the Supreme Court will not disturb the Trial Court’s ruling based on the conflicting evidence. Matthews v. State (1959), 239 Ind. 252, 156 N. E. 2d 387.”
Having considered all of the attendant circumstances of the instant case, as contained in the record before us, we cannot say as a matter of law that the trial court erred in admitting the waiver and confession into evidence. Nor can we say as a matter of law that the defendant’s constitutional or statutory rights have been violated.
The judgment of the trial court is affirmed.
Sharp, J., concurs, Staton, J., concurs with opinion.

=== CASE 9742803 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:20:43.092168+00 ===

JUSTICE GORDON delivered the opinion of the court: Vito DeFrancesco contracted to sell an apartment building located in Cicero, Illinois, to defendant Nancy Stewart. After De-Francesco delivered the deed to and possession of the premises to Stewart, but before Stewart paid him the full contract price, the building was destroyed by fire. Both Stewart and DeFrancesco submitted claims to their respective fire insurance carriers, and both collected insurance proceeds for the loss of the subject property. Plaintiff State Farm General Insurance Co. (State Farm General), De-Francesco’s insurer, brought this action against Stewart as a purported subrogee to DeFrancesco’s right to payment from Stewart for the unpaid contract price on the apartment building. State Farm General sought to obtain the fire insurance proceeds that Stewart had received from her insurer, defendant Hartford Insurance Company of Illinois (Hartford), and to enjoin Hartford from paying Stewart those proceeds. State Farm General later removed Hartford as a defendant in its first amended complaint, upon learning that Hartford had already paid Stewart on her claim. State Farm General subsequently filed a motion for summary judgment against Stewart, which the trial court granted. Stewart then filed a post-trial motion to vacate that order, which the trial court denied. Stewart appeals from those orders. The undisputed facts are as follows. On January 26, 1990, De-Francesco agreed to sell Stewart an apartment building located at 5125 West Cermak Road, Cicero, Illinois. The contract between Stewart and DeFrancesco was entitled "Real Estate Sales Contract” in an emboldened typeface and required Stewart to pay a $75,000 purchase price and additionally to assume the obligation to repay a $20,000 loan against the property to the lender, Billy Eaton. Stewart was also required to tender a $6,000 down payment to DeFrancesco, which she paid shortly after entering into the contract with DeFrancesco. The contract also contained a mortgage contingency provision and a date of closing provision, which provided in pertinent part as follows: "4. This contract is subject to the condition that Purchaser will apply for [a] mtge within 3 months as of Feb 90 to pay off seller’s balance ***. (Strike paragraph if inapplicable.) 5. The time of closing shall be January 26, 1990 prorated as of 2 — 1—90, or 20 days after notice that financing has been procured if paragraph 4 is operative *** at the office of [the] title company.” (Emphasis in original.) The sales contract further provided that Stewart "agrees to pay or satisfy the balance of the purchase price *** at the time of closing.” The contract also required DeFrancesco to deliver possession to Stewart "immediately *** after the sale has been closed.” The contract also stated that DeFrancesco agreed "to convey or cause to be conveyed *** a recordable warranty deed.” Upon entering the contract, DeFrancesco turned over the trustee’s deed (which he had received from Stewart in 1987, as discussed more fully below), the keys and the rent documents to Stewart; informed the tenants they should pay rent to Stewart; did not lease any further units; and did not enter the premises ever again. Stewart subsequently applied to the Savings of America bank for a loan to be used to pay DeFrancesco the unpaid contract price for the apartment building. On May 11, 1990, the day of the fire, Stewart closed on an $80,000 loan from Savings of America obtained to pay DeFrancesco the $69,000 unpaid balance owing on the building under their contract. Stewart deposited the $80,000 into her personal bank account. Stewart stated that upon learning of the fire, her attorney advised her not to pay DeFrancesco the balance due on the contract "until we figured out what the insurance companies were going to do.” Both parties carried fire insurance policies on the property. Stewart was covered by Hartford, and DeFrancesco, by the plaintiff, State Farm General. DeFrancesco’s State Farm General policy provided: "In the event of any payment under this policy, the Company shall be subrogated to all the insured’s rights of recovery against any person or organization and the insured shall execute and deliver instruments and papers and do whatever else is necessary to secure such rights. The insured shall do nothing after loss to prejudice such rights.” After the fire, State Farm General paid DeFrancesco $84,649.78 for his fire losses, an amount that represented the policy limits plus interest. Hartford paid Stewart $130,0001, for the fire damage sustained. Stewart then repaid the $80,000 loan, and used a portion of the $130,000 insurance proceeds to pay attorney fees incurred in defending against other lawsuits arising from the fire, the cost of boarding up and later demolishing the burned building, and the Billy Eaton loan. Although she repaid the Billy Eaton loan, Stewart did not pay the principal balance of $69,000 left owing on the contract to the seller, DeFrancesco. In its second amended complaint, State Farm General claimed that, pursuant to its payment of insurance proceeds to DeFrancesco after the fire, it was subrogated to DeFrancesco’s contractual right to collect the $69,000 unpaid purchase price for the property from Stewart and that it could collect that amount out of the insurance proceeds which she had received from Hartford. In that regard, State Farm General alleged that Stewart and DeFrancesco had entered into a real estate contract on January 26, 1990, for the sale of an apartment building located in Cicero, Illinois, for $75,000, and that Stewart paid a $6,000 down payment required under the contract. The complaint further alleged that the apartment building burned down on May 11, 1990, and that Stewart never paid DeFrancesco the unpaid portion of the purchase price, $69,000. State Farm General also claimed that it paid DeFrancesco $84,649.78 after the fire, that Stewart’s insurance carrier indemnified her in an unspecified amount after the fire, and that as DeFrancesco’s subrogee, State Farm General was entitled to $69,000 of Stewart’s insurance proceeds. Attached to the second amended complaint as exhibits were a subrogation receipt2, which purports to subrogate DeFrancesco’s rights arising out of the May 11 fire to State Farm Fire and Casualty Insurance Company, another State Farm entity, and an explanatory affidavit of State Farm General claim superintendent Candace Armstrong regarding that subrogation receipt, both of which are discussed more fully below. In her answer to the second amended complaint, Stewart alleged that State Farm General could not be subrogated to any rights that DeFrancesco may have had against her because she did not cause De-Francesco’s fire losses and, moreover, that DeFrancesco had no insurable ownership interest in the property at the time of the fire because he had transferred those interests to Stewart when he contracted to sell her the subject property. Stewart further alleged that De-Francesco’s State Farm General fire loss policy did not insure him for losses arising from Stewart’s failure to pay under the StewartDeFrancesco contract of sale, but only for his fire-related losses. Stewart also denied that State Farm General was DeFrancesco’s subrogee insofar as the aforementioned subrogation receipt, attached as an exhibit to plaintiff’s second amended complaint and discussed more fully below, designated State Farm Fire and Casualty Insurance Company as subrogee to DeFrancesco’s rights arising out of the fire loss. Finally, Stewart denied that she held her Hartford insurance proceeds in trust for State Farm General and stated that, in any event, she owed less than $69,000 to DeFrancesco on the building sale contract. Attached to Stewart’s answer to plaintiff’s complaint was the affidavit of DeFrancesco. In that affidavit, DeFrancesco averred that Stewart originally conveyed the subject property to him in 1987 by means of a trustee’s deed. DeFrancesco further stated that when he acquired the property from Stewart he assumed the duty to make payments to Billy Eaton between 1987 and 1989. He also stated that on January 26, 1990, he entered into a real estate sales contract with Stewart to transfer the property back to her and received a $6,000 down payment from her pursuant to the contract. At that time, Stewart agreed to assume the Eaton loan repayments. DeFrancesco further averred that on January 26, 1990, he turned over the title, keys and rent documents to Stewart, informed the tenants they should pay rent to Stewart, did not lease any further units, and did not enter the premises ever again. Stewart also separately filed an affirmative defense, wherein she alleged that title to the subject property was in a land trust at the time of the fire and that the records of the Cook County recorder of deeds reflected that fact. She further stated that she notified State Farm General before the May 11 fire that she "held the equitable title to the premises” in question. Stewart also alleged that De-Francesco therefore had no insurable interest in the subject property at the time of the fire and that, nevertheless, State Farm General carelessly and without any legal obligation to do so indemnified De-Francesco for his loss arising from the fire. Finally, Stewart alleged that she had paid her own insurance premiums to Hartford, that State Farm General had not, and that, therefore, State Farm General could not claim the benefits of her Hartford policy. State Farm General subsequently filed its motion for summary judgment. In that motion, State Farm General argued that, by paying DeFrancesco’s fire insurance claim, it became subrogated to De-Francesco’s contractual rights against Stewart. In support of its motion for summary judgment, State Farm General resubmitted the aforementioned "subrogation receipt” together with the explanatory áffidavit of State Farm General claim superintendent Candace Armstrong, which were attached as exhibits to plaintiff’s second amended complaint; excerpts of Stewart’s deposition testimony; the DeFrancesco-Stewart contract of sale; and a certificate of insurance, which reflects that Hartford insured Stewart on the subject property for $130,000. As discussed above, the subrogation receipt stated that DeFrancesco had subrogated all of his rights with respect to his May 11, 1990, fire loss to the State Farm entity indicated at the top of that receipt. In that regard, at the top of the receipt are listed several State Farm entities with boxes next to the name of each entity. The box next to plaintiff’s name, State Farm General Insurance Co., is not checked. Instead, the adjacent box is checked, indicating that a different State Farm entity, "State Farm Fire and Casualty Ins. Co.,” paid DeFrancesco for his fire-related loss and was therefore the subrogee of DeFrancesco’s rights arising out of the fire. The Armstrong affidavit specifies that plaintiff State Farm General, and not some other State Farm entity, had paid DeFrancesco for his May 11, 1990, fire loss and thereby had become his subrogee. The affidavit purports to explain that plaintiff State Farm General had inadvertently designated the wrong State Farm entity, State Farm Fire & Casualty Ins. Co., on the subrogation receipt as the entity that had paid DeFrancesco the fire insurance proceeds. In her deposition, Stewart testified that she originally acquired the subject apartment building in 1981 in a land trust, where she held it together with certain other real estate. Stewart used the apartment building as collateral to secure a loan from the aforementioned lender, Billy Eaton. Stewart stated that, in 1984, she contracted to sell the building to DeFrancesco, and in 1987, after De-Francesco had paid her for that building, "deeded the property personally to Mr. DeFrancesco.” In so doing, she directed the trustee to prepare a trustee’s deed to the property for DeFrancesco and then picked up that deed, which she then gave to DeFrancesco in exchange for an agreed-upon but unspecified cash payment and DeFrancesco’s assumption of the Eaton loan repayment obligations. Stewart' stated that in late 1989 and in early 1990 she and DeFrancesco discussed her repurchase of the property for $75,000 and her assumption of the Eaton loan repayment obligations. She stated that they entered into the aforementioned contract of sale on January 26, 1990, and that she paid DeFrancesco $6,000 as a down payment. She further testified that DeFrancesco returned the deed to her but that her attorney advised her not to pay DeFrancesco the unpaid balance of $69,000 on the contract after the fire "until we figured out what the insurance companies were going to do.” Stewart also testified that she received approximately $130,000 in insurance proceeds from Hartford for her losses arising from the May 11 fire. Stewart further stated that between 1981 and January 26, 1990, the date on which she contracted to purchase the apartment building from DeFrancesco, Stewart was the only individual to hold a beneficial interest in the land trust in which the apartment building had been held. In response to State Farm General’s motion for summary judgment, Stewart submitted the affidavit of an "expert witness,” Richard Kieffer, who stated that if State Farm General had followed the generally accepted procedures employed in the insurance industry for the adjustment of insurance claims, it would have known not to pay DeFrancesco on his claim because it would have learned prior to making that payment that only Stewart, and not DeFrancesco, had an insurable interest in the subject property. The trial court granted State Farm General’s motion for summary judgment and awarded State Farm General the amount of $69,000. Stewart filed a post-trial motion seeking vacatur of the trial court’s summary judgment order, which was denied, and this appeal ensued. For the reasons that follow, we reverse. DISCUSSION On appeal, Stewart contends that the trial court erred in granting summary judgment in favor of State Farm General, because, she urges, State Farm General cannot be subrogated to DeFrancesco’s contractual rights against her. In support, Stewart contends that because State Farm General’s insurance payment to DeFrancesco was based on his fire losses and not upon his contractual losses arising from Stewart’s nonpayment of the full contract price, Stewart’s contractual debt to DeFrancesco was collateral to that indemnification payment. Accordingly, Stewart urges that State Farm General’s subrogation to DeFrancesco’s rights against Stewart would be unwarranted in the absence of an express assignment from DeFrancesco of his rights against Stewart. In addition, Stewart contends that DeFrancesco had no insurable interest in the subject property at the time of the fire and that, therefore, State Farm General had no legal obligation to indemnify him for his purported fire losses. Thus, according to Stewart, State Farm General’s payment to DeFrancesco was voluntary, thereby precluding any right to be subrogated to DeFrancesco’s contractual rights against Stewart.  The right of subrogation may be grounded in equity and may also be founded upon an express or implied agreement. Bost v. Paulson’s Enterprises, Inc., 36 Ill. App. 3d 135, 343 N.E.2d 168 (1976). Subrogation is defined as the substitution of one individual in the place of a claimant to whose rights he succeeds in relation to the debt or claim asserted, which he has paid involuntarily. See generally Dix Mutual Insurance Co. v. LaFramboise, 149 Ill. 2d 314, 597 N.E.2d 622 (1992); Reich v. Tharp, 167 Ill. App. 3d 496, 521 N.E.2d 530 (1987); Continental Casualty Co. v. Polk Brothers, Inc., 120 Ill. App. 3d 395, 457 N.E.2d 1271 (1983); Restatement of Restitution § 162 (1937) (subrogation proper where property of one person is used in discharging an obligation owed by another). An insurer who indemnifies its insured for a loss may be subrogated to the rights of the insured against the party at fault under the equitable doctrine that the economic burden "should be shifted to the party responsible for the loss.” In re Estate of Ito, 50 Ill. App. 3d 817, 823, 365 N.E.2d 1309, 1314 (1977). See also Central National Bank & Trust Co. v. Central Illinois Light Co., 65 Ill. App. 2d 287, 294, 212 N.E.2d 489, 493 (1965). The prerequisites to subrogation are: (1) a third party must be primarily liable to the insured for the loss; (2) the insurer must be secondarily liable to the insured for loss under an insurance policy; and (3) the insurer must have paid the insured under that policy, thereby extinguishing the debt of the third party. See generally Dix Mutual Insurance Co., 149 Ill. 2d 314, 597 N.E.2d 622; Reich, 167 Ill. App. 3d 496, 521 N.E.2d 530; Polk Brothers, 120 Ill. App. 3d 395, 457 N.E.2d 1271; Restatement of Restitution § 162 (1937); C. King, Subrogation Under Contracts Insuring Property, 30 Tex. L. Rev. 62 (1951). However, when, as here, an insurer indemnifies its insured for property damage and then seeks to be subrogated to the insured’s collateral contract rights against the third-party purchaser of that property not responsible for the loss, "the extent of the right to subrogation is *** difficult to determine ***. The fact that liability of the third party *** does not rest upon fault makes the relative equities of the insurer much less appealing.” 30 Tex. L. Rev. at 71. See also W. Vance, Insurance § 134 (3d ed. 1951); Note, Subrogation of the Insurer to Collateral Rights of the Insured, 28 Colum. L. Rev. 202 (1928). There are three possible alternatives with respect to an insurer’s claim of subrogation against the contract rights of an insured: first, a court may permit the insured to keep the proceeds of both the insurance indemnification and the contract price and deny subrogation; second, a court may give the insurer the benefit of the collateral obligation; or third, a court may give the third-party obligor the benefit of the insurance. See generally 30 Tex. L. Rev. at 71; 28 Colum. L. Rev. at 203. However, each alternative possesses its own deficiencies: "To choose the first is to contravene the sound public policy which dictates that the insured should not be in a position to profit by a loss lest he be tempted to cause it, or be careless to prevent it; to choose the second is to give the insurer a windfall, for its premiums represented the fair equivalent of an obligation it contracted to incur without knowledge *** of the existence of collateral remedies or an abatement of rates in anticipation of such; to select the third is to violate the classical concept of the insurance contract as a personal one and, to some extent, the cherished privilege of the underwriter to select its obligor and determine its own moral risk.” 28 Colum. L. Rev. at 204. While there are no Illinois cases directly in point, the decisions among the various jurisdictions are divided as to the right of an insurer to be subrogated to an insured’s collateral contract rights. See, on the one hand, Universal Title Insurance Co. v. United States, 942 F.2d 1311 (8th Cir. 1991), Alabama Farm Bureau Mutual Insurance Service v. Nixon, 268 Ala. 271, 105 So. 2d 643 (1958), and Board of Trustees of First Congregational Church v. Cream City Mutual Insurance Co., 255 Minn. 347, 96 N.W.2d 690 (1959), which bolster Stewart’s position that no subrogation should be permitted here. See, on the other hand, Twin City Fire Insurance Co. v. Walter B. Hannah, Inc., 444 S.W.2d 131 (Ky. 1969), which appears to articulate State Farm General’s position that it may be subrogated to De-Francesco’s contractual rights against Stewart notwithstanding the fact that those rights are collateral and unrelated to State Farm General’s indemnification payment to DeFrancesco. See generally 4 G. Palmer, Law of Restitution § 23.2 (1978).  Having reviewed these authorities, we favor the view that an insurer that indemnifies its insured for property damage may not be subrogated to the collateral contractual rights of the insured against a third-party purchaser of the subject property. The case of Board of Trustees of First Congregational Church v. Cream City Mutual Insurance Co., 255 Minn. 347, 96 N.W.2d 690 (1959), is in point. In Cream City, the plaintiffs, the trustees of a religious congregation, purchased several fire insurance policies from the defendant insurance company to cover their church property and later entered into a contract to sell that property to the City of Austin, Minnesota. Prior to the buyer’s payment of the full contract price and the church’s transfer of legal title, a fire destroyed the property in question. Plaintiffs submitted claims for their losses pursuant to the insurance policies issued by defendant, and defendant refused payment. Plaintiffs then sued the defendant, who argued that the church should not be permitted to recover twice for the same loss by collecting both insurance proceeds and the unpaid balance on the contract of sale. In the event that they were forced to make payment under the policies, defendants sought to be subrogated to any rights that plaintiffs had against the buyer of the property. In holding that defendant was required to make payment to plaintiffs under the policies and that defendant had no right to be subrogated to any rights the plaintiffs may have had against the buyer, the Cream City court stated as follows: "[I]t is the universally accepted rule that an insurer may be subrogated to the insured’s rights against any person wrongfully causing a compensable loss to the insured. However, there is no such agreement of authorities as to the right of the insurer to be subrogated to collateral contract rights which the^ insured has against a third person who did not cause the loss. In considering the asserted right of the insurer to subrogation to the collateral rights of the insured, certain conflicting considerations come into play. To permit the insured to keep the proceeds of both obligations offends public policy which frowns upon placing an insured in a position to profit by a loss which he may be tempted to cause himself or by carelessness fail to prevent. On the other hand, to give the insurer the benefit of the collateral obligation through subrogation ignores the plain terms of the insuring agreement and provides the insurer with a windfall. Its premiums are assumed to represent the fair equivalent of the obligation it contracted to incur without knowledge of the existence of collateral remedies.” Cream City, 255 Minn. at 347, 96 N.W.2d at 695-96. The Cream City court concluded that the insurer would not be relieved of its liability under its policies, nor would it' be entitled to be subrogated to the rights of the insured against the contract buyer, simply because the seller "might have collateral contracts with third persons which operate to relieve the insured from the loss for which the insurer agreed to compensate him.” Cream City, 255 Minn. at 347, 96 N.W.2d at 696. In support, the court further noted as follows: "The most persuasive authority to this court is our own prior holding in Kahn v. American Ins. Co., 137 Minn. 16, 162 N.W. 685. In that case it was clearly held that in an action upon an insurance policy insuring the lessee against loss to his leasehold the contract relation between the lessor and lessee and a settlement of their differences arising from a fire to the leased premises are matters in which the insurer has no concern.” Cream City, 55 Minn. at 355, 96 N.W.2d at 697. The position articulated in Cream City that an insurer may not be subrogated to the collateral contract rights of its insured is consistent with the fundamental principle, already noted, that to be subrogated to the rights of another, an insurer’s indemnification payment to its insured must extinguish the debt of a third party primarily liable to that insured for his loss. See Dix Mutual Insurance Co., 149 Ill. 2d 314, 597 N.E.2d 622; Reich, 167 Ill. App. 3d 496, 521 N.E.2d 530; Polk Brothers, 120 Ill. App. 3d 395, 457 N.E.2d 1271; Restatement of Restitution § 162 (1937); C. King, Subrogation Under Contracts Insuring Property, 30 Tex. L. Rev. 62 (1951). Hence, where an insurer is not by its indemnification payment satisfying the obligation of the third party, the right of subrogation does not attach. Moreover, the holding in Cream City is consistent with the decision of our Illinois Supreme Court in First National Bank v. Boston Insurance Co., 17 Ill. 2d 147, 160 N.E.2d 802 (1959). Although Boston Insurance did not involve the subrogation rights of an insurance carrier, that decision makes clear that the obligation of an insurer to its insured remains independent of the obligation of a third-party purchaser to the insured. In Boston Insurance, the insured entered into a contract to sell certain property which required a downpayment of $3,000 with the balance of $16,000 to be paid at the time of closing. Prior to closing, the property was destroyed by fire. Damage from the fire was estimated to be $230,000. The insurance policies in question together had aggregate limits of $46,750, but the carrier refused to make payment in excess of $16,000, the amount owing on the contract of sale at the time of the fire. The Boston Insurance court held that the insurance carrier could not avoid or reduce its liability to the insured based upon a collateral contract of sale even though the balance due for the purchase price under the collateral sales contract was substantially less than the value of the fire damage as surveyed by the carrier. The court held that the purchase price in such a collateral contract would not limit an insurer’s obligation insofar as the two obligations are wholly independent of each other. In reaching its conclusion, the court stated as follows: "While it is clear that a vendee can hold a vendor to the terms of his contract, it is by no means clear that a stranger to the contract should be allowed to fix upon the contract price as an absolute measure of the value of the property. * * * *** [If the carrier] intended to mean that recovery should be limited by the price fixed in an executory contract for the sale of the property, it would have been easy to say so [in the policy].” Boston Insurance, 17 Ill. 2d at 151-54, 160 N.E.2d at 804-06.  As in Cream City, here, although State Farm General paid De-Francesco for his fire-related losses, that payment was independent of Stewart’s contractual debt to DeFrancesco insofar as Stewart did not cause those losses. As asserted both in Cream City and in Boston Insurance, State Farm General’s liability to DeFrancesco is wholly separate and unrelated to the obligation of Stewart to pay the balance under the real estate purchase contract to DeFrancesco. Therefore, State Farm General’s insurance payment to DeFrancesco cannot trigger any right to proceed under subrogation against the land purchaser for the purchase price. Accord Universal Title Insurance, 942 F.2d 1311; Nixon, 268 Ala. 271, 105 So. 2d 643 (holding that insurer has no right to be subrogated to insured’s collateral contractual rights where to allow subrogation would be to excuse insurer from obligations created by its collection of premiums). See 30 Tex. L. Rev. at 71 (permitting the insurer to be subrogated to a contractual obligation of an insured "gives the insurer a windfall in that its premiums did not take into consideration such collateral remedies”). See also Thornton v. Syracuse Savings Bank, 961 F.2d 1042 (2d Cir. 1992) (no right of subrogation where payment made by purported subrogee to putative subrogor discharged its own debt, not that of third party).  State Farm General would argue that a denial of its right to subrogate against the vendee (Stewart) would result in a windfall to Stewart since she recovered from her own insurance carrier (Hartford) and since she did not pay the full contract price to De-Francesco. This argument appears to be premised upon a theory of unjust enrichment. To state a cause of action upon a theory of unjust enrichment, a plaintiff must allege that the defendant has unjustly retained a benefit to the plaintiff’s detriment and that defendant’s retention of the benefit violates fundamental principles of justice, equity and good conscience. See generally HPI Health Care Services, Inc. v. Mt. Vernon Hospital, Inc., 131 Ill. 2d 145, 545 N.E.2d 672 (1989); F.H. Prince & Co. v. Towers Financial Corp., 275 Ill. App. 3d 792, 656 N.E.2d 142 (1995). A plaintiff alleging an unjust enrichment may be seeking to recover a benefit that he gave directly to the defendant or one that was transferred to the defendant by a third party. HPI Health Care Services, 131 Ill. 2d 145, 545 N.E.2d 672. To establish that the retention of a benefit conferred upon the defendant by a third-party constitutes an unjust enrichment, a plaintiff must show that (1) the benefit should have been given to the plaintiff, but the third party mistakenly gave it to the defendant instead; (2) the defendant procured the benefit from the third party through some type of wrongful conduct; or (3) the plaintiff for some other reason had a better claim to the benefit than the defendant. HPI Health Care Services, 131 Ill. 2d 145, 545 N.E.2d 672.  In the instant case, as already discussed, State Farm General has not established that it directly conferred any benefit upon Stewart insofar as its indemnification payment to DeFrancesco was collateral to Stewart’s contractual debt to DeFrancesco. Nor, for that matter, has State Farm General established that Stewart has unjustly retained a benefit conferred upon her by a third party, i.e., the benefit she received from her Hartford insurance policy. State Farm General has failed to establish that it was in any way entitled to Stewart’s Hartford insurance proceeds due to a mistake or that Stewart procured those proceeds through any type of wrongful conduct. Furthermore, although the record reflects that DeFrancesco apparently did not proceed in his own right to recover the balance on the purchase price from Stewart, there is nothing in the record to indicate that he did not intend to or that he would be unable to recover the purchase price from Stewart in the future. Thus, there is no indication that, in the absence of State Farm General’s subrogation action, Stewart will in fact retain the purchase price as well as her own insurance proceeds. Stewart also contends that DeFrancesco had no insurable interest in the subject property at the time of the fire and that, consequently, State Farm General had no legal obligation to indemnify DeFrancesco and was therefore a volunteer. See American National Bank & Trust Co. v. Weyerhaeuser Co., 692 F.2d 455 (7th Cir. 1982) (stating that mere stranger or volunteer who pays a creditor on a debt for which another is bound cannot be subrogated to the creditor’s rights against the principal debtor). In response, State Farm General argues that DeFrancesco did have an insurable interest, citing to International Insurance Co. v. Melrose Park National Bank, 145 Ill. App. 3d 286, 495 N.E.2d 1197 (1986), which stated that a seller’s interest under an installment agreement is analogous to that of a mortgagee whose insurable interest in the subject property extends to the amount of the unpaid mortgage balance. In support of its premise that a mortgagee has an insurable interest in the subject property limited to the amount of the unpaid debt, Melrose Park National Bank relies upon Great-West Life Assurance Co. v. General Accident Fire & Life Assurance Corp., 116 Ill. App. 3d 921, 452 N.E.2d 550 (1983), which in turn relies upon our supreme court’s decision in Le Doux v. Dettmering, 316 Ill. App. 98, 43 N.E.2d 862 (1942). The court in Le Doux upheld the principle that a mortgagee has a insurable interest in a property to the extent of the unpaid mortgage balance and that the insurer may be subrogated to that interest against the mortgagor.  Since we have predicated our decision on the theory that there can be no subrogation because of the collateral nature of the purchaser’s contractual obligation, as articulated in Cream City, we need not determine whether in fact the vendor has an insurable interest.3 Thus, we need not examine the decision in Melrose Park National Bank with respect to the insurable interest argument. However, we should nevertheless determine whether the holdings in both Melrose Park National Bank and in Le Doux militate against our implementation in Illinois of the holding in Cream City that an insurer may not subrogate to the claim of its insured against his vendee for the real estate purchase price. State Farm General may well seek to contend that the approach in Cream City is implicitly rejected in Illinois under Le Doux v. Dettmering, 316 Ill. App. 98, 43 N.E.2d 862 (1942), which permits subrogation by the fire insurer of a mortgagee against the mortgagor. See also 4 G. Palmer, Law of Restitution § 23.4, at 367 (1978) (and citations therein). State Farm General may wish to contend that in permitting subrogation against the mortgagor, Le Doux in effect ignores the principle that an insurer cannot be subrogated to the collateral contract rights of its insured. Seemingly, this proposed contention would become even stronger if we agree with State Farm General’s argument that there was an equitable conversion here4, whereby the vendor acquires a lien interest in the land to secure the purchase price. See Kindred v. Boalbey, 73 Ill. App. 3d 37, 39-40, 391 N.E.2d 236, 239 (1979). In that respect, State Farm General might argue that the vendor’s interest would be analogous to that of a mortgagee. However, a closer examination of the decision in Le Doux would reveal that it is not inconsistent with the holding in Cream City or with our holding in this case. In Le Doux, the mortgagee initially purchased insurance "as [a] legal holder of notes,” to protect his security interest in the unpaid balance due under the mortgage agreement. Le Doux, 316 Ill. App. at 100, 43 N.E.2d at 863. Before the mortgagor fully repaid his indebtedness, the mortgaged property was destroyed by fire. The mortgagee’s insurer indemnified him. for the unpaid balance due under the mortgage agreement and then sought to be subrogated to the mortgagee’s rights against the mortgagor. The Le Doux court concluded that such subrogation was permissible, stating as follows: "In cases like the instant one the insurance is considered as a further security of the debt; and on the familiar principle that a surety who pays the debt may resort to the principal debtor for payment, the insurer is permitted to recover from the mortgagor.” Le Doux, 316 Ill. App. at 110, 43 N.E.2d at 868. The Le Doux court reasoned that the insurance coverage obtained by the mortgagee extended only to the unpaid indebtedness under the mortgage agreement and that the insurer’s indemnification payment to the mortgagee effectively satisfied the debt of the mortgagor. See also Great-West Life Assurance Co. v. General Accident Fire & Life Assurance Corp., 116 Ill. App. 3d 921, 452 N.E.2d 550 (1983) (stating that a mortgagee’s insurable interest is prima facie the amount mortgaged and extends solely to the amount of the debt). Thus, in Le Doux, the sole purpose of the insurance procured by the mortgagee was to secure payment of the unpaid mortgage balance, and the insurance indemnification payment to the mortgagee was in that manner directly tied and limited to that unpaid balance.  In contrast, here, DeFrancesco’s insurance coverage with State Farm General did not purport to have as its purpose the protection of DeFrancesco’s right to collect the unpaid contract price from Stewart. Rather, this insurance was procured by DeFrancesco before the property was sold to protect him from fire loss as an ongoing owner of the property. DeFrancesco’s insurance was not designed to simply protect his interest as a seller. In that regard, State Farm General’s indemnification payment to DeFrancesco of $84,649.78 was not limited to the unpaid balance of the purchase price. State Farm General paid DeFrancesco the sum of $84,649.78 despite the fact that the actual total contract price was $75,000 and even though the unpaid balance thereon was only $69,000, Stewart having made a $6,000 down payment. Therefore, regardless of whether the circumstances would suffice to invoke the doctrine of equitable conversion, the basis and rationale in Le Doux for permitting subrogation (i.e., that the insurance coverage and resultant indemnification payment were expressly keyed to the unpaid mortgage balance) do not exist in the instant case. Here, as pointed out, there is no question that the insured acquired his coverage from State Farm General before the sale to Stewart. His coverage therefore was keyed to his general ownership interest rather than to any interest in the unpaid purchase price. Even if the doctrine of equitable conversion would be invocable here, it would only have arisen by operation of law and would not have changed the contractual nature of the transaction between the insurer and the insured. This stands in sharp contrast to the facts in Le Doux, where the mortgagee acquired the insurance only in its posture as mortgagee for the sole purpose of protecting his interest in the unpaid mortgage balance. Thus, unlike the indemnification payment made in Le Doux, State Farm General’s indemnification payment to DeFrancesco was not geared to Stewart’s indebtedness but rather was apparently paid to DeFrancesco for the independent value of his loss, in an amount well in excess of the unpaid purchase price. Consequently, as pointed out in Boston Insurance, the insurer’s obligation was wholly separate and independent of any obligation of the purchaser for the unpaid balance of the purchase price. Therefore, as in Cream City, subrogation would not be warranted since the indemnification of the insured did not purport to satisfy the wholly collateral obligation of the purchaser. Moreover, as pointed out in Boston Insurance and as reiterated in Melrose Park National Bank, the doctrine of equitable conversion is only enforceable as between the parties and does not alter the rights and obligations of third parties. The court in Boston Insurance summarized this principle as follows: "[The doctrine of equitable conversion] was evolved in order to carry out the intention of the parties to the contract. *** [I]t has frequently been held and stated that it should have no effect upon the rights of others. *** 'The doctrine *** extend[s] only to those persons who claim or are entitled to the property under or through the instrument ***.’ ” Boston Insurance, 17 Ill. 2d at 150-51, 160 N.E.2d at 804, quoting 4 J. Pomeroy, Equity Jurisprudence § 1166, at 492 (5th ed. 1941). Thus, the insurance carrier as a third-party to the vendor-vendee relationship is not free to invoke the doctrine of equitable conversion as between the vendor and the vendee for its own benefit or purpose. See also Melrose Park National Bank, 145 Ill. App. 3d at 289, 495 N.E.2d at 1199 (summarizing the decision of Boston Insurance as holding that the doctrine of equitable conversion "acts upon only the parties to a contract and has no effect on the rights of others”). The result here also finds support in the Pennsylvania decision of Dubin Paper Co. v. Insurance Co. of North America, 361 Pa. 68, 63 A.2d 85 (1949). Like the Boston Insurance decision, that case involved an attempt by an insurer to benefit from an insured’s collateral contract rights against a third-party to reduce its obligation to indemnify its insured. In rejecting the insurer’s arguments, the Dubin Paper court stated as follows: "The following statement from plaintiff’s brief is correct: 'The theory that the vendor’s policies represented nothing more than his security for the unpaid balance of the purchase price is completely untenable. *** On the contrary, *** [the insured], who insured his property long before he contemplated selling it, had every intention of insuring his entire interest therein at a time when he had both legal and equitable title. [He] paid premiums for insurance on his whole estate, not merely on the balance of the purchase price.’ *** * * * [The insured] was simply the beneficiary in two different contracts whose subject matter was his property. *** One contract defined [the insur.ed’s] rights against the insurance companies; the other contract defined [the insured’s] right against the purchaser of his property. *** * * * *** 'The vendor had an insurable interest in the whole estate both legal and equitable, and not just to the extent of the unpaid purchase price. *** The policies when issued covered the whole interest, the premiums covered vendor’s [sic] entire insurable interest and the contracts of insurance covered the vendor’s insurable interest even in the event of an agreement of sale. Further, the [insurer] *** recognized [the insured] had an insurable interest in the full value of the property by actually sending drafts in payment of this claim [to him], ... The [insurer] accepted the entire premium for the whole interest both legal and equitable ***. Why should they be permitted to take advantage of a collateral contract existing and enforceable only as between vendor and vendee so as to escape liability for a loss contracted for and the risk for which they were paid for many years?’ ” Dubin Paper Co., 361 Pa. at 86-92, 63 A.2d at 94-97. The decision in Dubin Paper Co., as those of Cream City and Boston Insurance, makes clear that State Farm General’s indemnification payment to DeFrancesco was unrelated to Stewart’s contractual debt and would therefore not provide a basis for subrogation. If subrogation were allowed, State Farm General would be repaid for its indemnification of DeFrancesco from his collateral contract rights despite having collected premiums that secured its coverage obligation and that were calculated without any knowledge or expectation of collateral recoveries.5  For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the circuit court of Cook County is reversed, and the cause is remanded for further proceedings in accordance herewith. Reversed and remanded. HOURIHANE, J., concurs.  The record is unclear as to whether this $130,000 represented indemnification solely for the May 11 fire damage to the building alone or for other fire-related losses as well.   This receipt was also attached to the original complaint and to State Farm General’s motion for summary judgment and, as discussed below, was supplemented by the Armstrong affidavit.   As discussed above, Stewart also contends that State Farm General was a volunteer in that it made payment to DeFrancesco even though he had no insurable interest in the property at the time of the fire. Strong argument can be made that DeFrancesco in fact had no insurable interest at the time of the fire. As noted in our statement of facts, Stewart testified in her deposition and DeFrancesco averred in his affidavit that Stewart received the deed to and possession of the property from DeFrancesco prior to the fire. If in fact DeFrancesco had, before the fire occurred, delivered title and possession to the purchaser, he may have divested himself of an insurable interest in the property. See, e.g., Inland Real Estate Corp. v. Tower Construction Co., 174 Ill. App. 3d 421, 528 N.E.2d 421 (1988). See also Farmer v. Koen, 187 Ill. App. 3d 47, 542 N.E.2d 1326 (1989). Moreover, while State Farm General would contend that the doctrine of equitable conversion would give the vendor a lienholder’s interest in the subject property to protect his right to receive payment of the unpaid purchase price (see International Insurance Co. v. Melrose Park National Bank, 145 Ill. App. 3d 286, 495 N.E.2d 1197 (1986); Kindred v. Boalbey, 73 Ill. App. 3d 37, 391 N.E.2d 236 (1979)), the law is clear that that doctrine will not apply once title and possession are delivered. See De Foor v. Northbrook Excess & Surplus Insurance Co., 128 Ill. App. 3d 929, 471 N.E.2d 938 (1984) (in equitable conversion, seller retains legal title to subject property after entry into contract of sale pending payment of purchase price); Kindred, 73 Ill. App. 3d 37, 391 N.E.2d 236. See also Sebesta v. Daniels, 812 S.W.2d 641, 644 (Tex. Ct. App. 1991) (doctrine of equitable conversion applies "during the period between execution of contract of sale and actual transfer of legal title”); Parson v. Wolfe, 676 S.W.2d 689 (Tex. Ct. App. 1984). See generally 18 C.J.S. Conversion § 6, at 45 (1990) (the doctrine of equitable conversion applies "during the period between the execution of the contract and the actual transfer of legal title”). See also footnote 4 and accompanying text (288 Ill. App. 3d at 693-94), for further discussion of the doctrine of equitable conversion.   The doctrine of equitable conversion has been defined by our supreme court as follows: "Equitable conversion is the treating of land as personalty and personalty as land under certain circumstances. Hence, as between the parties and those claiming through them, when the owner of land enters into a valid and enforceable contract for its sale he continues to hold the legal title, but in trust for the buyer; and the buyer becomes the equitable owner and holds the purchase money in trust for the seller. The conversion takes place at the time of entering into the contract. It stems from the basic equitable principle that equity regards as done that which ought to be done. The doctrine of equitable conversion has been recognized in Illinois, as it has in practically every other jurisdiction since earliest times. [Citations.]” Shay v. Penrose, 25 Ill. 2d 447, 449, 185 N.E.2d 218, 219-20 (1962). See also Ruva v. Mente, 143 Ill. 2d 257, 572 N.E.2d 888 (1991).   In order to comply with appellate court page limitations specified by revised Supreme Court Rule 23 (166 Ill. 2d R. 23), the discussion of certain issues has been designated as nonpublishable. These include issues pertaining to State Farm General’s purported right to subrogation under the Uniform Vendor and Purchaser Risk Act (765 ILCS 65/1 et seq. (West 1994)) and under the subrogation provisions of its policy. A full, unabridged text of this decision is on file with the clerk of this court under Docket No. 94—3161.

=== CASE 9741109 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:49:37.841038+00 ===

McCORMICK, Justice
(concurring specially).
Although due process does not impose the stringent principles of Gault and Winship upon a post-adjudicative juvenile proceeding, due process nevertheless is a requisite in such proceedings. Cf. Specht v. Patterson, 386 U.S. 605, 87 S.Ct. 1209, 18 L.Ed.2d 326 (1967); Townsend v. Burke, 334 U.S. 736, 68 S.Ct. 1252, 92 L.Ed. 1690 (1948). The difference in the post-adjudicative proceeding is in the process which is due. I believe the process which is due depends upon the nature and purpose of the proceeding.
After the November 15 adjudication of delinquency the child was placed in his home subject to supervision of a probation officer. § 232.34(2), The Code. Allegations of subsequent misconduct against the child resulted in the February hearing, the purpose of which was two-fold: (1) to inquire into the truth of the allegations, and (2) if the allegations were established, to determine the appropriateness of a different disposition. § 232.36, The Code. This proceeding was in many respects analogous to an adult probation or parole revocation hearing. The April hearing dealt solely with the choice of disposition.
I believe the minimum requirements of due process in a juvenile dispositional hearing under Code § 232.36, like the February hearing in this case, would include: (1) written notice to the child of the allegations upon which a change in disposition will be considered, (2) disclosure to the child of the evidence supporting those allegations, (3) an opportunity of the child to be heard in person and to present evidence, (4) the right of the child to confront and cross-examine adverse witnesses, (5) the right of the child to be represented by counsel throughout the proceeding, to be appointed by the court if •he is indigent (see § 232.28, The Code), and (6) a written statement by the court showing the evidence relied on and reasons for any change in disposition. See Morrissey v. Brewer, 408 U.S. 471, 92 S.Ct. 2593, 33 L.Ed.2d 484 (1972). In addition, the allegations supporting a change in disposition must be established by a preponderance of competent evidence. See State v. Hughes, 200 N.W.2d 559 (Iowa 1972). The child’s right to confront and cross-examine adverse witnesses is defined and explained in In re Delaney, 185 N.W.2d 726 (Iowa 1971).
In the present case, the child complains the juvenile court relied on incompetent evidence in finding the allegations of mis*292conduct subsequent to the adjudication of delinquency were established in the February hearing. He also complains the competent evidence was insufficient to sustain those allegations. I concur with the majority because I believe, after de novo review of the record, that the allegations were sustained by a preponderance of competent evidence. It is not necessary under this record to determine whether the other requisites of due process were met.

=== CASE 3027433 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2015-10-13 22:38:14.888074+00 ===

United States Court of Appeals
FOR THE EIGHTH CIRCUIT
_____________
No. 00-2589
_____________
Melissa Lancaster and                    *
Tim Lancaster,                           *
*
Plaintiffs/Appellants,       *
*
v.                                 * Appeal from the United States
* District Court for the Western
American & Foreign Insurance             * District of Missouri.
Company, Royal Insurance Company of *
America, and Royal Surplus Lines         *
Insurance Company, as garnishees,        *
*
Appellees,                   *
*
____________
Submitted: May 16, 2001
Filed: August 3, 2001
_____________
Before WOLLMAN, Chief Judge, HANSEN, Circuit Judge, and BARNES,1
District Judge.
_____________
1
The Honorable Harry F. Barnes, United States District Judge for the Western
District of Arkansas, sitting by designation.
BARNES, District Judge.
Melissa Lancaster and Tim Lancaster appeal the district court’s2 order denying
their motion for summary judgment, and granting summary judgment to Royal Surplus
Lines Insurance Company. We review the district court’s order de novo. Wayne v.
Genesis Medical Center, 140 F.3d 1145, 1147 (8th Cir. 1998). For the reasons set forth
below, we affirm.
I.
Melissa Lancaster was an employee of Leonard Scheffler’s McDonald’s
restaurant in Columbia, Missouri. She and her husband Tim Lancaster filed a sexual
harassment claim against Scheffler. The parties reached a settlement agreement
whereby the judgment amount of two million dollars actual damages and five million
dollars punitive damages was to be paid out of proceeds of any insurance policies held
by Scheffler. The district court reduced the agreement to a judgment after a short
hearing which essentially adopted the agreement of the parties in toto.
Scheffler had four insurance policies which were subject to the settlement;
however, this appeal is concerned only with the policy held by Royal Surplus Lines
Insurance Company (Royal Surplus). Melissa and Tim Lancaster filed garnishments
in aid of execution of the judgment awarded by the district court. Royal Surplus
opposed the garnishments alleging that their policy did not insure the risk and was not
subject to the execution. The district court held in its order of February 10, 2000, that
Royal Surplus was not liable and that the garnishment action must fail.
2
The Honorable Scott O. Wright, United States District Judge for the Western
District of Missouri.
-2-
II.
The issue raised on appeal is whether the district court erred in its application of
the "traditional principles of contract interpretation" rather than the "reasonable
expectations doctrine," to the policy with Royal Surplus. Scheffler purchased four
insurance policies. One was a package policy from American & Foreign Insurance
Company (American) which provided coverage for commercial property, commercial
crime, commercial auto, and commercial general liability. In addition, he purchased
an umbrella policy from Royal Insurance Company of America (Royal). Neither the
American package policy nor the Royal umbrella policy covered sexual harassment.
Scheffler also purchased an employment practices liability policy or EPLP, from
Reliance National Insurance Company of Illinois (Reliance) which provided
$250,000.00 coverage for claims relating to sexual harassment and Reliance has
surrendered its face amount in partial satisfaction of the judgment.
The policy which is the focus of this appeal is the special excess policy (SEP)
Scheffler purchased from Royal Surplus Lines Insurance Company. McDonald’s
provided this special excess policy to interested franchisees in an effort to cover
punitive damage awards above that covered by the franchisees’ individual general
liability policy and umbrella policy. The special excess policy application Scheffler
completed required that he list his other policies and their carriers. He listed the
American package policy and Royal umbrella policy on the application, but failed to
list his Reliance EPLP. Royal Surplus ultimately denied coverage since under the
language of the policy the SEP only provided coverage for those occurrences insured
by underlying insurance described in Scheffler’s application. Scheffler only listed two
policies, neither of which covered sexual harassment.3
3
Scheffler submitted his claim to Royal Surplus in 1997; however, it was not
until September 1, 1998 that Royal Surplus amended its policies to permit
-3-
Appellants argue that coverage was available to them under the Royal Surplus
policy because the insured (Scheffler) had a reasonable expectation of coverage and
had no reason to suspect coverage was dependent on the policies listed in his
application as underlying insurance. Appellants’ basis for their contention is set forth
in the case of Niswonger v. Farm Bureau Town & Country Insurance Company, 992
S.W.2d 308 (Mo. App. E.D. 1999); See also Bellamy v. Pacific Mut. Life Ins. Co., 651
S.W.2d 490 (Mo. 1983). The court in Niswonger , recognizing the fact that the
"reasonable expectations" doctrine is "not in strict accordance with traditional
principles of contract interpretation," found that it should only be applied with caution.
Niswonger, 992 S.W.2d at 320-321 (citing Rodriguez v. General Accident Ins. Co.,
808 S.W.2d 379, 382 (Mo. banc 1991)). An appropriate application might be a
situation where there is ambiguity in the policy. Id.
Appellants argue that the facts support Scheffler’s "reasonable expectations" that
he had coverage under the Royal Surplus policy. McDonald’s originally negotiated the
special excess policy specifically for those franchisees in need of coverage for punitive
damages. They also contend that Scheffler only knew that a surplus policy was in
effect when he purchased the policy and therefore had a reasonable expectation that
he was covered. In fact Scheffler claims that only after the filing of this lawsuit did he
receive a copy of the master policy and learn that underlying insurance listed in his
application was a necessary condition for coverage. Finally, appellants argue that
ignoring Scheffler’s reasonable expectations and permitting Royal Surplus to deny
coverage would produce an unconscionable result.
The district court, while agreeing with the appellants that Niswonger supports
the "reasonable expectations" doctrine, found that neither the policy nor the attending
employment liability policies to become eligible as underlying insurance. Therefore,
even had he listed his Reliance EPLP on the Royal Surplus application, that
coverage would have been unavailable to him.
-4-
documents in the instant case contained the necessary ambiguity. Therefore, the court
said, "that part of Niswonger which authorizes a court to introduce ambiguity based
upon extrinsic evidence does not apply and the reasonable expectations doctrine is
unavailable." Dist. Ct. Op. at 6. We agree, and hold that the district court properly
applied traditional principles of contract interpretation in its determination that coverage
under the special excess policy provided by Royal Surplus did not extend to appellants’
sexual harassment claims.
III.
Accordingly, we affirm the district court’s grant of summary judgment to Royal
Surplus Lines and its denial of summary judgment for Melissa and Tim Lancaster.
A true copy.
Attest:
CLERK, U.S. COURT OF APPEALS, EIGHTH CIRCUIT.
-5-

=== CASE 9741112 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:49:38.342008+00 ===

VOGEL, Judge.
Alice G. Stout applied for workmen’s compensation death benefits for the death of her husband, Archie A. Stout, who died on November 26, 1973. The Workmen’s Compensation Bureau denied the claim, she appealed, and the district court reversed the Bureau and entered judgment for her. The Bureau appeals. We affirm.
Stout was a truck driver. On the date of his death he delivered freight to a grain elevator at Thompson, North Dakota. The freight consisted of an anhydrous ammonia stand which carried two immovable metal reels intended to hold hoses. Stout and the manager of the elevator slid or skidded the machine off the truck onto a pickup truck. The machine weighed about 150 pounds and the effort involved was not strenuous. Almost immediately, Stout complained of not feeling well and of pain in his arm and chest. He went to the office and sat down. He called his employer in Grand Forks and asked to be picked up and returned home since he was unable to drive the truck. A few minutes later,' he was dead. The cause of death was myocardial arrest.
There was no inkling of heart disease in Stout’s prior medical history. In February of 1973, an electrocardiogram was taken and it was normal. In October of 1973, prior to a prostate operation, he had a physical examination and the report shows that his heart tones were regular and of good quality and there was no enlargement or *891heart murmur. He returned to work on November 12, and his work was uneventful until the day of his death.
An autopsy was performed. It showed atherosclerotic occlusion of the proximal portion of the right coronary artery and severe pulmonary edema.
Mr. Stout’s physician, who had examined him twice previous to the date of his death, testified that it was his opinion “ . that Mr. Stout’s exertion did precipitate the coronary insufficiency that resulted in acute cardiac failure and pulmonary edema and subsequent death.” He was asked, “And is it your opinion that the exertion, moving this object, although it may not have been any great exertion, could precipitate the coronary insufficiency?” and he replied, “It is indeed.” As to causation, he said that the facts speak for themselves: “ . . .he was at work, he did exert within a period of a minute or two and he developed a severe illness and died shortly thereafter.” He said that the pulmonary edema could occur within a very short time, and there was no evidence of any prior heart attack.
The Bureau offered no evidence to contradict that of the plaintiff’s physician.
The Bureau, however, apparently relied on further testimony of the doctor that Stout had preexisting “bad coronary disease” and that “He was, you might say, walking a thin line every day maybe for years.” The Bureau apparently concluded that the death was caused by the preexisting heart condition, and not by the exertion, although the Bureau concedes that the evidence shows that the exertion of moving the anhydrous ammonia stand precipitated the death.
The Bureau’s findings include statements that “ . . . the task was easy and that it required no particular amount of exertion . that the decedent had been performing the same type of work for years; that he suffered from marked coronary atherosclerosis; and that “medical evidence indicates that individuals who suffer from the type of heart disease which caused the claimant’s [sic] heart attack and death often die suddenly with very little exertion due to the nature of the disease.” The Bureau’s final three findings of fact are as follows:
“XII.
“That although medical evidence indicates that the deceased’s heart attack on November 26, 1973, was precipitated by the exertion in the course of his employment on that date, this same medical evidence also indicates that due to the nature of the deceased’s heart disease a heart attack could have resulted from any type of activity whether at home or on the job.
“XIII.
“That the fact that the deceased’s heart attack did occur after unloading freight, which required no particular amount of exertion, the evidence does not substantiate the claimant’s allegation that said heart attack was actually the result of the deceased’s occupation rather than an unfortunate coincidence resulting from any type of exertion and due to an underlying heart condition.
“XIV.
“That the underlying coronary atherosclerosis is not an industrial disease.”
The district court viewed the matter differently. Its findings point out that “some exertion” was required of Stout in order to move the stand, that he complained of pains in his chest and in his right arm immediately thereafter, and died soon afterward, and the Bureau’s findings conceded that there was a causal connection between the death and the employment.
The trial court, as its conclusions of law, stated that the claimant had proved that the unloading of the stand was causally connected to the death, that she had proved *892that the exertion of moving the stand precipitated the death, and that she had proved that she was entitled to death benefits. It reversed the decision of the Bureau.
I
We affirm the district court. We do so, first of all, on the very simple basis that the evidence is undisputed that a work-connected exertion precipitated the heart attack which caused the death almost immediately. If the Bureau has any testimony or opinions to the contrary available to it, they are not part of the record and cannot be considered.
In Foss v. North Dakota Workmen’s Compensation Bureau, 214 N.W.2d 519, 523 (N.D.1974), we said:
“While a myocardial arrest (also known as a myocardial infarction) may occur after exercise in some individuals, it often occurs unassociated with physical activity. . . . It is therefore difficult to establish the precipitating cause of such an affliction and the testimony of a medical expert is always desirable and in most cases indispensable to prove this issue.” [Citations omitted.]
In Foss, the claimant lost because she had no medical proof of causation. Here, the claimant provided the only medical proof of causation.
II
We affirm, secondly, on the basis that the Bureau’s distinction between “unusual exertion” and “usual exertion,” under which it makes awards in cases such as this where the exertion is “unusual” but not where it is “usual,” is an arbitrary distinction which we decline to follow. In Suedel v. North Dakota Workmen’s Compensation Bureau, 218 N.W.2d 164, 175 (N.D.1974), the majority of this court said “we leave for another day” the question of the survival of the unusual-exertion rule in this State, while the minority was of the opinion that the rule had not previously existed in this State. Be that as it may, we now state the rule to be that no such distinction is to be observed in this State. In so ruling, we join the majority of jurisdictions and become a part of the trend toward the so-called usual-exertion rule.
By adopting this rule, we do not reverse such cases as Sandlie v. North Dakota Workmen’s Compensation Bureau, 70 N.D. 449, 295 N.W. 497 (1941), which was decided primarily on the view that the evidence was •insufficient to sustain the award,1 nor do we let down the bars so that any death on the job becomes compensable. We hold that where, as here, the preponderance of the evidence sustains a holding that work-connected “usual” exertion precipitates injury or death, there may be recovery even though the injury or death was contributed to by a preexisting defect or disability. If the work-related exertion did not precipitate the injury, of course the recovery would be denied, as it was in Sandlie.
As we said in Kuntz v. North Dakota Workmen’s Compensation Bureau, 139 N.W.2d 525, 527 (N.D.1966),
“Therefore, the fact that even though a pre-existing disease or weakness, such as an aneurism, may have predisposed an employee to an early death, the claimant may be entitled to compensation if the bursting of the aneurism took place earlier because of an injury suffered by the employee. Pace v. North Dakota Workmen’s Compensation Bureau, 51 N.D. 815, 201 N.W. 348.”
In Suedel, supra, as the majority opinion pointed out, the Workmen’s Compensation Bureau found “that neither the rupture nor *893the aneurysm was incident to or had its inception with [the decedent’s] employment.” 218 N.W.2d 164, at 172. In the case before us, the Bureau, with commendable candor, concedes that the heart attack was precipitated by the employment, but claims that the preexisting condition was not connected with the employment. We hold that it is not necessary that the preexisting condition be connected with the employment. We have so held in the past. Kuntz v. North Dakota Workmen’s Compensation Bureau, supra; Booke v. North Dakota Workmen’s Compensation Bureau, 70 N.D. 714, 297 N.W. 779 (1941); Tweten v. North Dakota Workmen’s Compensation Bureau, 69 N.D. 369, 287 N.W. 304 (1939); Pfeiffer v. North Dakota Workmen’s Compensation Bureau, 57 N.D. 326, 221 N.W. 894 (1928).
It is the general rule, to which we have adhered, that an employer takes the employee as he finds him. In Pace v. North Dakota Workmen’s Compensation Bureau, 51 N.D. 815, 201 N.W. 348, 351 (1924), we said:
“It is quite immaterial that the decedent may have brought with him a disability.”
Ill
The Bureau further argues that the usual-exertion test cannot be applied in North Dakota because of statutory preclusion. It points to Section 65-01-02, subdivision 8, which defines “injury”:
“ ‘Injury’ shall mean only an injury arising in the course of employment including an injury caused by the willful act of a third person directed against an employee because of his employment, but such term shall not include an injury caused by the employee’s willful intention to injure himself or to injure another, nor any injury received because of the use of narcotics or intoxicants while in the course of the employment. Such term, in addition to an injury by accident, shall include:
“a. Any disease which can be fairly traceable to the employment. Compensation shall not be paid, however, for any condition which existed prior to the happening of a compensable injury nor for any disability chargeable to such condition. Ordinary diseases of life to which the general public outside of the employment is exposed shall not be compensable except where the disease follows as an incident to, and in its inception is caused by a hazard to which an employee is subjected to in the course of his employment. The disease must be incidental to the character of the business and not independent of the relation of employer and employee. ... It need not have been foreseen or expected, but after it is contracted, it must appear to have had its origin in a risk connected with the employment and to have flowed from that source as a rational consequence; and
“b. An injury to artificial members;
[Emphasis supplied.]
The Bureau argues that Stout died of a disease which could not be fairly traceable to his employment, and that the statute prohibits compensation for a condition which existed prior to the happening of the compensable injury. It further asserts that heart disease is an ordinary disease of life to which the general public is exposed and is not compensable unless it follows as an incident to a hazard of employment.
But this argument runs contrary to a long and growing line of cases holding that a heart attack caused by exertion is in itself an accident, not a disease,2 and therefore it is immaterial that a preexisting disease con*894tributed to the death. In order to eliminate any confusion, we now state that we adhere to the majority rule, which is that a claim, if otherwise within the terms of the workmen’s compensation Acts, is compensable even though the cause is routine and not accidental, if the result is not foreseen, intended, or anticipated. Subdivision 8 a of Section 65-01-02, N.D.C.C., relates only to disease, not accident. If the myocardial arrest is an accident — and we hold that it is — subdivision 8 a is not applicable.
In Larson, Workmen’s Compensation Law, § 38.00, page 7-9, the case law in the United States is summarized:
“The ‘by accident’ requirement is now deemed satisfied in most jurisdictions either if the cause was of an accidental character or if the effect was the unexpected result of the routine performance of the claimant’s duties. Accordingly, if strain of claimant’s usual exertions causes collapse from heart weakness, back weakness, hernia, and the like, the injury is held accidental. A very substantial minority of jurisdictions require a showing that the exertion was in some way unusual, or make other reservations, but this line of decision causes difficulty because of the constant necessity of drawing distinctions between usual and unusual strains.”
In the specific category of “heart cases” including myocardial arrest, such as the one before us, three times as many jurisdictions now accept the usual-exertion rule as those not applying it. Larson, op.cit., § 38.30, p. 7-37.
For a convincing demonstration that the unusual-exertion test is historically incorrect, logically unsound, and impractical in operation, see Larson, op.cit., Sections 38.61, page 7-98, 38.62, page 7-100, and 38.63, page 7-102.
We conclude that the Bureau’s decision was not in accordance with the law, and that its findings of fact are not supported by the evidence. We therefore affirm the district court judgment reversing the order of the Bureau, and remand the case to the Bureau for disposition in accordance with this opinion. Sec. 28-32-19, N.D.C.C.
PEDERSON and PAULSON, JJ., concur.
. We said (295 N.W. 497, at 499-500): “We are clear that the stroke was not the result of the employment, but rather of the condition which existed prior to the employment, and was not aggravated by the employment so as to cause additional injury.”
. Our cases are in conflict as to whether the “accident” must be found in the cause, or in the effect. In Booke v. North Dakota Workmen’s Compensation Bureau, supra, we ap*894proved a ruling by the Arizona Supreme Court that “accident” refers only to cause of injury, not injury itself. Pierce v. Phelps Dodge Corp., 42 Ariz. 436, 26 P.2d 1017, 1020 (1933). But in Pace v. North Dakota Workmen’s Compensation Bureau, supra, we held that excessive heat was the proximate cause of the bursting of a blood vessel that resulted in death, which was an end “not foreseen, intended, or anticipated” and was an “injury.” This seems to be an adoption of the general rule.

=== CASE 9741113 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:49:38.348319+00 ===

SAND, Judge.
(Concurring specially with modification.)
The proposed opinion properly concludes that the injury sustained by the employee is compensable under the North Dakota Workmen’s Compensation Act. With this I agree. However, the opinion does not, but should, give recognition to § 65-05-15, N.D. C.C., which relates to the aggravation of an injury or a disease existing prior to a com-pensable injury and provides that the benefits be pro-rated on a proportional basis depending upon the extent of the aggravation which is determined from all the facts surrounding the incident. The workmen’s compensation benefits would be proportionate to the disability arising from the aggravation of the prior disease or injury as may reasonably be attributable to the compensa-ble injury.
Section 65-05-15 has been considered by the North Dakota Supreme Court in Bender v. North Dakota Workmen’s Compensation Bureau, 139 N.W.2d 150 (1965), where it was recognized and applied, and in Tweten v. North Dakota Workmen’s Compensation Bureau, 69 N.D. 369, 287 N.W. 304 (1939), where it was briefly discussed. In Tweten *895this Court stated: “The above quoted statutory provision applies only to the aggravation of an existing disease; it does not require or permit a structural weakness to be considered in the allowance of compensation.”
The authors Larson and Schneider on Workmen’s Compensation discuss generally aggravation provisions, but they are not very helpful because the footnotes as to the North Dakota provisions refer to either § 65-01-02(9)(d), which was enacted by Chapter 388 of the 1961 Session Laws, relating to presumptions of certain disease in case of a fireman, or to § 65-04-18 relating to subsequent injury fund. Unfortunately, neither of the authors discuss § 65-05 — 15, which is a pertinent provision of the North Dakota Act, even though it was not part of the original Act and did not come into being until 1931.
The extent of the aggravation is basically a medical fact question to be resolved by the agency under appropriate rules of law. Even though it may be difficult in some instances to determine with exact precision the extent of the aggravation and the resulting proportionate benefits, nevertheless the statute contemplates that a reasonable effort be made.
This difficulty of apportioning the aggravation of an existing disease may have been recognized by the Bureau and may be the reason why Senate Bill 2125 was introduced in the Forty-fourth Legislative Assembly, which would have amended § 65-05-15 and would have provided that in all aggravation cases partial benefit awards would be on a fifty percent basis except where the claimant had no private medical or hospital insurance, in which instance the Bureau would pay the total amount of the medical expense. The Bill received a “do pass” by the committee, but on final passage was defeated by a vote of 23 ayes and 27 nays. The Senate Journal does not indicate or give any reason why the Bill was defeated. Consequently, any explanation here would be speculation, which would have no greater value than to speculate what the result would have been if a Bill had been introduced providing for one hundred percent benefits.
The facts (particularly the autopsy report) in this case clearly show that Stout had a pre-existing disease, as such term is defined in § 65-01-02(8)(a), and as further defined in subsection (9)(a), (b), and (c).
Were it not for the provisions of § 65-05-15, I would agree that there would be no need for further comment, but until the Legislature modifies, amends, repeals, or supersedes it, this statutory provision must be recognized.
On this basis I would remand the claim to the Bureau for appropriate action pursuant to the provisions of § 65-05-15, N.D.C.C.
ERICKSTAD, C. J., concurs.

=== CASE 9741114 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:49:39.632869+00 ===

Allen, P. J.
Plaintiff petitioned Avon Township to have an 80-acre parcel south of Avon Road near Livernois rezoned from single family to multi-family residential use. Upon the denial of said request, plaintiff commenced suit in circuit court to compel *531rezoning on the grounds that defendant’s zoning ordinance was unconstitutional as applied to the subject property. The lower court sustained the reasonableness of the zoning restriction, and plaintiff appeals.
Plaintiff’s arguments one and two concern the proper standard of review in zoning ordinance cases. Plaintiff maintains that the correct standard is set forth in the concurrence by Justice Levin in Kropf v City of Sterling Heights, 391 Mich 139; 215 NW2d 179 (1974), subsequently followed by three members of the Court in West v City of Portage, 392 Mich 458; 221 NW2d 303 (1974). This approach views a zoning board’s action on a request for rezoning as administrative, not legislative. Moreover, under this theory, the courts would look to the reasonableness of the proposed use of the property rather than simply the reasonableness of the use permitted by the zoning restriction.
The Levin view has recently garnered support. In Turkish v City of Warren, 61 Mich App 435; 232 NW2d 732 (1975), Judge Quinn, speaking for the full panel, endorsed the Levin concurrence in Kropf, supra, while recognizing that the Court of Appeals was bound by existing precedent. On August 19, 1975, in Sabo v Monroe Township, 394 Mich 531; 232 NW2d 584 (1975), three members of the Supreme Court reversed the township board’s rejection of plaintiff’s request to rezone plaintiff’s property so as to permit the construction of a mobile home park.1 In doing so, the majority of three held:
*532"Even if present zoning is not unreasonable or confiscatory, a proposed use should be permitted if reasonable under all the circumstances. Kropf v Sterling Heights; 391 Mich 139, 164 ff.; 215 NW2d 179 (1974) (concurring opinion).
"We would require that the proofs now adduced in circuit court be presented administratively and restrict judicial review to whether the record evidence supports the administrative finding on the issue whether the proposed use is reasonable. Kropf v Sterling Heights, supra (concurring opinion).” Sabo, supra, at 536-537.
Justice Levin’s approach, though gathering strength, does not yet represent the current jurisprudential law in Michigan. While the viewpoint gathered three votes in Sabo, this is still not a majority of the Court. Where no opinion is endorsed by a majority of the members elected to the Supreme Court, the result is not binding as precedent. In re Curzenski Estate, 384 Mich 334, 335; 183 NW2d 220 (1971). See also Palmer v Superior Twp, 60 Mich App 664; 233 NW2d 14 (1975). Though the law is obviously in flux we cannot at this point find that the trial court erred in applying the traditional standard of review reiterated by the majority of the Supreme Court in Kropf, supra, and followed by this Court in Ed Zaagman, Inc v City of Kentwood, 61 Mich App 693; 233 NW2d 146 (1975).2 In this connection we note that absent clarification, ambiguity appears in the sug*533gestéd standard of review. Does this mean that the court would look only at the reasonableness of the proposed use without regard to the existing use, or does it mean that the court must be persuaded that the proposed use is more reasonable than the existing use?3
Plaintiff points out that owing to the Clinton River flood plain and topography of the property, it is not possible under the existing zoning restriction to develop the maximum number of lots allowed; however, the maximum number of dwelling units could be constructed if the property was rezoned multi-family. It is argued that this factor creates such a disparity in property value as to constitute a confiscation, and, at least, indicates the unreasonableness of the ordinance. Therefore, says plaintiff, the ordinance is void as to plaintiff’s property under the standard adopted by the majority in Kropf. We disagree. The fact that the land is worth more if used for developing multi-family dwellings does not suffice to render the zoning restriction unreasonable. Kropf, supra, at 160. Further, to be considered confiscatory, plaintiff must show that "all permitted uses are so devoid of feasibility that the restriction has accomplished the destruction of all usable value”. Reibel v City of Birmingham, 23 Mich App 732, 739; 179 NW2d 243 (1970). The record shows it was feasible to develop single-family residences on the plaintiff’s property. The estimated 1 to 3.6 disparity in value between single-family and multi-family use cannot justify the conclusion that the zoning restriction is confiscatory. Compare Land Development Corp v *534Township of Bloomfield, 55 Mich App 438; 222 NW2d 768 (1974).
We find no substance in the argument that the zoning ordinance limiting plaintiffs property to single family residential use bears no real relation to public health, safety, morals or general welfare. A zoning ordinance is presumed valid, and the trial court, after hearing all of the evidence, determined that plaintiff failed to carry his burden of overcoming the presumption. This Court cannot say that had we been sitting in the lower court’s place, we would have reached a different result. Michaels v Village of Franklin, 58 Mich App 665; 230 NW2d 273 (1975).
Finally, we are convinced that the lower court did not rule plaintiff was precluded from attacking the zoning ordinance because of his awareness of the use restriction at the time the property was purchased.
Affirmed, but without costs, a public question being involved.
D. F. Walsh, J., concurred.
Also released on the same day and with the same division among the justices as Sabo, were companion cases Smookler v Wheatfield Township, 394 Mich 574; 232 NW2d 616 (1975), and Nickola v Grand Blanc Township, 394 Mich 589; 232 NW2d 604 (1975). The opinion in each read as follows:
"We affirm the Court of Appeals for the reason stated in our opinion in Sabo v Monroe Township.”
Absent the applicability of the Levin position, plaintiff’s fourth argument must also fail. "Plaintiffs challenge defendant’s refusal to rezone their property on numerous grounds. Several of these deal with administrative, not legislative, decision-making and would be cogent if we applied the Kropf concurrence- West test: that the Superior Township board has no standards to guide it in deciding requests for rezoning; that rezoning decisions have been selective and, in this case, inconsistent with the master plan. However, since we are applying the test of the Kropf majority, these reasons are of no force.” Palmer v Superior Twp, supra, 60 Mich App at 674; Ed Zaagman, Inc v City of Kentwood, supra.
If, for example, the court were to look only to the reasonableness of the requested use without balancing it against the existing use, variances would be more easily established and conceivably result in spot zoning by judicial rule. Well-recognized policy reasons work against opening the door to spot zoning.

=== CASE 9741115 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:49:39.636965+00 ===

O’Hara, J.
(concurring). I regret the necessity of writing separately again.
I am aware of the three recent zoning opinions released by the Supreme Court,1 and the forceful opinion of Judge Quinn in Turkish v City of Warren, 61 Mich App 435; 232 NW2d 732 (1975).
I am obligated to say that I do not agree with what has been called the "Levin view” or "Levin approach”.
Unless and until a majority opinion of the Su*535preme Court adopts by opinion the following language of Mr. Justice Levin, my friend and respected colleague in the appellate judiciary:
"Even if present zoning is not unreasonable or confiscatory, a proposed use should be permitted if reasonable under all the circumstances.” (Citation omitted.) Sabo v Monroe Township, 394 Mich 531, 536-537; 232 NW2d 584 (1975),
I shall oppose it on both legal and philosophical grounds.
Zoning, in my judgment, can never by any exercise of judicial osmosis be relegated to the category of "administrative finding” reviewable on that basis by courts.
Zoning is a child of the police power. The police power is inherent in the legislative branch of government. It is enforceable by the executive branch and reviewable judicially for constitutional overbreadth. ,
If anything would turn courts into super zoning boards adoption of the so-called "Levin approach” would. This result, as I understand it, Judge Quinn and Judge Allen both disavow.
To me, the Kropf2 majority opinion merely reinstated the precedential control of Brae Burn, Inc v Bloomfield Hills, 350 Mich 425; 86 NW2d 166 (1957), which I previously had relied on in Nickola v Grand Blanc Township, 47 Mich App 684; 209 NW2d 803 (1973), affirmed 394 Mich 589; 232 NW2d 604 (1975). Kropf is the law and what I believe the law ought to be.
1 reject the notion that:
"We would require that the proofs now adduced in *536circuit court be presented administratively and restrict judicial review to whether the record evidence supports the administrative finding on the issue whether the proposed use is reasonable.” (Citation omitted.) Sabo, supra, at 537.
I cling tenaciously to the concept of Montesquieu, the intellectual father of our separation of powers doctrine, that the legislature should legislate, the executive should execute, and the judiciary should judge without invasion of the prerogatives of the other two branches.
As for the case at bar, I agree that the plaintiff failed to maintain his burden of proof under the test of Brae Burn and Kropf, supra. His case thus fails. I vote to affirm the trial judge.
Sabo v Monroe Township, 394 Mich 531; 232 NW2d 584 (1975), Smookler v Wheatfield Township, 394 Mich 574; 232 NW2d 616 (1975), Nickola v Grand Blanc Township, 394 Mich 589; 232 NW2d 604 (1975).
Kropf v City of Sterling Heights, 391 Mich 139; 215 NW2d 179 (1974).

=== CASE 2226225 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:04.083663+00 ===

342 Mass. 597 (1961)
174 N.E.2d 663
EARL C. JERTSON
vs.
ROBERT HARTLEY, JUNIOR,[1] & another.[2]
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Suffolk.
December 8, 1960.
May 9, 1961.
Present: WILKINS, C.J., SPALDING, WILLIAMS, CUTTER, & KIRK, JJ.
David H. Fulton, for Lumbermens Mutual Casualty Company.
Dana J. Kelly, (William J. Conboy with him,) for the plaintiff.
WILLIAMS, J.
This is a suit in equity under G.L.c. 214, § 3 (10), to reach and apply the obligation imposed by a motor vehicle liability policy of the defendant insurance company (company) in satisfaction of a judgment for property damage entered for the plaintiff in an action of tort against the defendant Robert Hartley. G.L.c. 175, §§ 112-113. The evidence is reported and the judge has made a report of the material facts.
It is undisputed that on November 21, 1952, there was outstanding a motor vehicle liability policy issued by the company to one Ella B. Hartley providing optional coverage for property damage caused by the operation by her or some other person with her consent of a certain automobile described as a 1936 Ford coupe of which she was declared to be the owner. The policy provided as a condition for its enforcement that "The insured shall cooperate with the company and, upon the company's request, shall attend hearings and trials and shall assist in effecting settlements, *599 securing and giving evidence, obtaining the attendance of witnesses and in the conduct of suits." On the above date this car, while being driven by the defendant Robert Hartley, the son of Ella B. Hartley, collided with the plaintiff's car causing damage for which the plaintiff obtained judgment against Hartley in the amount of $1,909.02. The judgment remains unsatisfied.
The company alleged in its answer to the plaintiff's bill that the insured car did in fact belong to Robert Hartley and not to his mother; that Ella B. Hartley had no insurable interest in it; that to induce the company to issue said policy she falsely represented that she was the owner of the car; and that at the time of the accident no coverage under the policy existed. It further alleged that in connection with the plaintiff's claim both Mrs. Hartley and her son failed to cooperate with the company; that they were "guilty of active connivance with the ... [plaintiff] to bring about a loss to the" company; and that the judgment against Hartley was procured by the fraud and collusion of the plaintiff with the Hartleys. It sought by counterclaim to enjoin Robert Hartley from further proceedings against it.
There was evidence that on November 22, the day after the accident, Robert Hartley gave a signed statement to an investigator for the insurance company in which he said that he had bought the Ford coupe three months before for $85 with money which he had saved from his job and that the car was registered in his mother's name. On January 6, 1954, in a second signed statement he said that he was eighteen and "made a gift of this car to ... [his] mother for the purpose of registration since ... [he] was under twenty-one and couldn't register the car in ... [his] own name." On March 3, 1953, Ella B. Hartley gave the company a signed statement to the effect that her son Robert bought the Ford coupe with money which he had earned and that he was the sole owner of it; that she registered it in her own name as she intended to use it also herself; and that Robert paid for the registration. In a second statement *600 on January 6, 1954, she said, "This car was the personal property of my son Robert but as I would have to use the car from time to time and as Robert was under twenty-one years of age I felt it best that the car be called mine so that it could be registered in my name. I did not contribute anything toward the purchase price of this car and in truth it was Robert's car but as I say for registration purposes I declared the car to be mine and my son Robert made a gift of the car to me for this specific purpose of registering the car. Robert retained the right to use the car any time he wished and should the car have been sold the proceeds of course would have belonged to Robert."
The plaintiff brought the action in which he obtained judgment against Robert Hartley on or about December 19, 1953. Ella B. Hartley was joined as a defendant. The declaration was in three counts, alleging in count 1 the negligent operation of the car by Robert, in count 2 that Robert was driving an illegally registered car, and in count 3 that Ella B. Hartley had permitted an improperly registered car to be on the highway. Appearances for the two defendants were entered by attorneys for the insurance company.
On May 20, 1954, the attorneys filed in behalf of each defendant answers to interrogatories by the plaintiff. In her answers Mrs. Hartley affirmed what she had told the insurance investigators, namely that she did not own the car but had caused it to be registered in her name. In Robert's answers he said that he was the owner of the car. In letters to Mrs. Hartley dated October 20 and December 28, 1953, the company advised her that it did not then have sufficient information to decide whether she was covered by her policy. On June 17, 1954, it notified her that it had found she was not the owner of the Ford coupe and disclaimed liability. On July 22, 1954, counsel for the company withdrew their appearances in the tort action. In July, 1954, the action came to trial before a judge of the Superior Court who, on October 26, 1954, entered a finding *601 for the plaintiff on count 1 against Robert Hartley. He specifically found that the Ford coupe "was properly registered in the name of its owner, Ella B. Hartley ... [and] that ... Robert Hartley ... was operating the aforesaid Ford coupe on the day in question with permission of the owner, Ella B. Hartley."
In the trial of the equity suit Robert Hartley testified that it was his mother's car. Ella B. Hartley testified that she owned the car and thought she had it legally registered. She paid for it with the board money that her son had paid her and it was her money.
The judge found that the car in question was owned by Mrs. Hartley; that it was properly registered in her name; that it was being operated by Robert Hartley with her permission; that the damage to the plaintiff's car was caused by Hartley's negligence; and that the finding on which the judgment was entered "was not as a result of the connivance, lack of cooperation, fraud or collusion on the part of any of the parties to that action."
A final decree was entered ordering payment of the judgment by the company, dismissing its counterclaim, and dismissing the plaintiff's bill as against the defendant Hartley. From this decree the company appealed.
The evidence is reported and we must decide the case according to our own judgment, giving due weight to the judge's findings. Lowell Bar Assn. v. Loeb, 315 Mass. 176, 178. Skil Corp. v. Barnet, 337 Mass. 485, 488. So far as they are based upon oral testimony these findings will not be reversed unless plainly wrong. Masterson v. American Employers' Ins. Co. 288 Mass. 518, 521.
The company's contention that Mrs. Hartley had no insurable interest in the Ford coupe and that the policy was void cannot be sustained. There was evidence that the car was purchased with her money and it could be found that in buying it her son Robert was acting as her agent. It could be found that she was the owner. See Goldrick v. Lacombe, 231 Mass. 397; McTigue v. Ryan, 286 Mass. 515, 517. It could also be found that at the time of the accident Robert *602 was driving the car with her consent. He was therefore an unnamed insured person referred to in the policy, and as such was entitled to its benefits. It is the company's obligation to him which the plaintiff seeks to reach and apply. Crompton v. Lumbermens Mut. Cas. Co. 333 Mass. 160. O'Kane v. Travelers Ins. Co. 337 Mass. 182.
The coverage afforded by the policy for property damage was not compulsory and the company may maintain against the plaintiff any defences which would be available to it in a suit by Robert. Imperiali v. Pica, 338 Mass. 494, 497-498, and cases cited. The grounds relied on by the company are failure of the insured to cooperate, active connivance with the plaintiff, and procurement of the judgment by fraud and collusion.
The intentional furnishing of false information of a material nature either before or at trial is a breach of the cooperation clause. Williams v. Travelers Ins. Co. 330 Mass. 476, 479. Cassidy v. Liberty Mut. Ins. Co. 338 Mass. 139, 142. We think the judge was not plainly wrong in finding adversely to the contention of the company in respect to this matter. The alleged false statements of Robert and his mother pertained in large measure to the ownership of the car and the title to the money with which it was purchased. It could be found that the statements were not made with an intention to deceive but were due to their ignorance of what might be the legal consequence of their acts.
In our opinion it was not reasonably inferable from the evidence that they or either of them connived or colluded with the plaintiff to obtain a judgment which would enable him to prevail in a subsequent suit against the company. The specific findings of the judge in the tort action were appropriate to explain why Mrs. Hartley, who was a codefendant, was not liable to the plaintiff. It is not to be assumed that the judge was improperly induced to make these findings.
The company's exception to their admission in the equity suit cannot be sustained. It is settled that "Where an action *603 against the insured is ostensibly within the terms of the policy, the insurer, whether it assumes the defence or refuses to assume it, is bound by the result of that action as to all matters therein decided which are material to recovery by the insured in an action on the policy.... This case is but one instance under a rule of broad application that an indemnitor, after notice and an opportunity to defend, is bound by material facts established in an action against the indemnitee." Miller v. United States Fid. & Guar. Co. 291 Mass. 445, 448-449. Saragan v. Bousquet, 322 Mass. 14, 20-21, and cases cited.
The finding that the car was properly registered in the name of Mrs. Hartley was material on the issue of her ownership and consequently of Robert's rights under the policy. It was rightly admitted in evidence.
Decree affirmed.
NOTES
[1]  The true name of this defendant is Robert G. Hartley, hereinafter referred to as Robert Hartley.
[2]  Lumbermens Mutual Casualty Company.

=== CASE 9741116 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:49:41.613546+00 ===

HARRIS, Justice.
This appeal challenges the propriety of the trial court’s refusal to grant probation under § 789A.1(2), The Code. We affirm.
Donald Peckenschneider (defendant) entered a guilty plea to a charge of receiving stolen goods in violation of § 712.1, The Code. There is no claim the proceedings did not comply with the rules laid down in State v. Sisco, 169 N.W.2d 542 (Iowa 1969) and Brainard v. State, 222 N.W.2d 711 (Iowa 1974). Defendant limits his challenge to the trial court’s refusal to grant what is commonly called a “bench parole.” Section 789A.1(2) provides in material part: “By record entry at time of or after sentencing, the court may suspend the sentence and place the defendant on probation upon such terms and conditions as it may require.”
The record would have supported the grant of probation if the trial court had so chosen. In accordance with a plea bargain the county attorney did not oppose defendant’s request. Probation was recommended in a presentence investigation report prepared and submitted at the trial court’s request by the Iowa Bureau of Adult Correction Services.
The recommendation was based on a careful study of defendant by the bureau’s parole agent. The State in no way disputes the facts outlined in the report and the trial court seems to have taken them as true. Defendant was 52 years old and married. *346His two daughters were 12 and 8 years of age. The family lived in the rural community of Donahue, Iowa, where they owned their own home.
Defendant’s background was entirely rural. He had been self-employed during most of his life. From 1966 to February of 1975 he operated a tavern and restaurant in Donahue. The parole agent concluded:
“The present offense represents a radical departure from a lifetime which could be considered as exemplary until now. It must be assumed' that, under the forces which operate in and around pool halls and. like recreational facilities, the opportunities, and the temptations, for criminal activity can overcome a person’s sense of fitness and propriety developed over long periods of self-discipline.
“This appears the only logical explanation for a sudden reversal of pattern evident in this case. Mr. Peckenschneider is quite remorseful, mainly because of the ugly stain on an otherwise bright shield. It is the opinion of this writer, following the interview, that Mr. Peckenschneider will suffer more in his own conscience than he would from any formalized penalty, and the chances for a recurrence should be completely nil.
a* * *
“It is recommended that this man be granted probation.”
The trial court expressed only one reason for determining to decline the recommendation for probation. The sole expressed reason was to deter thefts in the community. The record discloses the following:
“THE COURT: I pondered over this thing for a long time, and if we didn’t have receivers, we wouldn’t have so many break-ins. We are having an epidemic of break-ins in this town, as Mr. Berger will verify. Is that right?
“MR. BERGER [Prosecutor]: Yes, there is a rash of crime going on that is unprecedented in this community.
“THE COURT: And these fellows wouldn’t be breaking into homes and stores if they couldn’t find a person to buy these things. Mr. Peckenschneider was fully aware of that, and at the time he pled guilty, I forewarned Mr. Peckenschneider that if he was pleading guilty in the hopes of getting a parole from me, that he shouldn’t plead guilty. Do you remember that, Mr. Peckenschneider?
“[DEFENDANT]: I don’t know if those were your exact words.
“THE COURT: I cannot condone this thing, because we are having an epidemic of break-ins, and they wouldn’t be breaking in if they couldn’t sell the things they stole, and we have got to put a stop to it in this town. If I condone it, there will be more break-ins. And therefore, I refuse to give you a parole at this time. * *
The record did not bear out the trial court’s claim to have forewarned defendant he should not plead guilty in the hope of obtaining a parole.
Defendant’s challenge is twofold. He asks us to repudiate our established scope of review in criminal sentences and adopt the ABA Standards of Appellate Review of Sentencing. In the alternative defendant argues the trial court’s refusal to grant probation was an abuse of discretion.
I. It should first be conceded one might well question the validity of positiñg a probation question within the ambit of sentencing. Sentencing and probation are elsewhere thought to be distinct concepts. It is generally held denial of probation is not appealable, at least in the 'absence of statute. 24 C.J.S. Criminal Law § 1656, pp. 1019-1020.
Our own review of criminal sentences proceeds from an Iowa statute which we have interpreted to govern our reviews both of sentence and of probation. Section 793.-18, The Code, provides:
“If the appeal is taken by the defendant, the supreme court must examine the record, without regard to technical errors or de*347fects which do not affect the substantial rights of the parties, and render such judgment on the record as the law demands; it may affirm, reverse, or modify the judgment, or render such judgment as the district court should have done, or order a new trial, or reduce the punishment, but cannot increase it.”
Because the mandate of § 793.18 directs our review to judgment and not merely sentence, we review the trial court’s denial of probation. The scope of our review was described in State v. Cole, 168 N.W.2d 37 (Iowa 1969). We said:
“What is commonly called a ‘bench parole’ is authorized by [section 789A.1(2), The Code]. This section to the extent applicable here provides: ‘The trial court * * * may * * * suspend the sentence and grant probation to said person during good behavior. * * [Section 789A.7] provides for the custody, care and supervision of the person to whom probation is granted by a parole agent or agency designated by the court.
“Section [789A.1(2)] says the court ‘may’ suspend sentence. The granting of a suspended sentence and parole is a matter of grace, favor, or forbearance. It is not a matter of right. (Authorities).
“ * * * Trial courts have broad discretion in the granting or withholding of bench paroles and an appellate court will seldom interfere with their determination of such matters. There is, however, a duty to consider and determine an application for parole. State v. Boston, 233 Iowa 1249, 11 N.W.2d 407. See also second appeal in the same case, 234 Iowa 1047, 14 N.W.2d 676.
<f ⅜ * *
“From these pronouncements it is clear that a trial court has a duty to hear an application for parole but has wide discretion in what must be considered in granting or denying the application.” 168 N.W.2d at 39-40. See also State v. DeVan, 205 N.W.2d 699, 700 (Iowa 1973).
The provisions of § 793.18, The Code, which allow us to reduce a sentence imposed by a trial court were adopted in 1860. Iowa seems to have been the first state to allow appellate review of legally valid sentences challenged on appeal as being excessive. Mueller, Penology on Appeal: Appellate Review of Legal but Excessive Sentences, 15 Vand.L.Rev. 671 (1962).
Actions of a judge pronouncing sentence were of considerably more importance to a convicted criminal prior to 1907 when our indeterminate sentence law was enacted. Acts of the 32nd G.A., 1907 Regular Session, ch. 192, § 9, now § 789.13, The Code. Even so we exercised our power to reduce sentences sparingly. During the 47 year period from 1860 to 1907 we reduced sentences in only a handful of cases. The State of Iowa v. Madden, 35 Iowa 511 (1872); The State v. Hayden, 45 Iowa 11, 18 (1876); The State v. Thompson, 46 Iowa 699, 700 (1877); The State v. Doering, 48 Iowa 650, 652 (1878); The State v. Moody, 50 Iowa 443, 446 (1879); The State v. Sullivan, 51 Iowa 142, 148, 50 N.W. 572, 574 (1879); The State v. Fields, 70 Iowa 196, 198, 30 N.W. 480, 481 (1886).
Our scope of review as developed accommodates the purpose and effect of the indeterminate sentence law. In 1907 (except for the crimes excluded in § 789.13, The Code) the responsibility of determining the length of a prison sentence was shifted from the trial court to the board of parole. State v. Cupples, 260 Iowa 1192, 1196, 152 N.W.2d 277, 279 (1967) and authorities. It remains for the trial court to determine for most felonies, including receiving stolen goods under § 712.1, The Code, whether the convicted person receives an indeterminate prison sentence or jail sentence or fine or some combination of such punishments. Section 789.15, The Code. Under § 793.18, The Code, we have retained authority to reduce the punishment thus imposed but not to determine the length to be served under an indeterminate sentence.
*348In a long line of cases we have consistently said the determination of whether to sentence a defendant to jail or assess a fine rather than sentencing him to imprisonment in the penitentiary is addressed to the sound discretion of the trial court. State v. Jennings, 219 N.W.2d 1,1-2 (Iowa 1974); State v. DeVan, 205 N.W.2d 699, 700 (Iowa 1973). These cases also note the trial court has similar discretion on the question of probation.
We have demonstrated a growing reluctance to interfere with the trial court’s discretion. The reason for that reluctance is apparent. The statutory scheme outlined in the indeterminate sentence act is complemented by specific powers given the parole board. Under § -247.5, The Code, power is given the board of parole to determine whether a parole should be granted any inmate, other than those serving life terms. Under § 247.7, The Code, the board of parole may, upon recommendation of the trial judge and prosecuting attorney, grant parole prior to commitment.
We pass the serious question of whether the ABA Standards of Appellate Review of Sentencing in fact contemplate a review of a denial of probation. We decline to adopt the standards. Our review, as developed under § 793.18, The Code, is sufficient, especially in view of the indeterminate sentence act.
.Defendant’s first assignment is without merit.
II. A much more difficult question is presented under defendant’s second assignment, the claim the trial court abused its discretion in failing to grant probation. Defendant argues that because the trial court mentioned only the deterrent effect of his declination of probation we must assume he ignored all other criteria.
Other criteria for such a determination are listed in § 789A.1, The Code. They include opportunity for rehabilitation of the defendant, the protection of the community from further'offenses by the defendant and others, the age of the defendant, his pirior record of convictions, his employment circumstances, his family circumstances, the nature of the offense committed, whether a dangerous weapon or force was used in the commission of the offense, and such other factors as are appropriate.
It is not clear from the remarks of the trial court that he was prompted to his denial solely in the hope his act would deter others in the community from committing crime. His remarks may have indicated this hope was the decisive reason rather than, as defendant suggests, the exclusive reason for his denial. While the record is certainly not strong it cannot be said there were no other factors for the trial court to consider. For example other charges against defendant were dismissed. On review we believe the case falls within the scope of the trial court’s discretion.
This is not to imply it would be inappropriate for the board of parole to grant defendant a parole before commitment or a parole at the earliest time after commitment under the statutory authority mentioned in the preceding division. Defendant appears to be an excellent parole risk. But, under our statutory scheme, it is for the parole board and not for us to act.
Affirmed.
MOORE, LeGRAND, REES and UH-LENHOPP, JJ., concur.
McCORMICK, MASON, RAWLINGS and REYNOLDSON, JJ., dissent.

=== CASE 9741117 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:49:41.61926+00 ===

McCORMICK, Justice
(dissenting).
I believe defendant’s sentence resulted from an abuse of trial court discretion. In addition, I would adopt prospectively a number of ABA standards relating to the exercise of sentencing discretion.
I. Once again the court is confronted with a defendant’s challenge of his sentence in a criminal case. Once again the majority opinion notes our statutory obligation to determine if the sentence is too severe. § 793.18, The Code. And, once again having determined that the sentence is among *349the statutory alternatives available to the sentencing judge, the majority has somewhat reluctantly refused to interfere. I believe the time has come for us to recognize our obligation to accord meaningful review to judgments in criminal cases.
Concurring specially in State v. Horton, 231 N.W.2d 36, 40 (Iowa 1975), I tried to emphasize the hollowness of present compliance with our mandate to review criminal sentences:
“The most important responsibility of a' trial judge in a criminal case is his duty to pronounce sentence after a defendant’s conviction. No other power of the judge has such a potentially devastating effect on the lives of the defendant and his family. No other power so affects the public interest.
“It is an anomaly that the exercise of this power, among the greatest that one person may exercise over the life of another, is virtually unreviewable. We have made it so. If the sentence does not exceed the maximum provided in the applicable statute, we will not interfere unless the record affirmatively demonstrates the sentence resulted from an abuse of the judge’s discretion. State v. Stakenburg, 215 N.W.2d 265, 267 (Iowa 1974). When the record is silent we presume the sentence is grounded upon proper reasons.”
In that case three members of the court advocated adoption of a requirement that sentencing judges be required to state their reasons for selection of a sentence on the record so this court would have something to review if the sentence were later challenged. See ABA Standards, Appellate Review of Sentences, § 2.3(c) (Approved Draft 1968); ABA Standards, Sentencing Alternatives and Procedures, § 5.6(ii) (Approved Draft 1968).
Arguments for that principle were outlined in the Horton special concurrence and will not be repeated here. However, I adhere to those views. Compliance with that principle would have made our task easier and much more confident here. As it is, the majority takes refuge behind what it finds is an ambiguous record and resorts again to the presumption that the sentencing judge must have had good reasons for the sentence because the record fails to show he definitely did not.
II. Applicable statutes and our eases have established standards which govern trial court discretion in selecting a sentence, although we have neither consistently recognized nor applied them.
Since 1860 this court has been obliged to accord appellate review to criminal judgments by examining the record “without regard to technical errors or defects which do not affect the substantial rights of the parties” and to “render such judgment on the record as the law demands.” We may “affirm, reverse, or modify the judgment, or render such judgment as the district court should have done, or order a new trial, or reduce the punishment, but cannot increase it.” § 793.18, The Code. In 1860 the Code also contained standards governing criminal sentences. §§ 4875-4877, Re-, vision of 1860. Aggravating and mitigating circumstances were defined in an effort to guide trial court sentencing discretion. Obviously, they were also intended to guide this court in its review of sentences.
The present Code also provides certain sentencing standards. A defendant may be granted either deferred judgment or bench probation under § 789A.1, The Code. In deciding between these options, the sentencing court must first “determine which of them will provide maximum opportunity for the rehabilitation of the defendant and protection of the community from further offenses by the defendant and others.” A logical implication of this provision is that the same principle should govern the choice between incarceration and probation.1
In addition, § 789A. 1 provides:
*350“In making this determination the court shall consider the age of the defendant, his prior record of convictions, if any, his employment circumstances, his family circumstances, the nature of the offense committed, whether a dangerous weapon or force was used in the commission of such offense, and such other factors as shall be appropriate.”
In a manifest effort to assure that trial judges focus upon the goal of providing maximum rehabilitation opportunity consistent with protection of the community and to assure a record for review, the statute adds:
“The court shall file a specific written statement of its reasons for and the facts supporting its decision to defer judgment or to suspend sentence and its decision on the length of probation.”
The legislature has also made clear its intention that the court have available all the information bearing upon the defendant which it is required to consider before imposing any sentence. This information may come from the parties and other sources. In all felony cases a presentence investigation must be obtained. ' § 789A.3, The Code. The presentence investigator is required to gather detailed information about the defendant and his circumstances:
“Whenever a presentence investigation is ordered by the court, the investigator shall promptly inquire into the defendant’s characteristics, family and financial circumstances, needs, and potentialities; his criminal record and social history; the circumstances of the offense; the time the defendant has been in detention; and the harm to the victim, his immediate family, and the community. All local and state mental and correctional institutions, courts, and police agencies shall furnish to the investigator on request the defendant’s criminal record and other relevant information. With the approval of the court, a physical examination of the defendant may be ordered, or the defendant may be committed to a psychiatric facility for an evaluation of his personality and mental health. The results of any such examination shall be included in the report of the investigator.” § 789A.4, The Code.
The presentence report is also part of the record. § 789A.5, The Code.
These statutory provisions make it plain the legislature has marked the boundaries within which a sentencing judge’s discretion may operate. Fundamental in these provisions is the concept that each defendant is to be sentenced as an individual. If he is to be locked up, it must be because that disposition is appropriate in the particular case and not because of some emotional reaction of the trial judge or preconceived determination based solely on the nature of the offense.
The overriding statutory responsibility of the sentencing judge is to select the sentencing alternative which will provide maximum opportunity for rehabilitation of the defendant while at the same time avoiding unreasonable risk to the security of the community. Cf. Symposium, Student Commentary on Proposed Criminal Law Reform in Iowa, Judgment and Sentencing Procedures, 60 Iowa L.Rev. 598-610 (1975). The sentence must reflect individualized justice.
Our decisions have independently set similar limits upon a sentencing judge’s discretion. Included are principles that each sentence must depend upon the peculiar facts of a given case, and the trial judge has a duty to ascertain all facts which will assist in the exercise of his discretion. State v. Cupples, 260 Iowa 1192, 1197, 152 N.W.2d 277, 280 (1967). Above all:
“The trial court and we on review should weigh and consider all pertinent matters in determining proper sentence, including the nature of the offense, the attending circumstances, defendant’s age, character and propensities and chances of *351his reform. The courts owe a duty to the public as much as to defendant in determining a proper sentence. The punishment should fit both the crime and the individual.” Ibid.
A criminal sentence must be based upon more than a knee-jerk reaction to a single, factor in the entire picture; it must be based upon careful consideration and weighing of all factors.
The principle of individualized justice is emphasized in the indeterminate sentence law. § 789.13, The Code. The length of an indeterminate' sentence, within the maximum fixed by statute, is determined by the parole board. The board may even grant parole prior to commitment in certain situations. § 247.7, The Code. The indeterminate sentence law was born in the concept that the main purpose of a criminal sentence is rehabilitation of the offender, and “It is intended that a parole board determine whether or not the felon must serve the maximum number of years or whether he has been ‘cured’ and ready to return to society.”- Note, 49 Iowa L.Rev. 49.9, 509 (1964). See Frankel, Lawlessness in Sentencing, 41 U.Cin.L.Rev. 1, 29 (“The basic premise of the indeterminate sentence is the modern conception that rehabilitation is the paramount goal in sentencing.”). From this, it is clear the legislative scheme is inconsistent with the notion that judges may ignore the individual and sentence an offender to a period of incarceration simply to set an example to others.
In addition to the fact such a determination is contrary to legislative policy as manifested in the sentencing statutes, the indeterminate sentence law prevents this purpose from being realized. If the offender is treated as an individual by the parole board, as the indeterminate sentence law intends, he will be retained in prison only so long as necessary to correct his individual behavior and reasonably assure it will not recur. Thus, when an indeterminate sentence is involved the legislature has preempted the judicial right to order an offender imprisoned for the sole or primary purpose of deterring others. In these situations, the legislature has chosen to accommodate the deterrency objective by the relative severity of possible maximum sentences, a legislative determination. It has deprived the judiciary of the right to say how long an offender will stay in prison, and the parole board’s prerogative to make that decision is controlled by rehabilitation objectives.
Similarly, when retribution and deterren-cy become overriding legislative goals, the legislature knows how to deprive the judiciary of the right to pronounce an individualized sentence. The legislature simply prescribes a mandatory prison sentence. See § 789A.1, The Code. (“However, this section shall not apply to the crimes of treason, murder, or violation of section 204.401, subsection 1 or 2 * * *.”).
III. In the present case, the record unambiguously demonstrates that the sentencing judge ignored the legislative and judicial standards which mark the limits within which his sentencing discretion must operate. In affirming his judgment we compound the resulting injustice. We deprive a criminal defendant once again of meaningful appellate review. What is more, we further constrict the judicial role in the sentencing process, moving closer toward complete abandonment of the field to the legislative and executive branches.
Here, by his own admission, the trial judge had decided to send defendant to prison before even accepting his plea of guilty. He revealed this close-minded attitude in recalling, erroneously, that he had forewarned defendant of his intention not to exercise discretion in the case: “ * * * I forewarned Mr. Peckenschneider that if he was pleading guilty in the hopes of getting a parole from me, that he shouldn’t plead guilty.” This remark shows the judge had determined to order defendant imprisoned without regard to the legislative and judicial standards governing his exercise of sentencing discretion. Defendant’s *352characteristics, his family situation, his employment situation, his mental and physical health, any circumstances of aggravation or mitigation surrounding the offense — none of these factors mattered.
The judge confirmed his predetermined refusal to follow these standards when he announced his reason for sending defendant to prison:
“I cannot condone this thing, because we are having an epidemic of break-ins, and they wouldn’t be breaking in if they couldn't sell the things they stole, and we have got to put a stop to it in this town. If I condone it, there will be more break-ins. And therefore, I refuse to give you a parole at this time * * *(Italics added).
The majority suggests this statement may reflect the decisive but not exclusive reason for the prison sentence. I do not think the judge left any doubt about the fact that in his mind defendant had to be imprisoned to deter others, and it did not matter what the other circumstances were bearing on the sentencing decision. Even if this inference from the single statement were debatable, the judge removed all doubt when he earlier demonstrated he had decided to send defendant to prison before the court had even accepted his plea of guilty.
The circumstances here are not qualitatively different from those in State v. Jackson, 204 N.W.2d 915 (Iowa 1973). There the defendant was incarcerated because a group of judges had decided in advance all those who were convicted of the offense involved should be incarcerated, regardless of individual circumstances. The only factual difference is that here one judge made the same kind of decision in the case of one defendant. The result is the same. In both cases, the sentencing judges refused in advance to sentence the defendants as individuals. We condemned the practice in Jackson and reversed the judgment; we should do the same here. Punishment must fit the offender and not merely the crime. Woolsey v. United States, 478 F.2d 139, 143 (8 Cir. 1973); United States v. Daniels, 446 F.2d 967 (6 Cir. 1971).
Other recent cases in which we have recognized our duty to reverse when the record shows the sentence resulted from a violation of applicable sentencing standards include State v. Drake, 224 N.W.2d 476 (Iowa 1974), and State v. Milliken, 204 N.W.2d 594 (Iowa 1973).
In an early opinion this court said it would not find an abuse of trial court discretion without “some legal data upon which to base its action.” State v. Baughman, 20 Iowa 497, 501 (1866). Correctively, when the record presents legal data showing the sentencing judge has left the area marked by the pertinent sentencing standards, we have a duty to find an abuse of discretion. See State v. Warner, 229 N.W.2d 776, 783 (Iowa 1975); State v. Boston, 233 Iowa 1249, 11 N.W.2d 407 (1943).
I believe the sentencing judge abused his discretion by refusing to weigh all the pertinent factors in order to give the defendant a sentence based upon individualized justice in this case.
IV. The record reveals an additional basis for finding an abuse of trial court discretion. The trial judge displayed an erroneous legal view of the concept of probation. He equated a grant of probation with condoning defendant’s offense. This is wrong.
In 1957 the National Council on Crime and Delinquency published its Guides for Sentencing. This book is the work product of some of this country’s most distinguished and experienced jurists from federal, state, and local courts. They spent four years formulating concepts to assist judges in making sentencing decisions.
They had this to say about probation:
“In common with imprisonment, the ultimate purpose of probation is the protection of society through the proper control of those persons whose behavior has brought them before the criminal courts. Probation differs from imprisonment in that it ‘seeks to accomplish the rehabilitation of persons convicted of crime by *353returning them to society during a period of supervision rather than sending them into the unnatural and, all too often, socially unhealthful atmosphere of prisons and reformatories.’
“The program of probation is, however, more than an alternative to the contaminating influences of imprisonment. Offering a more hopeful approach than any other disposition made by the court, probation rests foursquare upon the conviction that rehabilitation in the community is a realistic possibility. The proper use of probation, therefore, demands careful selection, since our knowledge of human behavior indicates that not every offender can be treated through probation and that some people must be isolated from society by commitment to a correctional institution.
“Probation is not granted out of a spirit of leniency. It involves placing an offender under the supervision of a probation officer for a specific period. The term ‘supervision’ implies continuing control by the court through the agency of its probation officer. This control is manifestly of a different character from that present in a penal institution. During the period of supervision, the officer's guidance and direction continue to be exercised and the offender remains accountable to the court for his behavior. As the Wickersham Commission said, probation is not merely ‘letting the offender off easily.’ ” Guides for Sentencing supra at 13-14.
By placing probation among the alternatives available to a sentencing judge and surrounding it with the standards and criteria contained in Code chapter 789A, I believe our legislature has shown it shares this view. Probation is a substantial restriction of freedom; it is not forgiveness, and it is not an endorsement of the offense. The sentencing judge manifestly erred in holding otherwise.
The fact that the trial court equated probation with condoning the offense demonstrates that the court did not follow the legislative standards established in Code chapter 789A regarding selection of probation as a sentencing alternative. I would find an abuse of discretion on this ground also.
V. Rather than set aside defendant’s sentence and remand for resentencing, I would modify defendant’s sentence here under Code § 793.18. We have all the information which the trial judge had. It shows this is an appropriate case for probation.
Under Code § 789A.1, probation is appropriate in Iowa when it will “provide maximum opportunity for the rehabilitation of the defendant and protection of the community from further offenses by the defendant and others.” This statute commits Iowa to the desirability of probation when those purposes will be served. Those purposes will be served by probation in this case. The advantages of probation far outweigh anything to be gained by incarceration of this defendant.
Reasons for granting probation in appropriate cases are summarized in ABA Standards, Probation, § 1.2 (Approved Draft 1970):
“Probation is a desirable disposition in appropriate cases because:
(i) it maximizes the liberty of the individual while at the same time vindicating the authority of the law and effectively protecting the public from further violations of law;
(ii) it affirmatively promotes the rehabilitation of the offender by continuing normal community contacts;
(iii) it avoids the negative and frequently stultifying effects of confinement which often severely and unnecessarily complicate the reintegration of the offender into the community;
(iv) it greatly reduces the financial costs to the public treasury of an effective correctional system;
*354(v) it minimizes the impact of the conviction upon innocent dependents of the offender.”
In its Commentary on this standard the committee which drafted the standards discusses four advantages which accompany the use of probation. Numerous authoritative studies are cited in support of the committee’s findings.
The first advantage is: “Probation often will offer far more meaningful possibilities for rehabilitation than will other sentencing alternatives, particularly in the case of first offenders. * * * Continuing normal community contacts has much to offer by way of affirmative contributions to the reintegration of the offender as a useful and non-offending citizen. * * * [TJhere are *' * * negative and frequently stultifying effects of confinement which can unnecessarily complicate this process of reintegration.” Id. at 28.
The second advantage “is that probation maximizes the liberty of the individual while at the same time vindicating the authority of the law and effectively protecting the public from further violations.” Id. at 29.
The third advantage “is the simple point of economy * * *.” Probation costs one-tenth as much as imprisonment. Ibid.
The fourth advantage is that probation minimizes the impact of conviction upon the innocent dependents of the offender. “Imprisonment has its hidden costs, among which are the impact of removing the main source of income from a family. The effect of the criminal sanction on innocent dependents will be much less if the offender can be put on probation and can work to support his family at the same time.” Id. at 30. The same advantage accrues to the community when the dependents are thereby kept off the welfare rolls.
Further amplification of its position in support of a presumption in favor of probation is provided by the American Bar Association in its committee Commentary to ABA Standards, Sentencing Alternatives and Procedures, § 2.3(e) at 72-73 (Approved Draft 1968). That presumption is fully applicable here.
This defendant is 52 years old, married and parent of two young daughters. He is an honorably discharged veteran of World War II. His roots in the community are deep and strong. He has always supported his family and appears devoted to it. He has no prior criminal record. This charge and the three separate charges which were dismissed all grew out of incidents which occurred during an eleven-day period. As observed by the presentence investigator, this offense “represents a radical departure from a lifetime which could be considered exemplary until now.” No circumstances of aggravation surrounded the offense. The prosecutor did not oppose probation. Four reputable businessmen in the community recommended probation. Defendant expressed remorse which the presentence investigator believed to be genuine. The investigator also believed the chances of recurrence were nil.
Imprisonment of this defendant is unjustified under this record. Cf. People v. McClendon, 130 Ill.App.2d 852, 265 N.E.2d 207 (1970). He is an ideal candidate for probation. Incarceration in these facts could only be destructive. It would serve no useful purpose. It could do no good for this defendant, his family, or the community, and it would inevitably do considerable harm. Prison would not make defendant a better man; it could easily make him worse. It would deprive his family of its sole source of support and the companionship of a dedicated spouse and parent. The family might become dependent upon the community for support. The trip to prison would be a round trip. Upon his return from prison it is difficult to imagine defendant would be less a threat to the community than he is now. He, his family, and the community would be far better served by a two-year program of supervised probation.
*355Applying the principle in Code § 789A.1,1 would modify the defendant’s sentence to place him on bench probation.
The majority opinion seems to recognize an abuse of the sentencing power occurred in the present case but shifts responsibility for its correction to the executive branch (“it is for the parole board and not for us to act”). I think the buck should stop here.
VI. This case shows the desirability of adopting certain ABA standards to reinforce the principles inherent in our statutes and eases and to help us give meaningful review to criminal Sentences. These standards would not change our principles of review; they would lend coherence and concreteness to existing standards, encourage uniformity of sentencing practices, require individualized justice, and provide a meaningful record for appellate scrutiny.
The general principle in the standards puts the general principle in our statutes and cases in concrete terms:
“2.2 General principle: judicial discretion.
The sentence imposed in each case should call for the minimum amount of custody or confinement which is consistent with the protection of the public, the gravity of the offense and the rehabilitative needs of the defendant.” ABA Standards, Standards Relating to Sentencing Alternatives and Procedures, § 2.2 (Approved Draft 1968)
The sentencing philosophy reflected in this standard underlies our indeterminate sentence law and probation alternatives in Code § 789A.1. The thinking of our legislature and this court, as shown in our statutes and cases, is like that of the distinguished drafters of the ABA standards. Sentences which do not involve imprisonment are more likely to be effective in the vast majority of cases. See Commentary to ABA Standards, Standards Relating to Sentencing Alternatives and Procedures, supra, at 62-63 and 72-73.
I would also adopt ABA Standard,. Sentencing Alternatives and Procedures, supra, § 2.5(c) and Standards Relating to Probation, § 1.3 (Approved Draft 1970). They implement the general principle in Standard 2.2.
Standard 2.5(c), Sentencing Alternatives and Procedures, provides:
“A sentence not involving total confinement is to be preferred in the absence of affirmative reasons to the contrary. Examples of legitimate reasons for the selection of total confinement in a given case are:
(i) Confinement is necessary in order to protect the public from further criminal activity by the defendant; or
(ii) The defendant is in need of correctional treatment which can most effectively be provided if he is placed in total confinement; or
(iii) It would unduly depreciate the seriousness of the offense to impose a sentence other than total confinement. On the other hand, community hostility to the defendant is not a legitimate basis for imposing a sentence of total confinement.”
Standard 1.3, Probation, provides:
“(a) The probation decision should not turn upon generalizations about types of offenses or the existence of a prior criminal record, but should be rooted in the facts and circumstances of each case. The court should consider the nature and circumstances of the crime, the history and character of the offender, and available institutional and community resources. Probation should be the sentence unless the sentencing court finds that:
(i) confinement is necessary to protect the public from further criminal activity by the offender; or
(ii) the offender is in need of correctional treatment which can most effectively be provided if he is confined; or
*356(iii) it would unduly depreciate the seriousness of the offense if a sentence of probation were imposed.
(b) Whether the defendant pleads guilty, pleads not guilty or intends to appeal is not relevant to the issue of whether probation is an appropriate sentence.”
In order to provide a basis for appellate review and to assure the pronouncement of a reasoned sentence in accordance with these standards, I would also adopt ABA Standards, Appellate Review of Sentences, § 2.3(c) (Approved Draft 1968). It provides:
“(c) The sentencing judge should be required in every case to state his reasons for sélecting the particular sentence imposed. Normally, this should be done for the record in the presence of the defendant at the time of sentence. In cases in which the sentencing judge deems it in the interest of the defendant not to state fully the reasons for the sentence in the presence of the defendant, he should prepare such a statement for transmission to the reviewing court as a part of the record.”
See State v. Horton, 231 N.W.2d 36, 40-42 (Iowa 1975) (special concurrence); McCleary v. State, 49 Wis.2d 263, 182 N.W. 2d 512 (1971). See also Korbakes, Criminal Sentencing: is the Judge’s sound discretion subject to review?, 59 Judicature 112 (October 1975) and Korbakes, Criminal Sentencing: Should the “judge’s sound discretion” be explained?, 59 Judicature 185 (November 1975).
The frustrating and complex problem of criminal sentencing calls for the most sensitive and profound exercise of judicial responsibility, not an abnegation of judicial duty and prerogatives. No problem in the law is more urgent or more deserving of our best efforts. See, generally, Coburn, Disparity in Sentences and Appellate Review of Sentencing, 25 Rutgers L.Rev. 207 (1971); Prankel, Lawlessness in Sentencing, 41 U.Cin.L.Rev. 1 (1972); Mueller, Penology on Appeal: Appellate Review of Legal but Excessive Sentences, 15 Vand.L.Rev. 671 (1962); Comment, Appellate Review of Sentences: A Survey, 17 St. Louis U.L.Rev. 221 (1972); Note, 46 Iowa L.Rev. 159 (1960).
I believe we should confront this problem and take the forward step of prospective adoption of the ABA standards discussed herein as a means of solving it. These standards provide much-needed guidance to the exercise of trial court discretion and appellate review.
I would find an abuse of sentencing discretion in the present case and modify the sentence to place defendant on bench probation.
MASON, RAWLINGS and REYNOLD-SON, JJ., join this dissent.
. This principle is explicit in S.F. 85, ch. 3, § 106, part of Iowa’s revision of its criminal law, First Session 66 G.A., as adopted in the Iowa Senate.

=== CASE 9741118 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:49:42.120389+00 ===

REES, Justice.
Plaintiffs appeal from the order of the trial court sustaining motion of defendant Perry Community School District for summary judgment and dismissing plaintiffs’ petition as against the school district. We affirm.
On March 25, 1971, Kenneth L. Shearer, Jr., then age 14 and a student at Perry Community High School, was engaged in an exercise known as “curling” which involved lifting a weight attached to a bar with a cable, on a device described as a Universal Gladiator “70”, the property of the school district. While the Shearer youth was involved in such exercise, a portion of the machine became disengaged from the rest of the device and struck him in the mouth and teeth, resulting in the loss of his two front teeth and necessitating considerable dental treatment.
At the time of the injury, the physical education instructor was in the room with young Shearer, and the injury was immediately reported to the assistant principal and the principal of the defendant school district. The following day Shearer’s mother reported the injury to the superintendent of the school district.
On March 23, 1973, Kenneth Shearer, Jr., by and through his father and next friend, Kenneth L. Shearer, filed a petition against the school district and the distributor and manufacturer of the exercise machine for damages in the amount of $25,000 arising out of the injury. Kenneth L. Shearer, Sr., also prayed for damages against the school district in the amount of $5000 for loss of his son’s services and other damages arising out of the injury. The petition of the plaintiffs was based upon theories of negligence, breach of implied warranty and the doctrine of strict liability. The manufacturer and distributor of the machine both answered and are not parties to this appeal.
Defendant school district filed answer denying liability and later filed its motion for summary judgment alleging neither plaintiff had complied with the notice requirements of § 613A.5, The Code, 1971, as amended. In their resistance to the motion for summary judgment, plaintiffs asserted the school district, through its agents and employees, had actual notice of the injury, that the time for bringing the action was extended by § 614.8, The Code, 1971, and further asserted that § 613A.5, The Code, is unconstitutional.
In sustaining defendant’s motion for summary judgment and dismissing plaintiffs’ petition as against the school district, trial court held actual notice by the teacher and other agents of the school district and verbal notice to the superintendent did not constitute compliance with § 613A.5; that § 614.8 had no application to the right of action and the limitation of actions created *691by chapter 613A; and further that § 613A.5 was not unconstitutional. This appeal followed the entry of such order.
Plaintiffs present the following issues for review which they contend necessitate a reversal of the order of the trial court:
1. Section 613A.5, The Code, 1971, violates the guarantees of due process of law of the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of Iowa.
2. Section 613A.5, The Code, 1971, violates the Equal Protection Clause of the Constitution of the United States.
3. The actual knowledge of the injury to plaintiff on the part of teachers or other agents of the school district and the verbal notice of the injury to the superintendent of the school district constituted substantial compliance with the notice requirements of § 613A.5, The Code, 1971.
4. Section 614.8, The Code, 1971, extended in the case of the minor plaintiff the time for making a claim for personal injuries against the school district to a period ending one year after the termination of his minority.
I. In their first issue presented for review, plaintiffs assert § 613A.5, The Code, 1971, is repugnant to the guarantees of due process of law set forth in Amendment 14 of the United States Constitution, and in the Constitution of the State of Iowa.
Chapter 613A, The Code, 1971, provided for the tort liability of governmental subdivisions and for methods of enforcing a right of action arising thereunder. Section 613A.5 provided periods of limitation for claimants asserting a right to recover under the chapter. Said section is as follows:
“613A.5 Limitation of actions. Every person who claims damages from any municipality for or on account of any wrongful death, loss or injury within the scope of section 613A.2 shall commence an action therefor within three months, unless said person shall cause to be presented to the governing body of the municipality within sixty days after the alleged wrongful death, loss or injury a written notice stating the time, place, and circumstances thereof and the amount of compensation or other relief demanded. Failure to state the amount of compensation or other relief demanded shall not invalidate the notice; providing, the claimant shall furnish full information regarding the nature and extent of the injuries and damages within fifteen days after demand by the municipality. No action therefor shall be maintained unless such notice has been given and unless the action is commenced within two years after such notice. The time for giving such notice shall include a reasonable length of time, not to exceed ninety days, during which the person injured is incapacitated by his injury from giving such notice.”
Plaintiffs argue the above statute is constitutionally offensive on its face and as applied to them in that it arbitrarily and capriciously infringes upon a vested property right and places the burden on an injured minor to protect such right regardless of his age or the nature and extent of his injury.
Plaintiffs are laboring under a heavy burden. With exceptions not here involved, statutes regularly enacted by legislatures are afforded a strong presumption of constitutionality and all reasonable in-tendments are indulged in favor of the validity of the legislation attacked. Presbytery of Southeast Iowa v. Harris, 226 N.W.2d 232, 237 (Iowa 1975); Keasling v. Thompson, 217 N.W.2d 687, 689 (Iowa 1974) and citations. Where the constitutionality of a statute is doubtful or fairly debatable, we will not set it aside. Keasling v. Thompson, supra.
Plaintiffs invoke the due process clauses of both our state’s constitution and Amendment 14 to the United States Constitution. The provisions of both are similarly phrased. Where constitutional provisions contain similar guarantees, they are usually *692deemed to be identical in scope, import, and purpose. Davenport Water Co. v. Iowa State Commerce Commission, 190 N.W.2d 583, 593 (Iowa 1971).
We consider first plaintiffs’ claim § 613A.5 is constitutionally offensive on its face. Important in our consideration is the fact chapter 613A created a right of action unknown at our common law. In Sprung v. Rasmussen, 180 N.W.2d 430, 433 (Iowa 1970), we said of this chapter, and particularly of § 613A.5:
“The statute creates a new liability and provides for methods of enforcing the same, and by its terms fixes the time within which action for recovery may be commenced. It being a statute of creation, the commencement of the action within the time the statute fixes is an indispensible condition of the liability and of the action permitted. The time element is an inherent element of the right so created, and the limitation of the remedy is likewise a limitation of the right." (emphasis supplied)
At the same page of Sprung, supra, we noted that under these statutes of creation, sometimes referred to as “conditions precedent to suit” statutes, non-compliance affects the right of action as well as the remedy. We also commented upon the basis for disparate treatment of victims of governmental and private torts, saying:
“Where, as here, the legislature has created a new right of action, it made a legislative judgment that the cause should be brought within a specified time. This difference doubtlessly arises from the fact the statute we are here interpreting is in derogation of sovereign immunity and that the legislature might, and did, properly restrict and limit the application of the statute.”
In the light of our interpretation of § 613A.5 we are unable to agree with plaintiffs that said section arbitrarily and capriciously infringes upon or cuts off vested rights in violation of constitutional guarantees. Instead, we conclude the right of action provided by chapter 613A is co-extensive with, and no broader than, the notice requirement of § 613A.5. In other words, it might be said compliance with the notice requirement is a condition precedent to the maintenance of an action for compensation for torts committed by governmental subdivisions. See 1 Am.Jur.2d Actions § 81, p. 610.
We might find some difficulty in upholding § 613A.5 against a constitutional challenge if it were shown the condition attached to the right of action was so unreasonable as to render compliance almost impossible or to give an injured person, in essence, no right of recovery. Yet we are mindful of the general rule stated in 16 C.J.S. Constitutional Law § 266a, p. 1260:
“Where the time within which a right of action may be enforced is limited by the legislative enactment which creates the right, the legislature is the exclusive judge of the reasonableness of the limitation and it is not the province of the courts to inquire concerning it.”
Courts have attributed to legislatures a number of intentions in the enactment of notice statutes such as that with which we are here concerned. Most of such legislative intentions have been held to be bottomed on the belief that where a governmental division is involved the public has an interest it does not have as to claims against private persons in seeing prompt and thorough investigation of claims is made. Lunday v. Vogelmann, 213 N.W.2d 904, 907 (Iowa 1973). Such notice requirements protect the public treasury from stale claims, permit prompt settlement of meritorious claims, avoid unnecessary litigation, facilitate planning of municipal budgets, and ensure that notice reaches the public officers with responsibility to deal with them, enabling such officers to remedy defects in municipal property before other persons are injured. See Lunday v. Vogelmann, supra at 908-909, and citations.
In the light of the enumerated permissible purposes for the enactment of § 613A.5, *693we are unwilling to say said statute is arbitrary and capricious on its face. Plaintiffs have not carried their burden to prove the statute unconstitutional in this regard.
Plaintiffs place heavy reliance on Grubaugh v. City of St. Johns, 384 Mich. 165, 180 N.W.2d 778. In Grubaugh the Michigan court held a statute similar to our § 613A.5 offensive to due process as applied to the particular plaintiff. We note the Michigan court has followed the Grubaugh rationale in several cases, notably Hussey v. City of Muskegon Heights, 36 Mich.App. 264, 193 N.W.2d 421, and Corona v. County of Lenawee, 36 Mich.App. 579, 194 N.W.2d 46. Aside from the fact the Grubaugh decision did not invalidate the Michigan statute on its face, we note it was also premised on the court’s conclusion the legislature, by abrogating sovereign tort immunity, intended that victims of public and private torts be placed on equal footing. We have no basis for following that reasoning here. See Sprung v. Rasmussen, supra.
Plaintiffs ask that we declare § 613A.5 unconstitutional in its application to the claim of Kenneth Shearer, Jr. Unfortunately, plaintiffs’ brief does not provide us with reasons why the statute has operated unreasonably with respect to the peculiar circumstances of the Shearers’ situation. Rather, plaintiffs rely on the fact young Shearer was 14 years old when his injuries occurred, and upon general statements that the statute applied to infants is unjust, unfair, illogical, arbitrary, capricious, offensive and wrong. They further allude to the burden the notice requirement places upon an injured youth no matter how serious his injuries or his age, but do not explain how Shearer’s age at the time, or the claimed seriousness of his own injuries, made it unreasonable to expect from him compliance with the statute in this particular instance.
The adjudication of the constitutionality of statutes is too delicate a task to be based upon generalities or conjecture. We must hold plaintiffs have not met the burden of demonstrating the statute violative of due process as applied to the minor.
II. We reject plaintiffs’ claim § 613A.5, The Code, violates the Equal Protection Clause of Amendment 14 to the United States Constitution. According to plaintiffs, the notice requirement of that section arbitrarily divides the natural class of tort-feasors and tort victims into unequally treated subclasses, namely, private tort-feasors and their victims and governmental tort-feasors and their victims.
We rejected an identical claim in Lunday v. Vogelmann, supra, and there held we were unable to say § 613A.5, The Code, was patently arbitrary and bore no rational relationship to a legitimate governmental interest. We believe that reasoning to be sound and dispositive of the identical issue in the instant case.
III. In the third issue stated for review, plaintiffs contend actual knowledge of the injury on the part of the physical education instructor, the principal and the vice principal of the school, together with the verbal notification to the superintendent by Shearer’s mother on the day following the accident, constituted substantial compliance with the notice requirements of § 613A.5. We are unable to agree with plaintiffs’ contention in this regard.
In American States Insurance Co. v. City of Dubuque, 186 N.W.2d 601, 604 (Iowa 1971), we held the notice required by § 613A.5 is essential to the maintenance of a suit under chapter 613A, and its minimal content specifically a requirement of the statute. We reiterated this view in Goodwin v. City of Bloomfield, 203 N.W.2d 582, 586 (Iowa 1973), wherein we said:
“We now hold section 613A.5 prescribes the minimal essential contents of a notice of claim required by this section and substantial compliance therewith is essential to the maintenance of suit against a municipality for tort * ⅜ *.”
The knowledge on the part of the school officials and employees certainly can*694not be construed as substantial compliance with the notice requirements of the statute. We are not informed as to the substance of the verbal notification to the superintendent by the student’s mother, but in any event we are not prepared to say such verbal notification constituted substantial compliance with a statute clearly and specifically requiring written notice.
IV. Finally, plaintiffs contend § 614.8, The Code, 1971, extended, to a minor making claim for personal injuries against a school district, the time for the assertion of such claim through a period ending one year after the termination of his minority.
This issue was before us in Vermeer v. Sneller, 190 N.W.2d 389 (Iowa 1971), but a majority of this court did not believe its treatment necessary to the disposition of that appeal. The question is, therefore, one of first impression in this case.
Chapter 614 of the 1971 Code was entitled, “Limitations of Actions,” and § 614.8 thereof provided as follows:
“Minors and mentally ill persons. The times limited for actions herein, except those brought for penalties and forfeitures, shall be extended in favor of minors and mentally ill persons, so that they shall have one year from and after the termination of such disability within which to commence said action.”
Plaintiffs contend we should interpret § 614.8 as applying to actions brought under the provisions of chapter 613A. We cannot agree.
It is clearly within the power of a legislature to put adults and minors on an equal basis with regard to statutes of limitation. See Lane v. Travelers Ins. Co., 230 Iowa 973, 977, 299 N.W. 553, 554. Where the legislature creates a new cause of action unavailable at common law, or in derogation of common law, it is not required to exempt minors from limitations upon such cause of action.
Section 614.8 does, as plaintiffs point out, provide that minority of a claimant tolls a statute of limitations, but by its terms it is applicable only to actions referred to in chapter 614, The Code, i. e., “actions herein.” The benefit of § 614.8 is limited by its own language.
We must conclude the conditions and times fixed by § 613A.5, The Code, exclusively control rights and remedies available under chapter 613A. Section 613A.5 provides that disability shall extend the period of time in which an incapacitated or injured person shall present the required notice of claim to a municipality. Sprung v. Rasmussen, supra. There is nothing in § 614.8 which provides for a tolling of the notice of claim period because of the minority of a claimant seeking to maintain an action under chapter 613A, and we must therefore hold the minority of plaintiff Kenneth L. Shearer, Jr., did not toll the operation of the statute.
In conclusion, we hold plaintiffs have not shown § 613A.5, The Code, to be constitutionally infirm or offensive. Neither have they established compliance with the notice requirements of the section. We further hold § 614.8, The Code, did not act to toll the notice period. Trial court was correct in sustaining defendant’s motion for summary judgment and dismissing plaintiffs’ petition, and must be affirmed.
Affirmed.
MOORE, C. J., and RAWLINGS, Le-GRAND and UHLENHOPP, JJ., concur.
REYNOLDSON, J., dissents.
MASON, HARRIS and McCORMICK, JJ., join Division II of the dissent.

=== CASE 9741119 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:49:42.125867+00 ===

REYNOLDSON, Justice
(dissenting).
I respectfully dissent from divisions I and II of the majority opinion.
I. Following Lunday v. Vogelmann, 213 N.W.2d 904 (Iowa 1973), the majority turns back plaintiffs’ constitutional assault on § 613A.5, The Code, as violating the equal protection clause, Amendment 14, United *695States Constitution. My convictions remain as expressed in the Lunday dissent, 213 N.W.2d 908 — 912. It should be added parenthetically the facts in this appeal place it among those analyzed in that dissent which belie the obsolete rationalizations employed to justify the constitutionality of § 613A.5, including the concept this suit-limiting notice statute is necessary to give the municipality knowledge of the injury. Here the school’s employees knew of the injury the day it occurred, and defendant district’s executive officer knew of it the next day.
II. But the majority also rejects plaintiffs’ argument that § 613A.5 is, on its face and as applied to this minor, violative of the due process clauses of the United States and Iowa Constitutions. We noted this issue but considered its resolution unnecessary in Vermeer v. Sneller, 190 N.W.2d 389, 395 (Iowa 1971) and Lunday v. Vogelmann, supra, 213 N.W.2d at 906.
The majority correctly states where constitutional provisions contain similar guarantees, they are usually deemed to be identical in scope, import, and purpose. For example, when in Duncan v. City of Des Moines, 222 Iowa 218, 227, 268 N.W. 547, 551 (1936), we struck down as unconstitutional state legislation purportedly enacted under the police power, we linked together the following Iowa and United States constitutional provisions:
“The Constitution of this state contains section 1 of article I, known as the Bill of Rights. This section is as follows:
‘AH men are, by nature, free and equal, and have certain inalienable rights — among which are those of enjoying and defending life and liberty, acquiring, possessing and protecting property, and pursuing and obtaining safety and happiness.’
“Section 9 of the Bill of Rights, in the last clause thereof, says:
‘But no person shall be deprived of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law.’
“This, it will be observed, conveys the same idea as contained in section 1 of the 14th Amendment of the Federal Constitution,
‘nor shall any State deprive any person of life, liberty or property, without due process of law.’ ”
We may thus turn to federal decisions for the due process concept applicable here. Plainly relevant is a federal decision which turned squarely on the due process clause, Boddie v. Connecticut, 401 U.S. 371, 91 S.Ct. 780, 28 L.Ed.2d. 113 (1971). The Boddie court pointed out due process litigation has “ * * * typically involved rights of defendants — not, as here, persons seeking access to the judicial process in the first instance,” and noted “ * * * this Court has seldom been asked to view access to the courts as an element of due process.” 401 U.S. at 375, 91 S.Ct. at 784, 28 L.Ed.2d at 117.
After noting that in Covey v. Town of Somers, 351 U.S. 141, 76 S.Ct. 724, 100 L.Ed. 1021 (1956), “The Court expressly rejected an argument that ‘the Fourteenth Amendment does not require the State to take measures in giving notice to an incompetent beyond those deemed sufficient in the case of the ordinary taxpayer’ ”, the Boddie court observed,
“Just as a generally valid notice procedure may fail to satisfy due process because of the circumstances of the defendant, so too a cost requirement, valid on its face, may offend due process because it operates to foreclose a particular party’s opportunity to be heard. The State’s obligations under the Fourteenth Amendment are not simply generalized ones; rather, the State owes to each individual that process which, in light of the values of a free society, can be characterized as due.” (Emphasis supplied.)
—401 U.S. at 380, 91 S.Ct. at 787, 28 L.Ed.2d at 120.
After Boddie there can be no doubt the construction of a statute limiting the “opportunity to be heard” has due process im*696plications not only for the named defendant in litigation, but for one who, as plaintiff, seeks access to the judicial system. See Bush v. Reid, 516 P.2d 1215 (Alaska 1973). Before leaving the federal cases we should note those decisions holding constitutional rights do not turn upon whether a governmental benefit is characterized as a “right” or a “benefit”, Morrissey v. Brewer, 408 U.S. 471, 481, 92 S.Ct. 2593, 2600, 33 L.Ed.2d 484, 494 (1972); Graham v. Richardson, 403 U.S. 365, 374, 91 S.Ct. 1848, 1853, 29 L.Ed.2d 534, 543 (1971), and those which hold whether any procedural protections are due depends on the extent to which an individual will be “condemned to suffer grievous loss.”. Morrissey v. Brewer, supra, and citations.
It is not necessary to our decision here to debate whether plaintiffs’ right to redress in court is an inalienable right per se, as I unsuccessfully contended in Lunday, or a statutory right. It is noteworthy in passing, however, that four justices of this court, forcefully dissenting in Boyer v. Iowa High School Athletic Association, 256 Iowa 337, 127 N.W.2d 606 (1964), argued that as governmental immunity was “court-made the rule should be eliminated by its creator.” 256 Iowa at 350, 127 N.W.2d at 614. And the Boyer majority never disputed the court’s right to strike down the immunity barrier judicially interposed to thwart injured persons’ remedies against municipalities, it simply took the position the matter was “a public policy doctrine * * * more appropriately left to the legislature.” 256 Iowa at 348, 127 N.W.2d at 612. Under the position of both the majority and minority, this court had the power to abolish municipal governmental immunity. Had it been exercised the resultant tort remedy would have no statutory origin. A person injured by municipal tort would have followed the same procedures available against any other tortfeasor. Section 614.8, The Code, would have protected those disabled by minority or mental illness. The fact this court elected to await legislative action should not mean child tort victims’ rights may be shackled by unconstitutional restraints.
It is clear chapter 613A constitutes a legislative recognition of a remedy for a person injured through tort of the municipality or its agents. Section 613A.2 declares a municipality is liable for its torts and those of its officers, employees and agents. At the time of this injury “tort” was defined as “every civil wrong which results in wrongful death or injury to person or injury to property and includes but is not restricted to actions based upon negligence, breach of duty and nuisance.” Section 613A.1(3), The Code. After the Lunday v. Vogelmann decision was filed the definition was expanded to include, inter alia, “impairment of any right under any constitutional provision, statute, or rule of law.” 65 G.A., Ch. 1263, § 2 (1974).
Thus we arrive at the hard questions presented by this litigation: Does this minor plaintiff have a property interest, and if so, does § 613A.5 so inhibit his right to enforce it as to deprive him of “that process which, in light of the values of a free society, can be characterized as due”?
The identification of a property interest is decisive because if the minor has one it is among his inalienable rights, Iowa Constitution, Art. I, § 1, and cannot be taken from him without due process of law. United States Constitution, Amendment 14, § 1; Iowa Constitution, Art. I, § 9.
When the word “property” is used without qualification it may reasonably be construed to include obligations, rights and other intangibles, as well as physical things. Citizens State Bank of Barstow, Texas v. Vidal, 114 F.2d 380, 382-383 (10 Cir. 1940); Beeghly v. Wilson, 152 F.Supp. 726 (N.D. Iowa 1957).
The term “property” includes choses in action. Gulf, C. & S. F. Ry. Co. v. Cities Service Co., 273 F. 946, 949 (D.Del.1921). Such property falls within the protection of federal and state constitutional provisions prohibiting deprivation of property without due process. Chemical Foundation v. E. I. *697DuPont de Nemours & Co., 29 F.2d 597, 602 (D.Del.1928), aff’d, 39 F.2d 366 (3 Cir. 1930), aff’d, 283 U.S. 152, 51 S.Ct. 403, 75 L.Ed. 919 (1931); Bush v. Reid, supra at 1219; People v. Eddy, 43 Cal. 331, 13 Am.Rep. 43 (1872).
Clearly, a minor has a property interest (chose in action) instanter upon becoming a victim of a municipality’s tort.
We thus arrive at the second branch of our inquiry, whether the constraints of § 613A.5 effectively operate to deprive minors of due process. We examine its impact on minors in light “of the values of a free society,” Boddie, supra, and in particular, the mantle of protection we have traditionally thrown about children as legally incompetent under our common law rules and statutory law.
Early in the history of this bench we find the court ruling,
“It is the duty of every court to watch, with jealous care, the interests of those parties who, in legal contemplation, are incapable of asserting their just rights.”
—Cavender v. Heirs of Smith, 5 Iowa 157, 195 (1857).
See 43 C.J.S. Infants § 105, pp. 271-272.
The minor is accorded special consideration in the field of torts. In Rosenau v. City of Estherville, 199 N.W.2d 125, 129 (Iowa 1972) we said, “In these cases where the two principles collide — where statute and child meet — the better reasoned decisions hold a child is not to be charged with negligence per se even though his conduct may involve violation of a statute which relating to an adult would require application of that rule.”
The common law presumption that children under age 14 were incapable of committing any crime, State v. Fowler, 52 Iowa 103, 106, 2 N.W. 983, 986 (1879), has resolved into those protections codified in chapter 232, The Code. An infant was from the earliest times the ward of the court and generally incapable of making other than a voidable contract. Wallin v. Highland Park Co., 127 Iowa 131, 102 N.W. 839 (1905); Jenkins v. Jenkins, 12 Iowa 195 (1861); see Allen v. Berryhill, 27 Iowa 534 (1869); § 599.2, The Code.
Material which is constitutionally protected for distribution to adults is not necessarily constitutionally protected from restriction upon its dissemination to children. The United States Supreme Court, noting 36 states have enacted such legislation, has recognized the exigent interest of the states in protecting their children. Ginsberg v. New York, 390 U.S. 629, 636-639, 88 S.Ct. 1274, 1278-1280, 20 L.Ed.2d 195, 202-203 (1968); see chapter 725, The Code, 1975.
The societal values accorded the special status of children in our law were best articulated by the Illinois Supreme Court when faced with a similar statute which also failed to mention its application to children. The court observed “if the construction insisted upon by appellee were adopted it would undoubtedly render the act unconstitutional, as depriving appellant [minor] of due process of law.” The Illinois court construed the statute to exclude the requirement of notice by children, employing the following rationale:
“Statutes general in their terms are frequently construed to contain exceptions, when considered in connection with well-known rules of law, without the courts being subjected to the criticism of having entered the legislative field. This is done upon the theory that statutes, though general in their terms, have been enacted with the full recognition of rules of law which have become well known and well established. From time immemorial the status of a minor of tender years has been recognized in law to be different from that of one of more mature years. The law recognizes that up to the age of seven years a child is incapable of such conduct as will constitute contributory negligence, and our courts have uniformly so stated the law in their instructions to juries. Chicago City Ry. Co. v. Tuohy, 196 Ill. 410, 63 N.E. 997, 58 *698L.R.A. 270; Illinois Central R. Co. v. Jernigan, 198 Ill. 297, 65 N.E. 88. At common law an infant within seven years of age could not be convicted on a criminal charge, as he was conclusively presumed not to be capable of committing a crime, and between the ages of 7 and 14 he was still presumed to be incapable; but between those ages this presumption might be overcome by proof. These rules of law are based upon the well-known fact of the incapacity of children of tender years, and they are not held to the same accountability as are adults. The recognition, by the law, of the status of infants, and of their exemption up to a certain age from liability under the law, is so well known that it must be presumed that the Legislature in enacting such a statute as the one under consideration, did not intend by the general language used to include within its provisions a class of persons which the law has universally recognized to be utterly devoid of responsibility.”
—McDonald v. City of Spring Valley, 285 Ill. 52, 54-55, 120 N.E. 476, 477 (1918).
In Grubaugh v. City of St. Johns, 384 Mich. 165, 180 N.W.2d 778 (1970), the Michigan Supreme Court held the state’s 60-day notice statute unconstitutional as violative of due process, as applied to an injured minor plaintiff. The court there noted:
“It is axiomatic that the constitutional provision of due process extends to protect that ‘property’ construed to be a vested right and that generally an accrued right of action is a vested property right which may not be arbitrarily impinged. See 16 Am.Jur.2d, Constitutional Law, § 421, et seq.
In determining whether a vested right had accrued to plaintiff under the remedial statute here involved, we turn to 2 Cooley [Constitutional Limitations], supra, where the full dimension of the issue was expressed at p. 745:
‘Nevertheless, in many cases and many ways remedial legislation may effect [sic] the control and disposition of property, and in some cases may change the nature of rights, give remedies where none existed before, and even divest legal titles in favor of substantial equities where the legal and equitable rights do not chance to concur in the same persons.
The chief restriction upon this class of legislation is, that vested rights must not be disturbed; but in its application as a shield of protection, the term ‘vested rights’ is not used in any narrow or technical sense, or as importing a power of legal control merely, but rather as implying a vested interest which it is right and equitable that the government should recognize and protect, and of which the individual could not be deprived arbitrarily without injustice. The right to private property is a sacred right; not, as has been justly said, ‘introduced as the result of princes’ edicts, concessions, and charters, but it was the old fundamental law, springing from the original frame and constitution of the realm.’ (Emphasis added.)”
—384 Mich, at 170-171, 180 N.W.2d at 781.
In Grubaugh the Michigan court rejected the rationale adopted here by the majority:
“It is argued in this case that our Court in Moulter v. City of Grand Rapids (1908), 155 Mich. 165, pp. 168, 169, 118 N.W. 919, 920, held:
‘It being optional with the Legislature whether it would confer upon persons injured a right of action therefor or leave them remediless, it could attach to the right conferred any limitations it chose. Whether the limitations imposed are reasonable or unreasonable in such cases are questions for the Legislature, and not for the courts.’
The logical result of such a rule under that holding, and as advocated by defend*699ant in the instant ease, would be to legislatively divest plaintiff, under legal disability as he was during the 60-day period, of a vested right without due process of law.
Under the statute a plaintiff could institute suit on the first or fifty-ninth day after the injury. To take away his cause of action on the sixty-first day because he could not meet the notice provisions of the act would deprive him of a vested right of action without due process of law.”
—384 Mich, at 175, 180 N.W.2d at 783.
It is as true in the case sub judice that the minor plaintiff’s cause of action against defendant school district was viable if filed within the three months following his injury. It is not correct, as majority asserts, that “the notice requirement is a condition precedent to the maintenance of an action for compensation for torts committed by governmental subdivisions.” Under relevant provisions of § 613A.5, a tort victim may, within three months (now six months, 65 G.A., Ch. 1263, § 5), bring action and never provide the municipality with any notice other than an original notice of suit. Heth v. Iowa City, 206 N.W.2d 299 (Iowa 1973); Gates v. City of Des Moines, 240 Iowa 775, 38 N.W.2d 96 (1949). That one under legal disability to protect his own property interests could be so stripped of a vested right after three months unless he filed notice within sixty days should cause us to reflect on the incongruities inherent in majority's treatment of child claimants.
The minor himself cannot sue for his own injury. Rule 12, Rules of Civil Procedure; 42 Am.Jur.2d, Infants § 155, p. 147. Neither can he compromise, settle, or release a damage claim for his own injuries. See §§ 633.647(5), 633.648, The Code. So a statutory direction that no such action may be brought after three months unless “ * * * said person [who claims damages] shall cause to be presented * * * within sixty (60) days * * * a written notice * * * ” should be viewed with suspicion, especially where we have noted, “The statute expressly imposes upon the injured party the responsibility for the giving of the required notice.” Sprung v. Rasmussen, 180 N.W.2d 430, 432 (1970). In addition, persons non sui juris are ordinarily held incapable of appointing an agent. 2A C.J.S. Agency § 28, pp. 592 — 593. With limited exceptions not here relevant, see §§ 633.108, 633.681, rule 297, R.C.P., a parent as such has no control over the property of the child.
The anomaly of requiring a minor who cannot sue on, compromise or release his damage claim for injuries to nonetheless legally protect it by serving a complicated written notice has been marked by other jurisdictions which are in agreement with Grubaugh, supra. See Lazich v. Belanger, 111 Mont. 48, 54, 105 P.2d 738, 739 (1940) (“It would be unreasonable to require that to be done which plaintiff was incapable of doing. Neither should his right of action be frittered away because of the omission of the parents to give notice. To so hold would be to impute the negligence of the parents to the child — a doctrine which has long since been repudiated by this court”); Turner v. Staggs, 89 Nev. 230, 233-234, 510 P.2d 879, 881-882, cert. denied, 414 U.S. 1079, 94 S.Ct. 598, 38 L.Ed.2d 486 (1973) (“The requirement of giving notice presupposes the existence of an individual capable of giving it. * * * We could conclude that minority alone will excuse compliance with the notice requirements * * * and dispose of this case upon the ground that the notice requirements of our claim statutes violate the rights of these minors to due process * * * ”); McCrary v. City of Odessa, 482 S.W.2d 151, 153 (Tex.1972) (“ * * * persons of tender years * * * are powerless to comply with such conditions.”)
Especially pertinent here is the following from Hunter v. North Mason High School, 12 Wash.App. 304, 306, 529 P.2d 898, 899-900 (1974):
“Simply stated, it would be fundamentally unfair for a minor to be denied his *700recourse to the courts because of circumstances which are both legally and practically beyond his control. The legal disabilities of minors have been firmly established by common law and statute. They were established for the protection of minors, and not as a bar for the enforcement of their rights.
* * *
A minor lacks the capacity to appoint an attorney, and his capacity to appoint an agent is disputable. 43 C.J.S. Infants § 23 (1945). As stated, his right of action should not depend on the good fortune of having an astute relative or friend to take the proper steps on his behalf.
It is noteworthy that minority alone is a disability which tolls the general statute of limitations. RCW 4.16.190. There is no reason why the minor should not be similarly protected when the alleged wrongdoer is a governmental entity. To grant the minor protection in one situation and not the other is arbitrary and manifestly unjust.”
See also City of Barnesville v. Powell, 124 Ga.App. 132, 183 S.E.2d 55 (1971); Reich v. State Highway Department, 386 Mich. 617, 194 N.W.2d 700 (1972); Gonzalez v. State Liquor Authority, 30 N.Y.2d 108, 331 N.Y. S.2d 6, 282 N.E.2d 101 (1972); City of Tulsa v. Wells, 79 Okl. 39, 191 P. 186 (1920); City of Houston v. Bergstrom, 468 S.W.2d 588 (Tex.Civ.App.1971); Simpson v. City of Abilene, 388 S.W.2d 760 (Tex.Civ.App.1965).
The majority’s interpretation of § 613A.5 to cut off this minor’s property right stands in stark contrast to the legislature’s careful language when it sets out to limit a minor’s continuing property rights in chapter 614, The Code. In both § 614.17 (claims to real estate antedating 1960) and § 614.24 (reversion of use restrictions on land — preservation) not only are the time sequences more reasonable, the obligation to take affirmative action to preserve the right is, in the case of a minor, placed squarely on his “guardian, trustee or either parent” (§ 614.-17) or his “guardian, trustee, or either parent or next friend” (§ 614.24). In addition, in each instance, a separate section carefully draws notice to the fact § 614.8 (extending time for minors and mentally ill) is not applicable against the provisions of §§ 614.-17 and 614.24. See §§ 614.19, 614.27.
The futility of the effort to identify an esoteric right of action created by chapter 613A to constitutionally justify the unreasonable and arbitrary treatment of minors under § 613A.5 will be evident when the first minor’s case against an employee under the present amendment to this section surfaces here. 65 G.A., ch. 1263 § 5 (1974). A common law tort action against a municipal employee has long been recognized in Iowa. Crabb v. Payton, 192 N.W.2d 761, 762 (Iowa 1971); Vermeer v. Sneller, supra at 392 and citations. But under § 613A.5 as now amended, following majority’s interpretation, a minor “who claims damages from * * * any officer, employee, or agent of a municipality * * * under common law” would be confronted with the sixty-day notice requirement. 65 G.A., ch. 1263 § 5.
Thus a legislative largess in relaxation of governmental immunity cannot be utilized to justify constitutionally unreasonable or arbitrary treatment of infants, or to deprive them of access to courts under a strict interpretation of § 613A.5. It is now clear the legislature has included within that section’s limitations common law actions against which governmental immunity has never been a recognized defense.
In the end it would be of little importance whether we held the school district’s interpretation adopted by district court would render § 613A.5 unconstitutional and therefore judicially construe that section as inapplicable to minors, or held it has been properly construed by the school district and district court as including minors and hold it unconstitutional with respect to children, facially and as applied here, as viola-tive of due process under both the state and federal constitutions. Compare McDonald *701v. City of Spring Valley, supra, with Hunter v. North Mason High School, supra.
The first alternative suggests itself as the more appropriate solution. If the rights of infants which have always had the “jealous care” of this court, Cavender, supra, and even the legislature’s careful protection in other contexts, see, e. g., § 614.8, are to be subjugated to the interests of the insurance carriers for municipalities and their employees, then the legislature will surely be more specific than the present language of § 613A.5. As the legislature has not specified the status of children with respect to such litigation, I would simply postpone the statutory time limitations of § 613A.5 until the child’s disability is removed. See McCrary v. City of Odessa, supra, 482 S.W.2d at 154. By construing the statute as inapplicable to those under the legal disability of minority we would have resolved the issue of constitutionality as raised in this litigation.
I would reverse and remand for trial on the merits.
MASON, HARRIS and McCORMICK, JJ., join Division II of this dissent.

=== CASE 2226230 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:04.162001+00 ===

342 Mass. 642 (1961)
174 N.E.2d 422
PEARL LENDALL'S CASE.
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Essex.
April 4, 1961.
May 10, 1961.
Present: WILKINS, C.J., SPALDING, WILLIAMS, WHITTEMORE, & CUTTER, JJ.
Hyman Marcus, for the claimant.
Garfield R. Morgan, for the insurer.
WHITTEMORE, J.
The employee's claim for incapacity from an injury sustained October 17, 1953, was filed on May 8, 1958. The reviewing board, adopting in part and modifying in part the decision of the single member, and awarding compensation, found inter alia: the employee injured her back by a fall from a chair while hanging draperies in the insured's house where she was employed to do general housework and this was the precipitating cause of the 1958 incapacity; the insured had contemporaneous knowledge of the accident; there was reasonable cause for *643 delay in filing the claim; the insurer was not prejudiced by delay in the filing.
The decree in the Superior Court ordered the claim dismissed on the ground that the employee had failed to sustain the burden of proving that the delay in filing claim was occasioned by mistake or other reasonable cause or that the insurer was not prejudiced.
The employee had testified that she fell on a Thursday; the chair went out from under her as she was trying to reach over the air conditioner in the window. "[S]he struck her back over the chair," she was black and blue in both legs and "all the way around." She told her employer (Mrs. Clara C. Miller) about it, and that she "broke about fifty veins in her leg." The employer sent her to Dr. Collins. She telephoned Dr. Collins on Saturday, and he put her in the Beverly Hospital on Sunday and she was there seven days. She had had phlebitis "a long time ago," and so told the physician. When she went into the hospital she had a pain in her upper back and legs, mostly the left leg. When she got home she had pain in her legs and back, "has never been without that pain"; she did lighter work after the injury. She did not at first ascribe the pain to the fall. She had asked her employer, the insured, "to do something about insurance." Thereafter she had a talk with one Tapley and signed a form of some sort and was told it was an insurance form. The words "United States" were written on the form at the top of the sheet. "I asked ... [Mrs. Miller] what the name was and she said it was the insurer." The employee heard from no one thereafter. She had a talk with Mrs. Miller who said she could not collect so "she went back to work." She believed Mrs. Miller so "did not try" to collect. She was miserable and had medical treatment by a Dr. Box. She did not keep track of the number of times she saw Dr. Box. She owed the employer $1,000. The employer had told her she would be remembered in her will and the note cancelled. The employer died in 1955 or 1956. The employee was not mentioned in the will. She had brought *644 suit against the estate for services. She went to work for a Mrs. Gabinsky in 1956 or 1957. Her back bothered her. She saw Dr. Box. She was able to work only a few months. The only actual witness of the fall was "Vickie," the maid, whose last name and present whereabouts were unknown to the employee. Mr. Miller had predeceased his wife by about three years.
After leaving Mrs. Gabinsky, the employee went to Dr. Samuel Levine. He testified that when he first saw the employee on March 29, 1958, she gave a history of the fall on October 17, 1953. He discovered a ruptured disc. If there was no intervening injury "the complaints and physical findings ... [of March 29, 1958] ... were directly, continuously, traceable to or caused by the injury of October 17, 1953." If she did sustain an injury to the disc "she has about held her own, [for] if it had worsened very much ... surgery would have to be done." He could not say she did not have competent treatment. "Supportive care" was indicated for a ruptured disc. He could not say if she was wearing a supportive garment when she came to him. He prescribed one. The severe symptoms of a ruptured disc may not have appeared for some time after the injury.
Dr. Leonard F. Fox testified that he saw the employee at his office once, sometime in 1953, and in that year on one occasion in the hospital. She told him of the fall. On examination he found a "contusion and ecchymosis over legs ... both thighs." In January, 1958, she was in a room in the Beverly Hospital where he had a patient; he did not treat her then. "She had tried resting on bed boards and ... got an orthopedic mattress"  neither helped much. He thought she had a chronic sacroiliac strain. He thought there was probably a continuity of symptoms from 1953. He had no way of telling whether she would have been better off in 1958 if she had been treated with supportive measures and heat in the intervening period.
Dr. John J. Crowley examined the employee for the insurer May 27, 1958. He found a one half inch shortening *645 of the right leg. This could predispose to a ruptured disc. He testified that the employee when examined said that her "left leg was dead" about a month after the accident when she tried to get out of bed; she went to Dr. Box because Dr. Collins was away and was advised to use a bed board and get a support for her back; off and on she had been treated by Dr. Collins or Dr. Box as needed, and she had ordered a bed board and "posture-pedic" mattress; she had gone to Dr. Box and Dr. Collins during the past four and one half years when she could not get along; she was told "she probably would have to wear the garment to bed if she had a lot of trouble." Dr. Crowley also testified that it "was good medical advice" to sleep on boards and get a postural mattress and take it easy and rest.
Dr. William J. Collins testified that he saw the employee at the Beverly Hospital October 25, 1953. She stated she fell from a chair one week prior to admission and injured her right lower leg. She did not complain of anything else. She complained of severe pain in "right upper quadrant." She did not link the fall and the pain at first, but later did so. The discharge diagnosis was "Contusions, upper abdomen and back, right." The Blue Cross paid for the treatment and Mrs. Miller for the office visits. The employee could have had a ruptured disc "just in the findings at the hospital." He thinks he did not examine her back.
Helen Cook, Mrs. Miller's stepdaughter, testified that in October, 1953, Mrs. Miller told her that the employee (Pearl) would not be in as she had fallen from a chair while hanging "drapes." Pearl did not do as heavy work thereafter "because of her back."
There was evidence that an attorney for the employee wrote the insurer November 1, 1957, that Pearl Lendall was injured while in the employ of the late Clara C. Miller in October, 1953, and that he had been informed the addressee had covered the employees with workmen's compensation insurance. "Will you please investigate ... and communicate with me...."
The single member had found that the insurer was not *646 prejudiced because "they received full information of said injury in 1953." The reviewing board in effect deleted this finding. It noted that counsel had argued against the finding, and observed "We do not know who are meant by `they' received full information etc." "In lieu of the member's finding of want of prejudice in respect of the issues [of] `notice and claim,'" the board found in substance as follows: (1) On the question of notice, the insured had contemporaneous knowledge; the employee was treated by a physician who was paid by the insured; the physician saw her at the Beverly Hospital in October, 1953. The employee then described the fall, complained only of her leg. "[T]he discharge diagnosis was `contusions, upper abdomen and back, right ...'"; the employee went to the physician "to obtain necessary and adequate treatment for her injury." (2) On the question of the claim, "the employee had reasonable cause for delay in filing her claim and ... the insurer was not prejudiced in respect thereof, for the same reasons that we have related in respect of `notice,' and the further reasons that the employee filed claim within due time after having been examined ... on March 29, 1958, and being advised ... of the trouble in her back...."
General Laws c. 152, § 44, provides that "[w]ant of notice shall not bar proceedings, if it be shown that the insurer, insured or agent had knowledge...." The board's finding that the insured had knowledge of the accident is supported by evidence. Chapman's Case, 321 Mass. 705, 707. Herson's Case, 341 Mass. 402, 406.
The employee's burden with respect to the late filing of the claim is governed by G.L.c. 152, § 49, which excuses delay "occasioned by mistake or other reasonable cause, or if it is found that the insurer was not prejudiced by the delay." The conclusions of the board on these issues are not supported by adequate findings.
The facts referred to by the board as the basis of its conclusion that there was reasonable cause for delay are inadequate in law to support the conclusion. On this issue *647 the board should have made specific findings in respect of the evidence tending to show, if believed, that the employee had signed a paper addressed to an insurer and had cause to think that as a result an insurer had investigated the injury and denied liability, and that the employee relied on the employer's statement that no recovery could be had. The deletion of the single member's finding of notice to the insurer does not deprive the testimony in respect of Tapley and a supposed insurer of all relevance on the issue of mistake or reasonable cause. Findings on this issue are also required in respect of the evidence tending to show that there was reliance by the employee on an expectation to be remembered in the will and an election to forego any rights to compensation in favor of the expectation. It was error, however, for the judge to rule that on no aspect of the evidence could mistake or reasonable cause be found. Compare McLean's Case, 223 Mass. 342; Fells's Case, 226 Mass. 380; Barry's Case, 240 Mass. 409.
Similarly the facts referred to by the board do not furnish legal support for the finding of want of prejudice. In the following cases which have ruled that lack of prejudice had not been shown both seasonable notice and seasonable claim were absent. Kangas's Case, 282 Mass. 155. Booth's Case, 289 Mass. 322. Hatch's Case, 290 Mass. 259. Russell's Case, 334 Mass. 680. But it does not follow that, because the employee has shown that the employer had notice, the employee has necessarily sustained the burden of showing that the insurer was not prejudiced.
The evidence tended to show that the employee's injury in 1953 arose "out of and in the course of ... [the] employment." G.L.c. 152, § 26. Nevertheless the conclusion should not be left to inference and a finding should be made whether the insurer was not prejudiced by lack of opportunity to investigate the applicability of the Workmen's Compensation Act. There is a substantial possibility of prejudice to the insurer through lack of any notice in fact, and consequent inability to make any investigation either of the nature and extent of the injury or of possible *648 intervening injury to account for the 1958 incapacity, as well as through loss of the opportunity to supply adequate medical care. See Russell's Case, 334 Mass. 680.
There is no medical testimony of treatment from 1953 to 1958. Giving full weight to the testimony favorable to the employee, soon after the fall she was told to get a board, a mattress, and a "garment." This leaves most of the four and one half years unaccounted for except by the implication of her testimony of consulting Dr. Box on occasion. The hearsay report in Dr. Crowley's testimony that when the employee felt that she needed to do so she went to Dr. Collins or Dr. Box is not evidence of the fact. Dr. Collins testified to services only in the period shortly after the injury. Dr. Box is not called not his absence accounted for. Findings are reasonably required on the issues of whether the insurer had knowledge in fact, and what medical attention the employee received in the four and one half year interval and its probable or possible effect on the incapacity in 1958. In the circumstances we do not rule on the sufficiency of the evidence in respect of prejudice.
The decree is reversed. The case is to be remanded to the board for further findings. Herson's Case, 341 Mass. 402. Garrigan's Case, 341 Mass. 413. Thibeault's Case, 341 Mass. 647.
So ordered.

=== CASE 9741120 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:49:42.958567+00 ===

PAULSON, Judge.
This is an appeal from an order of the District Court of Stark County denying the defendant’s motion for a change of venue. The American State Bank of Dickinson and the Bank of North Dakota, plaintiffs [hereinafter “the banks”], brought action against the defendant, Francis Hoffelt [hereinafter Mr. Hoffelt], on the basis of a contract of guaranty allegedly signed by Mr. Hoffelt. Separate actions were commenced against several other defendants, who also allegedly signed the same contract of guaranty.
The Environmental Development Corporation of North Dakota [hereinafter ENDE-CO, INC.], the principal debtor, had previously executed a promissory note to the two banks and it is alleged that said corporation has defaulted, is insolvent, and is unable to pay its debts. Thus, payment has been demanded of Hoffelt and other guarantors.
The two banks instituted legal action against Mr. Hoffelt on November 20, 1973, by service of a summons and complaint. Mr. Hoffelt, on or about November 27, 1973, served upon the banks’ attorneys his demand for change of venue, in which he demanded that the place of trial in such action be changed from Stark County to the County of Williams because Mr. Hoffelt was at all times and still is a resident of Williams County. The demand, together with a stipulation for change of place of trial, was forwarded to the attorneys for the banks for their signatures. They refused to execute the stipulation and suggested in a letter dated March 24, 1974, that the attorneys for Mr. Hoffelt prepare and serve the necessary motion papers for change of place of trial, and, in addition, filed a return to such anticipated motion. Under date of April 5,1974, Mr. Hoffelt’s attorneys served and filed the requisite motion papers for change of place of trial.
Mr. Hoffelt’s affidavit showed that he was, at the time of the service of the summons and complaint, and still is, a resident of Williams County. Section 28-04-05, N.D.C.C. The banks’ affidavit of resistance admitted Hoffelt’s residence as being in Williams County but, in addition, indicated that the convenience of witnesses and the ends of justice would be promoted by the case being venued in Stark County; that Hoffelt and the other defendants were officers and directors of ENDECO, INC., which is bankrupt; and that the main office and the plant of ENDECO, INC., is located at Dickinson, North Dakota, and, accordingly, that § 28-04 — 07, N.D.C.C., is controlling. The parties, through their attorneys, agreed that the court render its decision on the pleadings without arguments or briefs. The district court, under date of May 30, 1975, issued the following order:
“ORDER
“The motion for change of venue filed on behalf of Defendant Francis Hoffelt transferring the case from Stark County, Sixth Judicial District, to Williams County, Fifth Judicial District, has been fully considered by the Court and said motion is hereby denied, it being clear that the transactions involved occurred at Dickinson, North Dakota, at the home office of the corporation also in Dickinson, North Dakota, and for the conveniences of the witnesses and to serve the ends of justice, the trial should be held in Dickinson, North Dakota. It is hereby further ordered that all seven cases should be consolidated for trial.”
The pertinent statutes which are involved in this case are §§ 28-04-05 and 28-04-07, N.D.C.C.:
“28-04-05. Actions having venue where defendant resides. — In all other cases, except as provided in section 28-04-03.1, and subject to the power of the court to change the place of trial as provided by statute, the action shall be tried in the county in which the defendant or *898one of the defendants resides at the time of the commencement of the action. If such county is attached to another county for judicial purposes, the action shall be tried in the latter county. If none of the defendants shall reside in the state, the action shall be tried in the county which the plaintiff shall designate in the summons.
“28-04-07. Court may change venue— Cases. — The court may change the place of trial in the following cases:
“1. When the county designated for that purpose in the complaint is not the proper county;
“2. When there is reason to believe that an impartial trial cannot be had therein;
“3. When the convenience of witnesses and the ends of justice would be promoted by the change;
“4. When upon the call of the calendar at any regular or special term there appears to be an insufficient number of jury cases for trial to warrant the expense of a jury, the court, on application of any party to such an action, or on its own motion, taking into consideration the convenience of witnesses and the promotion of justice, may order the transfer of such jury cases as are on the calendar to any county within the judicial district where a jury session of court will be held in the immediate future, so that a prompt trial of such cases may be had.” [Emphasis added.]
We are confronted with the following issue:
Did the district court err in denying Hoffelt’s motion for change of venue from the district court of Stark County to the district court of Williams County, which county was and is Hoffelt’s residence?
We reverse.
It is a general rule in this State that the defendant in an action of this character has an absolute right to change to the county of his residence if he seasonably makes demand therefor. Ott v. Kelley, 64 N.D. 361, 252 N.W. 269 (1934); Clark v. Cleveland, 60 N.D. 460, 235 N.W. 342 (1931); State v. Bloom, 49 N.D. 224, 190 N.W. 812 (1922). Further, the hearing on the motion could be held after the time for answering had expired. Hinsey v. Alcox, 38 N.D. 52, 164 N.W. 296 (1917).
In the instant case, Mr. Hoffelt made a timely demand for a change of place of trial to Williams County. When the banks’ attorneys refused to sign the stipulation which accompanied such demand, counsel for the banks requested Mr. Hoffelt to file and serve the motion papers and filed a return in opposition thereto. The banks’ attorneys also requested that the court decide the matter on the pleadings.
This Court, in Ott v. Kelley, supra, in paragraphs 1 and 4 of the syllabus, held:
“1. Where an action, properly triable in the county of the defendant’s residence, is begun in another county, and proper demand is made for a change of place of trial, the defendant is entitled to such change as a matter of right.”
“4. A motion for change of venue on the ground of the convenience of witnesses and furtherance of justice is addressed to the sound judicial discretion of the court.”
And, 252 N.W. at page 270, the Court stated:
“The district court of Stark county could not retain jurisdiction because of convenience of witnesses and the furtherance of justice. That was a matter for the district court of Grant county to determine. [Citations omitted.] It appears *899the California courts hold the application for change of venue because of convenience of witnesses can be made in opposition to a change to the proper county . but we believe the Dakota rule to be the better and more logical one. The rule should be a uniform one, and, as demand for change to the proper county must be made before the time for answer expires . . . while change for convenience of witnesses cannot be made until issues are joined, and as the former is a right and the latter a favor, it is more orderly to have these separate issues tried each in the proper court.”
We adhere to the holding and reasoning of the Court. Likewise, in Clark v. Cleveland, supra, in the syllabus, this Court held:
“A motion to change the place of trial to the proper county is not properly resisted by a showing that the convenience of witnesses will be subserved by trial in the county in which the action was begun. Proper practice requires such showing to be presented in support of a motion in the court in which the defendants have the right to have the case heard.”
And, 235 N.W. at page 343, the Court stated:
“Upon this showing it was clearly error to deny the defendants’ motion for change of place of trial. In an action of this character the defendant has an absolute right to change to the county of his residence if he seasonably makes demand therefor. [Citations omitted.]
“The right being absolute, the order denying the motion cannot be supported on the ground that trial in Wells county will subserve the convenience of witnesses. The proper practice in such case is to make a motion in the court in which the defendants have the right to have the case heard. When such a motion is there made, it invokes the discretion of the court to transfer the case to some other county on the grounds of prejudice or to subserve the convenience of witnesses and promote the ends of justice.”
We adopt the holding and reasoning of the Court in Clark v. Cleveland.
Mr. Hoffelt has further asserted that the district court had no authority to consolidate his action for two reasons:
1. That the case at bar is a separate action as are the actions against the other defendants; and
2. That Hoffelt’s situation is different and distinct from the other actions and other parties.
Mr. Hoffelt further asserts that there is no reference in the order of May 30, 1975, to the other cases which are to be consolidated and that neither he nor the adverse parties requested a consolidation of their trials. A perusal of Rule 42 of the North Dakota Rules of Civil Procedure reveals that normally a consolidation of trials will be called into use by motion of a party. 5 Moore’s Federal Practice (2d ed. 1975) ¶ 42.-02. However, since this Court has determined that Mr. Hoffelt is entitled to a change of venue to Williams County, it follows that this action cannot be consolidated with the other actions at this time.
It was further asserted on oral argument that the order denying the change of place of trial may be upheld by virtue of either Administrative Order No. 1 of this Court, dated October 30, 1974, or § 27-02— 05.1, N.D.C.C.
Administrative Order No. 1 pertains to the appointment of a presiding judge in each of the judicial districts and the delegation of certain administrative duties to such judge. Section 27-02-05.1, N.D.C.C., defi-nitizes the supervisory powers of the Supreme Court with reference to all other courts. Neither Administrative Order No. 1, nor § 27-02-05.1, N.D.C.C., is applicable to the case at bar.
The order of the district court is reversed.
PEDERSON, VOGEL and SAND, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9741121 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:49:42.962415+00 ===

*900ERICKSTAD, Chief Justice
(dissenting).
I respectfully dissent for the reason that I believe, as the California Courts apparently do, that it is better to permit the court of first instance to decide whether the convenience of the witnesses and the ends of justice would be promoted by retaining the case for trial in the place where it is first venued. Braunstein v. Superior Court, 225 Cal.App.2d 691, 37 Cal.Rptr. 666, 670 (1964). While Braunstein is predicated on specific statutory authority [Cal.Code of Civil Procedure § 369b (West 1973)], it reflects judicial declarations prior to the statute that allowed the trial court to retain the action if the convenience of the witnesses and the ends of justice required that the action be tried in the court where it was pending. Sheffield v. Pickwick Stages, Inc., 191 Cal. 9, 214 P. 852 (1923), and cases cited therein; Annot., 74 A.L.R.2d 16, 51 (1960).
The old practice which is today again approved by the majority of our court bifurcates and fragments the proceedings causing delay in the ultimate determination of the merits. Furthermore, it results in duplication of efforts and the unnecessary consumption of court time on procedural matters.
For these reasons I would remand this case to the trial court of Stark County so that an appropriate motion and affidavit may be filed setting forth specific reasons supporting retention of the cause and a hearing thereafter held on both the motion for a change of venue and the motion for retention.

=== CASE 2226235 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:04.253874+00 ===

342 Mass. 478 (1961)
174 N.E.2d 374
WANDA W. JORDAN
vs.
ROBERT A. MacMELVILLE.
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Essex.
March 9, 1961.
April 28, 1961.
Present: WILKINS, C.J., WILLIAMS, WHITTEMORE, CUTTER, & SPIEGEL, JJ.
Gerald M. Lewis, for the plaintiff.
Robert L. Athas, for the defendant.
WILLIAMS, J.
This action of tort for personal injury and property damage resulting from an automobile collision was heard by an auditor whose findings of fact were not to be final. He found for the plaintiff. Later tried to a jury on reservation by the defendant of the right to introduce further evidence (Rule 88 of the Superior Court *479 [1954]) there were verdicts for the plaintiff. The judge then, on motion, entered verdicts for the defendant under leave reserved subject to the plaintiff's exception.
The collision in question occurred on the morning of September 10, 1957, at the intersection of Main and Morton streets in Andover. The plaintiff was driving her car westerly on Morton Street which was twenty-four feet wide. The defendant was driving a truck southerly on Main Street, a forty foot street. The vehicles collided approximately in the center of the intersection. The report of the auditor was in evidence. He found that the plaintiff entered the intersection first and that at the moment of contact her car was at a complete stop. The defendant was operating his truck at a speed greater than the established speed limit, and made no attempt to reduce its speed until it had entered the intersection. He could have seen the plaintiff before entering the intersection and "should by the exercise of reasonable care have prevented the collision." "[T]he defendant was negligent and ... his negligence was a direct and proximate cause of the accident.... [The plaintiff's] failure to see the defendant's truck until after her car had entered the intersection was not due to any negligence on her part.... [A]t the time of the accident there was nothing on the windshield which would have interfered with her view of approaching traffic."
The plaintiff testified that she stopped at a stop sign on Morton Street about two car lengths back from Main Street. She stopped again at the curb of Main Street. She was "taking it very slow" because her vision was obscured somewhat by cars parked to her right on Main Street at the northeasterly curb about a car length from Morton Street. After stopping the second time she "pulled out slowly" and observed the defendant's truck about half a block away. She "observed traffic to her left and was slowly inching out when she saw the truck was almost upon her and applied the brakes." The point of contact was just over the middle line of Main Street. After the collision, skid marks on the road were observed thirty feet in *480 length behind the truck and five feet in length behind the plaintiff's car.
On cross-examination the plaintiff admitted that at the scene of the accident she said to both the defendant and a police officer that her windshield was covered with fog; that she did not see the defendant before the collision; and that the accident was her fault. She explained that she made the statements as "nervous chatter" which she said was a "continuous thing" from the time of the accident. On redirect examination she testified there was no fog on the windshield at the time the two vehicles came together and that she saw the defendant's vehicle prior to the impact.
The defendant contends that the statements to him and the police officer "conclusively bar ... [the plaintiff] from recovery as a matter of law, inasmuch as they constitute admissions of sole culpability on her part and, at the very least, contributory negligence in the operation of her motor vehicle." This contention cannot be sustained. The statements were evidence of the plaintiff's contributory negligence to be considered by the jury, but did not require a ruling that the collision was attributable to her fault. Tully v. Mandell, 269 Mass. 307, 309. Hartson v. Winship, 326 Mass. 380, 383. They were extrajudicial admissions, the probative value of which was to be weighed in the light of the circumstances in which they were made, and the subsequent testimony given by the plaintiff at the trial.
There was evidence for the jury of the plaintiff's due care and the defendant's negligence. It was error to enter verdicts for the defendant.
Exceptions sustained.
Judgments for the plaintiff on the verdicts of the jury.

=== CASE 2226238 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:04.305217+00 ===

64 Mich. App. 460 (1975)
236 N.W.2d 516
WALKOWSKI
v.
MACOMB COUNTY SHERIFF
Docket No. 20143.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided September 23, 1975.
*461 Bellanca & Beattie, for plaintiff.
Frank J. Kelley, Attorney General, Robert A. Derengoski, Solicitor General, and Patrick A. Aseltyne, Assistant Attorney General, for defendant Plants.
Before: QUINN, P.J., and BRONSON and N.J. KAUFMAN, JJ.
BRONSON, J.
Plaintiff, Dorothy Dian Walkowski, brought suit for battery, assault, false arrest, unlawful imprisonment, and defamation against police officers of the Macomb County Sheriff's Department, St. Clair County Sheriff's Department, and the Michigan State Police Department. Appellant here, John R. Plants, was sued in his capacity as Director of the Michigan State Police Department. Colonel Plants made motions for accelerated judgment and summary judgment, the denial of which he appeals by leave granted.
This cause of action arises out of events occurring on November 1 and 2, 1972. On the night of November 1, plaintiff was stopped by two officers of the Macomb County Sheriff's Department for allegedly running a red light. These two officers *462 ran a warrant check to determine if there were any outstanding warrants for plaintiff's arrest. They directed their inquiry to the Law Enforcement Information Network (LEIN), a computerized filing system used to store such information. LEIN is maintained by the Michigan State Police Department.
Plaintiff contends that the LEIN system gave forth the false information that plaintiff was wanted on an outstanding warrant for perjury committed in St. Clair County. Defendant agrees that no such warrant was ever in existence. Plaintiff alleges that this false information caused her to be conveyed by the state police to the St. Clair County Jail, where she was incarcerated until she was able to post bond at about 4:00 in the afternoon of November 2.
Colonel Plants asserts that the LEIN "charge code" for perjury and contempt of court was the same at that time. Plaintiff admits that a valid bench warrant for contempt was outstanding against her at this time, resulting from her failure to appear in court for a traffic ticket. Defendant states that the Macomb authorities followed standard procedures and verified the existence of a warrant through the state police, and that all subsequent actions were based upon the valid contempt warrant, with any "false" information having no effect. It is conceded by defendant, however, the perjury is a felony, while contempt is a quasi-criminal misdemeanor. From that fact, plaintiff argues that the police would have not taken her into custody if only the contempt warrant had been involved.
Defendant Plants filed a motion for summary judgment and accelerated judgment. Summary judgment pursuant to GCR 1963, 117.2(1) was *463 based upon the claim that Plants' actions were not the proximate cause of defendant's injuries. Accelerated judgment, under GCR 1963, 116.1(1)(2), was based upon: (1) the circuit court's lack of subject matter jurisdiction because the Court of Claims has exclusive jurisdiction of this type of claim; and (2) the circuit court's lack of personal jurisdiction over Plants due to his immunity from suit under the doctrine of governmental immunity. Because we hold that defendant John R. Plants is immune from suit, we need reach only that issue.
There is no question that a suit against the Michigan State Police Department by the plaintiff for the wrongs complained of here would be barred by governmental immunity. The new governmental immunity statute, MCLA 691.1407; MSA 3.996(107), was effective as of August 1, 1970, and applies to all injuries occurring after that date, Campbell v Detroit, 51 Mich App 34; 214 NW2d 337 (1973). The statute provides immunity when the agency is engaged in a "governmental function". The operations of police departments are governmental functions, Kelley v East Lansing, 50 Mich App 511; 213 NW2d 557 (1973), Anderson v Detroit. 54 Mich App 496; 221 NW2d 168 (1974). The operations of the state police are covered by the doctrine of governmental immunity.
The extent to which public officials are to be given the benefits of governmental immunity was set out in early Michigan law.[1] As Justice COOLEY concisely summarized, the rule draws a distinction *464 between "discretionary" or "quasi-judicial" and "ministerial" acts:
"A ministerial officer has a line of conduct marked out for him, and has nothing to do but to follow it; and he must be held liable for any failure to do so which results in the injury of another. A judicial officer, on the other hand, has certain powers confided to him to be exercised according to his judgment or discretion; and the law would be oppressive which should compel him in every case to decide correctly at his peril. It is accordingly a rule of very great antiquity that no action will lie against a judicial officer for any act done by him in the exercise of his judicial functions, provided the act, though done mistakenly, were within the scope of his jurisdiction: * * *. Nor does the rule depend upon whether the tribunal is a court or not; it is the nature of the duties to be performed that determines its application." Wall v Trumbull, 16 Mich 228, 235-236 (1867). (Citations omitted.)
That rule is followed in a majority of the states, Prosser, Torts (4th ed), § 132, pp 988-989. The reasons for the rule were further explored in Justice EDWARDS' dissenting opinion to Williams v Detroit, 364 Mich 231, 261-262; 111 NW2d 1 (1961):
"In the exercise of discretionary power, governmental duty runs to the benefit of the whole public, rather than to individuals. It is of great importance that this crucial function of democratic decision making be unhampered by litigation.[*]
[*] "`Government officials are liable for the negligent performance of their ministerial duties * * * but are not liable for their discretionary acts within the scope of their authority, * * * even if it is alleged that they acted maliciously. * * * Such immunity is not designed to protect the guilty, for "if it were possible in practice to confine such complaints to the guilty, it would be monstrous to deny recovery. The justification for doing *465 so is that it is impossible to know whether the claim is well founded until the case has been tried, and that to submit all officials, the innocent as well as the guilty, to the burden of a trial and to the inevitable danger of its outcome, would dampen the ardor of all but the most resolute, or the most irresponsible, in the unflinching discharge of their duties. * * * In this instance it has been thought in the end better to leave unredressed the wrongs done by dishonest officers than to subject those who try to do their duty to the constant dread of retaliation." Learned Hand, J., in Gregoire v Biddle, 177 F2d 579, 581.' Muskopf v Corning Hospital District, 55 Cal 2d 211, 220, 221; 11 Cal Rptr 89, 94, 95; 359 P2d 457."
In the earlier cases, the rule was directly applied in several situations. It was held that members of city councils are immune from suits arising from their disapproval of the liquor bonds of private citizens, in that those actions are considered "discretionary", Amperse v Winslow, 75 Mich 234; 42 NW 823 (1889), Pawlowski v Jenks, 115 Mich 275; 73 NW 238 (1897). In People, for use of Lapeer County Bank v O'Connell, 214 Mich 410; 183 NW 195 (1921), the Court held that the acts of the county drain commissioner in issuing partial payments for the construction of a drain were "ministerial", and that he could be held personally liable for improperly doing so.
Other cases have had some difficulty distinguishing between two different concepts: (1) whether the officer is procedurally protected from suit under the doctrine of governmental immunity and (2) whether the officer is substantively not liable to the plaintiff for his acts in that no duty is owed to this plaintiff. For example, in the case of Raynsford v Phelps, 43 Mich 342; 5 NW 403 (1880), it was held that seizure of property for delinquent taxes was a ministerial duty, the improper performance *466 of which created liability to the injured party. But the Court even then mentioned the related concept of substantive liability:
"[A] public officer having ministerial duties to perform, in which a private individual has a special and direct interest, is liable to such individual for any injury sustained by him in consequence of the failure to perform such duties." Raynsford, supra, p 344 (emphasis added).
That language has been used by later cases to produce some confusing results.
In Rose v Mackie, 22 Mich App 463; 177 NW2d 633 (1970), the state highway commissioner was being sued for damages resulting from an automobile accident occurring on a state highway. Two causes of action were pleaded. First, defendant was being sued for negligently performing his general duties to oversee the highways and make sure that they are not unsafe. Secondly, the complaint alleged a negligent design and state of repair with respect to the highway, and that defendant failed to correct this situation after notice to his agents.
The Court had little trouble disposing of the first count on grounds that the commissioner had only discretionary duties in this area.[2] They then went *467 on to hold that the second count failed to state a cause of action because the commissioner's duties ran to the public and not the individual plaintiffs. They did not base this part of the decision on governmental immunity:
"The official in Raynsford had invaded the rights of one person and one person's property. The present situation is much broader in scope, in that the state highway commissioner does not act personally against any single individual in the construction and maintenance of highways. It could in no sense be said that defendant singled out one individual in respect to whom he violated his official duties." Mackie, supra, p 467.
The test in Michigan for governmental immunity of public officers was not changed.[3]
*468 With this background in mind, we come to the case of Nichols v. Zera, 33 Mich App 274; 189 NW2d 751 (1971). We feel that the Zera Court reached the right result for the wrong reasons. In that case, the members of the board of education of the City of Flint were sued for failure to prevent several students from being assaulted by outsiders soon after one school was dismissed. The Zera Court applied a "public duty" analysis correctly, but improperly accepted defendants' argument that summary judgment was proper because defendants were "clothed in the sovereign immunity" of the board of education itself. We follow that case here only insofar as agreeing with its result, for the Court should have ruled that summary judgment was proper because the defendants simply lacked a substantive duty toward these particular plaintiffs.[4]
In summary, we hold that HN3the proper test to be used to determine whether a public officer is covered by governmental immunity is one distinguishing between ministerial and discretionary acts. The officer is immune from suit only for the performance of discretionary acts.
Once we have decided that the proper test is one distinguishing between discretionary and ministerial acts, we have little difficulty with the rest of the case. The executive head of the state police clearly exercises discretionary control over the operations of the LEIN system. There are a myriad of decisions to be made concerning the manner in which that system is to be set up and run. We can emphatically say that the acts in relation to this aspect of state police activities are not of the *469 ministerial type, where the path to follow is clearcut. Consequently, we hold that John R. Plants is immune from suit here, and the trial judge should have entered accelerated judgment in his favor.
Reversed and remanded with instructions for the trial judge to enter an order granting defendant John Plants an accelerated judgement. Costs of this appeal to appellant Plants.
NOTES
[1]  The common law rules on governmental or sovereign immunity apply here because the statute contains the general clause that, "Except as otherwise provided herein, this act shall not be construed as modifying or restricting the immunity of the state from tort liability as it existed heretofore, which immunity is affirmed." We read the term "state" to broadly differentiate between the state and its agencies and officers, and other government subdivisions, such as the municipalities, and their agencies and officers.
[2]  The Mackie Court stated that the issue did not "merit discussion", citing McDowell v State Highway Commissioner, 365 Mich 268; 112 NW2d 491 (1961), and Longstreet v County of Mecosta, 228 Mich 542; 200 NW 248 (1924). Both of these cases turn on the ministerial-discretionary distinction although they talk in terms of "looking through and beyond the nominal parties in interest", a doctrine formulated in the contract case of McDowell v Warden of Ionia Reformatory, 169 Mich 332; 135 NW 265 (1912). As the Court concluded in Longstreet, supra, p 551:
"An examination of the highway laws, including the act of 1919, shows a legislative intent to place upon the State highway commission duties of supervision, administration and discretionary control over the highways of the State * * *. Under no view of the case can liability of defendant Rogers either individually or as State highway commissioner be sustained."
The "discretionary" test was being applied, but under a different name.
[3]  In the Mackie opinion, citation to Massengill v Yuma County, 104 Ariz 518; 456 P2d 376 (1969), is made concerning the private duty-public duty distinction. That case makes it crystal clear that the public duty test goes to the substantive liability of the official, as Arizona had previously eliminated governmental immunity:
"There has been much discussion, by the plaintiffs, of the doctrine of sovereign immunity. * * * But nowhere in the record can we find any attempt by the defendants to envelop themselves in the cloak of immunity. Nor can they do so since this Court in the most unquestionable terms relegated that archaic doctrine to the dustheap of history.
* * *
"But we did not, by those decisions, change the basic elements of actionable negligence the components of which are a duty owed to the plaintiff, a breach thereof and injury proximately caused by such breach. Morris v Ortiz, 103 Ariz 119; 437 P2d 652 [1968].
"It is the first of these elements that concerns us here. The general rule pertaining to governmental agencies and public officers is that
"`* * * if the duty which the official authority imposes upon an officer is a duty to the public, a failure to perform it, or an inadequate or erroneous performance, must be a public, not an individual injury, and must be redressed, if at all, in some form of public prosecution.'" Massengill, 104 Ariz 520-521; 456 P2d at 378-379.
See, also, Gerneth v Detroit, 465 F2d 784 (CA 6, 1972), cert den, 409 US 1109; 93 S Ct 913; 34 L Ed 2d 690 (1973).
[4]  For similar reasons, we disagree with the same analysis in dictum found in Lovitt v Concord School District, 58 Mich App 593, 601-602; 228 NW2d 479 (1975).

=== CASE 2226240 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:04.345805+00 ===

64 Mich. App. 331 (1975)
236 N.W.2d 72
PEOPLE
v.
HOCQUARD
PEOPLE
v.
MITCHELL
Docket Nos. 16400, 16401.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided September 22, 1975.
Frank J. Kelley, Attorney General, Robert A. Derengoski, Solicitor General, Bruce A. Barton, Prosecuting Attorney, and James M. Justin, Assistant Prosecuting Attorney, for the people.
Roger L. Wotila, Assistant State Appellate Defender, for defendants.
Before: BASHARA, P.J., and J.H. GILLIS and M.F. CAVANAGH, JJ.
Leave to appeal applied for.
BASHARA, J.
Defendants, Earl E. Hocquard and Gene E. Mitchell, were convicted by a jury of attempted prison escape. MCLA 750.193; MSA 28.390. Our Court affirmed the conviction in an order issued on January 25, 1974. The Michigan Supreme Court vacated the order and remanded for rehearing.[1] Later the Michigan Supreme Court amended their order to limit reconsideration to the issues of the scope of cross-examination of defendant Hocquard, the excluded defense of duress, *334 and the denial of separate trials.[2] The facts are set out in a discussion of the issues.
The first issue presented is whether the trial judge erred in requiring Hocquard to remain on the witness stand for cross-examination after denying Hocquard's offer of proof on the defense of duress. Hocquard took the witness stand in his own defense and testified to his name and address. Defense counsel then inquired into Hocquard's medical history prior to the attempted prison escape. The prosecutor objected to the question on the ground that such inquiry was immaterial. The trial court ruled that the defense of duress was available in limited circumstances as a defense to prison escape and agreed to hear an offer of proof. Accordingly, the jury was excused and Hocquard made an offer of proof on the defense of duress. After the offer of proof the trial judge ruled that Hocquard's allegations did not satisfy the elements of the defense of duress. At this point defense counsel stated, "I'm wondering if he'd be on the stand, excused or remain here." The court ruled that Hocquard was still subject to cross-examination and brought back the jury. On cross-examination, without objection, Hocquard admitted all the elements of the crime.
Hocquard contends that he took the stand for the limited purpose of making an offer of proof on the defense of duress. Once the court ruled that the defense of duress was not available there was no reason for Hocquard to testify. Therefore, requiring Hocquard to submit to cross-examination violated his privilege against self-incrimination.
The record discloses nothing to indicate that Hocquard initially took the stand for the limited purpose of making an offer of proof on the defense *335 of duress. Defense counsel should have announced that he was proposing his witness for the sole purpose of a limited evidentiary hearing on the question of the defense of duress. Once the defendant assumed the stand he waived his constitutional right to refuse to answer any question that may be material to the case and which would, in the case of any other witness, be legitimate cross-examination. People v Roger Johnson, 382 Mich 632; 172 NW2d 369 (1969), cert den 397 US 1079, 90 S Ct 1533; 25 L Ed 2d 816 (1970).
We must determine whether the procedure of defense counsel allowing the defendant to take the stand without attempting to limit the scope of examination was so injurious that, but for this action, the defendant might not have been convicted. People v Degraffenreid, 19 Mich App 702; 173 NW2d 317 (1969). The evidence, excluding the confession on the witness stand, shows that Hocquard did attempt to escape from prison. Two guards identified the defendant as the individual who came to the main gate dressed as a guard and attempted to leave the prison. Three other guards testified to seeing the defendant dressed in a guard uniform at the control center. The evidence tended to show that the defendant attempted to obtain a pass at the control center to leave the prison. When the defendant could not produce identification he was taken into custody. The evidence is overwhelming that the defendant would have been convicted even if defense counsel had not proceeded as he did.
The next issue presented is whether the trial court erred in refusing to allow the jury to consider Hocquard's offer of proof on the defense of duress. He attempted to show that he had a medical history of back problems and that he was *336 periodically treated by Dr. Frank Walker. Hocquard re-injured his back a month before the prison escape while working in the prison tin shop. He described the pain as so excruciating that he had difficulty sleeping at night. Hocquard testified that he requested help in obtaining medical attention from his shop supervisor and the security officer in the tin shop. A letter was obtained from Dr. Walker documenting Hocquard's back problems and copies of the letter were sent to the Prison Hospital Administrator and the Director of the Department of Corrections. Still Hocquard received no medical treatment. At the time of his attempted escape Hocquard testified that the pain was so severe that he could not bend at the waist. At the close of the offer of proof the trial court ruled that Hocquard's physical condition did not satisfy the elements of the defense of duress. Apparently, the trial judge did not believe that Hocquard's physical injury was of such a nature to induce a well founded apprehension of death or serious bodily harm, which is an element of the defense of duress.
In the past courts have refused to recognize defenses to prison escape based upon unsanitary and unhealthy conditions, State v Davis, 14 Nev 439 (1880), or intolerable living conditions and brutal and inhuman treatment by guards, People v Whipple, 100 Cal App 261; 279 P 1008 (1929), or inadequate medical attention. State v Palmer, 45 Del 308; 72 A2d 442 (1950). The rationale has been founded on public policy. See State v Palmer, supra at 310, 72 A2d at 444. We reject public policy considerations that condone and sanction inhuman treatment of prisoners incarcerated in penitentiaries.
The cases of People v Harmon, 53 Mich App 482; *337 220 NW2d 212 (1974), lv granted 392 Mich 817 (1974), and People v Lovercamp, 43 Cal App 3rd 823; 118 Cal Rptr 110 (1974), have respectively allowed the defenses of duress and necessity[3] to prison escape arising out of threats of homosexual attack. We believe that the defense of necessity is applicable to those situations where a prisoner had been denied requested medical care. However, we hold that the defense of necessity is a very limited defense to the crime of prison escape or attempted prison escape. It may only be considered by the trier of fact where there is a prima facie showing of evidence to support each and every one of the following elements:
1. "The compulsion must be present, imminent and impending, and of such a nature as to induce a well-grounded apprehension of death or serious bodily harm if the act is not done. A threat of future injury is not enough."[4]
2. "There is no time for a complaint to the authorities or there exists a history of futile complaints which make any result from such complaints illusory;[5]
3. "There is no time or opportunity to resort to the courts;
4. "There is no evidence of force or violence used *338 towards prison personnel or other `innocent' persons in the escape; and
5. "The prisoner immediately reports to the proper authorities when he has attained a position of safety from the immediate threat."[6] (Footnote omitted.)
The facts presented in the offer of proof show that there existed a history of complaints seeking medical treatment and that no force or violence was used in the prison escape. The element of whether Hocquard was faced with a well grounded apprehension of death or serious bodily harm is "in all but the clearest cases, to be decided by the trier of fact taking into consideration all the surrounding circumstances, including the defendant's opportunity and ability to avoid the feared harm". People v Harmon, supra, at 486. While in retrospect the trial judge may have been in error in making the determination himself, People v Harmon, supra, had not been decided and was not available for reference. However, the record discloses no reason why Hocquard would not have had the time or opportunity to resort to the courts for a writ of mandamus[7] ordering prison officials to provide medical treatment. During the thirty-day period prior to the prison escape when Hocquard was sending letters and requesting help, he could have very easily resorted to the courts. Therefore, *339 the trial judge properly excluded the defense of necessity from the jury.
The final issue is whether the trial judge erred in denying both defendants' motion for severance. Defendants were represented by the same counsel. One week before trial defense counsel moved for severance because Mitchell was asserting the defense of alibi which was at variance with Hocquard's defense of necessity. The defenses were inconsistent as shown when Hocquard took the stand. On cross-examination Hocquard was asked a series of questions revolving around the identity of the second man in the prison escape. Hocquard refused to answer these questions. However, the inference was raised that Mitchell was the second man. Defense counsel was then in the precarious position of either attacking the credibility of Hocquard to protect Mitchell's interest or to let Hocquard's testimony go unchallenged at the expense of Mitchell. Defense counsel chose the latter.
It must first be recognized that effective assistance of counsel guaranteed by the Sixth Amendment and made applicable to the states by the Fourteenth Amendment "contemplates that such assistance be untrammeled and unimpaired by a court order requiring that one lawyer shall simultaneously represent conflicting interests". Glasser v United States, 315 US 60, 70; 62 S Ct 457; 86 L Ed 680 (1942). Furthermore, where co-defendants' defenses are inconsistent and the trial court is fully advised of the inconsistency before trial, it may be an abuse of discretion not to grant separate trials. People v Markham, 19 Mich App 616; 173 NW2d 307 (1969), lv den 383 Mich 804 (1970).
When defense counsel failed to impeach the credibility of Hocquard, it only amplified the inconsistency of the defenses of the parties. There *340 was no prejudice to Hocquard since counsel pursued his theory of the defense. However, in defense counsel's pursuance of Hocquard's theory of defense he seriously prejudiced Mitchell when he failed to impeach Hocquard's credibility.
Accordingly, defendant Mitchell's conviction is reversed and remanded for a new trial. Defendant Hocquard's conviction is affirmed.
NOTES
[1]  392 Mich 804 (1974).
[2]  393 Mich 762 (1974).
[3]  The difference between the defenses of duress and necessity is that the source of compulsion for duress is the threatened conduct of another human being, while the source of compulsion for necessity is the presence of natural physical forces. 43 U Cinc L Rev 956, 960. Since Hocquard's theory of defense is that the denial of medical attention was the compulsion for his attempted escape, the proper name of the defense is necessity. Several terms have been used by courts to denote defenses based on compulsion, most commonly "duress", "necessity", "coercion", and "compulsion". U Cinc L Rev, supra, p 957, n 2. Michigan recognized the defense of compulsion in People v Merhige, 212 Mich 601; 180 NW 418 (1920). Since compulsion includes necessity this is not a recognition of a new defense in Michigan.
[4]  People v Merhige, 212 Mich 601, 610-611; 180 NW 418 (1920).
[5]  Elements two thru five are taken from People v Lovercamp, 43 Cal App 3rd 832; 118 Cal Rptr 110 (1974).
[6]  The element of return need not be considered since Hocquard failed to escape.
[7]  Parshay v Marquette Prison Warden, 30 Mich App 556, 558; 186 NW2d 859 (1971), recognized that mandamus is proper where there is a "clear, legal right in the plaintiff or a clear, legal duty to act or desist, requiring no exercise of discretion on the part of the defendant". People v Bland, 52 Mich App 649, 656; 218 NW2d 56 (1974), held that a convicted criminal has a right to medical treatment while in prison and that denial of such treatment violates the Eighth Amendment protections against cruel and unusual punishment. Therefore mandamus under GCR 1963, 712 is the proper procedure for a prisoner seeking medical attention.

=== CASE 2226242 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:04.382762+00 ===

22 Ill.2d 162 (1961)
174 N.E.2d 820
THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF ILLINOIS, Defendant in Error,
v.
THEODORE ROBINSON, Plaintiff in Error.
No. 35763.
Supreme Court of Illinois.
Opinion filed May 19, 1961.
*163 LEAH I. BROCK, of Chicago, (ALICE D. JOHNS, of counsel) for plaintiff in error.
WILLIAM G. CLARK, Attorney General, of Springfield, and DANIEL P. WARD, State's Attorney, of Chicago, (FRED G. LEACH, Assistant Attorney General, and JOHN T. GALLAGHER, and LEO F. POCH, Assistant State's Attorneys, of counsel,) for the People.
Judgment affirmed.
Mr. JUSTICE DAILY delivered the opinion of the court:
At a bench trial in the criminal court of Cook County, the defendant, Theodore Robinson, was convicted of murdering Flossie Mae Ward and was sentenced to the penitentiary *164 for the term of his natural life. Upon writ of error he now contends that: (1) he was denied due process of law when the trial court failed, of its own volition, to summon a jury to determine his sanity at the time of trial; (2) the People failed to overcome the proof that he was insane at the time the murder was committed; and (3) his constitutional rights were further violated when the court refused to permit him to subpoena a material witness.
The decedent had known defendant since 1955 and had lived with him as his wife for some time prior to the homicide, despite the fact she was then legally married to another man. Defendant called regularly at the Chicago restaurant where decedent was employed as a night waitress and usually escorted her home from work. Approximately one week before the murder, the decedent's legal husband also appeared at the restaurant and the two men had a heated argument over the woman's affections. On the night of February 28, 1959, decedent was working as usual and at about 10:30 P.M. defendant entered the restaurant door with a revolver in his hand. He was admonished by decedent not to "start anything tonight," but according to those present defendant jumped over a counter, rushed towards the victim and fired into her body, inflicting wounds which caused her death.
Neddie Batts and Jim Hackman, other restaurant employees, testified they were present and saw defendant fire the fatal shots. Clarence Starr, a Chicago police officer, told of arresting defendant and finding the murder weapon in defendant's coat pocket shortly after the arrest, while another officer, Robert Breckenridge, testified as to the police lineup at which the eye witnesses had identified the defendant.
The defendant did not testify in his own behalf. However, his mother, Willie Peterson, related he had been struck in the head with a brick when he was seven years old and thereafter "acted a little peculiar but not enough *165 that I took time out to see about him because I had to work." She further stated defendant had entered the military service in 1945 and that, on one occasion while home on furlough, he had kicked a hole in a family bar for no apparent reason. She said he was sullen and frequently complained of headaches after he returned from military service, that he would not consult a doctor, and that he was admitted to the Kankakee State Hospital in 1951 where he remained some six to seven weeks. About a year later, while separated from his wife, defendant fatally shot their baby and attempted suicide, after which he was tried and confined to the penitentiary until September, 1956. Thereafter, according to his mother, he became involved in many fights and she signed complaints against him in 1958 and February, 1959, but he was not arrested by the police. Based upon such facts, it was her opinion that defendant was insane and didn't know right from wrong. On cross-examination she testified that her son started drinking heavily after he got out of the service and that when he acted strangely, sometimes he would be drinking and sometimes not.
A friend of the family, Alice Moore, also testified to the occasion when defendant was home on furlough from the service, fourteen years before the trial, and said that she observed the hole he had kicked in the bar, and that when she tried to talk to him he either sat with his head down staring at the floor or looked at her glassy-eyed. Based upon the incident, the witness expressed an opinion that defendant is insane "when he is in those moods."
Defendant's grandfather, William Langham, testified that the former had not been right since he got out of the service, that he often walked away abruptly from his work as a painter and appeared in a daze, and that on one occasion defendant had quarrelled with his wife (defendant's) and threatened to burn her clothing. He said he had seen defendant a few days before the murder of Flossie Mae Ward, that he noticed nothing unusual, and that defendant *166 was then just giddy as always, "carrying on a little fun." It was his opinion that defendant was insane and that he had been partly insane at all times.
Helen Calhoun, defendant's aunt, stated she had observed unusual conduct on the part of defendant just prior to his admittance to the State Hospital at which time he was "stary-eyed" and afraid someone was going to kill him and the witness. She also related that defendant had shot the baby in her apartment and that, just prior to that crime, he was sick, prancing, nervous, and "just staring wild." The witness also testified defendant had lived in her house from November, 1956, to January, 1957, and was very nervous during that period. Based upon the incidents to which she testified, it was her opinion that defendant was presently mentally sick.
The medical record from the Kankakee State Hospital, which was admitted into the record by stipulation, set forth that defendant had been drinking heavily when admitted; imagined he heard voices and saw snakes, elephants and other animals, and thought he was going to be physically harmed. The record further indicated that defendant thereafter gained insight into his condition, tried to cooperate, and that he had recovered from his illness when discharged. Also noted in the report was that defendant had kicked the hole in his mother's bar because she had refused to give him money. It was also stipulated that defendant was adjudged sane by a restoration proceeding in 1953, and that if Dr. William Haines, director of the Behavior Clinic of the Criminal Court of Cook County, was called as a witness, he would testify that defendant knew the nature of the murder charge against him and was able to co-operate with his counsel in the defense to such charge.
The trial, adjudication, or sentence of a person charged with a criminal offense, while insane, violates his constitutional rights and is also expressly prohibited by statute. (People v. Bender, 20 Ill.2d 45; Ill. Rev. Stat. 1959, chap. *167 38, par. 593.) We have thus held that if, before or during trial, facts are brought to the attention of the court, either from its own observation or by suggestion of counsel, which raise a bona fide doubt as to a defendant's present sanity, it becomes the duty of the court to impanel a jury to determine whether the accused is capable of understanding the nature of the charges against him and of co-operating with his counsel. (People v. Burson, 11 Ill.2d 360.) Bona fide doubt is not necessarily raised, however, by the mere revelation that an accused had been declared a psychopath some years prior, (People v. Zerba, 20 Ill.2d 269,) nor by a prior adjudication of mental illness, unless it appears that the insanity was of a permanent and continuing nature. (People v. DePompeis, 410 Ill. 587.) Similarly, depravity of character, abandoned habits, or the commission of an atrocious crime are not in themselves evidence of insanity. People v. Spencer, 264 Ill. 124.
In the present case there was no request by defendant or his counsel for a sanity hearing, nor in our opinion were the facts brought to the attention of the court such as would raise doubt of defendant's sanity and require the court to hold an inquiry into his mental condition. There is no proof in this record that the traits, conduct and crimes of defendant are true manifestations of insanity, and it cannot escape notice that the conclusions of the defense witnesses that he was insane at the time of trial were based largely upon incidents occurring many years before the trial. Such incidents had little, if any, relevancy to defendant's condition at the time of trial and must be viewed in light of the witnesses' family relationship with defendant. Although the court was aware that defendant had spent six or seven weeks in a mental hospital eight years prior to trial, the medical records indicated his illness was a temporary condition resulting in part from alcoholism, he was discharged from the hospital as recovered from his condition, and, in fact, defendant was fully restored by a proceeding six years *168 prior to his trial. Furthermore, in considering whether any duty devolved upon the court, it is to be remembered that the court had before it a stipulation that the director of the court's Behavior Clinic would testify that defendant knew the nature of the charges against him and was capable of co-operating with counsel in the defense against such charges.
In the latter respect, the record reflects several instances where defendant displayed his ability to assist in the conduct of his defense in a reasonable and rational manner. Typical instances of when defendant displayed mental alertness, as well as understanding and knowledge of the proceeding, appear in his remarks to the court as follows: "Your honor, they were on the State's witness list and the State said they have several witnesses. They produced two. For what reason, I don't know, but I am on trial here and I would like to be given every consideration, and I would like that the court be adjourned until tomorrow morning  to give me time to confer with counsel for the calling of witnesses." Again, when discussing witnesses with the court, defendant said: "Well, the police are contending that the clothes they have found in Moore's apartment was mine. That is the reason at the beginning of trial, I asked the attorney to have a pre-trial preliminary to determine the admissibility and validity of the evidence that the State was intending to use against me."
Under all the circumstances, we are of the opinion that the court violated no duty, and denied defendant no constitutional right, when it did not, of its own volition, require a sanity hearing.
Turning next to defendant's contention that the People failed to overcome the proof that he was insane at the time the homicide in this case was committed, it is a basic principle that the law presumes all men to be sane and, in the absence of contrary proof, that no duty rests upon the prosecution to produce evidence in such respect. However, if *169 the defense brings forth proof which is sufficient to create reasonable doubt and overcome the presumption of sanity, it is then incumbent upon the prosecution to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused had sufficient mentality at the time of the crime to distinguish and choose between right and wrong. (People v. Patlak, 363 Ill. 40; People v. Haupris, 396 Ill. 208.) Defendant's present contention assumes that his proof raised a reasonable doubt as to his sanity. However, as we have already pointed out, we do not agree that this is so, particularly in view of the absence of proof that his prior mental condition, induced largely by alcoholism, was of a permanent or continuing nature. Considering the entire record, it is our opinion that the evidence presented by the defense was insufficient to overcome the presumption of defendant's sanity. This being so, it was unnecessary for the prosecution to affirmatively prove it. People v. Jones, 6 Ill.2d 252; People v. DePompeis, 410 Ill. 587.
We likewise find no merit to defendant's remaining contention that the court "refused" to permit him to subpoena a material witness. It appears from the testimony of police officers that defendant's gun was recovered from the pocket of a coat found in an apartment occupied by one Fred Moore, and that defendant had admitted the coat was his. At the conclusion of the People's evidence and before any defense testimony was given, defendant stated to the court that he had requested his attorney to subpoena Moore and his wife but that counsel had failed to do so. Upon being questioned by the court, defendant admitted he had no idea as to what the witnesses would testify to, but that he nevertheless wanted them to be subpoenaed. When the court pointed out that a subpoena would not issue unless it was known what the witnesses would testify to, defendant's counsel intervened to state that he did not recall being asked to subpoena the Moores and proposed that he would discuss the matter with his client at a forthcoming recess. Defendant *170 agreed, and we do not find that the request was ever pursued further. The controlling statute does provide that it shall be the duty of the clerk to issue subpoenas upon request, (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1959, chap. 38, par. 735,) but we find nothing in this record to indicate that such duty was violated or that defendant was refused the benefits of the statute. There was never a showing made that the witnesses desired were material to the defense and, furthermore, for all that appears in the record, defendant's counsel considered the matter and concluded that the witnesses were neither necessary nor helpful to the defense of the case. Under the circumstances, defendant has no cause to complain. Cf. People v. Gambino, 12 Ill.2d 29.
The judgment of the criminal court of Cook County is affirmed.
Judgment affirmed.

=== CASE 2226244 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:04.416716+00 ===

22 Ill.2d 52 (1961)
174 N.E.2d 191
THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF ILLINOIS, Defendant in Error,
v.
JAMES O'LEARY, Plaintiff in Error.
No. 36065.
Supreme Court of Illinois.
Opinion filed March 29, 1961.
Rehearing denied May 17, 1961.
*53 JULIUS LUCIUS ECHELES, of Chicago, for plaintiff in error.
WILLIAM L. GUILD, Attorney General, of Springfield, and BENJAMIN S. ADAMOWSKI, State's Attorney, of Chicago, (FRED G. LEACH, Assistant Attorney General, and FRANCIS X. RILEY, and JAMES R. THOMPSON, Assistant State's Attorneys, of counsel,) for the People.
Judgment affirmed.
Mr. JUSTICE HOUSE delivered the opinion of the court:
Frank Esposito, Raymond Derring and James O'Leary were jointly indicted and tried by jury in the criminal court of Cook County for the crime of robbery. They were found guilty and judgment was entered on the verdict sentencing each of them to a term of not less than ten nor more than twenty years in the penitentiary. James O'Leary individually prosecutes a writ of error in this court contending that there was insufficient evidence to sustain the jury's verdict.
On December 8, 1958, Mrs. Louise Prevenas lived in an apartment over a tavern she operated at 8690 Vincennes Street in Chicago. In this neighborhood the north-south streets, from east to west, are Vincennes, Sangamon, Morgan *54 and Ashland; the east-west streets, from north to south, are 85th, 86th, 86th Place and 87th. The tavern building faces east on Vincennes Street between 86th Place and 87th Street and has an alley running west from the rear of the tavern which crosses Sangamon and continues on to Morgan Street.
About four o'clock in the morning, Mrs. Prevenas was awakened when a man entered her apartment and told her it was a hold-up. It was dark so she could not see him. She heard one or more others in the apartment and one tied her hands and the other her feet. They took her mink coat, jewelry, wrist watch and $815 in coins. Her screams were heard by a neighbor who arose and went downstairs to investigate. He saw two men, one wearing a checkered ski cap, taking liquor out of the back room of the tavern. He immediately notified a nearby policeman who radioed an alarm about the robbery and then returned with the neighbor to the tavern.
After talking with Mrs. Prevenas, the two went into the alley where they found three or four sets of footprints clearly visible in the fresh snow. The tracks led them west down the alley away from the rear of the tavern. At Sangamon Street, one set of tracks turned north and led to a place where fresh tire tracks indicated that an automobile had been driven from a parking space at the curb. The remaining three sets of tracks proceeded west across Sangamon and led down the alley toward Morgan Street.
In the meantime, two more patrolmen who heard the broadcast of the robbery, drove south on Morgan Street. As they crossed 85th Street they saw three men run out of the same alleyway into which the first patrolman had been led by the tracks from the rear of Mrs. Prevenas' tavern. One was wearing an overcoat and railroad cap, the second an overcoat and checkered ski cap, and the third a suburban coat but no hat. The three men ran south on Morgan and west into another alley about fifty feet south *55 of 87th Street. The two patrolmen drove their car into the same alley, parked and then pursued the men on foot. They were able to follow the fresh tracks in the snow to the next north-south alleyway where two sets of foot prints turned to the north and the third turned to the south. As they followed the two sets of tracks going north, they caught sight of two of the men running north and captured Esposito and Derring near 85th and Ashland Streets. When captured, Esposito was wearing a suburban coat but no hat and Derring was wearing a dark blue overcoat and checkered ski cap.
As the first two patrolmen chased the two men running north, they alerted two other policemen who were patrolling west on 87th Street. The latter then drove their car into the alley behind the first patrol car, parked and followed the single set of footprints from the point where they separated from the other two. They were able to follow this single set of footprints in the snow into and out of several passageways until they found and apprehended the defendant, James O'Leary, lying on the ground under the rear porch of one of the houses. When arrested, O'Leary was wearing a dark overcoat and dark hat. Meanwhile, the patrolman who had broadcast the alarm found the loot taken from Mrs. Prevenas in the alleyway not far from the rear of the tavern.
The defendant contends that the State's case is purely circumstantial and insufficient to produce a reasonable and moral certainty that he participated in the crime. He says that the only fact which can be relied upon is that he was running when first observed two blocks away from the scene.
That fact is supplemented by the uncontradicted testimony of the several officers. From the tracks in the newly-fallen snow, the three men were backtracked from the point where they were seen running together to the place where the loot was found and from thence to the tavern. Defendant *56 was with the two men, one of whom wore a distinctive checkered ski cap similar to that worn by one of the men in the tavern. His trail was followed from the point of separation to the porch under which he was apprehended.
Defendant's statement that two men only were in the apartment is not borne out by the record. Mrs. Prevenas heard more than one but could not say just how many there were. Similarly, the argument that only two men were seen about the tavern indicates only that no more than two men were seen together at any one time and the number of tracks refutes the two-men theory.
The foregoing facts, coupled with the inferences to be drawn from defendant's flight and hiding under a porch at the hour of 4:30 on a cold morning, justified the verdict. "(T)he requirement that the defendant's guilt be proved beyond a reasonable doubt does not mean that the jury must disregard the inferences that flow normally from the evidence before it. * * * The jury was not required to search out a series of potential explanations compatible with innocence, and elevate them to the status of a reasonable doubt." People v. Russell, 17 Ill.2d 328, 331.
The judgment of the criminal court of Cook County is affirmed.
Judgment affirmed.

=== CASE 9741122 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:49:49.025891+00 ===

*2Sheran, Chief Justice.
Appeal from a judgment of the Hennepin County District Court holding that respondent North Star Research Institute is exempt from personal property taxes assessed in 1968, 1969, and 1970. The trial court determined that during these years respondent was operating as a nonprofit corporation for charitable purposes within the meaning of former Minn. Const, art. 9, § 1, now Minn. Const, art. 10, § 11 and Minn. St. 272.02, subd. 1(6).2 We reverse.
*3The significant facts stipulated by the parties can be found in State v. North Star Research & Development Institute, 294 Minn. 56, 200 N. W. 2d 410 (1972). Since the decision in that case, North Star Eesearch and Development Institute has been renamed North Star Eesearch Institute. The title of this case is amended to reflect the change, and the corporation will be called “North Star” in this opinion.
North Star has failed to sustain its burden of proving entitlement to exemption.3 In summary, we hold:
(1) To be exempt from taxation, property must be put to a use which is purely charitable and public;
(2) A significant part of the use to which the property of North Star is- put involves applied research for private business enterprises engaged in business for profit;
(3) Any private business contracting with North Star to conduct research acquires an exclusive proprietary interest in the information developed, which it can use to its advantage in the market place and which, if it sees fit, it can preclude others from using by obtaining patents;
(4) The fact that a substantial part of the research is done for governmental agencies, Federal and state, does not make North Star “purely” charitable and public;
(5) If the research done for private enterprise is so minimal in comparison to the total as to be of no legal consequence, the record fails to demonstrate it.
North Star was organized in 1963 in response to a recognized need for a center in this area capable of providing applied re*4search services. It has functioned as a nonprofit corporation, although its capital resources came principally from the Minneapolis Area Development Corporation (a business corporation which was dissolved when its assets, valued in excess of $3,-000,000 and consisting mainly of approximately 2,100 acres of real estate in Scott County, were transferred to North Star) and from other persons, including corporations, who had formed MADC. As a result of these contributions, plus an additional $800,000 given by other individuals and corporations, North Star received donated capital in excess of $4,300,000. All but a small part of the real estate has been or is being developed and marketed commercially. The “members” of North Star, comparable in position to the shareholders in a business corporation, are 12 persons of distinction, none of whom are paid directly or indirectly for their efforts. The “directors” of North Star, selected by the members, are educators, professional persons, representatives of the business community, and other community leaders, who serve without compensation and receive no special benefit from North Star.
The applied research produced by North Star, measured in dollars, has reached an annual level exceeding $1,000,000. Of this amount, more than half has been performed at the request of Federal and state governmental agencies, but in number the clients served are mostly private corporations. North Star’s clients define the objective for the applied research to be carried out pursuant to agreement and pay a fee for the services, fixed usually at cost plus 8 percent. Of determinative significance, the research work product becomes the property of the client requesting it — an interest which may be, and in some instances has been, protected by patent application. Examples of research projects conducted at the request of business concerns by North Star include: The discovery of commercial uses for waste products ; the discovery of devices to control rodents in grain storage facilities; the analysis and refinement of billing and accounting procedures; the use of ultrasound to improve the quality of sugar *5beet seeds; the development of a device to improve the function of a filtering system.
Given these facts, the issue becomes: Is a nonprofit corporation engaged in applied research which to a significant degree makes its services available to private enterprises, who pay for the research defined and requested by them on a cost-plus basis and acquire ownership of the information developed as a result of the undertaking, entitled to tax-exemption status under the provisions of Minnesota’s Constitution and statutes ?
We accept for purposes of analysis these propositions:
(1) The research facility could not function without the initial donations, of capital made by persons who are concerned with the economic development of the area and who receive no significant special benefit because of the existence of the facility.
(2) For the most part, the research center realizes no profit; any profits which are generated are used to improve the research potential of North Star.
(3) The individuals who manage and control North Star do so without pecuniary reward and are motivated primarily by an interest in improving the economic climate and general well-being of the area which North Star serves.
Our decisions give us no controlling precedent or direction by clear analogy. In State v. North Star Research & Development Institute, 294 Minn. 56, 200 N. W. 2d 410 (1972), the majority of the court limited their decision to a holding that North Star was a nonprofit corporation and therefore entitled to a tax exemption available to nonprofit corporations, leasing real estate owned by public schools for limited periods of time. It is clear that the dissenters rejected the theory that North Star was a “purely public charity,” but the majority reserved judgment on the question and it remains open for decision.
For the most part, the decisions of this court have dealt with organizations which were engaged in charitable undertakings in the traditional sense — care for the sick, the aged, and the in*6firm;4 education of young people;5 hospital care for the poor;6 facilities to promote the moral and educational welfare of youth;7 institutions for religious education.8 In these cases, assessment has been made of such factors as- (1) whether the stated purpose of the undertaking is to be helpful to others without immediate expectation of material reward; (2) whether the entity involved is supported by donations and gifts in whole or in part; (3) whether the recipients of the “charity” are required to pay for the assistance received in whole or in part; (4) whether the income received from gifts and donations and charges to users produces a profit to the charitable institution; (5) whether the beneficiaries of the “charity” are restricted or unrestricted and, if restricted, whether the class of persons to whom the charity is made available is one having a reasonable relationship to the charitable objectives; (6) whether dividends, in form or substance, or assets upon dissolution are available to private interests.
The tendency of our decisions has been to sustain exemption where these traditionally “charitable” objectives are being furthered, so long as no individual profits from ownership of the “charity” are realized and so long as the undertaking is not a subterfuge by which the needs of a select and favored few are accommodated.9
These undertakings have one characteristic in common which *7serves to distinguish them from the case at hand: In none can it be said that a person or corporation gains a profit or commercial advantage as the immediate and intended direct consequence of the “charity.”
In all of these situations except those involving religious education, where constitutional limitations apply, the activity involved is one which our state and Federal governments have historically supported with public funds. Government programs for relief of poverty, care for the sick and aged, and the education and training of young people have been long and widely accepted. It can be said with respect to activities that are traditionally “charitable” that ultimately people will benefit in an economic sense from the charitable undertaking. Persons relieved from poverty and illness and the restraints of old age demand less of, and contribute more to, the economic well-being of a community than do those who are not so relieved. A person who receives the benefits of an education, whether theoretical or practical, may add more to the well-being of a society than one who is not so advantaged. It has been recognized that religious education and training add to the moral strength of a community.
There are distinctive characteristics of North Star which make its situation so different from those of charities in the traditional sense that reference to general statements made in our previous cases are of limited value.
For one thing, the objective of North Star is to put the benefits of research to the purposes of commerce. North Star succeeds in its goal only if through its research facilities commercial enterprises secure information which can be put immediately and directly to profitable use. Its concern is not to develop knowledge in the abstract, with possible indirect benefit to private enterprise, but instead to apply research tools to the particular problems of a particular business enterprise for the specific purpose of developing data or processes which can be turned into a profit for the beneficiary of the information. It is true of course that a public advantage is achieved ultimately whenever *8a process is discovered which makes it possible to produce goods or services more efficiently and economically than would otherwise be the case. But this public benefit is an indirect one and is not the immediate objective of the undertaking.
A second characteristic of North Star, and the critical one, is that information developed as. a result of the research is not made available to the public generally or to industry generally. Instead, the knowledge becomes the exclusive property of the profit-making enterprise for which it was researched. It is appropriate, and probably necessary, that this exclusive entitlement to the product of the research be granted to the business organization which requested and, in part at least, paid for it. But a process which enables one business to improve its competitive position with respect to others in the same field cannot be said to be a “charity” as that term has been generally understood, even in its broadest sense. And the purpose of improving directly the profit-making potential of a private business is not a “public purpose” in a sense comparable to such purposes as the relief of poverty and sickness, the general dissemination of knowledge, and the encouragement of religion, science, and the arts. “Charity” in the strict sense and applied research, whether motivated directly and immediately by humanitarian considerations or considerations of profit, are both important to the social welfare. The difference lies in the fact that applied research immediately and directly related to profit-making activities is better able than purely charitable activities to share the burdens of taxation.
The question remains whether principles enunciated by this court and others permit a determination that an entity dealing with nonprofit activities for a purpose essentially economic constitutes a purely public charity notwithstanding the significant differences delineated. We address, ourselves, then, to illustrative cases bearing on the question.
Minnesota cases involving issues similar to the present one are: State v. Evans Scholars Foundation, 278 Minn. 74, 153 *9N. W. 2d 148 (1967); In re Junior Achievement of Greater Minneapolis, Inc. 271 Minn. 385, 135 N. W. 2d 881 (1965); Camping & Education Foundation v. State, 282 Minn. 245, 164 N. W. 2d 369 (1969); Madonna Towers v. Commr. of Taxation, 283 Minn. 111, 167 N. W. 2d 712: (1969); and State v. United Church Homes, Inc. 292 Minn. 323, 195 N. W. 2d 411 (1972).
In the Evans Scholars Foundation case, exemption was denied because the educational scholarship program involved was conditioned upon the recipient’s past employment as a caddy at a limited number of golf courses. We said (278 Minn. 79, 153 N. W. 2d 151): “It is a restriction which, in our opinion, serves a private rather than a public objective,” and upon that ground exemption was denied.
In the Junior Achievement case, we had for consideration an educational program — traditionally favored — and exemption was allowed even though the study program involved training in practical business affairs for young people. We emphasized that the program was available to all persons between the ages of 15 and 19, and that no profit motive was involved in its operation.
In the Camping and Education Foundation case, exemption was denied to a nonprofit corporation operating a boys’ camp in northern Minnesota. The court recognized that recreational facilities for young people serve a commendable purpose but, noting that the bulk of the camp’s income came from tuition charges made to campers, rejected the exemption.
In the Madonna Towers and the United Church Homes cases, exemption was denied to homes for the aged, also a traditionally favored form of charitable activity, because the charges made to residents by the nonprofit corporations involved gave a preferred status to wealthy persons.
While it can be said that each of these cases deals with a situation where economic and charitable motivations were intertwined, none of them bears directly on the problem presented by the unique facts of this case.
*10Of the cases from other jurisdictions which have been called to our attention, the one most directly in point is Battelle Memorial Institute v. Dunn, 148 Ohio St. 53, 73 N. E. 2d 88 (1947), where the Supreme Court of Ohio held that realty was not used exclusively for “charitable” purposes when it was used for extensive research for compensation for industrial corporations and others and when the results of the research were primarily for the pecuniary advantage of those for whom the research was performed. The stated purpose of the Battelle Institute was “the encouragement of creative and research work and the making of discoveries and inventions in connection with the metallurgy of coal, iron, steel, zinc and their allied industries * * *.” 148 Ohio St. 55, 73 N. E. 2d 90. Capital funds for the project came principally from bequests. A principal source of the institute’s income was endowments, the balance coming from payments made by industrial concerns and governmental agencies for “sponsored research.” The charges made for this research were on a cost-plus basis. The Ohio court noted (148 Ohio St. 58, 73 N. E. 2d 91):
“The institute, in conducting this ‘sponsored research,’ often makes discoveries for the sponsors which are valuable and patentable. Generally, the sponsors procure patents and reap whatever resulting benefits there may be.”
The institute was a nonprofit corporation, but receipts from sponsored research approximated and sometimes exceeded, costs of operation.
The work of the Battelle Institute was not confined to “sponsored reasearch”; technical reports and scientific treatises were distributed generally to individuals and institutions having an interest in the subject matter. Nevertheless, the court concluded (148 Ohio St. 60, 73 N. E. 2d 92):
“There can be little doubt that the institute’s real property, which it seeks to have exempted from taxation, is being devoted in part to activities which may properly be denoted as ‘chari*11table.’ Generally, the dissemination of knowledge for the edification and improvement of mankind is regarded as a charitable object. However, under the will of Gordon Battelle, providing for the institute, he plainly stated that it should be conducted in furtherance of the interests and to serve the ends of designated industries, which certainly would not constitute a charitable purpose. In practice, the institute is being operated in large measure as a business for the benefit and financial advantage of commercial enterprises. The ‘sponsored research’ is financed by these commercial enterprises and: they are the direct beneficiaries of what is produced by the institute for them. Therefore, the real property in issue cannot fairly be said to be used exclusively for charitable purposes within the contemplation of the statute. * * *
‡ ‡ ‡ ‡
“Where the use of property is wholly for the promotion and advancement of learning, science and the useful arts generally, that use is deemed charitable; but where the use is essentially for the private and pecuniary advantage of a class, such as industrial organizations, the contrary is true.” (Italics supplied in part.)
In our judgment, the reasoning in the Battelle case applies here and controls decision.10
In Boston Chamber of Commerce v. Assessors of Boston, 315 Mass. 712, 54 N. E. 2d 199, 152 A. L. R. 174 (1944), it was held that a chamber of commerce, the dominant purpose of which was to promote business and trade and to foster good business practices and relations in the community with a view to increased profits as well as public benefit, was not a “charitable” institution within the meaning of a tax-exemption statute. In that deci*12sion, the court noted (315 Mass. 718, 54 N. E. 2d 202, 152 A. L. R. 179) :
“Notwithstanding the law’s, acknowledgment of the manifold new forms in which charity may find expression, the more remote the objects and methods become from the traditionally recognized objects and methods the more care must be taken to preserve sornd principles and to avoid unwarranted exemptions from the burdens of government. This statement becomes especially pertinent where the alleged charity operates in the fields of trade and commerce. * * * A foundation for industrial research for the sole purpose of discovering and making generally available more efficient methods of production and distribution might be a charity. But of the multitude of trade organizations and associations, existing today in all branches of industry and commerce it is believed that few could pass the test.” (Italics supplied.)11
In American Institute for Economic Research v. Assessors of Great Barrington, 324 Mass. 509, 87 N. E. 2d 186 (1949), exemption from taxation was denied to a corporation whose purposes included conducting scientific research in economics and disseminating the results.
In Association of Bar of City of New York v. Lewisohn, 34 N. Y. 2d 143, 313 N. E. 2d 30 (1974), it was held that real property belonging to a nonprofit corporation which had as its primary purpose the promotion, exploration, and research principally in the earth’s sciences was not entitled to statutory exemption from real estate taxes available to nonprofit corporations organized or conducted exclusively for charitable purposes. In denying the claimed exemption, the court said, with respect to the Explorers Club (34 N. Y. 2d 154, 313 N. E. 2d 36):
“* * * To be sure, it has charitable and educational attributes *13and functions. Indeed, the educational aspects of its current endeavors — for example, the field science lecture series — are laudatory and not insubstantial. But they are, in the final analysis, adjunctive to its primary scientific purpose — to promote exploration and research principally in the earth sciences. Similarly, the aspects of its operation properly characterizable as charitable-are incidental to this overriding purpose. That this organization confers a public benefit is not to be denied. But, again, public benefit is not the test of qualification for exemption. And while research oriented activities may result in an educational benefit, the Explorers Club is not organized and conducted primarily for educational purposes in the traditional sense of that term.” (Italics supplied.)
Institute for Trend Research v. Brown, 100 N. H. 286, 124 A. 2d 195 (1956), involved a declaratory judgment action to determine exemption from unemployment compensation contribution liability. The statutory question was whether taxpayer was a corporation (100 N. H. 290, 124 A. 2d 197) “organized and operated exclusively for * * * scientific * * * or educational purposes * * * no part of the net eárnings of which inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual.” In holding that the statute did not accord exemption, the court said (100 N. H. 290, 124 A. 2d 198):
“* * * It appears * * * that ‘no substantial part of the income * * * has been used for research or other services contemplated in * * *’ the exemption section of the statute, * * * and that ‘less than 10 per cent of the income * * * has been used for research outside of the specific research undertaken for private business organizations.’ Thus more than 90 per cent of the * * * research was paid for by and became the exclusive property of the private business organizations for whom the work was performed.
í¡: % ‡ %
«* * * [j]t may have been necessary for [taxpayer] to *14operate the way it did * * * but the small percentage of its income devoted to non-private research makes it difficult to reconcile its practice with the statutory requirement ***.*** The total activities * * * were directed fundamentally to private research for scientific industries rather than to basic trend research available generally to the public. Here, * * * there was a ‘commercial hue permeating petitioner’s organization’ * * (Italics supplied.)12
American Concrete Institute v. Michigan State Tax Comm. 12 Mich. App. 595, 163 N. W. 2d 508 (1969), also involved considerations similar to the case at bar. In denying a tax exemption available to “educational and scientific institutions,” the court said (12 Mich. App. 606, 163 N. W. 2d 513):
“* * * The Institute’s services are principally for its members, which eventually will benefit the public, but are not the kind of services to the general public which were contemplated by the legislative enactment for tax exemption.”13
In South Dakota State Medical Assn. v. Jones, 82 S. D. 374, 381, 146 N. W. 2d 725, 729 (1966), the South Dakota Supreme Court, in denying exemption to a medical association, wrote:
“* * * It fairly appears from the evidence that there are elements of personal advantages and profit to members of the association that differ from those inuring to the public. The activities and expenditures of the association do not sustain its claim that the property is used exclusively — that is, primarily— for a benevolent or other purpose warranting exemption.”
See, also, Massachusetts Medical Soc. v. Assessors of Boston, 340 Mass. 327, 164 N. E. 2d 325 (1960).
*15There are other decisions which have allowed tax exemption in similar situations to organizations having commercial aspects, but in each instance emphasis was placed on the circumstances that the data, information, and publicity generated by the organization claiming tax exemption were made available to the people generally, or at least such segments of the public as might have an interest in the subject matter.
In American College of Surgeons v. Korzen, 36 Ill. 2d 340, 224 N. E. 2d 7 (1967), the Illinois Supreme Court found the American College of Surgeons to be entitled to tax exemption under a statutory provision exempting realty “used for * * * charitable and beneficient purposes.” 36 Ill. 2d 347, 224 N. E. 2d 10. The funds used to operate the college came primarily from donations and membership dues. The library, the education programs, and the reports of experiments and research were made available to the medical profession and the public. No one acquired a proprietary interest in the medical research developed.
People ex rel. Hellyer v. Morton, 373 Ill. 72, 25 N. E. 2d 504 (1940), involved a foundation purportedly created “for practical scientific research work in horticulture and agriculture * * * by means of a large outdoor arboretum.” 373 Ill. 73, 25 N. E. 2d 505. Results of research were to be publicized to increase general knowledge. The foundation’s purposes were followed. No' sales were made and there was. no income, other than a bulletin published at less than cost. A charitable exemption was allowed.14
In American Soc. for Testing and Materials v. Board of Revision of Taxes, 423 Pa. 530, 225 A. 2d 557 (1967), the nonprofit corporation’s purpose, carried out by technical committees doing research and writing, was “promotion of knowledge of the materials of engineering and the standardization of specifications and methods testing.” 423 Pa. 533, 225 A. 2d 558. Industry, *16government, and education contributed resource scientists. The claim was that the society was a mere “business pool.” Achievements included a wide variety of improvements in products; better education; work for various governments; and savings to taxpayers. Members, of the society included those profiting from the work. It appeared that everything done by this taxpayer was either without charge or at less than cost and that it operated at a loss. Exemption was allowed.
Of the cases from other jurisdictions we have reviewed, none appears more in point than Battelle Memorial Institute v. Dunn, 148 Ohio St. 53, 73 N. E. 2d 88 (1947), where the exemption was denied upon the ground that the results of the research were primarily for the pecuniary advantage of those for whom the research was performed. If it is possible to derive a principle from the other cases mentioned, it would be that a claim for tax exemption by an organization engaged in research in whole or in part, may be viewed sympathetically by the courts, depending on whether the entity involved makes the product of its research efforts available to the public generally. If access to the information generated by the study and research is limited in whole or in significant part to the commercial advantage of the person receiving it, and that is the case here, exemption will probably be denied, particularly in situations where the determinative language is “a purely public charity” or words of like import.
Whether exemption would be allowed if the knowledge and discoveries generated by the applied research of an organization like North Star did not become the property of a significant number of its clients remains for decision when and if a case with such facts comes, before us. Our holding is limited to the proposition that the facts of this case do not justify exemption.
For the reasons stated in the special concurring opinion of Mr. Justice Kelly, the important tax exemption problem presented by this case is commended to the attention of the legislature, which has the power under our constitution to grant exemption *17in cases of this kind if, in its judgment, the public interest will be advanced by doing so.
Reversed.
The applicable constitutional provision is former art. 9, § 1. Prior to its November 3, 1970, amendment, it read, in pertinent part: “* * * Taxes shall be uniform upon the same class of subjects, and shall be levied and collected for public purposes, but public burying grounds, public school houses, public hospitals, academies, colleges, universities, and all seminaries of learning, all churches, church property and houses of worship, institutions of purely public charity, and public property used exclusively for any public purpose, shall be exempt from taxation * * The 1970 amendment added these words after “taxation”: “except as provided in this section.” Then, at the end of § 1, these words were also added: “The legislature may by law define or limit the property exempt under this section, other than churches, houses of worship, and property solely used for educational purposes by academies, colleges, universities and seminaries of learning.” The Minnesota Constitution was amended in the November 1974 general election, and the former art. 9, § 1, became art. 10, § 1. These grammatical changes were also made: “* * * Taxes shall be uniform upon the same class of subjects and shall be levied and collected for public purposes, but public burying grounds, public school houses, public hospitals, academies, colleges, universities, all seminaries of learning, all churches, church property, houses of worship, institutions of purely public charity, and public property used exclusively for any public purpose, shall be exempt from taxation except as provided in this section. * * * The legislature by law may define or limit the property exempt under this section other than churches, houses of worship, and property solely used for educational purposes by academies, colleges, universities and seminaries of learning.”
Minn. St. 272.02, subd. 1, provides in part: “Except as provided in *3other subdivisions of this section, all property described in this section to the extent herein limited shall be exempt from taxaton:
}ji % >}í jJí >|«
“(6) Institutions of purely public charity.”
In re Junior Achievement of Greater Minneapolis, Inc. v. State, 271 Minn. 385, 135 N. W. 2d 881 (1965).
In re Claim of Assembly Homes, Inc. v. Yellow Medicine County, 273 Minn. 197, 140 N. W. 2d 336 (1966).
In re Junior Achievement of Greater Minneapolis, Inc. 271 Minn. 385, 135 N. W. 2d 881 (1965).
See, County of Hennepin v. Brotherhood of Church of Gethsemane, 27 Minn. 460, 8 N. W. 595 (1881).
Christian Business Men’s Committee of Minneapolis v. State, 228 Minn. 549, 38 N. W. 2d 803 (1949).
County of Hennepin v. Grace, 27 Minn. 503, 8 N. W. 761 (1881).
In this context, the word “purely” means “wholly,” “solely,” and “exclusively.” State v. Willmar Hospital, Inc. 212 Minn. 38, 41, 2 N. W. 2d 564, 566 (1942).
In a later case, In re Bond Hill-Roselawn Hebrew School, 151 Ohio St. 70, 76, 84 N. E. 2d 270, 273 (1949), the Ohio Supreme Court characterized the Battelle case as one of a group of Ohio decisions “involving a substantial use for a purpose having a clear commercial aspect.”
Accord, Better Business Bureau v. United States, 326 U. S. 279, 66 S. Ct. 112, 90 L. ed. 67 (1945); People ex rel. Chamber of Commerce v. Mills, 188 Misc. 593, 65 N. Y. S. 2d 231 (1946), affirmed, 272 App. Div. 804, 71 N. Y. S. 2d 896 (1947).
Accord, American Medical Assn. v. Board of Review, 392 Ill. 614, 65 N. E. 2d 350 (1946); Consumers Research v. Evans, 128 N. J. L. 95, 24 A. 2d 390 (1942), affirmed, 132 N. J. L. 431, 40 A. 2d 662 (1945).
Accord, Engineering Soc. of Detroit v. City of Detroit, 308 Mich. 539, 14 N. W. 2d 79 (1944); Engineers and Scientists of Milwaukee, Inc. v. City of Milwaukee, 38 Wis. 2d 550, 157 N. W. 2d 572 (1968).
Cf. Rotch v. Emerson, 105 Mass. 431 (1870), where a bequest to trustees for a sum “to be by them applied for the promotion of agricultural or horticultural improvements, or other philosophical or philanthropic purposes, at their discretion,” was termed a charitable bequest.

=== CASE 9741123 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:49:49.031029+00 ===

Kelly, Justice
(concurring specially).
I concur in the majority decision because the main issue here is in a gray area and our cases have favored taxation rather than exemption. As I view the issue before this court, it could be decided either way, depending upon one’s personal views as to the desirability of promoting the economic development of the state at the expense, initially at least, of other taxpayers. Presumably, to the extent that the state’s economic development is enhanced by North Star’s presence in the area, any initial costs to other taxpayers may be more than replaced by the additional tax revenues generated by the increased economic activity. The weight that such factors should have in solving the problem at hand depends upon a variety of complex economic and political questions that could best be solved by the legislature. Indeed, that body was chosen by the people to determine the precise issue presented here.
We pointed this out in State v. North Star Research & Development Institute, 294 Minn. 56, 80, 200 N. W. 2d 410, 425 (1972) in these words:
“* * * Besides, it would be preferable to give the legislature an opportunity to limit or define the property of purely public charities that may have an exempt status, particularly in view of the fact that Minn. Const, art. 9, § 1, as amended November 3,1970, specifically gives the legislature power to limit or define the property of a purely public charity to be exempted from tax. See, L. 1969, c. 925.”
The factors that make it desirable for the legislature to define and thereby determine North Star’s status are not only complex but innumerable. A few of them should be mentioned as they are *18the bases for our having exercised judical restraint with the hope that the legislature would indicate its preference by action.
I would start with a short statement about the genesis of North Star and the reason for its creation. While we might accept this history at face value, the legislature might desire to question it in the arena of legislative hearings. In the first North Star case, we summarized this history:
“North Star’s genesis is found in a joint study conducted by Upper Midwest Research and Development Council (Upper Midwest) and the University of Minnesota. Upper Midwest was a nonprofit corporation organized to promote the economy of the area comprising the Ninth Federal Reserve District. The joint study was funded by a $850,000 grant from the Ford Foundation and by matching contributions of $220,000 raised by Upper Midwest and the University. The purpose of the study was ‘to help finance and develop a continuing economic study of the upper Midwest region.’ Pursuant to that goal, the study fostered a proposal for the organization of a research institute. While there are approximately a dozen nonprofit research centers located around' the country, none previously existed in the area comprising the Ninth Federal Reserve District.1 In June 1962, Upper Midwest resolved ‘jointly with the * * * University of Minnesota [to] take steps to incorporate * * * a research institute to be located in the Twin Cities metropolitan area.’
“The plans involving the research center came to the attention of certain officers of Minneapolis Area Development Corpora*19tion (MADC) in 1962. MADC, a profitmaking corporation, had been organized for the purpose of stimulating the economy by bringing new business in to the area.2 In 1956, pursuant to that goal, it had acquired from various landholders an industrial site in Scott County along the Minnesota River. In 1962, the site, known as Valley Industrial Park, contained approximately 2,100 acres having a cost basis of $710,063.15. By 1962, the fair market value of the industrial site was estimated by experienced appraisers to be over $5,000,000. This valuation was, however, subject to a discount to $3,534,250 if the land were to be sold to a single developer — even then, a gain in value of nearly 500 percent before taxes.
“The officers of MADC believed that the proposed research center served their objective of bringing new industry into the area. The president of MADC wrote a letter to MADC shareholders wherein he proposed that they donate the industrial site, their shares and debentures of MADC, and 75 percent of their tax savings to the research institute. The proposal, subsequently reduced to an agreement, provided that all shareholders except the Chicago & North Western Railway Company donate all of their stock and debentures. The railway, the largest MADC shareholder, received no tax benefit from the donation due to its lack of taxable income, but nonetheless it contributed 8,312 shares and sold its remaining 1,288 shares and its MADC debentures for approximately $300,000. This made the railroad North Star’s largest contributor. The contributors also agreed to pledge at least $700,000 in cash to support the initiation of the research center. Additionally, certain financial institutions made low-interest loans to the institute. Finally, several companies which were not MADC shareholders contributed cash to the research center. MADC then dissolved.”
*20As we pointed out in North Star, there are approximately a dozen research centers in the United States. We were then advised that two of them were substantially supported by state funds. We do not know how many of them were promoted and fostered by tax advantages. We do know that Battelle Memorial Institute apparently was not. Should the legislature, in order to promote this economic development of this state, give financial aid by a tax advantage to North Star? The policy of this state is indicated in part at least by Minn. St. 362.12, subd. 1(6), which provides that the Department of Economic Development shall conduct or encourage research designed among other things to develop new products, and industrial processes.1 The University of Minnesota has engaged in applied research in the fields of agriculture and mining, apparently thereby favoring research that will promote the economic wellbeing of the area. The taconite process developed by research at the University of Minnesota is perhaps the most shining example. That process probably was offered to any who would use it, while if developed by North Star the process would be confidential and given only to the person or corporate entity requesting and paying for the research. Where the process or product results from an idea for research and the research is paid for by the entrepreneur who furnishes the idea, it isn’t very realistic to assume that the research should be other than confidential. Without any payment for its services, North Star could not survive without substantial aid from the state. Thus, one pertinent question to be answered by the legislature would be — should the fact that the entrepreneur or enterprise paying for the research obtains the direct *21benefits of that research because of its confidentiality prevent an otherwise purely public charity from being that? It should be noted that in only 10 instances patents were applied for and in the overall affairs of North Star these items could be said to be de minimis. (Moreover, as knowledgable people are aware, many patents turn out to be invalid after protracted litigation.) Thus, it would seem that the confidential nature of the research will in many instances be dissipated as soon as the product is marketed or the services are sold.
Our majority opinion in large measure is based on the reasoning in the Battelle Institute case. While I agree that reasoning is persuasive, I must admit that the answers to the issue at hand are not as one-sided as the Battelle case could lead one to believe. We should not forget that without commercial enterprises there would be little charity of any kind. First of all, we should not assume that all applied research insures a profit, let alone an immediate profit. However, it is a reasonable assumption that in many instances applied research supplied by an institute such as North Star will result in a profit. When that happens, the government then becomes a partner in those profits through taxation and the corporation that risked its capital to acquire a process or product finds itself paying Federal and state income taxes, if it is a business of any consequence, of over 50 percent of its profits. If the owner-stockholders realize any return on their investment, then the government gets an additional share in the returns from the efforts of the research institute and the investment by industry. These taxes are used in large measure for welfare purposes and it is safe to say that today the government is the source of most social welfare. To the extent that applied research results in creating jobs and reducing unemployment, the need for charity by the government is reduced even as more taxes are generated from the pay of our work force. Should research institutes such as Battelle and North Star be given tax-exempt status because of the end result of their research *22or should tax-exempt status be withheld because businesses with risk capital may make a profit? How should courts equate this type of decision with one which would give a tax-exempt status to an entity engaged in fostering the performing arts or other cultural objectives? I suspect that if, in an appropriate case, a “nonprofit corporation” in the statutory meaning of that phrase were to engage in a business with the avowed purpose of creating jobs for minorities or the handicapped, we might conclude that such an entity would have a tax-exempt status solely because jobs were provided for the disadvantaged. Applied research, at least when successful, would provide employment although not just for the disadvantaged. Should this make that much difference?
It perhaps would be conceded that applied research will provide a better quality of living overall because of better products and services, less unemployment, and a greater financial ability on the part of the government to improve its welfare programs.
The main reason for deciding that a research institute such as North Star should not be defined as a public charity is that in the first instance the benefits that may accrue from the research go to the profit-making entity that pays for that research. Undoubtedly, if that research were made available to the public, we would not hesitate to declare North Star to be a public charity. I agree that this distinction is sufficient to sustain our decision, but would also agree that the line thus drawn could conceivably be drawn differently by the legislature. We should not forget that it is the research institute alone and not some of its customers that is to be or not to be a public charity. Legislative policy might dictate that the work of such an institute is of such benefit to this state that its performance should be extended or improved by a tax-exempt status.
If we compare the present case with the so-called Guthrie case,2 we can perhaps more clearly see that any definition of *23“purely public charity” now devised is inadequate and the ultimate decision is based on a philosophical view rather than any real legal reasoning.
In Guthrie, the issue presented was whether the Tyrone Guthrie Theatre Foundation and the Minnesota Theatre Company Foundation were purely public charities — thereby exempting their properties from taxation. In Guthrie, as in the instant case, it was conceded that the entities involved were nonprofit and the only substantial issue was whether or not their activities were such as to bring them within the scope of a purely public charity. There were some educational aspects involved in their activities, but in the main and perhaps by way of oversimplification, these entities were operating a classical repertory theater. As such, it unquestionably became a cultural resource of this state. The majority opinion commented on this aspect as follows:
“The charitable objectives of all of the Interveners can be conveniently summarized as the promotion of the public good by providing the community at large with the benefits of a valuable cultural resource without purpose of private profit. The presence of the Theatre and the imaginative use of its facilities have injected new vitality into the cultural life of our region and in so doing, have stimulated the minds and enriched the spirits of hundreds of thousands of our citizens.
“The value of the Theatre as a cultural resource is indicated by the direct uses to which it has been put during the first two seasons of its existence, by the way in which its policy of integrating its activities with other cultural resources of the community has already augmented, supplemented, and enhanced the programs of these other institutions by the ferment of new ideas that it has excited and by the admiration and regard it has been accorded locally, nationally and internationally. This is charity in the broad sense.”
*24In Guthrie the Tax Court decided that these activities were those of a purely public charity. This decision was not appealed to this court. The legislature has not seen fit to change that decision although approximately 10 years have elapsed.
I do not intend by these comments to imply that the Guthrie decision was erroneous. I merely wish to point out that if one were to ask whether furnishing this community with the classical performing arts was of greater benefit to the state than the furnishing of applied research with the resulting improvement of products and employment, and thus generation of taxes, I suspect most people would choose the applied research. Our legal decisions are not based on the same factors that legislators might use in their legislative processes. We might emphasize the history involved to a greater degree. In North Star, the majority opinion correctly points this out. Somehow anything with a commercial aspect doesn’t seem to fall into a “public charity” and yet from a benefit-to-mankind approach, some activities with that commercial aspect probably should. At least for the present, any steps in that direction should be taken by the legislature, and this is especially so where a compromise may be called for. As Mr. Chief Justice Burger observed in a dissenting opinion in Twentieth Century Music Corp. v. Aiken, 422 U. S. 151, 170, 95 S. Ct. 2040, 2051, 45 L. ed. 2d 84, 98 (1975):
“* * * In my view, we should bear in mind that ‘[our] ax, being a rule of law, must cut straight, sharp, and deep; and perhaps this is a situation that calls for the compromise of theory and for the architectural improvisation which only legislation can accomplish.’ ”
For the reasons stated, I concur in the majority opinion. I sincerely hope, however, that the legislature will give its attention to this matter and determine as a matter of policy, rather than on some finely drawn legal grounds, the tax status of North Star. A number of persons and entities have given their time and substantial assets to secure a research institute to improve the *25economic climate in Minnesota and the surrounding states and their efforts should be rewarded by at least having a complete ventilation of the issue at the legislative level.
Mr. Justice Scott took no part in the consideration or decision of this case.
“1 There are three large research centers: Battelle Memorial Institute in Columbus, Ohio; Stanford Research Institute in Menlo Park, California; and Illinois Technology Research Institute, Chicago, Illinois. Smaller ones include Southwest Research Institute, San Antonio, Texas; Midwest Research Institute, Kansas City Missouri; Southern Research Institute, Birmingham, Alabama; Research Triangle Institute, Durham, North Carolina; Franklin Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; Spindle-top Research Inc., Lexington, Kentucky; and Gulf South Research Institute, Baton Rouge Louisiana. The last two are substantially supported by their respective states.
“2 The impetus for MADC was the refusal of a major corporation to move to the Twin Cities area because of the lack of a large site for a plant.” 294 Minn. 58, 200 N. W. 2d 412.
Minn. St. 362.13(9), additionally empowers this department to aid the tourist and resort industry. The legislature has also seen fit to furLKo* aid the resort business if devoted to temporary and seasonal residential occupancy ror recreational purposes by creating a partial tax advantage. See, Otis Lodge, Inc. v. Commr. of Taxation, 295 Minn. 80, 206 N. W. 2d 3 (1972). Thus, the encouragement of certain commercial enterprises by the creation of tax advantages would not be innovative as far as legislative policy is concerned.
City of Minneapolis v. Commr. of Taxation, Minnesota Theatre Company Foundation, T. B. Walker Foundation, Incorporated, Tyrone Guthrie Theatre Foundation, and Walker Art Center, Intervenors, a *23Minnesota Tax Court case decided June 23, 1966 (Docket Nos. 1205, 1206, 1207).