=== CASE 2207552 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:20.825591+00 ===

802 N.E.2d 284 (2003)
345 Ill. App.3d 250
280 Ill.Dec. 359
Donald SHIPP, Cheryl Shipp, Theodore Rietveld, Joan Rietveld, Park City Mobile Homes, Inc., Plaintiffs-Appellees,
v.
COUNTY OF KANKAKEE, an Illinois Municipal Corporation, and Village of Bourbonnais, an Illinois Municipal Corporation, Defendants-Appellants.
No. 3-02-0642.
Appellate Court of Illinois, Third District.
December 16, 2003.
Rehearing Denied January 28, 2004.
*285 Edward D. Smith, State's Attorney, Brenda L. Gorski (argued), Kenneth B. Nelson, Assistant State's Attorneys, Kankakee, *286 for County of Kankakee, Village of Bourbonnais.
Michael P. O'Brien (argued), William F. Smith, O'Brien & Smith, P.C., Bradley, for Appellant.
Jack M. Siegel (argued), Holland & Knight, LLP, Chicago, J. Dennis Marek, Ackman, Marek & Boyd, Kankakee, for Park City Mobile Homes, Inc., Joan Rietveld, Theodore Rietveld, Cheryl Shipp, Donald Shipp.
Justice LYTTON delivered the opinion of the court:
Plaintiffs filed an application for a special use permit and variance with the County of Kankakee, in order to develop a manufactured home park. The county denied the permit, causing plaintiffs to file a complaint for declaratory judgment, claiming that the county unconstitutionally denied their special use permit application and that the village improperly denied them sewer service. The circuit court ordered the county to grant the permit application. We reverse.
Plaintiffs are the owners and contract purchasers of a 158 acre parcel of land in Kankakee County. Plaintiffs intended to develop the land into a manufactured home park containing nearly 700 residential sites. A manufactured home park is permitted as a special use in Kankakee County. Under the county zoning code, a party must file an application for a special use permit for any proposed manufactured home park construction.
The zoning code provides that applicants must include the following information in the permit application:
a. Name and address of applicant.
b. Location and legal description of the proposed manufactured home park.
c. Plans and specifications of the proposed manufactured home park development including but not limited to the following:
1. Map including area and dimensions of tract of land;
2. Number, location and size of home sites;
3. Location and width of public and private streets, roadways, and walks;
4. Location of all water, storm sewer and sanitary sewer lines, water supply, and refuse and sewage disposal facilities;
5. All buildings existing or to be constructed within the park;
6. Location of internal lighting and electrical systems. Kankakee County Zoning Ordinance § 6.03(U) (ratified May 11, 1999).
Plaintiffs applied for a special use permit. Their application was a sketch plan, i.e., a general drawing of the proposed park. The sketch plan included the following items required under the zoning code: the numbering and placement of the residential sites; a legal description of the land; a breakdown of the acreage indicating how much land was dedicated to open space and recreational areas; a picture of a standard residential lot; and a general description of the location of common areas, buildings, existing easements, and streets. However, the sketch plan did not include other code requirements, such as the specific dimensions of any buildings or structures, the location of sewer lines or water supply lines, or a description of the internal lighting and electrical systems. The county board determined that the application was insufficient and denied the special use permit.
Plaintiffs also filed a request for a variance of five feet from the set back requirements to afford home owners the space to construct a garage on each lot.
The land is located within the Village of Bourbonnais' facility and planning area jurisdiction. *287 Plaintiffs never filed an application for sewer service with the village.
After plaintiffs' permit was denied, they filed a complaint seeking injunctive relief and a declaratory judgment that the zoning ordinance relating to special use permits was unconstitutional as applied. The complaint also sought a declaratory judgment against the Village of Bourbonnais, seeking an adjudication that the village must provide sewer service to the project. The circuit court found the ordinance unconstitutional as applied to the subject property and enjoined the county from "interfering with the development and to issue such permits as may be required upon proper application." The court also ordered the village to provide water and sewer service to the project.
I. Special Use Permit Application
The county argues that it was premature for the trial court to review the denial of the permit application on the merits since the county did not deny the permit on its merits. It contends that plaintiffs' permit application was incomplete and could not be properly considered or acted upon; thus, the trial court improperly reviewed the substantive rights of the parties We agree.
Counties have a right and a duty to maintain their land use through zoning regulations. See Hawthorne v. Village of Olympia Fields, 204 Ill.2d 243, 256, 274 Ill.Dec. 59, 790 N.E.2d 832 (2003). A special use is a property use which the controlling zoning code expressly permits within a zoning district as long as the use meets certain criteria or conditions. Chicago Heights v. Living Word Outreach Full Gospel Church And Ministries, Inc., 196 Ill.2d 1, 16, 255 Ill.Dec. 434, 749 N.E.2d 916 (2001). "The purpose of special uses is to provide for those uses that are either necessary or generally appropriate for a community but may require special regulation because of unique or unusual impacts associated with them." Chicago Heights, 196 Ill.2d at 16, 255 Ill.Dec. 434, 749 N.E.2d 916. Since a special use permit allows property owners or developers to use their land in an express exception to the zoning code, the application must prove that the property falls squarely within that exception. Chicago Heights, 196 Ill.2d at 23, 255 Ill.Dec. 434, 749 N.E.2d 916.
The Kankakee County zoning code regulates manufactured home parks as special uses. The code establishes criteria which the application for a special use permit must meet to be considered by the county. Plaintiffs' application failed to meet these criteria. Among other things, the code requires that the permit application describe the location of all water lines and sewage disposal facilities, a description of all buildings on the property, and the location of internal lighting and electrical systems. Kankakee County Zoning Ordinance § 6.03(U). Plaintiffs' sketch plan did not contain specific information describing any of the above requirements. It ignored details and locations of pedestrian walkways, sewer lines, lighting and electricity lines, natural gas lines and fire hydrants. The plan also failed to establish how each of the lots would meet setback and space requirements.
The Kankakee County zoning code established a set of standards for each permit applicant to meet. If the criteria are not met, the county cannot ensure that the proposed development is consistent with the special use which the zoning code authorizes. Because the application was incomplete, the county lacked the information to determine whether the property qualified for a special use exception.
Nonetheless, plaintiffs argue that they presented expert testimony in the circuit *288 court suggesting that their completed development would meet the county's requirements. However, that argument is flawed because counties have little or no control over the development of manufactured home parks after the special use permit is granted. A county must have all the pertinent information before it can rule on the merits of an application. To ensure public safety, utility and proper growth, a county must be able to determine whether the proposed development meets those requirements before the permit is approved. See Chicago Heights, 196 Ill.2d at 22-26, 255 Ill.Dec. 434, 749 N.E.2d 916.
The code requires special use applicants to demonstrate compliance with the zoning requirements when the application is made. Plaintiffs were required to include specific facts in their application, but instead made only a general promise to comply with those requirements in the future. To provide that information for the first time in the circuit court erroneously removed the special use authorization from the zoning board and placed it in the hands of the trial judge.
Because the county could not rule on an incomplete application, it never had the opportunity to make an informed decision. Before the county, through its regulatory process, could determine whether the proposal met its special use requirements, the trial court forced the approval of the incomplete application. The trial court removed the proposal from the county's review and, in the process, usurped the county's statutory duty to ensure proper growth and land use. See Chicago Heights, 196 Ill.2d at 22-26, 255 Ill.Dec. 434, 749 N.E.2d 916.
Since the trial court erroneously granted plaintiffs' permit, we reverse. However, inasmuch as the county denied plaintiffs' permit on procedural grounds, plaintiffs must be allowed to file a new permit for the county's consideration. See People ex rel. Redd v. Mulholland, 134 Ill.App.3d 929, 930-31, 89 Ill.Dec. 756, 481 N.E.2d 307 (1985). To that end, we remand the cause to the zoning board so that plaintiffs may file a new special use permit application.
II. Variance
Plaintiffs also sought a variance from the zoning code for their proposed development. Since the county properly denied the special use permit, the variance request for the lots in the development must also fail. Therefore, we need not decide whether the variance should have been granted.
III. Sewer Service
In their complaint, plaintiffs claimed that the Village of Bourbonnais wrongfully denied them sanitary sewer service for the proposed development. The village argues that since plaintiffs never applied for sewer service, it could not have wrongfully denied the service; thus, plaintiffs failed to present an actual justiciable controversy ripe for review.
When determining the ripeness of a declaratory action, the court must first determine whether the complaint states an actual legal controversy between the parties. Best v. Taylor Machine Works, 179 Ill.2d 367, 228 Ill.Dec. 636, 689 N.E.2d 1057 (1997). An "actual controversy" exists where there is a legitimate dispute involving an immediate and definite determination of the parties' rights, the resolution of which would help terminate all or part of the dispute. Dolezal v. Plastic & Reconstructive Surgery, S.C., 266 Ill. App.3d 1070, 1083, 204 Ill.Dec. 10, 640 N.E.2d 1359 (1994). A declaratory judgment action is used "to afford security and relief against uncertainty with a view to avoiding litigation, rather than in aid of it." *289 Dolezal, 266 Ill.App.3d at 1083, 204 Ill.Dec. 10, 640 N.E.2d 1359.
In addition, the complaint must show that the underlying facts and issues of the case are not moot or premature. Pincham v. Cunningham, 285 Ill.App.3d 780, 782, 221 Ill.Dec. 105, 674 N.E.2d 898 (1996). Courts cannot pass judgment on mere abstract propositions of law, render advisory opinions, or give legal advice as to future events. Pincham, 285 Ill.App.3d at 782, 221 Ill.Dec. 105, 674 N.E.2d 898. If the question of whether plaintiffs will suffer any infringement of their rights is speculative, i.e. if their interests would be adversely affected only in the event some future possibility does or does not occur, the action for a declaratory judgment should be dismissed. Township High School District v. Northfield, 184 Ill. App.3d 367, 373, 132 Ill.Dec. 625, 540 N.E.2d 365 (1989).
Here, plaintiffs asked the trial court to find that the village wrongfully denied their application for sanitary sewer service before any application was made. Since plaintiffs did not file an application, the village could not have denied it. Plaintiffs objected to a denial that never occurred.
Plaintiffs suggest that the village will deny their application in the future. But any infringement on the right to sanitary sewer service is speculative. Until the village considers and denies an application, the village cannot infringe upon plaintiffs' rights, and an actual controversy does not exist. Because plaintiffs' complaint for declaratory judgment did not state an actual controversy, it was not ripe for review and should have been dismissed.
IV. Circuit Court Review
The county argues that the trial court erred by reviewing the case de novo, and that the court should have taken the case under administrative review. The county bases its argument on our supreme court's recent holding in Klaeren v. Village of Lisle, 202 Ill.2d 164, 269 Ill.Dec. 426, 781 N.E.2d 223 (2002). In Klaeren, our supreme court held that "a legislative body acts administratively when it rules on applications for special use permits." 202 Ill.2d at 182, 269 Ill.Dec. 426, 781 N.E.2d 223.
While it is clear that permit denials after Klaeren constitute an administrative act subject to administrative review, we need not determine whether Klaeren should have been applied retroactively. Since we are reversing the circuit court, its standard of review of the board's denial of the permit is not relevant to our decision.
CONCLUSION
The order of the circuit court of Kankakee County is reversed, and the cause is remanded to the zoning board of appeals.
Reversed and remanded.
BARRY, J., and McDADE, P.J., concurring.

=== CASE 2207559 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:20.872116+00 ===

367 Pa. 152 (1951)
Commonwealth ex rel. Sheeler
v.
Burke.
Supreme Court of Pennsylvania.
March 29, 1951.
*153 Louis B. Schwartz and Raymond J. Bradley, for Petitioner.
John H. Maurer, District Attorney and James W. Tracey, Jr., First Assistant District Attorney, for Commonwealth.
OPINION BY MR. JUSTICE JONES, March 29, 1951:
Rudolph Sheeler, the relator, filed his original petition with this court for a writ of habeas corpus on the ground that he was being illegally restrained of his liberty in the Eastern State Penitentiary as a result of a life sentence imposed upon him by the Court of Oyer and Terminer of Philadelphia County on March 31, 1939, following his plea of guilty to an indictment (No. 574, March Sessions 1939, in said court) charging him *154 with the murder of James T. Morrow, a police officer of the City of Philadelphia, on November 23, 1936, in Northeast Philadelphia. The petitioner alleges that his plea and confession of the crime charged in the indictment were obtained and used in violation of the due process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment of the Constitution of the United States and of Article I, Section 9, of the Constitution of Pennsylvania. We entered a rule to show cause why the prayer of the petition should not be granted on the district attorney of Philadelphia County who duly filed a responsive answer.
The petition and answer raised such important issues of material fact (for the resolution whereof on testimony taken at a hearing an appellate court lacks the requisite facilities) that we referred the matter to Honorable LOUIS E. LEVINTHAL, a judge of the Court of Common Pleas of Philadelphia County, for the purpose of holding a hearing on the issues framed by the petition and answer with notice to all interested parties; the order further directed that a record of the hearing, including a transcript of the testimony taken, together with the hearing judge's findings of fact on the issues raised be returned to this court. Judge LEVINTHAL ably and thoroughly performed the duties imposed upon him by our order of reference and the matter is now before us for final disposition. The findings of the learned referee are, however, purely advisory. The instant petition is peculiarly a matter for this court's action in the exercise of our original jurisdiction which, by reason of the unusual circumstances pleaded, we invoked at the instance of the relator. The services performed by the referee were in aid of our discharge of our duties in the premises.
From the findings of the referee, who heard and saw the witnesses, we summarize and adopt the following *155 salient facts and conclusions which are amply supported by substantial evidence.
Sheeler was taken into custody by the police of Philadelphia on February 16, 1939, on suspicion of having participated with a confederate, one Howard, in the murder of Officer Morrow. He was held by the police incommunicado in City Hall under a fictitious name which they intentionally gave him. He was subjected to coercion, both physical and psychological, in an effort to force from him a confession that he had been a participant in the Morrow murder. During the time he was so held by the police, he was denied opportunity to communicate with family or friends and was taken from his cell-room many times for questioning by detectives for a total of 45 to 50 hours within the first week. At the end of that period, to wit, on the morning of February 23, 1939, he orally "confessed" that he was with Howard when the Morrow crime was committed. A little later the same morning, he signed a statement in which he vaguely narrated the commission of the crime. He was given a hearing before a magistrate on February 24th where he denied that his "confession" was voluntary. He was held without bail for further hearing on the representation of the detective in charge that additional time was required for investigation and, thereupon, was recommitted to the custody of the police. Later that day (February 24th), he signed a statement in which he repudiated his earlier public assertion that the "confession" was involuntary.
On March 24, 1939, the relator was arraigned on various bills of indictment for the crimes covered by the "confession", including indictment No. 574 for the Morrow murder, whereto he pleaded guilty. He was not represented by counsel at the time of his arraignment and pleas.
*156 On the same day (March 24, 1939), Sheeler signed and swore to an "affidavit of destitute circumstances and request to assign counsel" under the Act of March 22, 1907, P.L. 31, Sec. 1, 19 PS § 784. The court subsequently assigned him counsel who were notified of their appointment about noon of March 28th, the day before the court hearing for determining the degree of the murder "confessed" and fixing the penalty. The court-appointed counsel mistakenly believed that Sheeler's "confession" and pleas of guilty were voluntary as he himself confirmed to them. They, therefore, did not consider it necessary or desirable to ask for a continuance of the hearing in order to examine into the "confession" or to investigate the underlying facts.
The following morning, March 29, 1939, a hearing on indictment No. 574 for the murder of Officer Morrow was had before the court en banc. The "confession" of February 23rd was offered in evidence and attached to the record. Sheeler also testified in support of the "confession". Several discrepancies in the evidence were noted by one of the members of the court en banc. After the hearing, the police retained their custody of the accused and on March 31st a final "confession" was obtained from him whereby the discrepancies above-mentioned were eliminated. The court then adjudged Sheeler guilty of murder in the first degree and sentenced him to imprisonment for life in the Eastern State Penitentiary to which he was transferred and where he is now held.
The accused's plea to the indictment for murder and his self-incriminating testimony, as well as the "confession", were the result of coercion, subtly and psychologically exerted upon him by the attendant and ever-present police in whose exclusive custody he was from the day of his apprehension (February 16, 1939) *157 to the time of his commitment to the Eastern State Penitentiary on April 1, 1939.
The question involved is not whether the relator was guilty or innocent of the murder charged against him but whether his conviction was obtained by violating his constitutional rights. As has long been recognized, a petition for habeas corpus is incapable of performing the functions of a writ of error or appeal: Passmore Williamson's Case, 26 Pa. 9, 17; Commonwealth ex rel. McGlinn v. Smith, 344 Pa. 41, 47, 24 A. 2d 1, and cases there cited. We take occasion to note in passing that no comparison is to be drawn between the instant application for habeas corpus and the extraordinary remedy of a motion for a new trial, nunc pro tunc, which we heretofore accorded the relator at his instance under the Act of April 22, 1903, P.L. 245, Sec. 1, and which was ultimately ruled against him.
We are unanimous that the relator's conviction of the murder of Officer Morrow was had without due process of law and that, consequently, the sentence imposed upon him and his plea of guilty on March 24, 1939, to the indictment charging him with that murder cannot be upheld. (1) The arraignment of and acceptance of a plea of guilty from an uncounseled defendant, charged with a capital crime, constitutes a denial of due process especially where, as here, legal knowledge is required to determine whether the accused is properly chargeable with the alleged crime: cf. Powell v. Alabama, 287 U.S. 45, 71. That Sheeler was not represented by counsel when he was arraigned and so pleaded to the indictment for murder is indisputably established by the evidence. Indeed, that fact is expressly conceded of record. (2) The failure of a court to assign counsel timely to a destitute person charged with a capital offense is equally a violation of constitutional due process: see Powell v. Alabama, *158 supra, where it was said at p. 71 that a court's duty to assign counsel for a destitute defendant charged with a capital crime ". . . is not discharged by an assignment at such a time or under such circumstances as to preclude the giving of effective aid in the preparation and trial of the case." Cf. also Commonwealth v. Bryant, at p. 135 ante. (3) A conviction in a capital case based upon a confession or self-incriminating testimony which has been coerced from the defendant by police officers likewise constitutes a denial of due process (e.g., Turner v. Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, 338 U.S. 62) which, in the procedural circumstances here present, is remediable by habeas corpus: see United States ex rel. Innes v. Hiatt, 141 F. 2d 664, 665-666 (C.A. 3rd Cir.).
The petitioner has met the burden of establishing that he is illegally detained and is, therefore, entitled to relief. But, inasmuch as his guilt or innocence of the crime charged cannot be resolved by this proceeding, we will follow the practice adopted in Commonwealth ex rel. Townsend v. Burke, 361 Pa. 35, 42-43, 63 A. 2d 77, and make the following order.
The sentence imposed on the relator by the Court of Oyer and Terminer of Philadelphia County on March 31, 1939, upon indictment No. 574, March Sessions 1939, is hereby vacated and set aside as is, likewise, the relator's plea of guilty to that indictment. It is further ordered and directed that Judge LEVINTHAL'S report be filed as a part of the record in this proceeding at the cost of the County of Philadelphia.

=== CASE 2207560 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:20.873751+00 ===

208 Cal.App.2d 633 (1962)
THE PEOPLE, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
LUTHER C. HUNTER, Defendant and Appellant.
Crim. No. 8175.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. Three.
Oct. 17, 1962.
Thomas H. Greenwald for Defendant and Appellant.
Stanley Mosk, Attorney General, William E. James, Assistant Attorney General, and George Roth, Deputy Attorney General, for Plaintiff and Respondent.
SHINN, P. J.
Luther C. Hunter was accused by information in count I of grand theft and in count II of forgery. In a nonjury trial the cause was submitted on the evidence contained in the transcript of the preliminary hearing. Hunter was acquitted of forgery, but upon count I the court found him guilty of violation of section 650 1/2 of the Penal Code, as if it were included in the crime of grand theft. Proceedings were suspended and probation was granted for one year on the condition, among others, that defendant pay a fine of $200. He appeals from the order granting probation, as a judgment.
The facts were: the Superior Court of Los Angeles County approved a compromise of a claim of defendant's daughter, Linda Hunter, a minor, for personal injuries. The net amount due the minor was $618.50. The order required defendant *634 to deposit the money in Wilshire Federal Savings and Loan Association in defendant's name as trustee for the minor, and to be withdrawn only upon order of the court. Defendant received a check for the amount payable to him as trustee for Linda and to Wilshire Federal Savings and Loan Association. Defendant endorsed the check by writing thereon the name of the loan association and his own name as trustee. The loan association did not authorize the endorsement. Defendant deposited the check to his own account in a Nevada bank.
The sole point on the appeal is that defendant was found guilty of an offense which is not necessarily included in the offense of grand theft.
Section 650 1/2 of the Penal Code provides that any person who commits any of a number of enumerated acts "for which no other punishment is expressly prescribed by this code, is guilty of a misdemeanor."
It is unnecessary to decide whether violation of section 650 1/2 is an offense necessarily included within the offense of grand theft. [1] Defendant could not be found guilty of violation of section 650 1/2 for the reason that it does not apply to a prosecution for grand theft, for which other punishment is prescribed by section 489 of the Penal Code. (People v. Proctor, 46 Cal.2d 481 [296 P.2d 821].)
The judgment is reversed.
Ford, J., and Files, J., concurred.

=== CASE 9736825 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:07:50.537716+00 ===

Murphy, P.J.
The issue before this Court is limited. Did the trial court err by including language in a postjudgment divorce order that provided that "the minor child may use the surname of Gregory if she so wishes”?
The parties were married in 1977. Their only child, Adria, was born November 27, 1978. In 1981, the parties separated. Defendant mother took custody of Adria and left South Africa where the parties had been living. By 1982, defendant and Adria were living in the United Kingdom with William Gregory. Plaintiff and defendant were divorced in 1984. The judgment of divorce granted defendant mother physical custody of the child. Following the divorce, defendant married William Gregory. In the fall of 1984, the Gregorys and Adria returned to the United States to live in Jackson, Michigan.
From the time defendant and William Gregory began living together, they called Adria "Adria Gregory” rather than "Adria Rappleye,” the *398child’s birth name. Adria’s medical, dental, and school records state her surname to be Gregory. However, the school administration is aware of her legal name and legal documents such as her passport, social security card, and bank account show the surname Rappleye. Adria’s friends refer to her as Adria Gregory.
When plaintiff learned that his daughter was using Gregory instead of her legal surname, he asked defendant to change Adria’s name back to Rappleye. Later, plaintiff brought a motion to enforce his visitation rights which also asked the court to enjoin defendant from using any surname for Adria other than her legal name.
We are not presented with issues concerning the propriety of a legal name change of a minor under the probate code, MCL 711.1; MSA 27.3178(561). We are not dealing with an order of the court that requires a minor to go by a surname other than that given on her birth certificate pursuant to MCL 333.2824; MSA 14.15(2824). In fact, we are not even facing a legal name change at all. Simply, we have before us an order from the trial court that allows a minor, if she so desires, to continue informal use of a name she has used for the past several years.
At common law a person could adopt any name he or she wished, without resort to any court and without legal proceedings, provided it was not done for fraudulent purposes. Piotrowski v Piotrowski, 71 Mich App 213, 215-216; 247 NW2d 354 (1976). Similarly, the common law would permit a minor who was of sufficient age and maturity to make an intelligent choice to assume any chosen name. 57 Am Jur 2d, Name, § 42, p 679. There is no contention in this case that Adria Rappleye’s use of the surname Gregory was for a fraudulent purpose. If common law allows such use, we are *399hard pressed to conclude that the trial court erred by ordering nothing more than that which is permitted at common law.1
Again, we emphasize that we are not addressing a grant of a legal name change for the parties’ minor child pursuant to the probate code, a decision we would review for an abuse of discretion. MCL 711.1; MSA 27.3178(561). Assuming that this is the correct standard in the present case, we cannot conclude on this record that the trial court abused its discretion by determining that it is in the minor child’s best interest to allow her to continue using the name Gregory, if she so desires. Abuse of discretion implies that the trial court’s decision was not based on fact, logic, and reason. Poet v Traverse City Osteopathic Hosp, 433 Mich 228, 251; 445 NW2d 115 (1989); Spalding v Spalding, 355 Mich 382, 384-385; 94 NW2d 810 (1959). In the present case, the trial court’s decision was clearly based on the facts and on what was right and equitable under the circumstances. See Lagnes v Green, 282 US 531, 541; 51 S Ct 243; 75 L Ed 520 (1931).
The record establishes that Adria, who was almost ten years old at the time of the hearing, expressed her desire to use the name Gregory. She had used that name since she was four years old. She was in the custody of her mother who is remarried and is known by the surname of Gregory. The child was known to her friends and classmates by the name Adria Gregory.
The trial court interviewed the minor child, in camera, to determine whether the use of the Gregory surname was being imposed for the purpose of *400frustrating the plaintiff father’s relationship with his child and to foster ill feelings. The court concluded that it was the child’s true desire to be known as Gregory. The trial court had ample opportunity to determine the child’s maturity level and was apparently satisfied that she was mature enough to understand her own desires and make an intelligent choice.2
We defer to the trial court’s special opportunity to judge the credibility of the parties and, in particular, of the minor child, and will not disturb its findings. MCR 2.613(C).
Affirmed.
Cavanagh, J., concurred.
We also question the practicality, effectiveness, and enforceability of an order that attempts to restrain the third party, or the individual whose name is at issue, from informally using a surname other than the person’s birth name.
Although not stated by the court, it is certainly conceivable that forcing a change in the minor child’s commonly used name at this point would only confuse the child and her friends and acquaintances. A forced change might well foster such resentment in the child as to lead to a further breakdown in the already fragile parental relationship between plaintiff and the child.

=== CASE 9736826 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:07:50.542105+00 ===

Mackenzie, J.
(dissenting). The issue in this case is whether a custodial mother may, over the objection of the noncustodial father, informally change their minor child’s surname to that of the child’s stepfather. Under the circumstances of this case, I conclude that she may not.
The parties were married in 1977. Their only child, Adria, was born November 27, 1978. In 1981, the parties separated and defendant mother took custody of Adria. By 1982, defendant and Adria were living with William Gregory. The parties were divorced in 1984. The judgment of divorce granted defendant mother physical custody of the child. Following the divorce, defendant married William Gregory.
From the time defendant and William Gregory began living together, they have called Adria ”Ad*401ria Gregory” rather than "Adria Rappleye,” the child’s birth name. Adria’s medical, dental, and school records state her surname to be Gregory, although legal documents such as her passport,, social security card, and bank account are listed in the surname Rappleye. Adria and her friends refer to her as Adria Gregory.
In 1988, plaintiff father filed a motion which in relevant part sought an order preventing defendant mother from using any surname for the minor child other than Rappleye. Following a hearing, the trial court denied the motion. The court essentially found that the child preferred to be called Adria Gregory, and found that preference controlling.
Under the common law a person may adopt any name he or she wishes, without resort to any court and without any legal proceedings, provided it is not done for fraudulent purposes. Piotrowski v Piotrowski, 71 Mich App 213, 215-216; 247 NW2d 354 (1976). There is no requirement that any person go through the courts to establish a legal change of name. Piotrowski, supra, p 216. While Michigan, as most states, has a statute authorizing procedures by which a probate court can, upon petition, change the name of any person, see MCL 711.1; MSA 27.3178(561), such name change statute does not abrogate or supersede the common-law right. Id. Moreover, the common-law right to change one’s name without legal formality extends to minors. Laks v Laks, 25 Ariz App 58; 540 P2d 1277 (1975), 57 Am Jur 2d, Name, §42, p 679. Thus, a minor can effectuate a common-law change of name on his or her own initiative, provided he or she is of sufficient age and maturity to make an intelligent choice. Id.
In this case, the decision to change Adria’s surname to Gregory was not made on her own *402initiative, nor was it made when she was capable of expressing a meaningful opinion about the change. It was instead made unilaterally by her mother and William Gregory when Adria was approximately three years old. Adria’s mother has acted to effectuate a common-law change of the child’s name; Adria has not.
A mother who has been awarded custody of a minor child may not, over the objection of the noncustodial father, unilaterally change the surname of a child to that of the mother’s subsequent husband unless the change would be in the best interest of the child. See Sobel v Sobel, 46 NJ Super 284: 134 A2d 598 (1957), Kay v Bell, 95 Ohio App 520: 121 NE2d 206 (1953), Nitzberg v Bd of Ed of City of New York, 104 NYS2d 421 (1951), Hall v Hall, 30 Md App 214; 351 A2d 917 (1976), Laks v Laks, supra, Young v Young, 356 NW2d 823 (Minn App, 1984), and Cohan v Cunningham, 104 AD2d 716; 480 NYS2d 656 (1984). See, generally, Anno: Rights and remedies of parents inter se with regard to the names of their children, 92 ALR3d 1091, §10, pp 1118-1123. There appear to be at least three rationales for this rule. Some courts have noted that, while under the common law one may adopt any name he or she chooses, that right does not grant other persons the right to select for a person a name different from the name by which such person is known. See, e.g., Kay v Bell, supra. Second, at least one court has refused to allow a unilateral name change because neither parent has a superior right to determine a child’s name. See Cohan v Cunningham, supra. The third rationale advanced is that, when there is a divorce and the mother is given custody of the children, the bond between the father and his children becomes tenuous, and if the children’s name is changed *403that bond may be further weakened or destroyed. See Laks v Laks, supra.
In deciding whether a custodial mother’s unilateral change of a child’s surname from that of the child’s father is in the child’s best interest, courts look to several factors. Primary considerations are whether the father has engaged in misconduct, or abandoned or refused to support the child. Hall v Hall, supra. The preference of the child may be given some weight, depending on the age of the child and the circumstances of the case. Id. The desirability of maintaining a bond with the father and the father’s family is given substantial weight. Id. The inconvenience or embarrassment of having more than one surname in the mother’s household has been held not to be determinative. Id.
In this case, plaintiff father has shown an interest in Adria’s welfare. He retains joint legal custody. There are no allegations of misconduct. While there have been ongoing visitation problems, plaintiff has sought to exercise his visitation rights. With one exception, when he was denied visitation, plaintiff has made support payments. The child maintains contact with plaintiff’s family; her paternal grandparents appear to exercise their visitation rights regularly. Given Adria’s young age and the circumstances of this case, it is questionable whether she is capable of making an intelligent choice in the matter. See Hall v Hall, supra. Her preference with respect to a change of name should thus be given minimal weight. On the other hand, it is apparent that the bonds between the child and her father have been greatly weakened by this divorce, and the desirability of maintaining some bond should be given substantial weight.
In light of the above, I am convinced that the trial court abused its discretion in concluding that *404defendant should not be restrained from unilaterally changing Adria’s name to Adria Gregory. There is insufficient justification for such a common-law name change at this time. Accordingly, I would reverse.

=== CASE 9736827 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:07:52.272523+00 ===

OPINION
SCHUMACHER, Judge.
Pursuant to plea negotiations, appellant Dale Einar Synnes pleaded guilty to a reduced charge of burglary in the second degree and receiving stolen goods. The parties agreed to a sentence of 53 months executed for second degree burglary and a consecutive term of 37 months executed for receiving stolen goods, concurrent with parole revocation. In exchange, the state agreed to dismiss another charge of burglary in the second degree. The trial court adopted the recommended sentence in the plea agreement.
FACTS
Appellant was charged in Hennepin County District Court with three offenses: *647burglary in the first degree, receiving stolen property, and burglary in the second degree. Appellant pleaded not guilty to all three charges on December 1, 1988. On January 17, 1989, pursuant to a plea agreement, appellant pleaded guilty to the charge of burglary in the second degree (reduced from first degree burglary), and to the charge of receiving stolen property. On May 1, 1989, prior to sentencing, appellant brought a motion to withdraw his guilty plea. The motion was denied by the trial court that same day. On July 25, 1989, the trial court adopted the recommended sentence in the plea agreement and sentenced appellant to 53 months executed for burglary in the second degree, and a consecutive term of 37 months for receiving stolen goods. The original charge of second degree burglary was dismissed.
The sentence, in regard to receiving stolen property, constitutes an upward departure from the Minnesota Sentencing Guidelines, both as to duration and consecutive service. At the time of sentencing, the trial court gave no reasons for the departure.
Appellant alleges the trial court abused its discretion in departing from the sentencing guidelines where there were no substantial and compelling reasons cited to justify the departure, even though there was a negotiated plea.
ISSUE
Did the trial court abuse its discretion by sentencing appellant to a consecutive sentence of 37 months for the offense of receiving stolen property where there were no substantial and compelling reasons cited to justify the departure?
ANALYSIS
The.Minnesota Sentencing Guidelines require that a judge provide written reasons justifying a departure. The Guidelines provide as follows:
When departing from the presumptive sentence, a judge must provide written reasons which- specify the substantial and compelling nature of the circumstances, and which demonstrate why the sentence selected in the departure is more appropriate, reasonable, or equitable than the presumptive sentence.
Minnesota Sentencing Guidelines II.D. Minnesota Rules of Criminal Procedure also require that the trial court provide written reasons justifying a departure. Minn.R.Crim.P. 27.03, subd. 4(C).
The Minnesota Supreme Court has stated: If no reasons for departure are stated on the record at the time of sentencing, no departure will be allowed.” Williams v. State, 361 N.W.2d 840, 844 (Minn.1985). The facts in the present case reveal the trial judge gave no reasons for departure at sentencing. The prosecutor provided the court with a memorandum in support of a sentencing departure which listed four reasons he claimed justified departure. The record does not indicate, however, that the trial court adopted these reasons.
Although we are concerned about the result in this case, we do not feel we are in a position to create an exception to Williams, nor to disregard the language in State v. Garcia, 302 N.W.2d 643, 647 (Minn.1981).
An attempt * * * by the parties to limit sentence duration does not create a “substantial and compelling circumstance” which may be relied upon as justifying a departure from the Guidelines. Only the court, acting in accordance with the Guidelines, and not the parties, has the authority to determine the appropriate sentence.
State v. Garcia, 302 N.W.2d 643, 647 (Minn.1981). We conclude, under present Minnesota law, the trial court must provide a written record stating the reason for departure when there is a negotiated plea.
DECISION
We hold that because the trial court provided no written reasons justifying the departure at the time of sentencing, no departure is allowed. We reverse and remand for imposition of a presumptive concurrent sentence under the Minnesota Sentencing Guidelines of 44 months executed for receiving stolen property.
Reversed and remanded.

=== CASE 2207573 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:20.998384+00 ===

161 Pa. Commonwealth Ct. 149 (1993)
636 A.2d 279
D'ANDREA WINE & LIQUOR IMPORTS, Petitioner,
v.
UNEMPLOYMENT COMPENSATION BOARD OF REVIEW, Respondent.
Commonwealth Court of Pennsylvania.
Submitted October 8, 1993.
Decided December 30, 1993.
*151 Patrick J. Thomassey, for petitioner.
Clifford F. Blaze, Deputy Chief Counsel, for respondent.
Before DOYLE and FRIEDMAN, JJ., and RODGERS, Senior Judge.
FRIEDMAN, Judge.
D'Andrea Wine & Liquor Imports, Inc. (Employer) appeals an order of the Unemployment Compensation Board of Review (Board) which reversed the referee's decision and granted benefits to Donna Knight (Claimant) on the basis that she voluntarily quit her job for cause of a necessitous and compelling nature. We affirm.
The facts, as found by the Board, are as follows:
1. Claimant was last employed as a bookkeeper by D'Andrea Wine & Liquor Imports, Inc. from June 1991, at a final rate of $8 per hour and her last day of work was July 14, 1992.
2. The claimant had previously worked for the employer as an employee from February, 1991 to March, 1991, and had voluntarily terminated her employment due to sexual harassment by the employer.
3. The claimant was subsequently offered subcontracting work by the employer, accepted the offer, and worked for the employer as a subcontractor from March, 1991, thru May, 1991.
4. At the time the claimant started back with the employer, there were no instances of sexual harassment.
5. At the end of May, 1991, upon completion of her subcontracting work, the claimant requested that the employer keep her on as an employee, and the claimant was hired to work three days per week by the employer.
6. The employer subsequently assigned the claimant to work for Tri State Liquor Company, a company owned by *152 the employer's sons, even though the employer would continue to pay the claimant, and the claimant came under the supervision of one of the employer's sons.
7. On May 29, 1992, the employer grabbed the claimant and began kissing her. He stopped this harassment when claimant demanded that he stop this behavior.
8. On July 14, 1992, the claimant finished her work after being sexually harassed[1] and then voluntarily quit her employment.
Board Decision, April 8, 1993 (footnote added).
On appeal,[2] Employer contends that the Board capriciously disregarded competent evidence and erred in reversing the referee's decision. Employer misconstrues our standard of review. Where, as here, both parties testify, we must determine whether substantial evidence in the record, taken as a whole, supports the findings of the Board, Peak v. Unemployment Compensation Board of Review, 509 Pa. 267, 501 A.2d 1383 (1977), not whether the Board capriciously disregarded the evidence.
Section 402(b) of the Unemployment Compensation Law (Law), Act of December 5, 1936, Second Ex.Sess., P.L. (1937) 2897, as amended, 43 P.S. §§ 802(b) provides in pertinent part:
An employe shall be ineligible for compensation for any week 
. . . .
(b) In which [her] unemployment is due to voluntarily leaving work without cause of a necessitous and compelling nature. . . .
*153 The burden of proving that the termination resulted from cause of a necessitous and compelling nature rests with the employee. Charles v. Unemployment Compensation Board of Review, 122 Pa.Commonwealth Ct. 439, 552 A.2d 727 (1989).
A necessitous and compelling cause for voluntarily leaving employment arises when circumstances "produce pressure to terminate employment that is both real and substantial, and which would compel a reasonable person under the circumstances to act in the same manner." Taylor v. Unemployment Compensation Board of Review, 474 Pa. 351, 359, 378 A.2d 829, 832-33 (1977).
Prior cases of this court have held that in order to prove that a claimant has used common sense in voluntarily quitting her employment as a result of sexual harassment, she must show that she made her employer aware of the harassment. St. Barnabas, Inc. v. Unemployment Compensation Board of Review, 106 Pa.Commonwealth Ct. 191, 525 A.2d 885 (1987).
Here, Claimant demanded that Employer stop his sexually harassing behavior on May 29, 1992. Apparently, over a month elapsed before the behavior began again. When, on July 14, 1992, Employer again sexually harassed her, she did not need to again tell him that this behavior was abhorrent to her. At the time of the May 29, 1992 incident, Claimant acted reasonably by demanding that Employer stop his behavior and put him on notice that she would not tolerate such behavior in the future.
Employer argues that the father who was conducting the harassing behavior was not the appropriate person to whom to complain. However, the record indicates that he was the head of the business and also the person doing the harassing, that the line of authority between Claimant and the son was not clear and that Claimant reasonably believed that speaking to the son would have made no difference.
Our review of the record convinces us that substantial evidence supports the Board's conclusions. Accordingly, we affirm.
*154 ORDER
AND NOW, this 30th day of December, 1993, the order of the Unemployment Compensation Board of Review, dated April 8, 1993, is affirmed.
NOTES
[1]  As to this incident of sexual harassment, Claimant alleged that Employer reached into her shirt and bra, petted her chest and said, "Didn't that get your blood going." R.R. at 23a, 24a.
[2]  Our scope of review is limited to determining whether constitutional rights have been violated, whether an error of law has been committed, or whether necessary findings of fact made by the Board are supported substantial evidence. Estate of McGovern v. State Employees' Retirement Board, 512 Pa. 377, 517 A.2d 523 (1986).

=== CASE 9736829 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:07:53.026826+00 ===

JUSTICE FREEMAN delivered the opinion of the court: At issue in this case is whether a police officer, having obtained an identification card from a passenger in a vehicle during a traffic stop, may perform a check to determine whether there are outstanding warrants for the passenger’s arrest. We hold that, under the circumstances at bar, the warrant check was outside the scope of the traffic stop and was impermissible. BACKGROUND At approximately 4:30 p.m. on September 27, 1997, Officer Vernard Reed of the Will County sheriffs department, observed a vehicle, driven by Keith Weathersby, make an illegal left turn from Route 53 onto Mills Road. Officer Reed initiated a traffic stop. During the course of the traffic stop, Officer Reed requested identification from defendant, a passenger in the vehicle. Officer Reed performed a check on defendant’s identification card and discovered that defendant had an outstanding warrant for failure to appear in court. Officer Reed placed defendant under arrest. In an ensuing search, officer Reed recovered a pea-sized rock of cocaine and a “Chore Boy”1 from defendant’s pocket. Defendant was charged by indictment, in the circuit court of Will County, with the unlawful possession of a controlled substance, a Class 4 felony. 720 ILCS 570/ 402(c) (West 1996). He filed a motion to quash arrest and suppress evidence, arguing that Officer Reed had neither a warrant to search him nor probable cause to believe that he had committed a crime. At a subsequent hearing on the motion, defendant testified that he was a passenger in the car stopped by Officer Reed. The officer told the driver that he had made an illegal left turn and requested identification from the driver. Sometime later, the officer approached defendant and asked him for identification. Defendant complied, giving the officer a state identification card. The officer returned to the squad car, ran a warrant check, and discovered that defendant had an outstanding warrant for failure to appear in court. The officer had defendant step out of the car, handcuffed defendant and searched him. Defendant stated that at no point during the stop did Officer Reed inform defendant that he wanted to see defendant’s identification to determine whether defendant had a valid driver’s license. Officer Reed testified that when he first initiated the traffic stop, he requested identification from the driver of the vehicle. The driver, Keith Weathersby, stated that he did not have his driver’s license on his person. The driver gave his date of birth, and identified himself as either Darren or Darryl Weathersby. Officer Reed transmitted the driver’s information to county dispatch and learned there was no valid driver’s license for anyone by that name. Officer Reed confronted the driver, who then gave his correct name and admitted that his license was either suspended or revoked. Officer Reed transmitted the new information to county dispatch and confirmed that Weathersby’s license was suspended or revoked. Officer Reed testified that it was his usual practice, once he determined that a driver could not legally drive, to request identification from the passengers in the car to determine whether another person could drive the car. In keeping with this practice, Officer Reed asked defendant for identification, intending to release the vehicle to defendant if defendant had a valid driver’s license. At no time during the traffic stop, however, did Officer Reed ask defendant whether defendant was able to drive the car. Further, defendant’s behavior had not aroused suspicion and Officer Reed did not believe that defendant had committed any wrongdoing. Having obtained defendant’s identification card, Officer Reed ran the information through county dispatch and discovered that defendant had an outstanding warrant. Officer Reed advised defendant of the outstanding warrant, placed defendant under arrest, handcuffed defendant and searched him, finding the pea-sized rock of cocaine and the “Chore Boy.” Officer Reed also searched the car incident to defendant’s arrest. Officer Reed found another pea-sized rock of cocaine on the back seat and arrested Weathersby. Lastly, Officer Reed testified that an officer has the authority to arrest any person driving with a suspended license. Pursuant to such an arrest, the officer also has the authority to impound the vehicle and perform an inventory search. Officer Reed stated that he had the right to search the car once he found out that Weathers-by’s license was suspended. At the conclusion of the hearing, the circuit court denied defendant’s motion to quash arrest and suppress evidence. The court found that Officer Reed requested identification from defendant in order to determine whether defendant had a valid driver’s license. Officer Reed intended to release the car to defendant, if defendant could legally drive the car, in order to avoid towing the vehicle. The cause proceeded to trial. At trial, Officer Reed testified that when he activated his emergency lights, Weathersby pulled the car to the side of the road. Although Officer Reed stated that he requested identification from defendant in order to determine whether defendant could drive the vehicle, Officer Reed acknowledged that, in his police report, he stated that the car was legally parked. Officer Reed also testified that once he determined there was no valid driver’s license for a Darrell Weathersby, he confronted the driver and obtained the driver’s correct name. Officer Reed then turned to defendant and asked him for identification. Having obtained defendant’s identification card, Officer Reed ran a check on both defendant and Weathersby. County dispatch informed him that Weathersby’s license was suspended and that defendant had an outstanding warrant. Officer Reed arrested defendant and searched him, finding the cocaine at issue. Because Officer Reed found a controlled substance on defendant, Officer Reed searched the car to see if it also contained drugs. Officer Reed explained, however, that in the absence of a passenger eligible to drive the vehicle, he would have done an inventory search of the vehicle and recovered the cocaine from the back seat. The jury found defendant guilty of unlawful possession of a controlled substance. Subsequently, the circuit court sentenced defendant to 28 days in jail with credit for 28 days previously served and to a term of probation for 24 months. The court also ordered defendant to pay court costs and certain fines. Defendant appealed, arguing that the circuit court should have granted the motion to quash arrest and suppress evidence. The appellate court agreed. The court held that defendant did not voluntarily comply with Officer Reed’s request for identification. Officer Reed conveyed the message that compliance with the request for identification was mandatory. Under the circumstances, no reasonable person would have felt free to disregard the officer and terminate the encounter without tendering identification. 325 Ill. App. 3d 262, 266. We granted the State’s petition for leave to appeal. 177 Ill. 2d R. 315. DISCUSSION A. Standard of Review As an initial observation, we note that the case at bar involves only the suppression of the evidence recovered from defendant during the course of the traffic stop. We are not called upon to determine any charges pressed upon defendant pursuant to the outstanding warrant for his arrest. As noted above, the circuit court denied defendant’s motion to quash arrest and suppress evidence. Generally, a motion to suppress evidence presents mixed questions of law and fact: the trial court first weighs the evidence and determines the facts surrounding the complained-of conduct, after which it decides whether, as a matter of law, these facts constitute an unconstitutional seizure. People v. Thomas, 198 Ill. 2d 103, 108 (2001); People v. Shapiro, 177 Ill. 2d 519, 524 (1997). A reviewing court accords great deference to the factual findings of the trial court. Thomas, 198 Ill. 2d at 108. However, the reviewing court considers de novo the trial court’s ultimate determination to grant or deny the defendant’s motion to suppress. People v. Cox, 202 Ill. 2d 462, 466 (2002); Thomas, 198 Ill. 2d at 108; People v. Sorenson, 196 Ill. 2d 425, 431 (2001). B. Identification/Warrant Check The State argues that defendant was not seized during the course of the traffic stop and defendant was free to decline Officer Reed’s request for identification. According to the State, defendant’s compliance with the officer’s request was voluntary and evinced a desire to cooperate with the officer’s community caretaking function. Defendant counters that for the duration of the traffic stop both he and Weathersby were detained, and the traffic stop had not come to an end when Officer Reed requested defendant’s identification. Thus, defendant reasonably believed that compliance with Officer Reed’s request was necessary. In People v. Gonzalez, 204 Ill. 2d 220 (2003), we considered whether, during the course of a routine traffic stop, a police officer’s request for identification from a passenger violated the federal and state constitutional prohibitions against unlawful seizures (see U.S. Const., amend. IV; Ill. Const. 1970, art. I, § 6). As an initial matter, we rejected the State’s contention that the fourth amendment was not implicated because the police offleer’s request for identification qualified as “community caretaking.” Gonzalez, 204 Ill. 2d at 223-24. Citing People v. Murray, 137 Ill. 2d 382, 387 (1990), we noted that “community caretaking” is a label used to describe consensual police-citizen encounters that typically involve the safety of the public. Gonzalez, 204 Ill. 2d at 224. A “community caretaking” encounter between the police and a citizen involves no coercion or detention, and, consequently, does not violate the fourth amendment. Gonzalez, 204 Ill. 2d at 224. We also rejected the State’s contention that the passenger was not seized during the course of the traffic stop. Gonzalez, 204 Ill. 2d at 224-26. We noted that “[t]he Supreme Court has characterized the temporary detention of ‘individuals’ during a vehicle stop by police, even if only for a brief period and for a limited purpose, as a ‘seizure’ of ‘persons’ within the meaning of the fourth amendment.” Gonzalez, 204 Ill. 2d at 225. We concluded that a passenger in a vehicle stopped by the police is “seized” within the meaning of the fourth amendment. Gonzalez, 204 Ill. 2d at 226; see also People v. Bunch, 207 Ill. 2d 7 (2003). Further, because a traffic stop constitutes a seizure of the vehicle’s occupants, the stop is subject to the fourth amendment’s requirement of reasonableness. Gonzalez, 204 Ill. 2d at 226, citing Whren v. United States, 517 U.S. 806, 809-10, 135 L. Ed. 2d 89, 95, 116 S. Ct. 1769, 1772 (1996); see also Bunch, 207 Ill. 2d at 13. Having disposed of the State’s preliminary contentions, we considered whether the officer’s request for identification from the passenger was reasonable. We noted that a traffic stop is analogous to a Terry investigatory stop (see Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1, 20 L. Ed. 2d 889, 88 S. Ct. 1868 (1968)). Gonzalez, 204 Ill. 2d at 226. Consequently, a court of review judges the reasonableness of a traffic stop by reference to Terry’s dual inquiry. The traffic stop is deemed reasonable if the officer’s action in initiating the stop was justified and if the officer’s action during the course of the stop was reasonably related in scope to the circumstances which justified the interference in the first place. Gonzalez, 204 Ill. 2d at 228, quoting Terry, 392 U.S. at 19-20, 20 L. Ed. 2d at 905, 88 S. Ct. at 1879; see also Bunch, 207 Ill. 2d at 14. With respect to the second inquiry, we explained: “[A] rule governing the application of Terry’s scope requirement to vehicle stops cannot be so permissive as to give police complete discretion in questioning the occupants of a stopped vehicle, nor can it be so limiting that any meaningful law enforcement activities are quashed. We believe the better approach, the one that strikes the proper balance, is that expressed by Judge Murphy in his partial concurrence and partial dissent in [United States u.] Holt: ‘Terry’s scope requirement is a common sense limitation on the power of law enforcement officers. It prevents law enforcement officials from fundamentally altering the nature of the stop by converting it into a general inquisition about past, present and future wrongdoing, absent an independent basis for reasonable articulable suspicion or probable cause. The scope doctrine does not, however, prevent officers from engaging in facially innocuous dialog which a detained motorist would not reasonably perceive as altering the fundamental nature of the stop.’ Holt, 264 F.3d at 1240 (Murphy, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part). Thus, in determining whether police questioning during the course of a traffic stop satisfies Terry’s scope requirement, we must consider, as an initial matter, whether the question is related to the initial justification for the stop. If the question is reasonably related to the purpose of the stop, no fourth amendment violation occurs. If the question is not reasonably related to the purpose of the stop, we must consider whether the law enforcement officer had a reasonable, articulable suspicion that would justify the question. If the question is so justified, no fourth amendment violation occurs. In the absence of a reasonable connection to the purpose of the stop or a reasonable, articulable suspicion, we must consider whether, in light of all the circumstances and common sense, the question impermissibly prolonged the detention or changed the fundamental nature of the stop.” Gonzalez, 204 Ill. 2d at 234-35. Applying these principles to the traffic stop at issue, we held in Gonzalez that the stop was justified at its inception because the vehicle did not have a front license plate. Gonzalez, 204 Ill. 2d at 228-29. Although the officer’s request for identification was not reasonably related to the initial justification for the traffic stop, we also held that the officer’s request for identification was reasonable. Gonzalez, 204 Ill. 2d at 235-36. We observed that the request for identification did not impermissibly prolong the length of the detention. Gonzalez, 204 Ill. 2d at 236. Further, the request did not change the fundamental nature of the traffic stop. Gonzalez, 204 Ill. 2d at 236. A simple request for identification is facially innocuous. Gonzalez, 204 Ill. 2d at 236. It does not suggest official interrogation and is not the type of question or request that would increase the confrontational nature of the encounter. Gonzalez, 204 Ill. 2d at 236.2  As in Gonzalez, we reject the State’s contention that defendant was not seized during the course of the traffic stop. The encounter between Officer Reed and defendant involved a detention and is not appropriately labeled as “community caretaking.” The fourth amendment is implicated when a police officer detains the driver and passenger of a vehicle during the course of a traffic stop. Because defendant was seized when the vehicle in which he was a passenger was stopped, we must determine whether the seizure was reasonable. To do so, we reference Terry’s dual inquiry. With respect to the first inquiry, we note that the traffic stop was justified at its inception. Officer Reed observed the vehicle, in which defendant was a passenger, make a left turn from the right-hand lane of Route 53 onto Mills Road. With respect to the second inquiry, we note that Officer Reed’s request for identification was facially innocuous. Such a request gave the officer the opportunity to identify a potential witness to the traffic violation and to the officer’s actions during the course of the stop, providing a certain level of protection to both the officer and the driver of the vehicle. Moreover, the request for identification, in and of itself, did not change the fundamental nature of the stop by converting it into a general inquisition about past, present and future wrongdoing. Gonzalez, 204 Ill. 2d at 236. Once Officer Reed obtained the identification card, however, he proceeded to run a check to determine whether there were outstanding warrants for defendant’s arrest. Thus, our review of the reasonableness of the traffic stop does not end with the request for identification, as it did in Gonzalez. Nevertheless, Gonzalez is instructive because we there emphasized that the scope inquiry into the reasonableness of the traffic stop is dependent upon both the duration of the traffic stop and the manner in which the stop is conducted. Gonzalez, 204 Ill. 2d at 233; see also Bunch, 207 Ill. 2d at 14 (“Under the second prong we consider the length of the detention and the manner in which it was carried out” (emphases in original)). With the warrant check at issue, as with the request for identification at issue in Gonzalez, we must consider whether the check was related to the initial justification for the stop. If the check was reasonably related to the purpose of the stop, no fourth amendment violation occurred. If the check was not reasonably related to the purpose of the stop, we must consider whether the law enforcement officer had a reasonable, articulable suspicion that would justify the check. If the check was so justified, no fourth amendment violation occurred. In the absence of a reasonable connection to the purpose of the stop or a reasonable, articulable suspicion, we must consider whether, in light of all the circumstances and common sense, the check impermissibly prolonged the detention or changed the fundamental nature of the stop. See Gonzalez, 204 Ill. 2d at 235; Bunch, 207 Ill. 2d at 16. The warrant check performed by Officer Reed was not related to the initial justification for the traffic stop. Officer Reed initiated the traffic stop because the driver made an illegal left turn. Defendant, however, was simply the front-seat passenger in the car and was not implicated in the traffic violation.3 Thus, the warrant check was not directly related to the initial justification for the traffic stop. Further, the warrant check was not supported by a reasonable, articulable suspicion that defendant had committed or was about to commit a crime. Officer Reed neither saw nor suspected that defendant had committed any wrongdoing. Indeed, Officer Reed testified that at the time he requested defendant’s identification, defendant was not doing anything suspicious and Officer Reed did not suspect defendant of committing a criminal offense. In the absence of a reasonable connection to the purpose of the stop or a reasonable, articulable suspicion, we consider whether the check impermissibly prolonged the detention or changed the fundamental nature of the stop. From the record, we cannot ascertain whether the warrant check prolonged the detention. Officer Reed testified at trial that he transmitted the driver’s and defendant’s information to county dispatch at the same time. Some time later, county dispatch informed Officer Reed that the driver’s license was either suspended or revoked. County dispatch also informed Officer Reed that defendant had an outstanding warrant. However, Officer Reed did not testify that the warrant check performed on defendant was completed before the check on the driver. The warrant check performed on defendant could well have lengthened the duration of the detention if the officer had to wait for the results of the warrant check. Under the circumstances at bar, however, regardless of the duration of the detention, the warrant check was impermissible because it changed the fundamental nature of the traffic stop. The warrant check converted the stop from a routine traffic stop into an investigation of past wrongdoing by defendant. As Justice Murphy aptly observed in Holt, “Terry’s scope requirement is a common sense limitation on the power of law enforcement officers. It prevents law enforcement officials from fundamentally altering the nature of the stop by converting it into a general inquisition about past, present and future wrongdoing, absent an independent basis for reasonable articulable suspicion or probable cause.” United States v. Holt, 264 F.3d 1215, 1240 (10th Cir. 2001) (Murphy, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part). In Gonzalez, 204 Ill. 2d at 229, we acknowledged the divergence of opinion among the federal and state courts regarding the propriety of police questioning during a traffic stop. We noted that some jurisdictions look only to the length of the detention in determining the propriety of police questioning during the traffic stop. Gonzalez, 204 Ill. 2d at 230-31. We chose, however, to emphasize that the manner in which the traffic stop is conducted is an important consideration in determining the reasonableness of the stop. Gonzalez, 204 Ill. 2d at 233. As in Gonzalez, we acknowledge the tempestuous discourse in foreign jurisdictions as to whether a police officer can either request identification from a passenger or perform a check for outstanding warrants for the passenger’s arrest using information obtained from the passenger. E.g., compare People v. Jackson, 39 P.3d 1174 (Colo. 2002) (evidence suppressed because police officer retained passenger’s identification, instructed passenger to remain in vehicle and performed warrant check on passenger); Spikes v. State, 323 S.C. 28, 31, 448 S.E.2d 560, 563 (1994) (evidence suppressed where passenger was detained for 20 minutes while the officers “went fishing” for evidence of some crime); Holt v. State, 227 Ga. App. 46, 487 S.E.2d 629 (1997); Commonwealth v. Alvarez, 44 Mass. App. 531, 692 N.E.2d 106 (1998); Hornberger v. American Broadcasting Cos., 351 N.J. Super. 577, 799 A.2d 566 (2002) (compiling cases); with State v. Higgins, 884 R2d 1242, 1245 n.2 (Utah 1994) (the officer could perform a warrant check because the passenger consented to drive the car, and the warrant check did not significantly extend “the period of time reasonably necessary to run” a check on the passenger’s driver’s license); State v. Johnson, 805 P.2d 761 (Utah 1991) (not within the scope of the traffic stop to do a warrant check on the passenger where the passenger had denied having a license); State v. Mennegar, 114 Wash. 2d 304, 787 P.2d 1347 (1990) (a traffic stop does not involve an arrest or seizure of the passenger; as part of a police officer’s community caretaking function, the officer may ask a passenger if the passenger wishes to drive an intoxicated driver’s vehicle and may run a check on the passenger’s information); State v. Larson, 93 Wash. 2d 638, 611 P.2d 771 (1980) (a police stop based on a parking violation committed by the driver did not reasonably provide the officer with grounds to require identification of passengers unless other circumstances gave the police independent cause to question them); and with State v. Landry, 588 So. 2d 345, 348 (La. 1991) (“While the request for information (or perhaps even the removal from the car) may not have been reasonable if the officers had stopped a lone person on a college campus in broad daylight, the circumstances of the traffic stop in the present case made the request for identification from the two men reasonable”); People v. O’Neal, 32 P.3d 533 (Colo. App. 2000) (an officer’s request for a passenger’s name was part of a consensual interview; once the officer had reason to believe that the passenger had given a false name, the officer could conduct the investigatory stop which led to the discovery of the outstanding warrants); State v. Chagaris, 107 Ohio App. 3d 551, 669 N.E.2d 92 (1995) (having obtained a passenger’s identification information, the police officer could perform a warrant check because any questioning which occurred during the detention, even if unrelated to the scope of the detention, was valid so long as the questioning did not improperly extend the duration of the detention). We continue to adhere, however, to our analysis in Gonzalez that the length and scope of the detention must both be considered in determining the reasonableness of the traffic stop. Having applied the Gonzalez framework and considered both prongs of the Terry dual inquiry, we conclude that Officer Reed exceeded the proper scope of the traffic stop when he retained defendant’s identification card and performed a check for outstanding warrants for defendant’s arrest. By our opinion today, we do not intimate that warrant checks are always improper. As we acknowledged in Gonzalez, 204 Ill. 2d at 234-35, “a rule governing the application of Terry’s scope requirement to vehicle stops cannot be so permissive as to give police officers complete discretion in questioning the occupants of a stopped vehicle, nor can it be so limiting that any meaningful law enforcement activities are quashed.” Circumstances may arise during a routine traffic stop that focus suspicion upon the passenger. The police officer may have a reasonable, articulable suspicion that the passenger has committed a crime, in which case a warrant check may be proper. See, e.g., Commonwealth v. Sinforoso, 434 Mass. 320, 749 N.E.2d 128 (2001). The passenger’s conduct may cause the officer to fear for his safety.4 We also do not address the situation where the passenger has violated a traffic law, such as riding in a car with an open container of alcohol. See 625 ILCS 5/11 — 502(b) (West 2000); United States v. Henderson, 229 F. Supp. 2d 35 (D. Mass. 2002). Lastly, we distinguish the facts of the present case from a situation where the driver and passenger, knowing that the driver is being arrested or is otherwise incapable of driving, agree that the passenger should drive the vehicle. See, e.g., Higgins, 884 P.2d at 1242. C. Inevitable Discovery The State argues that the evidence recovered from defendant should not be suppressed because the evidence would have been discovered independently of the warrant check and the ensuing search of defendant’s person. According to the State, Officer Reed would have performed an inventory search of the vehicle; Officer Reed would have discovered the pea-sized rock of cocaine in the vehicle; Officer Reed would have searched defendant, as an occupant of a vehicle containing cocaine; and Officer Reed would have found the evidence on defendant’s person which is the subject of this motion to suppress. Defendant counters that the inevitable-discovery doctrine requires a showing of much more than the possibility that an inventory search would have been conducted. According to defendant, the State must show that a proper inventory search would have occurred, leading to the discovery of evidence. Defendant argues the State has not met its burden of showing that Officer Reed would have arranged for the vehicle to be towed and would have performed an inventory search. Defendant also maintains that the State has failed to show that defendant would have been in or near the vehicle at the time of an inventory search. Pursuant to the inevitable-discovery doctrine, “evidence obtained in violation of an accused’s constitutional rights and which otherwise would be inadmissible at trial may be admitted if the prosecution is able to show that the evidence ‘would inevitably have been discovered without reference to the police error or misconduct.’ ” People v. Edwards, 144 Ill. 2d 108, 142 (1991), quoting Nix v. Williams, 467 U.S. 431, 448, 81 L. Ed. 2d 377, 390, 104 S. Ct. 2501, 2511 (1984). The rationale for the inevitable-discovery doctrine is that “while ‘the prosecution is not to be put in a better position than it would have been in if no illegality had transpired,’ the prosecution should not be put ‘in a worse position simply because of some earlier police error or misconduct.’ ” (Emphasis omitted.) People v. Burnidge, 178 Ill. 2d 429, 437 (1997), quoting Nix, 467 U.S. at 443, 81 L. Ed. 2d at 387, 104 S. Ct. at 2508. Speculation and assumption will not support application of the inevitable-discovery doctrine. In the present case, without addressing the propriety of the inventory search conducted, we decline to apply the inevitable-discovery doctrine. We agree with the appellate court that the chain of events presupposed by the State for application of the doctrine is simply too tenuous. It strains the imagination to assume that, once Officer Reed told defendant the car would be towed, defendant would have stayed for the duration of the inventory search. It is a further stretch to assume that, upon discovery of the pea-sized rock of cocaine in the back seat of the vehicle, Officer Reed would have searched defendant, the front seat passenger, in the belief that defendant possessed cocaine. In that regard we note that the State charged only the driver of the vehicle with possession of the cocaine found in the vehicle. A court must not apply the inevitable-discovery doctrine “upon the basis of nothing more than a hunch or speculation as to what otherwise might have occurred.” 5 W LaFave, Search & Seizure § 11.4(a), at 247 (3d ed. 1996). CONCLUSION In reaching our conclusion, we note that the case at bar involved only the suppression of the evidence recovered from defendant during the course of the traffic stop. We were not called upon to determine the validity of any charges pressed upon defendant pursuant to the outstanding warrant for his arrest. We also note that the warrant check performed by Officer Reed was not related to the initial justification for the traffic stop, that is, the illegal left turn the driver made. Further, the warrant check was not supported by a reasonable, articulable suspicion that defendant had committed or was about to commit a crime. Officer Reed neither saw nor suspected that defendant had committed any wrongdoing. Lastly, as noted above, a warrant check may be appropriate where a passenger’s conduct causes the officer to fear for his safety. However, in the present case, Officer Reed did not testify to any safety concerns. Nor was there any intimation that the warrant check was “a precautionary measure to afford a degree of protection to the officer.” Mimms, 434 U.S. at 110, 54 L. Ed. 2d at 336, 98 S. Ct. at 333. Instead, Officer Reed testified that he requested identification from defendant and performed the warrant check because he wanted to release the car to defendant. These facts indicate that Officer Reed neither feared for his own safety nor for that of the general public. Under the circumstances, we conclude that the warrant check changed the fundamental nature of the traffic stop. The detention was unreasonable and the circuit court should have suppressed the evidence recovered from defendant’s person. Accordingly, we affirm the judgment of the appellate court reversing the circuit court’s denial of defendant’s motion to suppress. Appellate court judgment affirmed.  A “Chore Boy” is a scrubbing pad that can be used to heat up cocaine. The cocaine can then be smoked.   We note that the request for identification, a mere question, did not constitute a seizure or a search. The important consideration in Gonzalez was that the passenger was seized by virtue of the traffic stop, and the questioning could not impermissibly prolong the detention or change the fundamental nature of the traffic stop. Gonzalez is thus entirely consistent with Cox, 202 Ill. 2d 462, where this court determined that a traffic stop was unreasonable, without consideration as to whether the dog-sniff test at issue was a search. The principle to take from Gonzalez and Cox is that an officer’s conduct during the course of a traffic stop must be reasonably related in length and scope to the initial justification for the traffic stop.   The passenger in this case is similarly situated to the passenger in Bunch, 207 Ill. 2d 7. In Bunch, an officer observed a car come to a brief stop but did not see the car’s brake lights activate. The officer initiated a traffic stop, arrested the driver because the driver could not produce a driver’s license, and asked the passenger, Bunch, to exit the car and stand at the rear of the vehicle. It was approximately 1:10 in the morning, and the officer twice shined a flashlight in Bunch’s face as the officer asked Bunch his name and where he was coming from. The officer observed a small, clear plastic item, containing something white, in Bunch’s mouth. The officer arrested Bunch and ordered him to spit the object out of his mouth. This court affirmed the judgment of the appellate court, finding that the trial court erred in denying a motion to quash arrest and suppress evidence. In doing so, we observed that “[pfcior to being approached by [the .officer], [Bunch] was simply a passive occupant of the car. Although the trial court indicated that the officer had ‘numerous’ reasons to have a conversation with [Bunch], including explaining to him the reason for the arrest and determining if [Bunch] could be an alternative driver, the questions the officer actually posed were not objectively related to either of these reasons.” Bunch, 207 Ill. 2d at 16-17. We note that the actions of the passenger in the present case and the passenger in Bunch Eire in sharp contrast to the actions of the passenger in People v. Gonzalez, 184 Ill. 2d 402 (1998). In Gonzalez, an officer initiated a traffic stop in a high-crime area at approximately 2:40 in the morning. As the officer exited his squad car, the passenger “abruptly” exited from the rear passenger seat. The officer ordered the passenger to stop and return to the vehicle because the officer “didn’t know what [the passenger] was plEinning on doing.” Because the passenger ignored the officer’s command and continued to walk away, the officer instructed his police dog to exit the squad car and stand in the “heel” position, at which point the dog began to bark. The officer repeated his instruction to the passenger to stop and return to the vehicle. The passenger turned around, looked at the officer, and walked back to the vehicle after hesitating a few seconds. Having observed this “strange behavior,” the officer asked the passenger whether he was carrying any guns, needles or knives, to which the passenger replied “yes.” The officer did a “pat down,” and discovered a gun inside the front waist area of defendant’s pants. This court determined “it is reasonable for a police officer to immediately instruct a passenger to remain at the car, when that passenger, of his own volition, exits the lawfully stopped vehicle at the outset of the stop.” Gonzalez, 184 Ill. 2d at 418.   Like the dissenting justices, the court recognizes that concerns about officer safety are “legitimate and weighty.” Pennsylvania v. Mimms, 434 U.S. 106, 110, 54 L. Ed. 2d 331, 336, 98 S. Ct. 330, 333 (1977). The court is mindful about the safety of officers in every situation where danger is present, as our case law aptly demonstrates. Today’s ruhng does not, in any way, alter our commitment to the safety of those entrusted to protect the public. In this case, we must emphasize that there was no testimony from Officer Reed regarding safety concerns. Moreover, we have made clear that a different set of factual circumstance may well yield a different conclusion based on safety concerns. Thus, while we share the anxiety of our dissenting colleagues over the number of officers killed during traffic stops, we simply cannot allow the understandable emotional reaction to such numbers to cloud our legal analysis, or ignore, as those in dissent appear to do, the fact that Officer Reed did not fear for his safety in this case.

=== CASE 9736830 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:07:53.033221+00 ===

JUSTICE FITZGERALD, dissenting: The majority holds that, under the facts of this case, Officer Reed could not lawfully run a routine check for outstanding warrants, after he lawfully obtained identification from the passenger of a lawfully stopped vehicle. In reaching this conclusion, the majority purportedly relies on this court’s recent decision in People v. Gonzalez, 204 Ill. 2d 220 (2003). In Gonzalez, we made clear that common sense was not to be abandoned in determining what is “reasonable” in the context of a vehicle stop. Gonzalez, 204 Ill. 2d at 234-35. Today, the majority not only abandons common sense, but distorts fundamental principles of fourth amendment jurisprudence. In Gonzalez, we held that, in judging the reasonableness of police questioning during a vehicle stop, where the questioning was neither related to the purpose of the stop nor justified by a reasonable, articulable suspicion of criminal conduct, “we must consider whether, in light of all the circumstances and common sense, the question impermissibly prolonged the detention or changed the fundamental nature of the stop.” Gonzalez, 204 Ill. 2d at 235. The majority first speculates that the warrant check in the present case “could well have lengthened the duration of the detention.” 207 Ill. 2d at 528. Constrained, however, by the absence of argument or evidence to that effect, the majority concludes that the warrant check “changed the fundamental nature of the traffic stop” by converting it into “an investigation of past wrongdoing by defendant.” 207 Ill. 2d at 528. The majority’s analysis and ultimate conclusion fails to recognize that not all police conduct is created equal. That is, the majority opinion overlooks the significant difference between the police conduct at issue in Gonzalez — a face-to-face exchange between a police officer and a detained passenger — and the police conduct at issue in the present case — an unobtrusive check of information that is part of the public record. Consideration of this difference leads to the inescapable conclusion that Officer Reed did not exceed the bounds of the fourth amendment when he checked for outstanding warrants. Roadside questioning by police of the passenger of a stopped vehicle can take many forms — from the totally benign to the highly intrusive. At the one extreme, an officer’s questions may constitute nothing more than casual banter that elicits a neutral response. At the other extreme, an officer’s questions may approach something akin to official interrogation that invites, or even compels, an incriminating response, possibly on matters divorced from the stop and unsupported by any newly aroused suspicion. The degree of intrusiveness permitted by the fourth amendment was the question we took up in Gonzalez. There, we were called upon to determine whether an officer’s request for identification from the passenger of a lawfully stopped vehicle offends fourth amendment principles in the absence of a particularized suspicion of criminal conduct. In short, did the officer go too far? In deciding this issue, we necessarily balanced the need for effective law enforcement, on the one hand, against the need to safeguard the privacy and security of passengers against arbitrary governmental invasions, on the other hand. Gonzalez, 204 Ill. 2d at 225, 234-36. We ultimately concluded that the officer’s mere request for identification from the passenger was facially innocuous, did not suggest official interrogation, and was not the type of request that would increase the confrontational nature of the encounter, thus changing the stop in some fundamental way. We held that the officer’s conduct did not make the otherwise lawful detention of the passenger unreasonable within the meaning of the fourth amendment. Gonzalez, 204 Ill. 2d at 235-36. The police conduct at issue in the present case stands in stark contrast to the conduct at issue in Gonzalez. A warrant check is simply a computerized retrieval of information in the public record — information which indicates whether a court has entered a written order commanding the arrest of a specific person. See 725 ILCS 5/107 — 1 (West 2002). Thus, a warrant check is never intrusive in the way that police questioning of a detained passenger can be. A warrant check involves no face-to-face exchange and does not even require the passenger’s participation. It is never inquisitorial, confrontational, or suggestive of official interrogation. It does not invite, much less compel, an incriminating response. Further, the passenger has no reasonable expectation of privacy in the information retrieved during a warrant check, whether the police suspect the passenger of criminal activity or not. Accordingly, unless the warrant check impermissibly prolongs the passenger’s detention — which was not the case here — no fourth amendment concerns arise. I recognize that where the identity of the passenger is unknown, the officer cannot run a check for outstanding warrants unless the passenger assents to the officer’s request for identification and permits this initial de minimis intrusion on his or her privacy. A warrant check, however, represents no further intrusion on the passenger’s rights. Thus, if, under Gonzalez, a police officer may lawfully request identification from the passenger of a stopped vehicle, the additional step of a warrant check, without more, does not somehow change the “fundamental nature of the stop.” Stated another way, if a police officer lawfully detains a passenger like defendant by lawfully stopping the vehicle in which he is riding; lawfully obtains the passenger’s identification; conducts a check for information in which the passenger can claim no privacy interest (information which even the majority could not seriously contend should be unavailable to police); does not require the passenger to implicate himself in possible criminal wrongdoing (as would, for example, a series of pointed questions irrelevant to the stop); does not intrude any further on the passenger’s privacy or security (as would, for example, a search of his person or property); and does so without unnecessarily prolonging the passenger’s detention, in what conceivable way have the passenger’s fourth amendment rights been compromised? Where is the governmental intrusion? Under the majority’s reasoning, even if Officer Reed was acquainted with the passenger and made no request for identification, he would have been prohibited from running a warrant check. The absurdity of this proposition is manifest. Thus, the majority opinion achieves what we sought to avoid in Gonzalez: “stripping any notion of common sense out of the ‘reasonableness’ equation.” Gonzalez, 204 Ill. 2d at 234. As we stated, “Although our legal system is steeped with rules, standards, and formulas, logic and common sense should be no less a part of it.” Gonzalez, 204 Ill. 2d at 234. Moreover, the majority opinion makes no attempt to balance the competing governmental and individual interests that lie at the heart of fourth amendment analysis and drove our analysis in Gonzalez. See Gonzalez, 204 Ill. 2d at 224-25, 233-35, citing Delaware v. Prouse, 440 U.S. 648, 654, 59 L. Ed. 2d 660, 667-68, 99 S. Ct. 1391, 1396 (1979); Illinois v. McArthur, 531 U.S. 326, 331, 148 L. Ed. 2d 838, 848, 121 S. Ct. 946, 950 (2001). Instead, the majority establishes a new rule of fourth amendment jurisprudence that prohibits police from engaging in one of the most basic law enforcement techniques with no explanation other than the simple statement that it constitutes an “investigation of past wrongdoing.” 207 Ill. 2d at 528. Nowhere in Gonzalez did we intimate that police should be barred from performing enforcement and investigatory functions. That is, after all, precisely what police do. What we said, in determining the acceptable parameters of police questioning during a routine traffic stop, is that police cannot conduct a “ ‘general inquisition about past, present and future wrongdoing,’ ” absent a reasonable, articulable suspicion. Gonzalez, 204 Ill. 2d at 235, quoting United States v. Holt, 264 F.3d 1215, 1240 (10th Cir. 2001) (Murphy, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part). Conducting a non-intrusive computerized check to determine if a judge has commanded the arrest of the passenger cannot reasonably be deemed a “general inquisition.” The majority’s conclusion to the contrary effectively creates a constitutional right to avoid justice. The majority opinion also calls into question this court’s decision in People v. Cox, 202 Ill. 2d 462 (2002). In Cox, we stated, without qualification, that an officer may conduct a speedy warrant check on the driver of a stopped vehicle. Cox, 202 Ill. 2d at 468, citing People v. Ortiz, 317 Ill. App. 3d 212, 220 (2000); People v. Easley, 288 Ill. App. 3d 487, 491 (1997); People v. Koutsakis, 272 Ill. App. 3d 159, 163 (1995). The appellate court cases cited in Cox for this proposition did not expound on this point, and no specific justification for permitting a warrant check on the driver of a stopped vehicle was offered. The reason, perhaps, is that there is nothing inherently objectionable about such an investigative technique. See 4 W LaFave, Search & Seizure § 9.2(f), at 51-58 (3d ed. 1996). Today, the majority holds otherwise. Under the court’s present analysis, a warrant check will only comport with Terry’s scope requirement if it is either related to the purpose of the stop, or supported by a reasonable, articulable suspicion of criminal conduct. A warrant check, however, will rarely, if ever, relate to the purpose of a routine traffic stop — issuing a warning or citation for an observed traffic violation. Nor will facts necessarily develop during a routine stop providing a reasonable, articulable suspicion of criminal conduct. Although the present case involves a passenger, rather than the driver, the same Terry principles that govern the reasonableness of the officer’s encounter with the passenger, also govern the reasonableness of the officer’s encounter with the driver. Accordingly, under the majority’s opinion, a driver can now legitimately argue that a warrant check “change[s] the fundamental nature of the traffic stop” by converting the stop “into an investigation of past wrongdoing.” 207 Ill. 2d at 528. Once again, the absurdity of the majority’s position is evident. Finally, I am compelled to comment on the majority’s conclusion that because Officer Reed did not testify that he feared for his own safety, considerations of officer safety should not color our analysis in this case. 207 Ill. 2d at 534. Officer safety is always at issue during a vehicle stop. Decades ago, the United States Supreme Court recognized that a state’s concern for officer safety during a traffic stop is “both legitimate and weighty.” Pennsylvania v. Mimms, 434 U.S. 106, 110, 54 L. Ed. 2d 331, 336, 98 S. Ct. 330, 333 (1977). The Court cited the high incidence of police shootings when an officer approaches a suspect seated in an automobile, as well as the significant percentage of murders of police officers during traffic stops. Mimms, 434 U.S. at 110, 54 L. Ed. 2d at 336-37, 98 S. Ct. at 333; see also United States v. McRae, 81 F.3d 1528, 1536 (10th Cir. 1996) (acknowledging “the tragedy of the many officers who are shot during routine traffic stops each year”); In re Arturo D., 27 Cal. 4th 60, 85 n.23, 38 P.3d 433, 450 n.23, 115 Cal. Rptr. 2d 581, 600 n.23 (2002) (“Nationwide, 13 law enforcement officers feloniously were killed while enforcing traffic laws in the year 2000,” and that same year “6,234 officers were assaulted during traffic pursuits and stops”), citing FBI, Uniform Crime Reports, Law Enforcement Officers Killed and Assaulted, at 28, 83 (2000); State v. Richards, 201 Wis. 2d 845, 875, 549 N.W.2d 218, 230 (1996) (Abrahamson, J., concurring) (“From 1978-94 about twice as many officers were killed in traffic pursuits or stops as were killed in arrest situations involving drug-related matters”), citing U.S. Dept, of Justice Hindelang Criminal Justice Research Center, 1994 Sourcebook of Criminal Justice Statistics, at 357; State v. Lund, 119 N.J. 35, 37, 573 A.2d 1376,1377 (1990) (“One study of State Police officers killed nationwide in the line of duty from September 1976 to September 1982, shows that 40 percent of the troopers killed by gunfire were fatally wounded while making traffic stops”). More recently, the Court has recognized that the possible sources of harm to an officer increase where a passenger is present. Maryland v. Wilson, 519 U.S. 408, 413, 137 L. Ed. 2d 41, 47, 117 S. Ct. 882, 885 (1997). This court, until today, has also considered the risk of harm to a police officer during a routine traffic stop in determining the permissible scope of the officer’s authority with respect to the passenger. See People v. Gonzalez, 184 Ill. 2d 402, 418 (1998) (concluding that the public interest in officer safety outweighs the potential intrusion to the passenger’s liberty interest in being ordered to remain at the scene). The majority’s present stance, that officer safety cannot be at issue unless the officer testifies to a subjective fear, is unjustified under the case law, totally divorced from reality, and does a grave disservice to police officers. In a footnote, the majority purports to recognize the legitimacy of concerns over officer safety. 207 Ill. 2d at 531 n.4. The majority nonetheless denigrates the dissenters’ concerns, characterizing them as nothing more than an “emotional reaction” which we have allowed to “cloud” our judgment in this case. 207 Ill. 2d at 531 n.4. I freely admit that the number of police officers killed each year during traffic stops strikes a very real emotional chord. How could it not? The suggestion, however, that I, and my colleagues in dissent, have elevated emotion over legal analysis is at best unfounded, and at worst a poor attempt to direct attention away from the other significant flaws in the majority opinion. As set forth above, the majority opinion misrepresents this court’s holding in Gonzalez, 204 Ill. 2d 220. Further, it distorts basic principles of fourth amendment jurisprudence. In addition, the majority opinion is inconsistent with statements the same majority made in Cox. In response to these observations, the majority has made no attempt to shore up its tortured fourth amendment analysis, nor any attempt to reconcile today’s holding with Cox. These are weighty and legitimate matters which the majority needs to address and which are far more significant than unwarranted suggestions that the dissenting justices are ruled by emotion. I dissent. JUSTICES THOMAS and CARMAN join in this dissent.

=== CASE 2207575 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:21.022557+00 ===

454 N.W.2d 289 (1990)
235 Neb. 140
STATE of Nebraska, Appellee,
v.
John G. GIESSINGER, Appellant.
No. 89-832.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
April 20, 1990.
*291 Casey J. Quinn and Bonnie Harty, Omaha, for appellant.
Robert M. Spire, Atty. Gen., and Linda L. Willard, for appellee.
HASTINGS, C.J., and BOSLAUGH, WHITE, CAPORALE, SHANAHAN, GRANT, and FAHRNBRUCH, JJ.
CAPORALE, Justice.
Defendant-appellant, John G. Giessinger, challenges the district court's affirmance of the county court's judgment adjudicating him guilty of driving a motor vehicle while his driver's license had been suspended, in violation of Neb.Rev.Stat. §§ 60-430.01 and 60-557 (Reissue 1988). Giessinger's five assignments of error consolidate into assertions that the district court failed to find error on the record by virtue of the county court's purportedly erroneous overruling of his motion to suppress evidence obtained through an allegedly unlawful investigatory stop. We affirm.
On November 12, 1988, the Nebraska Game and Parks Commission and the Nebraska State Patrol were jointly conducting a transitory roadblock operation in Otoe County, Nebraska, at the intersection of Highways 128 and 50. The commission officers were checking for game and fish permit violations, while the state troopers were inspecting operators' licenses, vehicle registrations, proofs of insurance, and vehicle equipment.
Participating in the roadblock was a commission conservation officer having statewide authority to enforce traffic laws as well as game, fish, and park regulations. At approximately 1:55 p.m., the conservation officer observed a brown Chevrolet pickup truck approaching the intersection at which the roadblock was located. The conservation officer noticed that when the pickup was approximately 200 to 250 yards from the roadblock, it slowed down, pulled off onto the shoulder of the highway, and stopped. The conservation officer shouted to one of the troopers that there was a vehicle pulling off the road. Through his binoculars, the conservation officer saw Giessinger stop the pickup and then saw Giessinger and the passenger of the vehicle switch places. When the conservation officer saw the two switch places, he decided to stop the pickup. He testified that although he had no evidence of any criminal activity, he believed that Giessinger's actions in pulling over and switching places with the passenger just before reaching the roadblock were suspicious.
When the pickup reached the roadblocked intersection, the conservation officer approached the driver's side of the vehicle and asked the driver for his operator's license. The trooper approached the passenger side of the vehicle where Giessinger was sitting, asked Giessinger for his operator's license, and learned that Giessinger's motor vehicle operator's license had been suspended.
Pursuant to Neb.Rev.Stat. § 29-822 (Reissue 1989), Giessinger moved in county court to suppress the evidence which was obtained pursuant to the stop and subsequent search, which in his motion he claims were "accomplished by law enforcement personnel by virtue of an unreasonable roadblock...." The county court overruled Giessinger's motion on the basis that *292 the investigatory stop was unrelated to the roadblock because the conservation officer had a particularized and objective basis for suspecting Giessinger of criminal activity and thus for stopping the vehicle.
Prior to the suppression hearing, the county court judge told defense counsel that the judge's usual practice was to handle the motion to suppress and the trial "collectively, at the same time, and [hear] evidence on the motion and also [receive] it as evidence at the trial at the same time," and asked defense counsel if he had "[a]ny problem with handling it that way." Defense counsel informed the judge that Giessinger might testify at the suppression hearing but not at trial, and the judge decided to consider the motion to suppress before proceeding with the trial.
In this regard we call attention to our recent holding in State v. Harms, 233 Neb. 882, 449 N.W.2d 1 (1989), that the intention embodied in § 29-822 is that unless a motion to suppress falls within one of the statutorily specified exceptions, which do not apply in this case, such a motion is to be ruled on and finally determined before trial.
Perhaps as a result of the county court judge's suggestion that they implement the practice of combining the suppression hearing and the trial for purposes of receiving evidence, Giessinger failed to make a timely objection to the admission of the claimed objectionable evidence at the "trial" phase of the proceedings. He instead renewed his motion to suppress at the close of the State's evidence at trial and at the close of all the evidence at trial. However, even if we treat Giessinger's renewed motions to suppress as motions to strike any testimony given at trial concerning the allegedly illegally obtained evidence, such motions to strike were not timely made. A motion to strike evidence to which there should have been an objection when the evidence was offered is merely another term for an objection and is governed by the rules pertaining to a timely objection. State v. Archbold, 217 Neb. 345, 350 N.W.2d 500 (1984). An objection to the admission of evidence is not timely unless it is made at the earliest opportunity after the ground for the objection becomes apparent. Id. Accordingly, a motion to strike is not timely where testimony has been adduced without objection and where the grounds for the motion should have been apparent at the time of the testimony. Id. See, also, State v. Welsh, 232 Neb. 219, 440 N.W.2d 225 (1989) (error cannot be predicated upon the admission of evidence to which no objection was made at the time the evidence was adduced).
Despite the fact that Giessinger failed to object at trial, because of the confusion introduced into the proceedings by the county court judge's suggestion that the suppression hearing and the trial be combined, we will consider the merit of Giessinger's claim that his motion to suppress should have been sustained.
We begin by noting that Giessinger possesses the necessary standing to question the seizure of the automobile, for while the record does not disclose the identity of the owner of the subject motor vehicle, it does disclose that Giessinger was an occupant thereof. As we recently held in State v. Harms, supra, an occupant of a vehicle ordinarily has a legitimate expectation to be free of unreasonable governmental intrusion so as to give him or her standing to challenge the stop as violative of the occupant's fourth amendment rights.
Giessinger argues that he was stopped pursuant to the roadblock, that the roadblock was conducted unlawfully in violation of the fourth amendment to the U.S. Constitution, and that the evidence gathered as a result of his being stopped at the roadblock should have been suppressed. He is in error.
It is true that automobile drivers are not shorn of their 4th and 14th amendment protections when they leave their homes and enter their automobiles. Delaware v. Prouse, 440 U.S. 648, 99 S. Ct. 1391, 59 L. Ed. 2d 660 (1979). However, an investigative stop of a vehicle is justified where a law enforcement officer has a reasonable suspicion founded upon articulable facts which indicate that a crime has been *293 committed or is being committed by occupants of the vehicle. Id.; State v. Rein, 234 Neb. 917, 453 N.W.2d 114 (1990); State v. Carter, 232 Neb. 666, 441 N.W.2d 640 (1989). In determining whether facts known to a law enforcement officer at the time of the investigatory stop provided a reasonable basis for the stop, we must consider the totality of the circumstances, including all of the objective observations and considerations, as well as the suspicions, drawn by a trained and experienced law enforcement officer by inference and deduction that the individual stopped is, has been, or is about to be engaged in criminal behavior. The officer must have a particularized and objective basis for suspecting the person stopped of criminal activity. State v. Carter, supra. A finding of a reasonable suspicion must be determined on a case-by-case basis.
A situation similar to that before us was considered in Snyder v. State, 538 N.E.2d 961 (Ind.App.1989), where the police were conducting a "sobriety roadblock." When approximately 100 yards away, Snyder turned around in the road to avoid the roadblock. A state trooper left the roadblock and stopped Snyder. Prior to the stop, Snyder had committed no traffic violations, nor was he driving erratically. The trooper testified that the sole reason he stopped Snyder was that Snyder was apparently trying to avoid the roadblock. Rejecting Snyder's contention that he was seized pursuant to the roadblock, the court held that although
a driver approaching a roadblock is not "seized" until actually reaching the roadblock, a driver's attempt to avoid the roadblock, by making a turn around, does raise a "specific and articulable fact" which gives rise to a reasonable suspicion on the part of a police officer that the driver may be committing a crime. Such a suspicion entitles the officer to detain the driver of the vehicle....
Id. at 965.
In another similar case, Coffman v. State, 26 Ark.App. 45, 759 S.W.2d 573 (1988), Coffman, who had been convicted for driving while under the influence of alcohol, challenged the validity of a police roadblock and argued that evidence should have been suppressed because the officers lacked probable cause to stop him. Coffman was stopped because, as he approached the roadblock, he pulled into a driveway, backed out onto the highway, and headed in the opposite direction. The officer who stopped Coffman testified that before stopping him, he did not observe Coffman driving erratically or suspect Coffman of any criminal activity. The court rejected Coffman's claim that the alleged unlawful roadblock made his arrest unlawful under the fruit of the poisonous tree doctrine, and held:
[W]e do not agree with appellant's contention that the stop of his vehicle was unconstitutional or unlawful. We agree with the appellee that the question is whether the record will support a finding that the police officer could have "possessed the requisite reasonable suspicion necessary to effectuate a constitutionally permissible investigatory stop." We find that the record will support such a finding. There is evidence from which it could be found that the appellant was approaching a roadblock made clearly visible by the presence of police vehicles with flashing blue lights; that the appellant attempted to avoid the roadblock; and that the trained police officers who were conducting the roadblock could reasonably suspect that one who attempted to avoid this roadblock was trying to hide some type of unlawful activity.
Id. at 48-49, 759 S.W.2d at 575. See, also, Tims v. State, 26 Ark.App. 102, 760 S.W.2d 78 (1988), modified on other grounds 26 Ark.App. 106-A, 770 S.W.2d 211 (1989) (act of defendant in driving through a police roadblock gave officers a reasonable suspicion to detain him); City of Las Cruces v. Betancourt, 105 N.M. 655, 735 P.2d 1161 (1987) (defendant's actions in proceeding through police roadblock at high rate of speed provided officers with articulable facts upon which to stop the defendant, regardless of constitutionality of initial stop at roadblock); Green v. State, 530 So. 2d 480 (Fla.App.1988), rev. denied 539 So. 2d 475 (Fla.1989) (even though police *294 roadblock was illegal, officer's stop of defendant prompted by defendant's failure to follow directions of officer to stop at roadblock was valid); Smith v. State, 515 So. 2d 149 (Ala.Crim.App.1987) (initial investigatory stop of defendant's vehicle was justified by state trooper's observation of defendant's vehicle coming around the curve in sight of the police roadblock, turning rapidly into driveway approximately 200 yards from roadblock, stopping some 50 feet from the house, and turning the lights off but not the engine); Boches v. State, 506 So. 2d 254 (Miss.1987) (initial stop of defendant's vehicle after he turned vehicle away from police roadblock and headed in opposite direction was justified); Stanley v. State, 191 Ga.App. 603, 382 S.E.2d 686 (1989) (fact that defendant, who was driving toward police roadblock, stopped and backed approximately six to eight car lengths away from the roadblock was sufficient to give rise to a reasonable suspicion that defendant was or was about to be engaged in criminal activity).
But see, Murphy v. Commonwealth, 9 Va.App. 139, 384 S.E.2d 125 (1989) (act of driver in making a lawful right turn onto an existing roadway 350 feet before police roadblock does not give rise to reasonable suspicion of criminal activity unless the driver's turn or action is coupled with other articulable facts, such as erratic driving, a traffic violation, or some behavior which independently raises suspicion of criminal activity); Pooler v. MVD, 306 Or. 47, 755 P.2d 701 (1988) (State concedes that act of motorist in making legal U-turn before reaching police roadblock does not in itself constitute cause for a reasonable suspicion).
While there may be nothing suspicious in making a lawful right turn onto an existing roadway or in making a lawful U-turn before reaching a roadblock, we are persuaded that the conservation officer's observation of Giessinger's actions in driving the pickup onto the shoulder of the highway and switching places with the passenger prior to approaching the roadblock was sufficient to provide the officer with the reasonable suspicion necessary to justify the investigatory stop. That is to say, Giessinger's actions provided a basis independent of the roadblock which justified his stop.
Thus, we do not reach the question whether the roadblock was lawful, for while Giessinger has standing to challenge the seizure of the vehicle in which he was riding, he does not have standing to challenge the seizure of other vehicles pursuant to the roadblock.
AFFIRMED.

=== CASE 9736832 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:07:55.820225+00 ===

*504OPINION
ZAPPALA, Justice.
Troning Lewis and Eric Bradley, the Appellants in these consolidated appeals, were convicted by a jury of possession of cocaine with the intent to deliver and conspiracy, 407 Pa.Super. 186, 595 A.2d 593.1 The Appellants moved to suppress the introduction of statements and physical evidence at trial on the ground that the evidence had been obtained in an unconstitutional search and seizure by agents of Amtrak and Harrisburg police officers. The trial court denied the suppression motions and the Superior Court affirmed the judgments of sentence. We granted allocatur to determine whether the Appellants’ rights under the Fourth Amendment of the United States Constitution and Article I, Section 8 of the Pennsylvania Constitution were violated, and to examine the use of a “drug courier profile” as a law enforcement technique. We now reverse the order of the Superior Court and vacate the judgments of sentence.
“When we review the ruling of a suppression court we must determine whether the factual findings are supported by the record. When it is a defendant who has appealed, we must consider only the evidence of the prosecution and so much of the evidence for the defense as, fairly read in the context of the record as a whole, remains uncontradicted. We are bound by the facts as are found and may reverse the suppression court only if the legal conclusions drawn from those facts are in error.” Commonwealth v. Cortez, 507 Pa. 529, 491 A.2d 111, 112 (1985), cert. den. 474 U.S. 950, 106 S.Ct. 349, 88 L.Ed.2d 297 (1985) (Citations omitted.).
At the suppression hearing, Officer John W. Ciupinski, an Amtrak police officer, testified that he had received two days of extensive training in a drug interdiction program prior to the Appellants’ arrests. The participants in the program were taught to identify potential couriers of narcotics by using a “drug courier profile” — a loosely defined set of singularly *505innocuous characteristics. Officer Ciupinski identified the following as characteristics of the drug courier profile: (1) travel to and from an import city for illegal drugs, e.g., New York City, Miami, and Los Angeles; (2) payment for tickets in cash; (3) frequent trips with quick returns; (4) displays of large amounts of cash; (5) alertness to surroundings; and (6) lack of luggage or packages.
Officer Ciupinski had discussed the drug courier profile with Amtrak ticket agents, informing them to be on the alert for individuals who displayed large amounts of money and made frequent trips to source cities. Approximately one week before the Appellants were arrested, an unidentified ticket agent told Officer Ciupinski that two black men had paid cash at his ticket window for a round trip ticket to New York City. The ticket agent, who did not testify at the suppression hearing or at trial, told Officer Ciupinski that the men wanted to return as soon as possible and were unconcerned that the cost of the tickets would be higher. The ticket agent indicated that the men had a bundle of money and that they had no luggage.
On the morning of September 22, 1990, the same ticket agent informed Officer Ciupinski that the two men had appeared again at his window and made a cash purchase of four one-way tickets to New York. The agent indicated that they had a “big bundle of money” to pay for the tickets. Each ticket cost $41.50. Officer Ciupinski observed the two men waiting for the train. Mr. Lewis was lying on a bench, but Mr. Bradley appeared apprehensive. Officer Ciupinski then contacted Detective William Holland of the Harrisburg Police Department to discuss the situation. The officers decided to meet the train on its return and to approach the men at that time.
When the Appellants returned, they were confronted by four officers — Officer Ciupinski and his partner, Officer Crandall, Detective Holland and his partner, Detective Arnold. Officer Ciupinski and Detective Holland stood side by side. Their partners followed behind them to act as backup. None of the officers were in uniform. The officers identified them*506selves and informed the Appellants that they were “working narcotics and doing an interdiction program checking for couriers bringing drugs back from New York.”
The officers asked whether the Appellants would mind speaking with them. The Appellants then backed away and the four officers followed. They continued to back away for five to ten feet until they were backed up to a wall with benches in front. They remained standing until backed up to the benches.
Officer Ciupinski informed them that they had been observed traveling between New York and Harrisburg and asked for an explanation. Mr. Lewis responded that he traveled to meet with his probation officer. When asked whether they lived in Harrisburg or New York, both indicated New York. Mr. Bradley said that he was visiting his aunt and gave an address which prompted Detective Holland to respond that there was no such address.
Officer Ciupinski testified that both men appeared extremely nervous and that Mr. Bradley continually moved his hands around his sides and towards his back. Officer Ciupinski told him to refrain from moving his hands. Questioning continued and when asked what he was on probation for, Mr. Lewis indicated a weapons violation. Officer Ciupinski testified that he asked them if they were carrying any weapons and Mr. Bradley’s eyes “became like saucers.” They then talked for a couple of minutes.
In the drug interdiction program, Officer Ciupinski learned that many drug couriers carry weapons. With this in mind, the officers decided to search the Appellants for weapons. No weapon was found on Mr. Lewis, but Mr. Bradley was carrying a pistol. The men were arrested and given Miranda warnings en route to the officers’ headquarters in the station. Another search was conducted on the two men, which uncovered a packet of cocaine in Mr. Lewis’ sock. During questioning, Mr. Bradley told the officers that he found the handgun on the train and Mr. Lewis said that they had purchased *507cocaine for $5,000 in New York and intended to sell it for $15,000 in Harrisburg.
The Appellants contend that the trial court erred in denying their suppression motions because the police officers did not have reasonable suspicion or probable cause to conduct an investigatory stop and the search and seizure was invalid under the federal and state constitutions. The Superior Court rejected this argument, holding that the initial questioning of the Appellants by the police officers was not an investigatory stop under Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1, 88 S.Ct. 1868, 20 L.Ed.2d 889 (1968). The Superior Court reasoned that even if an investigatory stop did occur, the conduct of the police officers was permissible because the circumstances gave rise to a reasonable suspicion that the Appellants fit within the drug courier profile. The Superior Court determined that the officers had a reasonable basis to make an investigatory stop which satisfied the guidelines established in United States v. Sokolow, 490 U.S. 1, 109 S.Ct. 1581, 104 L.Ed.2d 1 (1989). We hold that the investigatory stop of the Appellants was not supported by reasonable suspicion or probable cause and violated the Fourth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution and Article I, § 8 of the Pennsylvania Constitution.
The Fourth Amendment provides that “the right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and, effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated....” “No right is held more sacred, or is more carefully guarded, by the common law, than the right of every individual to the possession and control of his own person, free from all restraint or interference of others, unless by clear and unquestionable authority of law.” Terry v. Ohio, supra, 392 U.S. at 8, 88 S.Ct. at 1873, citing Union Pac. R. Co. v. Botsford, 141 U.S. 250, 251, 11 S.Ct. 1000, 1001, 35 L.Ed. 734 (1891). The Fourth Amendment’s prohibition of searches and seizures that are unsupported by objective justification governs all seizures of the person, including seizures that involve only a brief detention.
*508The U.S. Supreme Court stated in Terry that not all personal contacts or exchanges between police officers and individuals involve “seizures” of persons; however, not every police interrogation may be dismissed as personal intercourse. When an officer, by means of physical force or show of authority, has restrained the liberty of an individual, a “seizure” has occurred. “[A]ny curtailment of a person’s liberty by the police must be supported at least by a reasonable and articulable suspicion that the person seized is engaged in criminal activity.” Reid v. Georgia, 448 U.S. 438, 440, 100 S.Ct. 2752, 2754, 65 L.Ed.2d 890 (1980) (Citations omitted.).
In Florida v. Bostick, 501 U.S. 429, 111 S.Ct. 2382, 115 L.Ed.2d 389 (1991), the Court addressed the issue whether the Fourth Amendment permits police officers to approach individuals on a bus to ask them questions and to request consent to search their luggage. As part of a drug interdiction program, the Sheriffs Department of Broward County, Florida, routinely boarded buses at scheduled stops and asked passengers for permission to search their luggage. Two officers boarded a bus bound from Miami to Atlanta during a stopover in Fort Lauderdale. The officers singled out Terrance Bostick, concededly without any articulable suspicion, and asked to inspect his ticket and identification. The ticket matched Bostick’s identification. The officers then conducted a search of his suitcase and uncovered cocaine. There was a dispute as to whether Bostick consented to the search. Bostick was arrested and charged with trafficking in cocaine.
The trial court denied his suppression motion. The Florida District Court of Appeal affirmed and certified the question to the Florida Supreme Court. The Florida Supreme Court held that an impermissible seizure occurs when police initiate a drug search on buses during scheduled stops and question passengers without articulable reasons for doing so. The U.S. Supreme Court granted certiorari to determine whether the Florida Supreme Court’s per se rule was consistent with its Fourth Amendment jurisprudence.
The U.S. Supreme Court held that the Florida Supreme Court erred in adopting a per se rule that every police *509encounter on a bus is a seizure. The Court held that a seizure does not occur simply because a police officer approaches an individual for the purpose of asking a few questions so long as a reasonable person would feel free to ignore the police and go about his business. Encounters of that nature are consensual and no reasonable suspicion is required. The Court expressly refused to decide whether or not a seizure of Bostick had occurred because the trial court had made no express findings of fact and the Florida Supreme Court’s decision rested entirely on the fact that the encounter took place on a bus. The Court remanded the matter for further proceedings consistent with its opinion.
The U.S. Supreme Court articulated the following test to determine whether a particular encounter constitutes a seizure: “[A] court must consider all the circumstances surrounding the encounter to determine whether the police conduct would have communicated to a reasonable person that the person was not free to decline the officers’ request or otherwise terminate the encounter.” 501 U.S. at -, 111 S.Ct. at 2389. Applying the test to the facts of the instant case, we find that under the totality of the circumstances, the police conduct would have communicated to a reasonable person that the person was not free to leave. It is not our intention to single out the fact that the Appellants were confronted by four police officers as dispositive of our inquiry, but the nature of the confrontation demonstrated a show of authority which constituted a restraint of the Appellants’ liberty. We hold that a seizure occurred in this case.
We must consider next whether there were “specific and articulable facts which, taken together with rational inferences from those facts, reasonably warranted] that intrusion.” Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. at 21, 88 S.Ct. at 1880. A stop for investigatory purposes is justified only if the “police officer observes unusual conduct which leads him reasonably to conclude in light of his experience that criminal activity may be afoot....” Id., 392 U.S. at 30, 88 S.Ct. at 1884. The use of a “drug courier profile” as justification for the seizure was *510accepted by the Superior Court in this case, and has been analyzed by the U.S. Supreme Court in United States v. Sokolow, supra.
In Sokolow, the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) agents stopped Andrew Sokolow upon his arrival at the Honolulu International Airport and found 1,063 grams of cocaine after a search of his carry-on luggage. The DEA agents knew that (1) he had paid $2,100 for two airplane tickets from a roll of $20 bills that appeared to contain a total of $4,000; (2) he traveled under a name different from his telephone listing; (3) his original destination was Miami, a source city for illicit drugs; (4) his stay in Miami was for only 48 hours, even though a round-trip flight from Honolulu to Miami took 20 hours; (5) he appeared nervous during his trip; and (6) he did not check any luggage. A divided panel of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit held that the DEA agents did not have a reasonable suspicion to stop Sokolow.
The U.S. Supreme Court reversed, holding that the DEA agents had a reasonable basis to suspect that Sokolow was transporting illegal drugs under the totality of the circumstances. The Court stated,
... [T]he factors in this case that the Court of Appeals treated as merely “probabilistic” also have probative significance. Paying $2,100 in cash for two airplane tickets is out of the ordinary, and it is even more out of the ordinary to pay that sum from a roll of $20 bills containing nearly twice that amount of cash. Most business travelers, we feel confident, purchase airline tickets'by credit card or check so as to have a record for tax or business purposes, and few vacationers carry with them thousands of dollars in $20 bills. We also think the agents had a reasonable ground to believe that respondent was traveling under an alias; the evidence was by no means conclusive, but it was sufficient to warrant consideration. While a trip from Honolulu to Miami, standing alone, is not a cause for any sort of suspicion, here there was more: surely few residents of Honolulu travel from that city for 20 hours to spend 48 hours in Miami during the month of July.
*511Sokolow, 490 U.S. at 8-9, 109 S.Ct. at 1586. The U.S. Supreme Court acknowledged that any one of those factors was not proof of illegal conduct by itself and was consistent with innocent travel, but concluded that the factors amounted to reasonable suspicion when taken together.
The factual circumstances of the instant case do not rise to the level of reasonable suspicion. The cash payment of $166 for the purchase of four one-way train tickets and the short length of the trip to New York fall short of the suspicious behavior- in Sokolow. Even when considered together, the facts articulated by the police officers in this case were no more indicative of a drag courier than an innocent traveler. The use of cash, rather than a credit card, for the inexpensive tickets was not unusual. The length of the trip to New York was concededly commonplace, unlike air travel of 20 hours for a trip with a duration of only 48 hours.
The danger inherent in defining reasonable suspicion in the context of a “drug courier profile” is that the police officer’s suspicion is not aroused by personal observation of an individual whose behavior sets him apart from other travelers. The use of a drag courier profile encourages the police officer to direct his attention to any individual whose behavior falls within an over-inclusive set of characteristics that include innocent actions. A drag courier profile should serve only as a starting point of, and not as a substitute for, independent observation of an individual’s behavior.
In Commonwealth v. Edmunds, 526 Pa. 374, 389, 586 A.2d 887, 894-895 (1991), we stated that, “[I]t is both important and necessary that we undertake an independent analysis of the Pennsylvania Constitution each time a provision of that fundamental document is implicated.” Therefore, we do not rest our decision solely on federal constitutional grounds, for we hold also that the seizure and search of the Appellants violated Article I, Section 8 of the Pennsylvania Constitution. We emphasize that the state constitutional protections afforded under Article I, Section 8 provide an independent basis for concluding that the seizure and search were invalid. See *512Michigan v. Long, 463 U.S. 1032, 103 S.Ct. 3469, 77 L.Ed.2d 1201 (1983).
We undertook an extensive analysis of the unique history of Article I, Section 8 in Commonwealth v. Edmunds, supra, in which we stated,
The requirement of probable cause in this Commonwealth thus traces its origin to its original Constitution of 1776, drafted by the, first convention of delegates chaired by Benjamin Franklin. The primary purpose of the warrant requirement was to abolish “general warrants,” which had been used by the British to conduct sweeping searches of residences and businesses, based upon generalized suspicions. Therefore, at the time the Pennsylvania Constitution was drafted in 1776, the issue of searches and seizures unsupported by probable cause was of utmost concern to the constitutional draftsmen.
526 Pa. at 394, 586 A.2d at 897 (1991) (Citations omitted.). We reiterated our statement in Commonwealth v. Sell, 504 Pa. 46, 65, 470 A.2d 457, 467 (1983), that “the survival of the language now employed in Article I, Section 8 through over 200 years of profound change in other areas demonstrates that the paramount concern for privacy first adopted as part of our organic law in 1776 continues to enjoy the mandate of the people of this Commonwealth.”
The facile reliance on drug courier profiles is reminiscent of the generalized suspicions historically used to justify the general warrants of the British. While the use of the drug courier profile is not per se unreasonable, a police officer must observe “unusual and suspicious conduct on the part of the individual seized which leads him reasonably to conclude that criminal activity may be afoot....” Commonwealth v. Hicks, 434 Pa. 153, 253 A.2d 276 (1969). For the reasons which we have articulated in our analysis of the federal constitutional claim, we hold that the seizure and search which occurred in the instant case was violative of our state constitution as well. Since the police officers lacked an articulable reasonable suspicion to seize the Appellants, the evidence obtained during the search of the Appellants was also illegally obtained. Wong *513Sun v. United States, 371 U.S. 471, 83 S.Ct. 407, 9 L.Ed.2d 441 (1963); Commonwealth v. Green, 525 Pa. 424, 581 A.2d 544 (1990). The trial court erred in denying the Appellants’ suppression motions. Accordingly, the order of the Superior Court is reversed and the judgments of sentence are vacated.
LARSEN, J., did not participate in the decision of this case.
PAPADAKOS, J., files a dissenting opinion.
MONTEMURO, J., files a dissenting opinion in which PAPADAKOS, J., joins.
MONTEMURO, J., who was an appointed justice of the Court’s at the time of argument, participated in the decision of this case in his capacity as a Senior Justice.
. Eric Bradley was convicted also of theft by receiving stolen property and unlawful carrying of a firearm in connection with this incident.

=== CASE 9736869 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:08:43.549967+00 ===

G.B. Smith, J.
(dissenting). Because the Vermont court expressly declined to adjudicate the issue of equitable distribution, I would affirm the order of the Appellate Division.
Plaintiff Maureen O’Connell and defendant John J. O’Connell were married in 1959. She was a nurse and he was, as he described, a laborer at a beer brewing company. When the company closed in the early 1960s, defendant was vice-president of the company. Defendant then went to work for an energy company where he remained until his retirement in 1994.1 Plaintiff, by contrast, became a homemaker about a year after the marriage, raising the first of eight children. All the children were raised in a two-story five-bedroom colonial home constructed in 1968 and 1969. While defendant was primarily responsible for building the home, plaintiff maintained it. Plaintiff’s parents financed significant improvement of the home’s garage.
*187In 1982, the two separated. By then plaintiff had resumed her vocation as a nurse. Plaintiff moved to another home with all the children except for one who was away in school. Plaintiffs action for divorce that same year, based on cruel and inhuman treatment, was unsuccessful (O’Connell v O’Connell, 116 AD2d 823 [1986]). When plaintiff left with the children, she essentially took no marital property with her.
About a decade later, in December 1994, plaintiff succeeded in obtaining a divorce in Vermont where she was not required to establish that defendant was at fault. It was enough that they had been living apart for more than six months and reconciliation was unlikely. The defendant appeared at the court in Vermont to contest the divorce proceeding. The Vermont court would not allow his attorney, who was not admitted in Vermont, to participate in the proceeding. Defendant proceeded pro se and protested the proceeding only on the grounds of the prior New York divorce. The Vermont court stated that it would take defendant’s opposition to be an objection to the jurisdiction of the court, and it denied defendant’s assertion that the New York proceeding was determinative.
During the divorce proceeding in Vermont, the following discussion took place between plaintiffs counsel and the court after plaintiff testified:
“court: . . . am I to understand then, that questions of property division are conceded by you as to not appropriately being before this court?
“[counsel]: As far as I understand all of the property—
“court: You’re only asking at this point for a decree of divorce—
“[counsel]: Correct.
“court:—nothing ancillary to that?
“[counsel]: That’s it. Correct.
“court: And will you explain to the court why that is?
“[counsel]: Because as far as I know if any marital property exists, it exists in the State of New York and I don’t believe this court would have jurisdic*188tion to make orders with regard to the division of marital property assets in the State of New York.
“court: All right.”
Plaintiff then commenced this action in New York Supreme Court seeking equitable distribution. Plaintiff relied on New York Domestic Relations Law § 236, which provides, as relevant, that “in proceedings to obtain a distribution of marital property following a foreign judgment of divorce,” the court “shall determine the respective rights of the parties in their separate or marital property, and shall provide for the disposition thereof in the final judgment.” (§ 236 [B] [5] [a].) Defendant moved to dismiss the action on the ground of res judicata and collateral estoppel. The trial court denied the motion and the Appellate Division affirmed, concluding, that in the Vermont action, “[n]o provision . . . was made for the distribution of marital property nor was the issue litigated or alluded to in any way” (226 AD2d 950, 951 [1996]). This Court dismissed the defendant’s motion for leave to appeal (88 NY2d 963 [1996]).
Thereafter, the court awarded plaintiff approximately one half of the marital estate, including a share of the marital residence, defendant’s pension benefits, and various money accounts. The Appellate Division once again affirmed (290 AD2d 774 [2002]). The Appellate Division noted that the parties were both 62 years old at the time of the trial and that “defendant challenged and successfully defeated the 1982 divorce action, and subsequently failed to demonstrate any unfairness in permitting plaintiff to share in property acquired in the ensuing years” (290 AD2d at 777). This appeal ensued.
By specifically granting courts the authority to make equitable distribution awards “following a foreign judgment of divorce,” section 236 contemplates that a party can obtain a divorce in one state while having property equitably distributed in New York. Nevertheless, section 236 is subject to article IV § 1 of the United States Constitution, which provides that “Full Faith and Credit shall be given in each State to the public Acts, Records, and judicial Proceedings of every other State” (see generally Matter of Luna v Dobson, 97 NY2d 178, 182-183 [2001]).
Although defendant references res judicata and collateral estoppel, collateral estoppel or issue preclusion is not applicable in this case because only the issue of divorce was resolved by a final judgment on the merits (see Farrell v Mountain Folk, Inc., 169 Vt 568, 568-569, 730 A2d 597, 598 [1999]). The Vermont *189court did not resolve the issue of equitable distribution. There is no doubt that the Vermont court could have resolved that issue. Vermont Statutes Annotated, title 15, § 751 (a) reads in part, “Upon motion of either party to a proceeding under this chapter, the court shall settle the rights of the parties to their property, by including in its judgment provisions which equitably divide and assign the property.”
The doctrine of res judicata, as articulated by the Vermont Supreme Court, “bars the litigation of a claim or defense if there exists a final judgment in former litigation in which the ‘parties, subject matter and causes of action are identical or substantially identical’ ” (Berlin Convalescent Ctr., Inc. v Stoneman, 159 Vt 53, 56, 615 A2d 141, 143 [1992], quoting Berisha v Hardy, 144 Vt 136, 138, 474 A2d 90, 91 [1984]). Unlike issue preclusion, “[i]t bars not only issues actually litigated but also those which ‘should have been raised in previous litigation’ ” (159 Vt at 56, 615 A2d at 143-144, quoting American Trucking Assns., Inc. v Conway, 152 Vt 363, 370, 566 A2d 1323, 1328 [1989]). The purpose of the judicially crafted rule is to “protect the courts and the parties against the burden of relitigation, encourage reliance on judicial decisions, prevent vexatious litigation and decrease the chances of inconsistent adjudication” (159 Vt at 57, 615 A2d at 144).
In Roddy v Roddy (168 Vt 343, 721 A2d 124 [1998]), the court precluded a mother from seeking supplemental maintenance after entry of divorce and maintenance and child support orders without having to show a change of circumstances. The court found that the mother “could have, and should have, sought the maintenance supplement in connection with the original divorce and child support proceeding” (168 Vt at 347, 721 A2d at 127).
In Grant v Grant (136 Vt 9, 383 A2d 627 [1978]), the parties appeared before the District Court of the Virgin Islands, which granted a divorce but did not award alimony although the decree provided the court would determine alimony upon motion. The former wife then commenced an action in Vermont seeking to modify the decree to provide for alimony although she did not allege a change of circumstances. The court noted that the record did not indicate why alimony was not awarded. It was clear, however, that “the failure to award alimony was not the result of a lack of power to do so; and secondly, all the evidence plaintiff presented to the Vermont trial court could have been presented to the Virgin Islands court” (136 Vt at 13, 383 A2d at 629).
*190It does not necessarily follow that the Vermont Supreme Court would reach the same result in this case as it did in Roddy and Grant. Plaintiffs counsel did not fail to raise the issue of equitable distribution in the Vermont proceeding. Rather, counsel contended that the court lacked jurisdiction over property located in New York. The argument went directly to the court’s power and counsel’s ability to raise the issue in Vermont. What is clear is that there was no litigation on the merits of any equitable distribution claims in Vermont and, in fact, the Vermont court specifically concluded that it would not address such claims.
In Ford v Franklin (129 Vt 114, 274 A2d 461 [1971]) a Nevada court with personal jurisdiction over the parties had granted a divorce decree which did not, among other things, dispose of jointly owned property located in Vermont.2 The court held that upon motion by either party, a Vermont court could distribute the property, which “was, and is located in Vermont, and under Vermont jurisdiction” (129 Vt at 122, 274 A2d at 466; cf. Poston v Poston, 161 Vt 591, 657 A2d 1076 [1993]; Avery v Bender, 124 Vt 309, 204 A2d 314 [1964]).
In this case, the issue of equitable distribution of property was raised in the Vermont proceeding and neither the Vermont trial court nor the defendant challenged the assertion of the plaintiffs attorney that the court lacked jurisdiction over property located in New York. By using the term “[a] 11 right,” without more, the court placed its seal of approval on the argument of plaintiffs counsel. Whether the court did so because it genuinely believed in the merits of the argument or “to move the parties along” is irrelevant. When the defendant argued that the court should not exercise jurisdiction because of the New York divorce judgment, the court responded with the term “[a]ll right,” but immediately ruled as follows:
“The court will treat your opposition which was filed by letter and your recitation today as a motion to dismiss for lack of jurisdiction. The court will deny the motion on the following grounds . . . .”
*191In contrast, when plaintiff’s counsel argued that the court lacked jurisdiction, the court stated only “[a] 11 right,” and did not otherwise challenge the assertion as it did when defendant objected to the court’s jurisdiction. Had the court disagreed with counsel’s statement, then it could be argued that plaintiff should have raised the issue in Vermont. In light of the court’s ruling, it cannot be said that plaintiff could have brought an equitable distribution claim in Vermont. Despite the expansive language of section 751, the court rendered itself powerless to decide the issue.
The majority is troubled by the fact that plaintiff engaged in so-called forum shopping by going to Vermont after unsuccessfully seeking a divorce in New York. There is no New York statute, however, prohibiting plaintiffs conduct. There is no statute that provides that a plaintiff who was unsuccessful in seeking a divorce in New York may not come back to New York to litigate any related issues after obtaining a divorce in a foreign jurisdiction. In fact, the opposite is true. Similarly, there is no statute prohibiting a plaintiff who failed to obtain a divorce in New York from trying to do so in another state.
The holding of the majority will do little to discourage another plaintiff who fails to obtain a divorce in New York from going to another state like Vermont. What it will do is ensure that plaintiffs will either seek equitable distribution of property in the foreign state (assuming the court has personal jurisdiction over the spouse), or make it clearer than the plaintiff did in this case that the court did not wish to exercise jurisdiction over the marital property.
Separately, while the Vermont Supreme Court applied res judicata in Grant and in Roddy, the court has recognized that the judge-made doctrine is flexible and should not be applied mechanically (see Tudhope v Riehle, 167 Vt 174, 179, 704 A2d 765, 768 [1997], citing Delahunty v Massachusetts Mut. Life Ins. Co., 236 Conn 582, 591, 674 A2d 1290, 1295 [1996]; see also Jones v Murphy, 172 Vt 86, 772 A2d 502 [2001]). Although the issue of equitable distribution was not adjudicated, this was not due to plaintiffs desire to engage in piecemeal and vexatious litigation. It is also not the case that plaintiff wished to avail herself of the equitable distribution statute in New York, rather than the one in Vermont. Rather, the issue was not adjudicated out of a belief, accepted by the court, that the issue could not be resolved in Vermont.
Vermont’s broadly worded equitable distribution statute evinces the importance Vermont attaches to ensuring that a for*192mer spouse receives his or her fair share of the marital property. A party may choose to forgo that right, but that is not what occurred here. This case would be different had the court instructed plaintiff to raise the issue of equitable distribution rather than failing to challenge the statement by plaintiff’s counsel that the court did not have jurisdiction.
Roddy involved supplemental maintenance, which was pegged to the need of the children. The former wife would have had a remedy in Vermont if she could have shown a change of circumstances. Grant involved alimony, and the former spouse would also have had a remedy in Vermont upon proof of a change of circumstances. In addition, she could have commenced an action in the Virgin Islands since the court there retained jurisdiction over alimony.
This case involves the outright disposition of property. If plaintiff is precluded from seeking her fair share of marital property, then she will receive no marital property from a long term marriage (she took almost no marital property when she left the marriage) in which she was primarily responsible for rearing eight children and maintaining the marital home. Plaintiff will not receive what the lower courts found she was entitled to—equal distribution of marital assets, including the marital home, defendant’s various investments and bank accounts, and his pension.
The Full Faith and Credit Clause should not preclude the current action seeking equitable distribution.
Accordingly, I would affirm the order of the Appellate Division.
Chief Judge Kaye and Judges Rosenblatt, Graffeo and Read concur with Judge Ciparick; Judge G.B. Smith dissents and votes to affirm in a separate opinion.
Order reversed, etc.
. Defendant died recently and the preliminary executrix proceeded with this action.
. The majority asserts that reliance on this case is misplaced, quoting language from the opinion stating that neither defendant nor his attorney appeared at the proceedings. However, the sentence following the quoted language states that “Defendant was duly and regularly served with process in this action, and that more than twenty days have elapsed since the said service of Summons, and the default for said Defendant having failed to appear and answer having been duly and regularly entered herein” (129 Vt at 118, 274 A2d at 463).

=== CASE 2207710 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:22.637026+00 ===

802 N.E.2d 938 (2004)
Carlin KRIEG, Appellant-Plaintiff,
v.
Donald HIEBER, Appellee-Defendant.
No. 17A05-0306-CV-311.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
February 3, 2004.
*940 Wm. Joseph Carlin Jr., Kruse & Kruse P.C., Auburn, IN, Attorney for Appellant.
Robert Owen Vegeler, Vegeler Law Office LLC, Fort Wayne, IN, Attorney for Appellee.
*939 OPINION
BAILEY, Judge.
Case Summary
Appellant-Plaintiff Carlin Krieg ("Krieg") appeals the trial court's judgment in favor of Appellee-Defendant Donald Hieber ("Hieber"). We reverse and remand.
Issues
Krieg raises two issues, which we restate as:
I. Whether the trial court erred by considering parol or extrinsic evidence in making its determination that the contracting parties did not negotiate the contract price in contemplation of Krieg's right of residency; and
II. Whether the trial court erred by concluding that the holder of a life estate is not entitled to insurance proceeds from an insurance policy procured by the reversioner.
*941 Facts and Procedural History
In 1999, Krieg owned a dairy farm located at 7721 State Road 8 in St. Joe, Indiana (the "Farm"), which consisted of approximately eighty-two acres of real estate. On December 23, 1997, the value of the Farm was appraised at $154,000.00. In August of 1999, Krieg asked Hieber if he wanted to purchase the Farm, and Hieber responded in the negative. Krieg then informed Hieber that he intended to sell the Farm at a price of one hundred and six thousand dollars, with an additional twenty-four thousand dollars for the machinery and one thousand dollars per cow for the cattle. Hieber told Krieg that he was interested in purchasing the Farm, machinery, and cattle. Indeed, that same day, Hieber went to the bank to inquire about financing the purchase. Because Hieber was only able to secure financing for the Farm and machinery, he told Krieg that he would purchase the Farm and machinery, but not the cattle. Subsequently, however, Krieg and Hieber reached an agreement concerning the sale of the cattle. Krieg orally informed Hieber that he wanted to retain a "right of residency" in the Farm. Tr. at 25. On September 14, 1999, Krieg executed a hand-written statement ("Statement"), which Hieber signed, whereby Krieg agreed to sell the Farm for one hundred and six thousand dollars, the machinery for twenty-four thousand dollars, and the cattle for forty-five thousand dollars. The Statement provides, in part, that: "I [Krieg] have the privilege of living in home for life time." Appellant's App. at 11.
On October 6, 1999, Krieg and Hieber executed a Purchase Agreement regarding the sale of the Farm, the machinery, and the cattle. The Purchase Agreement provides that Krieg "shall transfer full and complete possession at the time of closing, subject to [his] right of residency." Ex. 1. The Purchase Agreement also contains an integration clause as follows:
Upon acceptance, this offer shall become binding upon and inure to the benefit of [Hieber] and [Krieg] and their respective heirs, executors, administrators[,] successors, and assigns, and shall be deemed to contain all the terms and conditions agreed upon, it being agreed that there are no conditions, representations, warranties or agreements not stated in this instrument.
Id. In addition, pursuant to the Purchase Agreement, Hieber requested that Krieg maintain fire and extended coverage insurance on any improvements to the Farm until the date of closing. At closing, on November 5, 1999, Krieg, i.e., the Grantor, executed a Warranty Deed to Hieber, i.e., the Grantee, for the Farm, "[s]ubject to right of residency of the Grantor in the house, garage, apartment, and land thereto, including use of the driveway."[1] Appellant's App. at 54. The Warranty Deed was recorded on November 9, 1999.
Prior to December 6, 1999, Krieg carried insurance on the Farm. However, on December 6, 1999, Krieg cancelled insurance coverage on the Farm in the amount of $189,000.00 and only retained insurance coverage in the amount of $5,000.00 for his personal property. On or about December *942 10, 1999, Hieber purchased insurance coverage on the Farm.
On November 19, 2000, the house located on the Farm was partially burned in an accidental fire, rendering it uninhabitable. Because the fire loss was covered by Hieber's insurance policy, Hieber filed an insurance claim and received the insurance proceeds. Hieber did not repair the house, but rather, used the proceeds to reduce his mortgage debt on the Farm.
On May 23, 2001, Krieg filed a Complaint for Right of Residency against Hieber, alleging estoppel and breach of contract. In his complaint, Krieg argued that his right of residency served as consideration for the reduced purchase price in the Purchase Agreement between himself and Hieber and, thus, Hieber breached the contract by not using the fire insurance proceeds to reconstruct the house wherein Krieg resided. As relief, Krieg requested that the trial court: (1) impose a constructive trust over the insurance proceeds; (2) require Hieber to use the insurance proceeds to rebuild the damaged portion of the residence; (3) award damages for loss of use of the residence until such time as it is rebuilt; and (4) award attorney fees. At trial, Krieg's request for relief changed in that he no longer wished to live in the "rebuilt" house on the Farm. Instead, Krieg asked the trial court to determine, with the help of life expectancy tables, the value of his life estate and award damages accordingly. Tr. at 18. After conducting a bench trial, the trial court entered a judgment in favor of Hieber. In so doing, the trial court issued findings of fact and conclusions thereon. In relevant part, the trial court issued Finding 14 and Conclusions 5 and 6, as follows:
FINDINGS OF FACT
* * * * *
14. Krieg initiated the conversation concerning the sale of the Farm and set the price which was accepted by Hieber before Krieg ever mentioned and before Hieber ever knew that Krieg wanted to reserve a right of residency. At the time that Krieg made the offer which was accepted by Hieber for the Farm, Hieber had no knowledge of Plaintiff's Exhibit 3 which was an appraisal of the Farm made several years earlier for Krieg's refinancing and which indicated a fair market value of $154,000.00 for the Farm. At no time did Hieber know of the appraisal set forth in Plaintiff's Exhibit 3 and did not believe that the Farm was worth $154,000.00 and would not have purchased the Farm for $154,000. At no time was Hieber interested in buying the Farm until he was approached by Krieg with a volunteered, fixed price.
* * * * *
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW
* * * * *
5. The price paid by Hieber in accepting the offer of Krieg was fair under the circumstances and was not discounted in order to recognize a right of residency in Krieg.
6. The price paid for the Farm by Hieber was reasonable and was accepted by Hieber, subject to financing, before Hieber was knowledgeable of the right of residency, and therefore, Hieber could not have discounted the price based upon such.
7. Krieg acted knowingly and voluntarily in changing the insurance after the sale had closed, acknowledging that he was only insuring *943 the personal property and that he did not wish to insure a right of residency.
8. Both parties had an insurable interest in the Farm in that a life tenant and a [reversioner] each has an insurable interest. A right of residency, although not the same as a life estate, is similar.
* * * * *
11. Krieg had more than adequate time and ability to insure his interests in the Farm and to protect his interests both individually and through his attorney. Such is shown by the Purchase Agreement which stated that Hieber could receive insurance proceeds for any preclosing loss.
12. Krieg voluntarily placed himself in the position of losing his right of residency, or the value thereof.
13. Krieg has failed to meet his burden of proof on the relevant issues in this cause.
Appellant's App. at 5-7. It is from the trial court's order that Krieg now appeals.
Discussion and Decision
I. Standard of Review
In challenging the trial court's judgment, Krieg, i.e., the party carrying the burden of proof at trial, is appealing from a negative judgment. A party appealing a negative judgment must establish that the evidence is without conflict and leads to but one conclusion and that the trial court did not reach that conclusion. OVRS Acquisition Corp. v. Cmty. Health Serv., Inc., 657 N.E.2d 117, 125 (Ind.Ct.App.1995), trans. denied. The appellant may attack the trial court's judgment only as contrary to law. Id. On appeal, we will affirm the trial court's judgment unless all evidence leads to the conclusion that the trial court's findings are clearly erroneous and against the logic and effect of the facts. In re Estate of Banko, 622 N.E.2d 476, 480-81 (Ind.1993). In determining whether the findings of fact are clearly erroneous, we may neither reweigh the evidence nor judge the credibility of the witnesses. Id. at 481. Instead, we will consider only the evidence most favorable to the judgment together with all reasonable inferences that may be drawn therefrom. Maddox v. Wright, 489 N.E.2d 133, 134 (Ind.Ct.App.1986).
II. Analysis
A. Parol Evidence
Krieg first argues that the trial court erred by considering certain parol evidence at trial.[2] In particular, Krieg challenges the trial court's consideration of evidence regarding the "negotiations" between the contracting parties on the purchase price of the Farm. In general, where the parties to an agreement have reduced the agreement to a written document and have included an integration clause that the written document embodies the complete agreement between the parties, as Krieg and Hieber did in this case, the parol evidence rule prohibits courts from considering parol or extrinsic evidence for the purpose of varying or adding to the terms of the written contract. Millner v. *944 Mumby, 599 N.E.2d 627, 629 (Ind.Ct.App. 1992). However, the prohibition against the use of parol evidence is by no means complete. Indeed, parol evidence may be considered if it is not being offered to vary the terms of the written contract, and to show that fraud, intentional misrepresentation, or mistake entered into the formation of a contract. Id. Moreover, our supreme court has held that parol evidence may be considered to show the nature of the consideration supporting a contract. Kentucky & I.B. Co. v. Hall, 125 Ind. 220, 224, 25 N.E. 219, 220 (1890). In addition, parol evidence may be considered to apply the terms of a contract to its subject matter and to shed light upon the circumstances under which the parties entered into the written contract. Millner, 599 N.E.2d at 629.
Here, the trial court did not err in considering parol evidence at trial. The extrinsic evidence was not intended to vary any of the terms of the written Purchase Agreement. Rather, it was offered to show one factor in the formation of the contracti.e., consideration.[3] The evidence reveals that in December of 1997, the Farm was appraised at $154,000.00. The testimony further demonstrates that, between December of 1997 and November of 1999, nothing substantial occurred that would have altered the Farm's value. Nevertheless, Krieg agreed to sell the Farm to Hieber for only $106,000.00. At trial, Krieg explained that the consideration or bargained-for-exchange behind executing the Purchase Agreement at such a reduced price, i.e., a price that constitutes an approximate 31% reduction in the value of the Farm, was his right of residency. As such, this extrinsic evidence demonstrated the nature of the consideration supporting the Purchase Agreement and, thus, was not barred by the parol evidence rule.
In addition, the evidence shed light upon the circumstances under which Krieg and Hieber entered into the Purchase Agreement. It explained, for example, why Krieg, a man of sound mind, would agree to sell the Farm for such a reduced price. Because this testimony regarding the parties' pre-contractual negotiations did not serve to vary any term of the contract, the trial court properly admitted it into evidence and considered it in reaching a judgment. See, e.g., id.
However, in light of this parol evidence, the portions of the trial court's Finding 14 and Conclusions 5 and 6 that pertain to whether Krieg and Hieber negotiated the purchase price of the Farm are clearly erroneous, as they are against the logic and effect of the facts. In ascertaining the terms of the contract between Krieg and Hieber, the trial court appears to have focused upon the parties' pre-contractual negotiations instead of the actual Purchase Agreement itself. The fact that Krieg initially fixed the purchase price of the Farm at $106,000.00 and Hieber, apparently unaware of Krieg's reservation of a right of residency, immediately applied for financing without negotiating further, does not support the trial court's findings and conclusions that Hieber accepted *945 Krieg's offer to sell the Farm before he knew that Krieg wanted a right of residency. Rather, the Purchase Agreement, which comprises Krieg's offer and Hieber's acceptance, expressly provides that Krieg "shall transfer full and complete possession at the time of closing, subject to [his] right of residency." Ex. 1.
Moreover, one can easily infer from the record that Hieber did not attempt to negotiate for a better purchase price because he knew that the Farm was worth more than $106,000.00.[4] Indeed, the evidence demonstrates that when Krieg first approached Hieber about purchasing the Farm, Hieber was not interested. However, after Krieg informed Hieber that the purchase price of the Farm would be one hundred and six thousand dollars, Hieber was so interested in purchasing the Farm that he went to the bank to secure financing that same day. In addition, the record reveals that prior to the execution of the Purchase Agreement, Krieg informed Hieber about his intention to retain a right of residency. After hearing Krieg's intention, Hieber understood that the fixed price contemplated Krieg's right of residency. Yet, Hieber did not negotiate a price reduction presumably because the purchase price of $106,000.00 was still acceptable to Hieber, even with Krieg's right of residency. Accordingly, to the extent that the trial court's findings and conclusions suggest that Hieber accepted Krieg's offer to sell the Farm before he knew of Krieg's desire to reserve a right of residency, they are clearly erroneous.
B. A Life Tenant's Right to Insurance Proceeds
Second, Krieg maintains that the trial court erred by concluding that the holder of a life estate is not entitled to insurance proceeds from an insurance policy procured by the reversioner. Before we address this issue, we note that, at the conclusion of the bench trial, the trial court found that Krieg does not have a life estate, but rather, a right of residency that is similar to a life estate. However, the evidence reveals that Krieg has a life estate in the house, garage, apartment, and land thereto, including use of the driveway. Indeed, the Purchase Agreement provides that the sale of the Farm is contingent upon Krieg's right of residency. In addition, the Statement provides that Krieg should have the privilege of living in the house for his lifetime.[5] The use of the term "life estate" is not necessary to create such an estate, but the intention to create a life estate may be expressed in any equivalent and appropriate language. Pointer v. Lucas, 131 Ind.App. 10, 22, 169 N.E.2d 196, 202 (1960). Here, Krieg's "right of residency" for life is equivalent language to express a life estate. See, e.g., Gladden v. Jolly, 655 N.E.2d 590, 592 (Ind. Ct.App.1995) (holding that in the context of wills that a "devise for or during the devisee's lifetime, or for as long as the devisee shall live, or until the devisee's death, or such similar phrase, creates a life estate in the devisee, unless other provisions show another intent"). Unlike other life estates, however, Krieg's life estate is *946 limited to residing in the residence. Krieg may not sell his life estate, lease the residence to others, or permit others to live there without him. See, e.g., id. at 593. Thus, we hold that Krieg has a limited life estate in the house and premises.
The next question regards the proper disbursement of the fire insurance proceeds, as between Hieber, i.e., the reversioner, and Krieg, i.e., the life tenant. We confronted the inverse situation in Ellerbusch v. Myers, 683 N.E.2d 1352, 1354 (Ind.Ct.App.1997). There, we were asked to determine the rights of remaindermen to fire insurance proceeds collected by the life tenant after the house was totally destroyed by fire. Id. at 1353. In Ellerbusch, the remaindermen requested an order that the life tenant hold the remaindermen's share of the insurance proceeds in constructive trust. Id. at 1354. Another panel of this court adopted the majority rule, which holds "that where a life tenant insures the property in his own name and for his own benefit and pays the premiums from his own funds, the life tenant is entitled to the entire proceeds of the insurance upon a loss to the property, even if the insurance covers the full worth of the property." Id. (citing 51 AM.JUR. Life Tenants and Remaindermen § 158 at 415-16 (1970)).
The Ellerbusch court also adopted the following exceptions to the majority rule: "A life tenant must provide insurance for the benefit of the remainderman if the instrument creating the estate expressly so provides, if the life tenant and remainderman so agree, or if a fiduciary relationship exists between the life tenant and the remainderman apart from the incidents of the tenancy." Id. By adopting the majority rule, with its exceptions, we expressly rejected the minority view that "a life tenant is entitled to all of the insurance proceeds only when the policy of insurance merely covers the life tenant's interest." Id. We likewise expressly rejected the view that "insurance proceeds collected by the life tenant, regardless of the amount, stand in place of the destroyed property and must be used to rebuild the property." Id. at 1355 (internal citations omitted).
The Ellerbusch court ultimately held that, "without an agreement or separate duty, a life tenant is not required to insure the property for the remainderman's benefit or hold insurance proceeds in trust for the remainderman." In so holding, we recognized that: "Despite the apparent inequity of the rule, a remainderman may protect his interest through an agreement with the life tenant that the latter carry insurance for the remainderman's benefit." Id. We also acknowledged that "both the life tenant and the remainderman have insurable interests, and each can insure for himself." Id.
However, the present case is distinguishable from Ellerbusch in that, by purchasing the insurance coverage on the Farm for his own benefit, Hieber, i.e., the future interest holder, necessarily insured the property for the benefit of Krieg's limited life estate. Indeed, Krieg has a present possessory interest in the Farm by virtue of his limited life estate. Despite this distinction, we observe that the record supports the inference that Hieber agreed to provide insurance on the Farm to ensure his future interest in the Farm. In so doing, he gave Krieg the impression that he was also ensuring the limited life estate. Indeed, the Purchase Agreement provides:
[Hieber] requests [Krieg] to maintain fire and extended coverage insurance on improvements on the above real estate in the amount of present insurable value... until the date of final closing.
Ex. 1 (emphasis added). This language demonstrates that Krieg was only required to maintain fire insurance on the Farm *947 until November 5, 1999, i.e., the date of closing, which he did.
Further, at trial, Hieber testified on direct as follows:
Q: Did you at all discuss with Mr. Krieg, uh, gee, Mr. Krieg, maybe, you oughta have insurance if this deal goes through?
A: Well, I told him he oughta have insurance on the, on, he oughta keep some insurance for his personal stuff, if nothin' else.
* * * * *
Q: Now could you explain to the Judge what Mr. Baughman's relationship is to this transaction?
A: Prior to me purchasing this, Carlin Krieg had insurance at DeKalb Mutual. And when we went to, we left Mr. Kruse's office, we went on over. And I said that I needed to get insurance on the premises up there for the equipment and the ground and liability. So, I talked with Dave Baughman, and he ended up writin' me up a new policy.
* * * * *
Q: ... Now, did you specifically tell Mr. Krieg on November 5th that he should have renter's insurance?
A: I told him that he should have insurance on the, at least, if nothing' else, on the, his items in the house.
Tr. at 28-32.
From this testimony, one may discern that Hieber gave Krieg the impression that Krieg only needed to insure his personal property, and not the real estate or improvements. As such, the notion that Hieber insure the premises, equipment, ground, and liability and that Krieg insure his personal property is tantamount to a tacit agreement between the parties. Krieg relied upon this tacit agreement to his detriment when he converted his insurance policy to cover his personal property only. Accordingly, to the extent that the trial court concluded that Hieber was not required to insure the Farm for the benefit of Krieg, the life tenant, its judgment is contrary to law, on these facts.
Because Krieg changed his prayer for relief at trial, we remand this case to the trial court to conduct an evidentiary hearing regarding the appropriate amount to compensate Krieg for the value of his reserved life estate. In so doing, the trial court should be guided by our holding that Krieg has a life estate interesti.e., a right of residencyin the premises. The trial court should also be mindful of the following: (1) that the market value of Krieg's right of residency, at the time the parties executed the Purchase Agreement, was calculated by Krieg to be approximately $48,000.00, i.e., the appraised value of the property less the purchase price; (2) Krieg's life expectancy in 1999; and (3) that Krieg resided in the premises for approximately one year before the fire.
For the foregoing reasons, we reverse the trial court's judgment in favor of Hieber and remand for proceedings consistent with this opinion.
Reversed and remanded.
RILEY and DARDEN, JJ., concur.
NOTES
[1]  The Warranty Deed identifies "Carlin Mack Krieg" as the Grantor and "Donald L. Hieber" as the Grantee and incorporates by reference Exhibit A. Appellant's App. at 53. However, Exhibit A contains numerous errors. For example, it identifies "Michael Bruce Krieg" as the Grantor and "Calvin Mack Krieg" as the Grantee. Id. at 54. Exhibit A also purports to have been notarized on November 5, 1998, as opposed to November 5, 1999. Because the parties do not dispute that the Warranty Deed and Exhibit A apply to the transaction in dispute, we will assume that the inconsistencies contained in Exhibit A are errors that do not render the Warranty Deed invalid.
[2]  Hieber argues that Krieg has waived this argument because he failed to object contemporaneously to the admission of parol evidence at trial. However, we note that: "`[t]he parol evidence rule is a rule of preference and of substantive law' which prohibits both the trial court and appellate court from considering such evidence even though it was admitted to trial without objection." Hancock v. Kentucky Cent. Life Ins. Co., 527 N.E.2d 720, 725 (Ind.Ct.App.1988) (quoting Franklin v. White, 493 N.E.2d 161, 165-66 (Ind.1986)), trans. denied.
[3]  We have held that "[a]n offer, acceptance, consideration, and a manifestation of mutual assent establish the existence of a contract." Homer v. Burman, 743 N.E.2d 1144, 1146-47 (Ind.Ct.App.2001). The concept of consideration is often encapsulated by the phrase "bargained for exchange." DiMizio v. Romo, 756 N.E.2d 1018, 1022 (Ind.Ct.App.2001), trans. denied. To constitute consideration, the promisor must receive a benefit and the promisee must receive a detriment. Id. at 1022-23. A benefit is a legal right given to the promisor to which the promisor would not otherwise be entitled. Id. Whereas, a detriment is a legal right the promisee has forborne. Id.
[4]  At trial, Hieber testified that he had not observed or reviewed the 1997 appraisal of the Farm. However, Hieber did not have to see the appraisal itself to know that the Farm was worth more than $106,000.00. Indeed, at the time of the sale at issue, Hieber owned his own farm and worked as a field man for "Schenkels," ensuring that farmers keep their farms at "Grade A status." Tr. at 22.
[5]  The Statement is not barred by the parol evidence rule because it was not offered to vary the terms of the Purchase Agreement. Rather, the Statement simply clarifies the duration of Krieg's "right of residency."

=== CASE 2207713 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:22.646869+00 ===

271 Cal. App. 2d 597 (1969)
REX ZINN, as Administrator, etc., Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
FRED R. BRIGHT COMPANY, INC., Defendant and Appellant.
Civ. No. 9309.
California Court of Appeals. Fourth Dist., Div. One.
Apr. 9, 1969.
Wien, Thorpe & Sutherland and Lowell F. Sutherland for Defendant and Appellant.
Ewing, McKee & Kirk and Russell J. Kirk for Plaintiff and Respondent.
AULT, J. pro tem.  [fn. *]
By amended complaint, the plaintiff, as administrator of the estate of Charles Kano, deceased, sued to recover the sum of $3,045.73 from the defendant Fred R. Bright Company, Inc. The amended complaint is in two causes of action, each in the form of a common count. The first count is framed as an account stated; the second seeks recovery on an open book account. After trial, the court found for the plaintiff on both counts and judgment was entered against the defendant in the amount prayed for in the complaint. From this judgment the defendant appeals.
The record reveals that in November 1962, the decedent, Charles Kano, was an employee of the defendant, Fred R. Bright Company, Inc. As an employee, he was entitled to a bonus based upon his employer's profit for the preceding crop-year. The amount of that bonus was computed by defendant's accountant to be the sum of $5,073.93. To pay this obligation the defendant employer issued and delivered two checks to Mr. Kano. The first check bore the number 19865 and was in the amount of $1,500. This check was presented and paid. The second check was dated November 14, 1962, bore the number 19866 and was in the amount of $3,045.73. An entry on the face of the check indicated the total amount due was $3,573.93. A second entry, also on the face of the check, showed that the sum of $528.20 had been previously advanced to Mr. Kano and was deducted from the total amount due. The face amount of the two checks, when added to the sum advanced, is equal to the bonus due as computed by defendant's accountant. The second check bore the printed notation: "If not cashed in 60 days this check is void." *600
The second check was retained by decedent and was never presented to the bank for payment. He died on September 19, 1966, and the uncashed check was found among his papers. It was stipulated that had the check been presented within 60 days of its date, defendant's account contained sufficient funds to pay it.
Plaintiff has not sued directly on the check. He does, however, rely on the check to establish an account stated. At the trial the check was offered and received in evidence over objection. It is appellant's primary contention on appeal that the check, issued to decedent and never presented by him for payment, cannot become the basis for an account stated.
A pre-existing obligation may be converted into an account stated by the use of a check (Levy v. Prinzmetal, 134 Cal. App. Supp. 2d 919, 923 [286 P.2d 1023]; 1 C.J.S., Account Stated,  36, pp. 714-715, and cases cited therein), but we have found no case where the question of failure to present the check for payment was involved. [1] The essential elements of an account stated are: (1) previous transactions between the parties establishing the relationship of debtor and creditor; (2) an agreement between the parties, express or implied, on the amount due from the debtor to the creditor; (3) a promise by the debtor, express or implied, to pay the amount due. (Bennett v. Potter, 180 Cal. 736, 745 [183 P. 156]; Hansen v. Fresno Jersey Farms Dairy Co., 220 Cal. 402, 408 [31 P.2d 359]; 1 Cal.Jur.2d, Accounts and Accounting,  43, p. 367.)
[2a] We believe these criteria have been met and that the check together with other evidence establishes an account stated. Requirements (1) and (3) listed above are obviously satisfied and need no comment. The only arguable question is whether there is sufficient evidence that decedent agreed to and accepted the amount set forth in the check as the amount due him from the defendant.
[3] The agreement of the parties necessary to establish an account stated need not be express and frequently is implied from the circumstances. In the usual situation, it comes about by the creditor rendering a statement of the account to the debtor. If the debtor fails to object to the statement within a reasonable time, the law implies his agreement that the account is correct as rendered. (California Bean Growers' Assn. v. Williams, 82 Cal. App. 434, 442 [255 P. 751]; Luse v. Peters, 219 Cal. 625, 629 [28 P.2d 357]; Shapiro v. Equitable Life Assur. Soc., 76 Cal. App. 2d 75, 91 [172 P.2d 725].) *601 [2b] The novelty of the present case is that it presents the opposite of the usual situation. Here it is the debtor who has rendered the account by issuing its check in payment. The precise question to be answered becomes: Can the creditor's assent to the account as stated in the check be implied where he does not present the check for payment?
We find no explanation in the transcript of why the check was not cashed, and that mystery remains. We do find evidence, however, which refutes the proposition that decedent's failure to cash the check resulted from any disagreement with the amount. Mr. George Lockett, Jr., who was the defendant's office manager and accountant in 1962 and who issued and signed the check involved, testified at the trial. In response to questions on cross-examination by defendant, he stated that he had discussed the matter of the check with Mr. Kano on only one occasion and that was approximately five or six months after the check had been issued. He inquired because "the check kept turning up on the outstanding checks during the time of reconciliation." The final questions and answers on the subject are significant:
"Q. What remarks did you address to Mr. Kano with regard to the check?"
"A. To the best of my recollection, I merely asked why he did not cash the check and if he would cash the check."
"Q. What was his response?"
"A. Also to the best of my knowledge [sic], I don't remember whether he said he had or whether he would cash it."
If, at the time of this confrontation with a responsible employee of the defendant company, decedent had felt that the check did not represent the true amount due him from defendant, we think he would have said so. The answer he gave indicates acquiescence in the amount of the check and not objection thereto.
Whether the decedent acquiesced or agreed to the amount due him from the defendant as set forth in the check is a question of fact. (Hemenover v. Lynip, 107 Cal. App. 356, 363 [290 P. 1089].) The failure to present the check is a fact to be considered in arriving at the appropriate conclusion. Also to be considered in this connection is the fact that decedent accepted the check, retained it for a long period of time and made no protest to the defendant concerning it. From this conduct, an inference arises that he agreed the amount set forth in the check was the amount due him from the defendant. *602 (California Bean Growers' Assn. v. Williams, supra, 82 Cal. App. 434, 442; Luse v. Peters, supra, 219 Cal. 625, 629; Shapiro v. Equitable Life Assur. Soc., supra, 76 Cal. App. 2d 75, 91.) Under well-established rules governing appellate review, we must assume that the trial court drew the latter inference and concluded it outweighed the contrary inference of nonagreement which might arise from the failure to present the check for payment.
[4] "Where two or more inferences may reasonably be deduced from a certain state of facts or circumstances, a reviewing court is not permitted to substitute its deductions for those of the trial court." (Wilbur v. Wilbur, 197 Cal. 1, 7 [239 P. 332]; see also Cottle v. Gibbon, 200 Cal. App. 2d 1, 4 [19 Cal. Rptr. 82].) [2c] There is substantial evidence in the record to support the trial court's finding that an account was stated between decedent and defendant on November 15, 1962, wherein it was agreed that defendant was indebted to decedent in the sum of $3,045.73.
[5] Defendant also contends on appeal that in permitting the check to be used as the basis for an account stated, it was unfairly deprived of defenses which would have been available had the suit been on the check itself or upon the underlying obligation. It complains that the statute of limitations on the underlying obligation (an oral agreement to pay for services rendered) is two years, whereas the statute of limitations on an account stated is four years. Where parties by agreement convert a previously existing obligation into an account stated, it frequently results that a longer period of limitation becomes applicable. We see no unfairness in this result. If plaintiff sued on the underlying obligation, he faced a two-year statute of limitations (Code Civ. Proc.  339, subd. 1); if he sued directly on the check, it bore the notation that it was void if not cashed in 60 days. Given a choice, no rule of law or requirement of fair play compels a party to select and pursue that theory of a case which is most advantageous to his adversary.
[6] It is also urged that the effect of permitting plaintiff to proceed on the theory of an account stated is to deprive defendant of the benefit of Civil Code section 3265b which at the time involved read: "A check must be presented for payment within a reasonable time after its issue or the drawer will be discharged from liability thereon to the extent of the loss caused by the delay."
We see no reason why the offset provided in this section was *603 not as available to defendant in defense to an action upon an account stated as in an action upon the check itself. If defendant suffered loss by reason of decedent's failure to present the check, payment of which would have satisfied the obligation, that defense could and should have been pleaded in this action. Defendant originally asserted the affirmative defense of laches, but stipulated that a demurrer to that defense could be sustained without leave to amend. Laches is an equitable defense and it cannot be pleaded as a defense in a case at law. (Brownrigg v. de Frees, 196 Cal. 534, 539 [238 P. 714]; Smith v. Los Angeles, 66 Cal. App. 2d 562, 568 [153 P.2d 69].) As pleaded, the affirmative defense dealt only with delay in bringing the action; it made no reference to delay in presenting the check and cannot be interpreted as an effort to bring into play the provisions of Civil Code section 3265b. In the trial court, as on appeal, defendant took the position that he had been deprived of the benefits of Civil Code section 3265b, but never, either by proper pleading or proof, attempted to assert the facts which would have made that section applicable. The contention that defendant was unfairly deprived of available defenses is without merit.
[7a] Finally, it is contended that defendant should have been allowed to amend its answer to plead the defense of payment. This request was made at the conclusion of the case and the basis for the motion was never clearly stated. The record before the trial court contained no evidence that the obligation sued upon had in fact been paid and the court denied the motion on that ground.
Defendant argues that under certain circumstances acceptance and retention of a check in itself constitutes payment. The cases cited by defendant to support this proposition (Western Pac. Land Co. v. Wilson, 19 Cal. App. 338 [125 P. 1076]; Conde v. Dreisam Gold Min. Co., 3 Cal. App. 583 [86 P. 825]), are based upon factual situations completely different from those under consideration here. Unless the parties expressly agree to the contrary, the rule is well established that the giving of a check constitutes conditional payment only. [8] The maker of a check should not be exonerated by the failure of the payee to present the check for payment, except to the extent he can show loss by reason of that failure. The rule is aptly stated in Williams v. Braun, 14 Cal. App. 396, 399 [112 P. 465]: " '[T]he drawer of a check is regarded as the principal debtor, ... And the negligence of the holder in not making due presentment, or not giving him notice of *604 dishonor, does not absolutely discharge him from liability unless he has suffered some loss or injury from such negligence, and then only to the extent of such loss or injury. He is at most entitled only to such presentment and notice as will save him from loss. Were it otherwise the drawer would profit by a neglect which could do him no injury.' "
[7b] The motion to amend the pleading to assert the defense of payment was addressed to the sound discretion of the trial court and that court's ruling thereon may not be disturbed on appeal unless there is a clear showing of abuse of discretion. (Fibreboard Paper Products Corp. v. East Bay Union of Machinists, 227 Cal. App. 2d 675, 726 [39 Cal. Rptr. 64]; Lewis & Queen v. S. Edmondson & Sons, 113 Cal. App. 2d 705, 711 [248 P.2d 973].) The motion to amend came at the conclusion of the trial and was not timely; it was not based upon evidence that had been offered or introduced during the trial; it cannot be interpreted as a motion to amend to plead facts which would bring the defendant within the provisions of Civil Code section 3265b. Under the circumstances, the motion was properly denied and no abuse of discretion appears.
[9] The ruling that an account stated was properly proved makes unnecessary any discussion concerning the open book account. An account stated constitutes a new contract which supercedes and extinguishes the original obligation. If a book account existed by reason of defendant's records, it merged into and was superceded by the account stated. (Jones v. Wilton, 10 Cal. 2d 493, 498 [75 P.2d 593]; Griswold v. Pieratt, 110 Cal. 259, 263 [42 P. 820].) The favorable finding as to both accounts involves a technical inconsistency. Since either finding supports the judgment, the inconsistent finding may be disregarded as surplusage (Freeman v. Jergins, 125 Cal. App. 2d 536, 561 [271 P.2d 210]; Baird v. Ocequeda, 8 Cal. 2d 700, 703 [67 P.2d 1055].)
The judgment is affirmed.
Brown (Gerald), P. J., and Coughlin, J., concurred.
NOTES
[fn. *]  *. Assigned by the Chairman of the Judicial Council.

=== CASE 9736838 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:08:10.840558+00 ===

KELLEY, Judge,
dissenting.
I respectfully dissent.
This appeal involves a challenge to a zoning ordinance enacted by Lower Merion Township which permits “student homes” to be located in residential areas only if allowed by special exception. The majority rejects the appellants’ equal protection argument, concluding that the ordinance is rationally related to the legitimate purpose of preserving the residential character of the community and that the classification of student homes is not arbitrary or unreasonable.
In its brief, the zoning hearing board cites a U.S. Supreme Court case, Village of Belle Terre v. Boraas, 416 U.S. 1, 94 S.Ct. 1536, 39 L.Ed.2d 797 (1974), in which the court held that a municipality may regulate the number of unrelated people living together in a household. I believe that case is clearly distinguishable from this case where the restriction of how persons may live together is based solely on the fact that they are students. When a municipality restricts the number of unrelated persons who may live together, there is a rational basis for the regulation because it is clear that unrelated persons will require more parking, etc., and that the residential character of a neighborhood will be changed by their presence.
In the present case, the restricted class is defined solely on the basis of the fact that they are students. This is the equivalent of defining a group based on what they do for a living. If an ordinance restricted where plumbers could live, *247or coal miners or all blue collar workers, we would hold that classification as arbitrary and a violation of equal protection. But because the classification is “student” we accept the zoning hearing board’s discriminatory stereotype of students as rowdy, noisy, undesirable neighbors. The ordinance clearly works a violation of equal protection when three or more college age students who work full-time can live together without restriction while two or more students cannot.
Accordingly, I would reverse the trial court and hold that the ordinance violates equal protection. I would also overrule this court’s Lautos decision, cited by the majority, which upheld the constitutionality of an ordinance similar to the one at issue here.
McGINLEY, J., joins in this dissent.

=== CASE 9736839 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:08:11.765862+00 ===

Brennan, P.J.
Following a jury trial, defendant was convicted of prison escape, MCL 750.193; MSA 28.390, and was sentenced to a prison term of one to five years. Defendant appeals as of right and we affirm.
In February, 1988, while serving a two to five year prison term for larceny over $100 and a 3 Vi to 14 year prison term for forgery, defendant was placed in the Department of Corrections’ extended furlough program. Under the terms of the furlough, defendant was required to report weekly to a corrections officer and to observe a strict 11:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. curfew. The violation of these terms of the furlough constitute an escape under the rules of the Department of Corrections.
After a relatively brief stay in a Department of Corrections halfway house, defendant moved into his own apartment. A corrections officer approved the move.
In March, 1988, defendant was notified that he would be monitored by electronic tether beginning April 1, 1988. The electronic tether permits corrections officers to monitor a furloughed inmate’s presence or absence from the inmate’s residence.
On April 19, 1988, the tether system indicated that defendant left his apartment at 8:46 p.m. and *345did not return by the 11:00 p.m. curfew. A corrections officer went to defendant’s apartment the next day. Defendant was not there. Defendant’s name was placed in the Law Enforcement Information Network computer as an escapee and a warrant was issued for his arrest. Defendant failed to report as required by the conditions of his furlough.
On April 26, 1988, defendant telephoned corrections officers and indicated that he wanted to surrender. Following instructions given to him by corrections officers, defendant turned himself in at the Delta County Jail. Apparently defendant had gone on a drinking binge and lost track of time.
Defendant argues that his conviction for prison escape must be reversed. Defendant contends that he cannot be convicted under the prison escape statute because he did not escape from a "prison” as that term is defined in the statute. Defendant contends that extended furlough under the tether program is not "prison” under the statute. We disagree.
At the time the furlough violation occurred, the prison escape statute, MCL 750.193; MSA 28.390, provided in part:
(1) A person imprisoned in a prison of this state who breaks prison and escapes, breaks prison though an escape is not actually made, escapes, leaves the prison without being discharged by due process of law, attempts to break prison, or attempts to escape from prison, is guilty of a felony, punishable by further imprisonment for not more than 5 years. The term of the further imprisonment shall be served after the termination, pursuant to law, of the sentence or sentences then being served. A prisoner who breaks prison, escapes, attempts to break prison, or attempts to escape, shall be charged with that offense and tried in the *346courts of the county in which the administrative office of the prison or penal facility to which the prisoner was committed or transferred is located at the time of the breaking, escape, or attempt to break or escape.
(2) "Prison” as used in this section means a state prison, penitentiary, reformatory, state house of correction, community residential center either operated or leased by the department of corrections, a camp constructed and maintained under Act No. 274 of the Public Acts of 1949, being section 798.351 of the Michigan Compiled Laws, or a penal camp, except a probation camp or probation recovery camp, and includes the grounds, farm, shop, road camp, or place of employment operated by the institution or under control of the officers of the institution, the department of corrections, a police officer of this state, or any other person authorized by the department to have a prison inmate under care, custody or supervision either in an institution or outside an institution, whether for the purpose of work, medical care, or any other reason.
The escape statute defines "prison” liberally to include any grounds under control of any person authorized by the Department of Corrections to have an inmate under care, custody or supervision, either in an institution or outside an institution, whether for work, medical care or otherwise. We believe defendant’s place of residence fit the definition of a "prison” under the escape statute. Thus, defendant’s furlough violations constitute an "escape” within the meaning of MCL 750.193(1); MSA 28.390(1). See People v Roupe, 150 Mich App 469, 476; 389 NW2d 449, lv den 426 Mich 863 (1986). We agree with defendant’s argument that the electronic tether was not a "prison”; but the tether was not intended to form the bounds of defendant’s physical confinement. The electronic tether *347is nothing more than a surveillance device which permits corrections officers to monitor a defendant’s presence in his approved residence during curfew hours.
We decline to consider defendant’s remaining arguments. Since defendant did not support his remaining arguments with citations to appropriate authority, those arguments are not properly before this Court. People v Battle, 161 Mich App 99, 101; 409 NW2d 739 (1987).
Affirmed.
Cynar, J., concurred.

=== CASE 9736841 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:08:14.154966+00 ===

TIMM, Circuit Judge.
Gordon Kier appeals an award of child support arrearages, interest and attorney’s fees. We affirm in part, reverse in part and remand.
FACTS
Charlotte and Gordon Kier divorced in 1973. Custody of their only child, Tracy, was granted to Charlotte subject to Gordon’s rights of reasonable visitation. Pursuant to the parties’ agreement, the circuit court amended their original divorce decree in 1982. Gordon’s monthly child support obligation was increased to $375 and he also agreed to pay certain college expenses for Tracy.
On September 9, 1988, Charlotte initiated a show cause/contempt proceeding seeking an award of child support arrearages and an interpretation of the parties’ agreement regarding payment of Tracy’s college expenses. Gordon responded on September 13, 1988, with a motion to dismiss alleging that all required child support payments had been made. However, on November 15, 1988, Gordon filed an affidavit admitting that he had not made certain child support payments. He defended his nonpayment by alleging that he had been relieved of his support obligation through an agreement with Charlotte.
A hearing took place on November 21, 1988. Evidence was received consisting of the affidavits of the parties, the affidavit of Connie Kier (Gordon’s wife) and the affidavit and oral testimony of Tracy. The trial court found that Charlotte had returned Gordon’s June 1984 child support payment and that he did not make or tender ten subsequent monthly payments. The trial court also found that there was no agreement between the parties relieving Gordon of his obligation to make these payments. Additionally, the trial court found that Tracy was in her senior year of college and that Gordon had paid her expenses for room, board, tuition and books, but that he had paid no other costs incurred by Tracy in obtaining her college education.
Based upon these findings, the trial court held that Gordon owed ten child support payments of $375 each plus interest but that he did not owe the payment returned by Charlotte in June 1984. The trial court also held that Gordon was not obligated by the amended divorce decree to pay for Tracy’s college expenses other than her room, board, tuition and books. Finally, Gordon was required to pay the portion of Charlotte’s attorney’s fees related to the collection of support arrearages.
CHILD SUPPORT ARREARAGES
Gordon attacks the trial court’s finding that the parties did not have an agreement terminating his child support obligation. Our review of the trial court’s finding is made under the clearly erroneous standard. SDCL 15-6-52(a). In applying this standard, we review all the evidence and overturn a finding only if we are left with a definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been made. Hilbrands v. Hilbrands, 429 N.W.2d 750 (S.D.1988).
The trial court was faced with testimony from Gordon that he had made all required child support payments and that he did not make the ten payments following the return of his June 1984 check because Charlotte told him, “keep the check, you’re not seeing Tracy.” Gordon also testified that his relationship with Tracy was strained and that he had made attempts to see Tracy, but, “most of the time,” was refused visitation by Charlotte. Finally, Gordon *546testified that he did not visit Tracy during the period of missed payments, “except for a very few times.”
On the other hand, Charlotte represented that she returned the June 1984 support check because she had heard that Gordon needed the money for a tax obligation. She also denied that there was any agreement relieving Gordon of his support obligation in exchange for his relinquishment of visitation rights. Tracy supported her mother’s version of the facts. Despite Gordon’s contention that he had not needed the support money, Tracy testified that she informed Charlotte that Gordon needed the money in June of 1984. Both Tracy and Charlotte claimed that Gordon exercised his visitation rights in 1984 and 1985.
Based upon our review of the foregoing facts and specifically noting Gordon’s inconsistent and equivocal statements, we conclude that the trial court’s finding that there was no agreement between the parties relieving Gordon of his support obligation is not clearly erroneous.
Gordon also attacks the award of support arrearages by contending that laches, waiver and estoppel prevented such an award. These affirmative defenses were not set forth in affidavits responding to Charlotte’s motion. Gordon first raised these defenses in his proposed findings of fact and conclusions of law and they were rejected by the trial court.
Laches, waiver and estoppel are affirmative defenses which may not be relied upon at trial unless they are affirmatively pled in response to a preceding pleading. SDCL 15-6-8(c). In Otten v. Otten, 245 N.W.2d 506 (S.D.1976), we clearly established that the duty to plead affirmative defenses applies to affidavits made in response to orders to show cause for failure to pay court ordered child support. “Under South Dakota practice the affidavit upon which an order to show cause is issued in a contempt action is treated as the complaint and the affidavit of the defendant as the an-swer_” Id. at 508. By failing to affirmatively plead these defenses in his responsive affidavit, Gordon waived them. Oesterling v. Oesterling, 354 N.W.2d 735 (S.D.1984). Therefore, the trial court correctly refused to consider them.
Charlotte, by notice of review, contends that the trial court erred in relieving Gordon of his June 1984 support obligation. We agree.
In 1987, the South Dakota legislature restricted the authority of trial courts to retroactively modify past due child support obligations. SDCL 25-7-7.3; SDCL 25-7-7.4. Only those payments which accrue while a petition for modification is pending may now be modified, but only from the date that notice of hearing on the petition has been given to the interested parties. Id. In Vellinga v. Vellinga, 442 N.W.2d 472 (S.D.1989), we determined that the legislature intended that these restrictions be given retroactive application. Therefore, under the circumstances of this case, we conclude that the trial court exceeded its authority in refusing to include Gordon’s June 1984 support obligation in its award of arrearages.
INTEREST
An award of interest on support arrearages is a matter of judicial discretion. See SDCL 25-7A-14. See also, Sarver v. Dathe, 439 N.W.2d 548 (S.D.1989). Gordon asserts that the trial court abused its discretion by awarding interest on the arrearages. He claims that he quit paying support because Charlotte led him to believe that his obligation had terminated. He cites Myhre v. Myhre, 296 N.W.2d 905 (S.D.1980) in support of his position. In Myhre we held that, “[w]hen circumstances exist which support a good faith termination of alimony payments, equity refuses to allow the recipient to collect any interest on the past due support installments.” Id. at 909. We agree that this principle applies equally in appropriate cases involving child support arrearages.
Myhre, however, is distinguishable from the case before us. The parties in Myhre stipulated at the time of their divorce that alimony would terminate upon remarriage of the obligee. After the divorce, the obli-gee moved in with a Mr. Quint, represent*547ing to others that she and Mr. Quint were married. As a result, the obligor gave his ex-wife written notice that he would no longer pay alimony due to her “remarriage.”
In the present case, the parties had no agreement relating to termination of child support. There were no representations made by Charlotte of facts which, if true, would have supported a conclusion by Gordon that he need not make further payments. The only fact from which such an inference could have been drawn was Charlotte’s return of the June 1984 support check. This did not provide a strong basis in fact or reason for Gordon’s inference that his support obligation had ended. It does not rise to the level of yielding a “good faith” belief on Gordon’s part that his support obligation was terminated. We find no abuse of discretion in the trial court’s award of interest.
AGREEMENT
Also by notice of review, Charlotte assigns error to the trial court’s interpretation of the parties agreement obligating Gordon to pay certain college expenses for Tracy. The trial court held that Gordon was only required to pay expenses for her room, board, books and tuition. Charlotte contends that the agreement also required Gordon to pay $470 per month for clothing and other personal expenses. Charlotte further contends that the agreement required Gordon to pay expenses related to Tracy's search for employment during her senior year.
In determining the proper interpretation of an agreement incorporated into a divorce decree, a court must seek to ascertain and give effect to the intention of the parties. Malcolm v. Malcolm, 365 N.W.2d 863 (S.D.1985); Johnson v. Johnson, 291 N.W.2d 776 (S.D.1980). In determining the intention of the parties, a court must look to the language that the parties used. Id. A court can also consider the construction actually placed on the agreement by the parties as evidenced by their subsequent behavior. Malcolm, supra; Huffman v. Shevlin, 76 S.D. 84, 72 N.W.2d 852 (1955).
The agreement provided that Gordon was to pay, “all of the regular costs in [Tracy’s] obtaining a college education to the level of an undergraduate degree....” From Tracy’s enrollment as a college freshman through the first semester of her senior year, Gordon paid for her room, board, books and tuition. Given the language of the agreement and Gordon’s expenditures pursuant thereto (unchallenged until Tracy’s senior year), we agree with the trial court’s interpretation that “regular costs” of college means room, board, books and tuition. There is nothing in the language of the agreement nor was there anything in the actions of the parties manifesting an intention by them that clothing expenses, costs of travel, and other “employment opportunity” expenses be paid for by Gordon.
ATTORNEY’S FEES
Gordon claims that the trial court erred in awarding attorney’s fees to Charlotte. Charlotte, by notice of review, claims that the trial court inaccurately determined the portion of attorney’s fees attributable to recovery of support arrearages.
An award of attorney’s fees in a proceeding to enforce the child support provisions of a divorce decree is proper if warranted. SDCL 15-17-7. See also, Sarver, supra. As in the original proceeding, the award rests in the sound discretion of the trial court and will not be overturned on appeal absent an abuse of that discretion. Garnos v. Garnos, 376 N.W.2d 571 (S.D.1985).
In determining whether to award attorney’s fees, a trial court must first consider what constitutes a reasonable fee. Prentice v. Prentice, 322 N.W.2d 880 (S.D.1982); Lien v. Lien, 278 N.W.2d 436 (S.D.1979). Second, the court must decide what portion of the fee, if any, should be allowed as costs to be paid by the opposing party. Id. In reaching this decision, a court should consider the property owned by each party, their relative incomes, whether the property of the parties is in fixed or liquid assets, and whether the actions of either party *548unreasonably increased the time spent on the case. Id.
The trial court considered all of the above factors and based its award on its finding that Gordon, an orthodontist, was in a much better financial position than Charlotte, who had returned to college to pursue a doctorate degree. Based upon the billing statements submitted by Charlotte’s counsel, the trial court also separated, as best it could, those fees incurred in pursuit of arrearages from those related to the college expense issue. We conclude that the trial court did not abuse its discretion in awarding Charlotte $1,326.81 of the $2,859.57 requested.
CONCLUSION
We reverse and remand that portion of the trial court’s decision disallowing the June 1984 support payment as part of the award of arrearages and affirm the trial court on all other issues.
WUEST, C.J., and HENDERSON and MILLER, JJ., concur.
MORGAN, J., concurs in part and dissents in part.
TIMM, Circuit Judge, for SABERS, J., disqualified.

=== CASE 9736842 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:08:14.159236+00 ===

MORGAN, Justice
(concurring in part and dissenting in part).
I concur in all respects except with regard to the notice of review issue on the “returned” June support check. I would affirm the trial court on that issue also.
The statutes, SDCL 25-7-7.3 and SDCL 25-7-7.4, do not say that the obligee parent cannot modify a payment. Charlotte had the payment in hand and for whatever reason, not attributable to any misconduct on the part of Gordon, she returned it. I am also troubled by the allowance of interest on the back payments. Granted that Gordon failed to properly raise the affirmative defenses of laches, waiver and estoppel on the issue of the back payments themselves, but I think that the fact that Charlotte waited until a considerable amount of ar-rearages had accumulated before seeking to enforce the agreement can be considered on the equitable aspect of allowance of interest. I think that the trial court could well have denied interest on that basis but, not having done so, I cannot say that it was a clear abuse of discretion on its part; so, I reluctantly join in the affirmation of that issue.

=== CASE 2207621 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:21.65122+00 ===

636 A.2d 892 (1994)
OCEANPORT INDUSTRIES, INC., a Delaware Corporation, Appellee Below, Appellant, and
Environmental Appeals Board of the State of Delaware, Appellee Below,
v.
WILMINGTON STEVEDORES, INC., a Delaware Corporation, Appellant Below, Appellee.
Supreme Court of Delaware.
Submitted: April 13, 1993.
Decided: January 26, 1994.
Rehearing Denied: February 28, 1994.
Jeremy W. Homer (argued), Parkowski, Noble & Guerke, P.A., Dover, for appellant Oceanport Industries, Inc.
John J. Schreppler, II (argued), Bayard, Handelman & Murdoch, P.A., Wilmington, for appellee Wilmington Stevedores, Inc.
Steven C. Blackmore, Dept. of Justice, for Environmental Appeals Bd.
Before VEASEY, C.J., HORSEY and MOORE, JJ.
*896 MOORE, Justice.
We accepted this interlocutory appeal by Oceanport Industries, Inc. ("Oceanport") from a decision of the Superior Court, reversing a decision of the Environmental Appeals Board (the "Board" or "EAB"). The Superior Court ruled that, pursuant to 7 Del.C. §§ 6008(a) and 7210, Wilmington Stevedores, Inc. ("WSI") had standing to appeal the issuance of environmental permits to Oceanport by the Secretary of the Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Control ("DNREC" or "Department"). Additionally, the Superior Court remanded the case to the EAB with instructions to remand in turn to the Secretary of the DNREC for a review of the status of Oceanport's project under the Coastal Zone Act ("CZA"), 7 Del.C. §§ 7001-7013.
The issue of standing is one of first impression, as is the scope of the EAB's jurisdiction in matters pertaining to the CZA. We conclude that the Superior Court erred in determining that WSI has an interest that is substantially affected by the Secretary's decision. With regard to the remand to consider the CZA status decision, the Superior Court confused the application of the CZA, found in Title 7, Chapter 70, of the Delaware Code, to the issuance of permits granted under the authority of Chapters 60 and 72. Accordingly, we reverse.
I.
The Parties
Oceanport, a Delaware corporation, is a wholly owned subsidiary of Granite State Minerals, Inc., a New Hampshire corporation. Oceanport is engaged in the business of off-loading, storing, and transferring bulk products.
WSI is a corporate citizen and taxpayer of the State of Delaware, engaged in the stevedoring business at the Port of Wilmington. WSI does not own or control the Port, which is owned and operated by the City of Wilmington. WSI contracts to use the Port's facilities, which are open to Oceanport and all others who wish to do business there. WSI currently competes with Oceanport at the Port of Wilmington.
The Oceanport Facility
The Oceanport terminal is located in the coastal zone at Claymont, Delaware, approximately six miles north of Wilmington. The site occupies 46.9 acres with eight hundred feet of frontage on the Delaware River. Once known as the Paragon Oil Petroleum Tank Farm, Texaco began operations at the site in 1905. The property includes petroleum storage tanks and a wooden pier extending 740 feet into the Delaware River, which have been used for the off-loading and storage of petroleum for at least thirty-five years. Oceanport purchased the site from Texaco in September 1986, and has operated it since that time.
The area surrounding the Oceanport facility is zoned for heavy industrial use. Airco is on the southwest; Citisteel is next to Airco on the south; General Chemical abuts on the northeast; and the manufacturing facility and pier of the Allied Chemical Company is to the immediate north.
The Coastal Zone Status Decision
The CZA prohibits the construction of new bulk product transfer facilities outside of the Port of Wilmington, 7 Del.C. §§ 7002(f) and 7003. However, a bulk product transfer facility in operation on June 28, 1971 constitutes a non-conforming use and is not subject to the CZA prohibition. Id. Although Texaco had obtained non-conforming use status *897 for the facility in 1972, Oceanport sought a new determination that its proposed use of the facility constituted the continuation of a non-conforming use.
On May 14, 1987 Oceanport requested a Coastal Zone Status Decision, an administratively created mechanism for the determination of whether or how proposed projects are regulated by the CZA. Oceanport requested a finding that its facility was exempt from the CZA as a docking facility or pier for a single industrial facility under 7 Del.C. 7002(f), or alternatively, that the site and its proposed use constituted a bulk product transfer facility which was in operation on June 28, 1971, and was therefore a nonconforming use under Sections 7003 and 7002(f).
In the application, Oceanport proposed to use the property to off-load and store solid bulk product, such as road salt, crushed stone, cement, and other non-toxic products. Oceanport indicated that it would reduce 25% of the oil storage capacity of the facility, including a cluster of eight tanks closest to the water, and remove two pipelines from the pier, to be replaced with a conveyor belt for the solid bulk products. Although the application indicated that the substitution of the conveyor belt for the pipelines would not in and of itself result in a restructuring, reconfiguration or widening of the existing pier, it also stated that the existing pier would be extended and improved to eliminate the need for frequent dredging.
On June 25, 1987, the Secretary of the DNREC issued a status decision which determined that the proposal was not governed by the Coastal Zone Act. In making the determination, he made three findings about the proposed project:
1. Because the use of the site as an offshore bulk product transfer facility predates enactment of the Coastal Zone Act, the facility enjoyed nonconforming use status at the time the Coastal Zone Act was enacted.
2. The use of the site as an offshore bulk transfer facility had continued to the present despite the temporary decrease in transfer operations caused by the pier fire in May 1987.
3. The proposed modifications did not constitute a significant expansion or extension since there would be no significant increase in production capacity (no production/manufacturing existed), no significant increase in land area encompassing the proposed operation, and no significant increase in environmental impact.
The three-part test applied in the status decision to the proposed modifications is derived from the regulatory definition of "expansion or extension" of non-conforming uses under the CZA.[1]
The status decision was not appealed by WSI or any other entity and, according to its terms, became final fourteen days following the date of the legal notice of the decision.
The Consent Decrees
Thereafter, Oceanport started work on the pier. On November 10, 1988, DNREC filed a complaint in the Superior Court against Oceanport, alleging that on September 29, 1988, the Department discovered a project involving "the construction, modification, repair or reconstruction" of an industrial pier without the appropriate permits for the work in private subaqueous lands. On the same day Oceanport executed a consent decree with DNREC, agreeing to submit the appropriate permit application in accordance with 7 Del.C. § 7205. In return, the consent agreement authorized work to continue without the permit, but with strict guidelines on the physical size of the pier. Additionally, the DNREC reserved the right to order the removal of portions of the pier in the event the DNREC later determined they were unstable or environmentally unsound.
*898 On December 18, 1990, DNREC filed another complaint in Superior Court against Oceanport, alleging that Oceanport had constructed a conveyor system and hopper on the pier over public subaqueous lands in the Delaware River. The same day, a second consent agreement was filed, which imposed a $20,000 fine against Oceanport and provided that Oceanport was not to conduct any commercial activity on the pier until such time as the DNREC permits were issued.
Permit Applications and Hearing Process
On November 28, 1988, Oceanport filed its application for the permit to undertake the pier improvements in subaqueous lands pursuant to 7 Del.C. § 7205. Following revisions to the application at DNREC's request, public hearings were held on March 7 and 15, 1989. During these hearings, the Department determined that Oceanport's application was incomplete and that no final decision could be reached without additional information. As a result, the hearing process was suspended to allow Oceanport an opportunity to amend its presentation after consultation with the DNREC on what was needed to cure the deficiencies.
That process continued for nineteen months until October 1990, when the hearings resumed. Before the hearing resumed, the second consent decree was executed regarding the requirement of an air discharge permit to construct the conveyor and other solid bulk product transfer equipment on the pier, which had created the potential for fugitive air emissions. The scope of the hearing was expanded to include a permit pursuant to 7 Del.C. § 6003 to discharge stormwater runoff into the Delaware River (the "NPDES" permit), and a permit pursuant to 7 Del.C. § 6003 to construct a bulk product transfer facility.
The public hearing on all the permits was held on November 18, 19 and 30, 1990, and concluded on December 13, 1990. The outcome of the hearing was mixed for Oceanport. On one hand, the hearing officer found that in its request for the Coastal Zone Status Decision, Oceanport did "not fully disclose the details of the project...." On the other hand, the hearing officer noted that "Oceanport made a strong technical case in support of its various permit applications."
Ultimately, however, the hearing officer concluded that the two consent decrees estopped the DNREC from denying the permit request or reopening the status decision. The Secretary of DNREC adopted the report of the hearing officer, and granted the permit requests on July 12, 1991.[2]
Appeal to the EAB
Pursuant to 7 Del.C. §§ 6008[3] and 7210,[4] WSI and the Delaware Audubon Society ("Audubon"), appealed the issuance of the permits to the Delaware Environmental Appeals Board ("EAB"). Oceanport moved to dismiss the appeals principally on the grounds that WSI and Audubon lacked standing and that the EAB lacked subject matter jurisdiction to consider certain issues related to the CZA. In an opinion dated November 1, 1991, the EAB dismissed the *899 WSI appeal on the basis of lack of standing, and denied dismissal of the Audubon appeal.[5]
With regard to standing, the EAB ruled that an appellant's interest should be distinguishable from those interests shared by the public in general. It stated:
WSI has not alleged any facts which identify how a failure to appropriately regulate these environmental issues will affect its commercial or other interest. At oral argument, WSI did state that it had a mari-time interest in maintaining the navigability of the Delaware River in the event of a spill. The Board finds this interest more remote than that contemplated by the statute.
With regard to WSI's claim that it sought to maintain a level competitive playing field by insuring Oceanport's compliance with the CZA and the status decision, the EAB stated that "the entire thrust of the WSI complaint clearly indicates that the complaint belongs before the Coastal Zone Industrial Control Board and not the Board."[6]
Appeal to the Superior Court
WSI appealed the EAB decision to Superior Court. In an order dated October 7, 1992, the Superior Court ruled that WSI has "a legitimate interest in the preservation of water quality in the Delaware Bay" that is substantially affected by the Secretary's ruling, and thus had standing to challenge the permits on appeal to the EAB. The decision also remanded the case to the EAB and directed the EAB to remand the matter to the Secretary of DNREC "for a review of the status of this project under the CZA."
II.
We first address the question whether WSI has standing in this case. That issue is a mixed question of law and fact. Whether the Superior Court correctly interpreted the applicable standing provisions is a question of law, which this Court reviews de novo. Fiduciary Trust Co. v. Fiduciary Trust Co., Del.Supr., 445 A.2d 927 (1982). To the extent that this appeal involves a factual determination whether WSI meets the legal test of standing, the Court determines whether substantial evidence supports the findings below. 7 Del.C. § 6009. "Substantial evidence" means such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion. Olney v. Cooch, Del.Supr., 425 A.2d 610, 614 (1981).
This is a case of first impression before us. The statutes involved, 7 Del.C. §§ 6008 and 7210,[7] govern the standing of those who wish to challenge the actions of the Secretary or the DNREC under either Chapter 60 or 72 of Title 7. According to the terms of the standing provisions, an appellant must have 1) an interest that is 2) substantially affected by an action of the Secretary or the DNREC. This Court has not previously interpreted either provision.
General Principles of Standing
The Superior Court rejected the EAB's ruling that an appellant's interest in a DNREC decision must be distinguishable from the interest shared by the public in general. Under traditional standards, a law that creates a duty to the general public does not give rise to privately enforceable rights. See, e.g. Cort v. Ash, 422 U.S. 66, 78, 95 S. Ct. 2080, 2087, 45 L. Ed. 2d 26 (1975); J.I. Case Co. v. Borak, 377 U.S. 426, 84 S. Ct. 1555, 12 L. Ed. 2d 423 (1964). However, after reviewing several cases, the Superior Court determined that "[t]he law [has] moved away from the strict requirement that a party asserting a claim must assert an injury that differs from that received by the public at large." In so concluding, the court distinguished two *900 Delaware Supreme Court cases that as a general matter required a heightened interest to achieve standing.
First, in Stuart Kingston, Inc. v. Robinson, Del.Supr., 596 A.2d 1378 (1991), this Court held that in order to achieve standing, a plaintiff must have an interest distinguishable from the greater public. Specifically, the Court noted:
The concept of "standing," in its procedural sense, refers to the right of a party to invoke the jurisdiction of a court to enforce a claim or redress a grievance. It is concerned only with the question of who is entitled to mount a legal challenge and not with the merits of the subject matter of the controversy. In order to achieve standing, the plaintiff's interest in the controversy must be distinguishable from the interest shared by other members of a class or the public in general. Unlike the federal courts, where standing may be subject to stated constitutional limits, state courts apply the concept of standing as a matter of self-restraint to avoid the rendering of advisory opinions at the behest of parties who are "mere intermeddlers."
Id. at 1382 (citations omitted). Because Stuart Kingston involved a private contract dispute not involving public property, the Superior Court determined that the foregoing discussion was irrelevant here.
Second, this Court has discussed standing in Gannett Co., Inc. v. State, Del.Supr., 565 A.2d 895 (1989). In Gannett, we held that "[t]he test of standing is whether: 1) there is a claim of injury-in-fact; and 2) the interest sought to be protected or regulated by the statute or constitutional guarantee in question." The Superior Court distinguished Gannett on the grounds that it was based on a constitutional, not statutory, analysis.
The language cited above from Gannett is derived from the United States Supreme Court case of Assoc. of Data Processing Serv. Org., Inc. v. Camp, 397 U.S. 150, 153-54, 90 S. Ct. 827, 829-30, 25 L. Ed. 2d 184 (1970). An interest is sufficient for the purposes of standing if "the interest sought to be protected by the complainant is arguably within the zone of interests to be protected or regulated by the statute or constitutional guarantee in question." Id. Based upon this plain language, the general test laid out in Data Processing applies to statutes as well as constitutional inquiries.
The Statutory Scheme
While the general principles of standing are helpful in determining WSI's status, the real determinant is the statutory language itself, for no party has a right to appeal unless the statute governing the matter has conferred a right to do so.
The relevant statutes do not define the term "substantially affected." The General Assembly passed the pertinent statutes as a whole and not in parts or sections. Consequently, each part or section should be read in light of every other part or section to produce an harmonious whole. Coastal Barge Corp. v. Coastal Zone Indus. Control Bd., Del.Supr., 492 A.2d 1242, 1245 (1985). Undefined words in a statute must be given their ordinary, common meaning. Id. Additionally, words in a statute should not be construed as surplusage if there is a reasonable construction which will give them meaning, Matter of Estate of Smith, Del.Ch., 467 A.2d 1274, 1280 (1983), and courts must ascribe a purpose to the use of statutory language, if reasonably possible. In re Estate of Webb, Del.Ch., 269 A.2d 413, 416 (1970), aff'd, Del.Supr., 276 A.2d 457 (1971).
The General Assembly provided a role for the participation of the general public in the protection of natural resources by establishing a minimal standing requirement for involvement in hearings during the permit process. Pursuant to 7 Del.C. § 6004(b) and 7 Del.C. § 7207(d), any citizen can obtain a hearing before the Secretary on a proposed permit by submitting a "meritorious request," which in the case of section 6004(b), is defined as "a familiarity with the application and a reasoned statement of the permit's probable impact."
After the hearing process is complete and the Secretary has made a decision on the permits, the standing requirement changes. It then becomes the more stringent "substantially affected" test of the standing provisions at issue here. Based on the foregoing, *901 it seems clear that the General Assembly intended a stricter standing requirement for appeals to the EAB or under the CZA than for that of the hearing process, which is open to the informed general public.
This conclusion overrules the Superior Court's broader interpretation of the term "substantially affected." Citing the purpose of the protection of the environment for the benefit of the public interest, the court ruled:
In light of the stated strong policy of preserving the environmental integrity of the natural resources of this State for the benefit of the public, it is clear that an erroneously issued permit could substantially affect the interests of the Delaware citizens in the preservation of publicly owned natural resources.... [D]ue to the fact that WSI is a corporate citizen with a legitimate interest in the preservation of water quality in the Delaware Bay, I find WSI's interests to be "substantially affected" by the Secretary's ruling so as to accord it standing to challenge the issuance of the [permits].
The court correctly noted that WSI has an interest in the issuance of the permits, but the court expanded the application of "substantially affected" to effectively include "the interests of the Delaware citizens in the preservation of publicly owned resources." On this basis, the term "substantially affected" becomes superfluous, and thus violates a rule of statutory construction that specific provisions should prevail over general provisions. See Mergenthaler v. State, Del.Supr., 239 A.2d 635, 637 (1968).
The Interest of WSI
WSI has asserted that it has both economic and environmental interests at stake in this appeal, which are being jeopardized by the Secretary's issuance of the permits to Oceanport. In order to satisfy the first part of the standing provision, the Court must determine whether WSI's economic and environmental interests are of the type protected by Chapters 60, 70 and 72.
The paramount consideration of Chapter 60, and presumably Chapters 70 and 72, is the protection of the environment. State v. Getty Oil Co., Del.Super., 305 A.2d 327, 329 (1973). The Superior Court cited 7 Del.C. §§ 6001(b),[8] 6020,[9] and 7201[10] for the underlying purpose of environmental protection in the public interest. It is evident from the foregoing that these Chapters were designed to protect environmental interests, including those of both WSI and Oceanport. Clearly then, WSI, as a corporate citizen of the State, has an interest in the protection of its natural resources.
Likewise, WSI has a stated economic interest involved in this case. WSI's most obvious economic interest is the deterrence of competition that would follow upon denial of operating permits to Oceanport. Because the stevedoring business depends on navigable waters, WSI also has an economic interest in seeing that the Delaware River remains open and free from any environmental damage that might prevent WSI from operating. Arguably, Section 6001(a)(1) contemplates this interest by stating: "The development, utilization and control of the land, water, *902 underwater and air resources of the State are vital to the people in order to assure adequate supplies for domestic, industrial,... and other beneficial uses...." So from an economic standpoint as well, WSI can demonstrate an interest in the issuance of permits to Oceanport by the Secretary. None of the foregoing circumstances, however, are legally sufficient to end our inquiry into the standing of WSI to challenge the Secretary's actions.
In environmental law litigation, standing issues are presently the most contentious being adjudicated. This case presents the Court with exactly that issue  whether WSI has standing to challenge the issuance of permits for pier improvements in publicly owned subaqueous lands (7 Del.C. § 7205), for fugitive air emissions (7 Del.C. § 6003), and for point source discharge into the Delaware River under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) (7 Del.C. § 6003) to Oceanport, see page 1.
Organizational Standing
WSI asserts standing based upon 1) claims made on behalf of its employees, and 2) claims alleged on its own behalf. To have standing to assert the claims on behalf of its employees, WSI must first meet the threshold requirement of showing organizational standing. This is a special standing requirement imposed upon organizations who are suing on behalf of their members.[11]
An organization may sue on behalf of its members if 1) the interests to be protected by the suit are germane to the organization's purpose; and 2) neither the claim asserted nor the relief requested requires the participation of individual members; and 3) the organization's members would otherwise have standing. Hunt v. Washington State Apple Advertising Comm'n, 432 U.S. 333, 97 S. Ct. 2434, 53 L. Ed. 2d 383 (1977). The question whether one's interest is germane is "undemanding" and requires only "mere pertinence between the litigation subject and organizational purpose." Humane Soc. of the United States v. Hodel, 840 F.2d 45, 58 (D.C.Cir.1988). This is a weak standard, barring only those whose litigation goals and organization's purpose are totally unrelated. Id. Arguably, a purpose, if not duty, of WSI is to protect its employees from injurious environmental conditions. Thus, it satisfies this part of the test.
The second part of the organizational standing test requires member participation in the suit to be unnecessary, and likewise is satisfied here. WSI is not claiming monetary damages, or seeking other relief in which its employees would be actively affected by a positive disposition. Rather, WSI challenged the issuance of permits, the ultimate objective of which is to ensure that the Secretary has lawfully complied with his duties. WSI's members are not needed to testify in the case or otherwise participate to allow the court to adjudicate the issues on their merits. WSI also has satisfied this part of the test.[12]
The third part of the organizational standing test, which requires that the organization's members also have standing, has not been met by WSI. In such circumstances the Data Processing test is normally applied to assess injury in fact and zone of interest. See generally, Overseas Shipholding Group v. Skinner, 767 F. Supp. 287 (D.D.C.1991). However, such an analysis is not necessary here, because WSI's organizational standing claim fails on another ground under this part of the test.
WSI claims that its standing is conferred by the potential injury to its members. This issue was first raised in this *903 Court, and therefore is not properly before us since it was not presented below. City of Wilmington v. Spencer, Del.Supr., 391 A.2d 199 (1978). As a result, we consider the issue waived, and it will not be considered by the Court. Id.[13]
As an additional ground for standing, WSI asserts that the organization itself has been or will be injured.[14] As to this issue WSI need not meet the organizational standing test, because an organization may have standing in its own right where it has alleged some injury to its own interests. Overseas Shipholding Group, 767 F.Supp. at 292.
Relevance of Data Processing Test
Under the Data Processing test, standing is conferred where there is "1) a claim of injury in fact; and 2) the interest sought to be protected is arguably within the zone of interest to be protected or regulated by the statute...." Gannett, 565 A.2d at 897 (citing Data Processing, 397 U.S. at 153-154, 90 S. Ct. at 829-30). Normally, this test applies only in the absence of a specific statutory grant of review. United States v. Richardson, 418 U.S. 166, 194, 94 S. Ct. 2940, 2955, 41 L. Ed. 2d 678 (1974) (Powell, J., concurring opinion); Presidio Bridge Co. v. Sec. of State, 486 F. Supp. 288 (W.D.TX.1978).
In this case, the pertinent Delaware statutes contain specific standing provisions which require the party who wishes to appeal a decision of the Secretary of the DNREC to have an interest which is "substantially affected."[15] However, neither of the standing provisions define the term "substantially affected." This is of crucial importance because the definition will ultimately confer or deny standing to a party. It therefore falls to us to give body to the phrase "substantially affected."
In a similar case, Agrico Chemical Co. v. Dept. of Environmental Regulation, Fla. App., 406 So. 2d 478 (1981), the Florida District Court of Appeals for the Second District interpreted the following language of Fla. Stat. 120.52(10)(b): "Party means ... (b) any person ... whose substantial interests will be affected by proposed agency action...." Id. at 482. In that case, several corporate parties who were economic competitors of Agrico wished to intervene in the process through which Agrico was to be granted a permit for the construction of a fertilizer facility. Id. at 478-480. The corporate parties were granted standing by the Hearing Board, but the District Court of Appeals reversed, holding that the phrase "substantial interests will be affected" required a showing of 1) an injury in fact, and 2) that the interest sought to be protected was within the zone of interest protected under the *904 statute. Id. at 478-482. Thus, the Agrico court in interpreting a phrase most similar to the "substantially affected" phrase with which this Court is now concerned, employed the Data Processing test, although not by name or reference.
There is a logical strength to the application of Data Processing to the present case independent of Agrico. By enacting the standing provisions, the General Assembly adopted an appeals standard requiring a heightened interest. It seems clear that the intent of the legislature was to limit standing to appeal to those who were actually affected by the Secretary's decisions. It seems equally clear that the General Assembly did not open the flood gates to anyone who merely claimed an interest in the matter. That would have created a totally unworkable administrative structure.
In supplying the necessary interpretation of the term "substantially affected," we adopt the Data Processing test because it gives meaning to the obvious intent of the General Assembly. In the Matter of Estate of Smith, Del.Ch., 467 A.2d 1274, 1280 (1983). A party who is required to show an injury in fact, and that such injury is within the zone of interest sought to be protected by the statute, clearly comes within the purview of these statutes. Determining standing by such criteria complies with the legislature's goal of administrative workability. Thus, in the absence of any legislative definition of the term "substantially affected", the Data Processing test provides a workable and just interpretation.
Application of Data Processing And Its Progeny
The refinement of the Data Processing test has had a long and varied history. However, the United States Supreme Court has clearly enunciated the definitive statement on its application in Lujan v. Defenders of Wildlife, ___ U.S. ___, 112 S. Ct. 2130, 119 L. Ed. 2d 351 (1992).[16] In Lujan the Court folded the first two parts of the Data Processing test into one, and held that two additional criteria had evolved. Id. at ___, 112 S.Ct. at 2136. First, a party must have suffered an injury in fact, which is the invasion of a legally protected interest within the zone of interest sought to be protected or regulated by the statute. Id. at ___, 112 S.Ct. at 2136. The invasion must be 1) concrete and particularized, and b) "actual or imminent, not `conjectural' or `hypothetical'" Id. at ___, 112 S.Ct. at 2136 (citations omitted). Second, "there must be actual connection between the injury and the conduct complained of  the injury has to be `fairly ... trace[able] to the challenged action of the defendant, and not ... th[e] result [of] the independent action of some third party not before the court.'"[17]Id. at ___, 112 S.Ct. at 2136 (citations omitted). Finally, it must be likely that the injury will be redressed by a favorable decision, rather than merely speculative. Id. at ___, 112 S.Ct. at 2136.
Here, WSI fails the first part of the standing test as to an injury in fact and its zone of interest. In reaching this conclusion we consider the facts pleaded by the party asserting standing. WSI contends first that it has an "interest in water quality and navigation." (App.Br. at 3). More specifically, WSI states that it is concerned about surface water runoff, the effects that dredging might have on water quality in the Delaware River, and fugitive air emissions from the Oceanport site. (App. Appendix at 4). WSI has filed *905 no affidavits or other documents providing further details about its first standing claim.
WSI's second claim is that the increased oil tanker traffic caused by the opening of the Oceanport facility will increase the likelihood of an oil spill. (App.Br. 4). WSI is concerned that such a spill would close the Delaware River to shipping traffic, and thereby cause economic damage to its interests. (App.Br. 3). WSI specifically asserts that the Oceanport facility will also increase the likelihood of any kind of shipping accident, which could close the Delaware River and cause economic damage to WSI. (App. Br. 3-4).
Oceanport urges us to deny standing to WSI based upon its claims of both environmental and economic injury. Oceanport asserts that such alleged injuries in an environmental case automatically divest a party of standing. Federal case law is clearly to the contrary, and we adopt it. That, however, does not advance WSI's position.
A party's asserted claim to standing may include both economic and environmental injuries, and a pecuniary interest will not defeat standing where there is a bona fide environmental claim. Overseas Shipholding Group, 767 F. Supp. 287, 292; See also Pack v. Corps of Engineers, 428 F. Supp. 460 (M.D.Fla.1977). "Courts should be reluctant to dissect a plaintiff's motivations for bringing a ... claim. `It is not part of [the] court's function to weigh or proportion' conflicting monetary and environmental interests." Id. at 295 (citing National Helium Corp. v. Morton, 455 F.2d 650, 655 (10th Cir.1971)). On the other hand, "courts should deny standing to businesses asserting... claims only when `the companies are motivated solely by protection of their own pecuniary interest and [] the public interest aspect is so infinitesimal that it ought to be disregarded altogether.'" Id. at 295 (citing National Helium, 455 F.2d at 655) (emphasis added).
In this case, it is clear that the persuasive federal case law will not divest WSI of standing based simply upon a mixed claim of injury. The real issue is whether WSI's interests are sufficient to confer standing.
Considering WSI's environmental claim first, it is clear the asserted injury is not sufficiently specific to withstand challenge. Thus, WSI's claim of environmental injury fails subpart (a) of the first part of the standing test  that the alleged injury must actually affect the plaintiff in a personal and individual manner. The mere allegation of a sincere interest in an environmental problem is not sufficient to confer standing. Sierra Club v. Morton, 405 U.S. 727, 739, 92 S. Ct. 1361, 1368, 31 L. Ed. 2d 636 (1972). In order to comply with the Sierra Club mandate, the party claiming standing must show that the alleged environmental injury will actually affect it. Lujan v. National Wildlife Federation, 497 U.S. 871, 110 S. Ct. 3177, 111 L. Ed. 2d 695 (1990).[18]
WSI's second claim is based on pecuniary loss. While it may satisfy the injury in fact test, it fails the zone of interest test. WSI has alleged that it will suffer a particularized and concrete injury  that increased shipping traffic on the Delaware River will lead to a greater likelihood of a spill closing the River to shipping traffic, and that such closure will cause it a pecuniary loss. Clearly, such an injury, if it occurs, would have a direct impact upon WSI, thereby satisfying subpart (a) of the first part of a standing analysis.
The claim also satisfies subpart (b) of the first part of the standing test. The claim is not conjectural or hypothetical. Although contingent, it is based upon the chance occurrence of some event which WSI has demonstrated will be appreciably increased by the opening of the Oceanport facility. It is not necessary for the event *906 about which the plaintiff complains to have actually occurred; only that it not be so conjectural as to be more creative imagination than fact. See Overseas Shipholding Group, 767 F. Supp. 287.[19]
While WSI's claimed injury is not conjectural or hypothetical it plainly fails the zone of interest test. Thus, we examine whether "the interest sought to be protected by the complainant is arguably within the zone of interests to be protected or regulated by the statute ... in question." Data Processing, 397 U.S. at 153-154, 90 S. Ct. at 829-830. Arguably, 7 Del.C. § 6001(a)(1) contemplates an economic interest: "The development, utilization and control of the land, water, underwater and air resources of the State are vital to the people in order to assure adequate supplies for domestic, industrial, ... other beneficial uses ..." However, this statement of purpose by the General Assembly does not place WSI's economic interest within the zone of interest of the statute.
It is indisputable that the goal of the relevant statutes is the protection of the environment. 7 Del.C. §§ 6001(b), 6020 and 7201. Each statute refers to the protection of natural resources and preservation of the environment as the main thrust of those acts. Id. The provisions of § 6001 quoted above do not even mention the protection of economic interests as a goal of the statute. 7 Del.C. § 6001(a)(1). Rather, it states that the goal of the statute is to preserve natural resources for beneficial uses, without defining such beneficial uses.
For this reason, the Agrico case is again instructive. Agrico, 406 So. 2d 478. That case turned on whether it was appropriate for the Florida Department of Environmental Regulation to deny a construction permit. Id. In determining the appropriateness of the action, the court was required to interpret Fla.Admin.Code Rule 17-2.03(1)(A), which states, "1) In making the determination [of whether to issue a permit], the Department shall give due consideration to ... (d) the social and economic impact...." Even in this case where the rule is more appreciably geared toward economic interests, the Florida Court of Appeal for the Second District found that an economic interest standing alone did not confer standing. Id. at 482-483.
That reasoning is sound. The statutes in question are designed to protect the environment, not economic interests. Reading the statutes as a whole, it would contravene the basic legislative intent to confer standing to challenge decisions made under those statutes based upon the sole claim of economic injury. Had WSI sufficiently asserted its environmental injury, or satisfied the elements of organizational standing, then the result might well be different. But WSI has not done so.
In summary, WSI has not satisfied organizational standing to proceed on behalf of its employees. Nor has it satisfied the injury in fact requirement for its environmental claim. Finally, WSI has not satisfied the zone of interest requirement for its economic claim.
Conclusion
The Superior Court construed the standing provisions too broadly in determining that WSI had an interest that was "substantially affected" by the permit issued by the Secretary. The purpose of environmental regulation is to protect the public and ensure the environmental quality of our natural resources. In furtherance of that goal the General Assembly has established specific procedures for the resolution and enforcement of environmental disputes. This includes a role for the citizens for whose protection the statutes are designed. In this case, the Superior Court misapplied that framework and erroneously focused on the interest of WSI as the operative condition for standing, rather than on the question whether its valid interests were substantially affected *907 by the decision of the Secretary. As a result, we conclude solely on standing grounds that WSI could not pursue the appeal to the EAB or the Superior Court.[20]
III.
Thus, we turn to the question whether the Superior Court correctly remanded the case to the EAB, which was then directed to remand the matter to the Secretary of DNREC for a review of the status of Oceanport's project under the CZA. This involves an interpretation of Chapters 60 and 70, and thus is a matter of law reviewed de novo. Fiduciary Trust Co. v. Fiduciary Trust Co., Del.Supr., 445 A.2d 927 (1982).
In addition to being generally responsible for the issuance of environmental permits under 7 Del.C. § 6003, the Secretary also is responsible for the issuance of permits with regard to subaqueous lands. 7 Del.C. § 7205. The purpose of these provisions is to protect the environment by controlling and abating pollution in the State. See 7 Del.C. § 6001. In discharging this responsibility, the Secretary must take into consideration the effects of the proposed project and any applicable regulations. Id. As such, this was the process in which the Secretary was engaged when he granted Oceanport the permits at issue here.
By contrast, the statutory purpose of the Coastal Zone Act, promulgated in Title 7, Chapter 70, of the Delaware Code is to prohibit the construction of new heavy industry along the coast, outside of the Port of Wilmington, 7 Del.C. § 7001, with the exclusion, however, of non-conforming uses in operation as of June 28, 1971. 7 Del.C. § 7004(a). If a non-conforming use is expanded or extended, the Secretary's permit powers and responsibilities are initiated. 7 Del.C. § 7005(a).
The Superior Court determined that before permits could be issued under Chapter 60, "the Secretary [had to] take a clear position as to whether or not the project as currently described violates the CZA." However, this confuses the statutory framework and requirements of Chapters 60, 70 and 72. Although both Chapter 60 and the CZA are administered by DNREC, they have different purposes and requirements. There is no statutory requirement that a permit applicant obtain a favorable CZA status decision before applying for Chapter 60 permits. Similarly, when determining an applicant's status under the CZA, there is no requirement that the applicant have any status with regard to Chapter 60 permits. Although Oceanport received a CZA status decision from the Secretary, Delaware law does not compel concurrent compliance with regard to Chapter 60 permits.
Notwithstanding the difference in the statutory schemes, however, it is perhaps hyper-technical to treat them in isolation. In order to determine the correct posture with regard to both Chapter 60 permits and CZA status, in the future the Secretary should make the DNREC's position clear on an applicant's CZA status. As we noted, the Coastal Zone Industrial Control Board handles the appeals from decisions of the Secretary. 7 Del.C. § 7007(a). Thus, a remand to the EAB in the posture of this case was erroneous regarding a determination of Oceanport's CZA status.
Since WSI has no standing here, a further remand is unnecessary. The judgment of the Superior Court is REVERSED.
NOTES
[1]  The applicable Coastal Zone Administrative Regulation states:
In order to clarify the types of actions covered by the term "expansion or extension" of non-conforming uses, this term is defined as follows:
"Expansion or Extension" means a change of existing processes, facilities or buildings which significantly increases the production capacity, land use area or environmental impact.
[2]  The permits include:
1) A permit issued pursuant to 7 Del.C. § 6003 and the State of Delaware Regulations Governing the Control of Air Pollution, to construct a bulk product transfer facility consisting of a clam shell bucket crane, a self-enclosed belt conveyer, and discharge hoppers;
2) A permit issued, pursuant to 7 Del.C. § 6003, to discharge stormwater runoff, steam condensate and boiler blowdown through a separator into the Delaware River (the "NPDES" permit); and
3) A permit, pursuant to 7 Del.C. § 7205, to construct portions of a pier in private subaqueous lands. The lease of subaqueous lands is for the construction of portions of the pier in public subaqueous lands.
[3]  7 Del.C. § 6008(a) states in pertinent part:
Any person whose interest is substantially affected by any action of the Secretary may appeal to the Environmental Appeals Board within 20 days after receipt of the Secretary's decision or publication of the decision.
[4]  7 Del.C. § 7210 states in pertinent part:
Any person whose interest is substantially affected by any action of the Secretary or of the Department taken pursuant to this chapter, may appeal to the Environmental Appeals Board as established by § 6007 of this title within 20 days after the announcement of the decision.
[5]  Audubon is not a party to the appeal before us. Thus, we do not address issues of its standing below.
[6]  As the Superior Court discussed in its decision:
The Board's problem arose because there is a split of appellate authority; appeals from decision of the Secretary [of the DNREC] regarding the coastal Zone Act are directed to one Board, the coastal Zone Industrial Control Board, and appeals from decisions of the Secretary regarding permits of the type at issue here are directed to a different Board, the Environmental Appeals Board. Quite naturally the Environmental Appeals Board considers it beyond the scope of its authority to review the CZA determination.
[7]  Because both 7 Del.C. § 6008 and 7210 use the "substantially affected" language, we will refer to them in concert as the "standing provisions."
[8]  A portion of this provision states:
In view of the rapid growth of population, agriculture, industry and other economic activities, the land, water and air resources of the State must be protected, conserved and controlled to assure their reasonable and beneficial use in the interest of the people of this State. Therefore, it is the policy of the State that:
(1) The development, utilization and control of all the land, water, underwater and air resources shall be directed to make the maximum contribution to the public benefit;
[9]  This provision states:
This chapter, being necessary for the welfare of the State and its inhabitants, shall be liberally construed in order to preserve the land, air and water resources of the State.
[10]  A portion of this provision states:
Subaqueous lands within the boundaries of Delaware constitute an important resource of the State and require protection against uses or changes which may impair the public interest in the use of tidal or navigable waters. The purposes of this chapter are to empower the Secretary to deal with or to dispose of interest in public subaqueous lands and to place reasonable limits on the use and development of private subaqueous lands, in order to protect the public interest....
[11]  It is manifest that this doctrine applies to this issue. Organization and member are not to be construed in a narrow sense as applying only to the most common situation where an organization is comprised of dues paying members or those who have affirmatively "joined" the group, such as the Sierra Club or a political group. Rather, it is to be given broad definition to apply to corporations who are suing on behalf of their employees. This result has been validated by the District Court for the District of Columbia in Overseas Shipholding Group, Inc. v. Skinner, 767 F. Supp. 287 (D.D.C.1991) and remains unchallenged.
[12]  The District Court for the District of Columbia reached the same conclusion in the corporate organizational standing case of Overseas Shipholding Group, 767 F. Supp. 287.
[13]  Even if we ruled otherwise, and considered this issue, WSI cannot prevail. As will become apparent under the Data Processing test analysis to follow, WSI has not provided this Court with affidavits or other specific evidence showing that its members actually use the Delaware River and would be affected by the Secretary's decision. In short, WSI has failed to show that one or more of its members would be directly affected by the Secretary's decision. Lujan v. Defenders of Wildlife, ___ U.S. ___, ___, 112 S. Ct. 2130, 2133, 119 L. Ed. 2d 351 (1992). A bald assertion of fact without proof, such as affidavits, will not carry WSI's burden of proving injury in fact sufficient to establish standing. See id. at ___ _ ___, 112 S. Ct. at 2137-2138.
[14]  In instances where the environmental law is designed to prevent the occurrence of environmental degradation, it is sufficient to show that the injury may or will occur at some future date. This is the case in National Environmental Policy Act litigation because the act is designed to prevent environmental degradation. Thus, future environmental degradation is within the zone of interest sought to be protected by the Act. Obviously, then, whether a contingent or future occurrence of an act is sufficient to confer standing is determined by the Data Processing test.
In the context of the Coastal Zone Act, 7 Del.C. §§ 7001-7013, and the Subaqueous Lands Act, 7 Del.C. 7201-7216, under review here, the future occurrence of environmental degradation is clearly within the zone of interest sought to be protected by the acts. The Coastal Zone Act, 7 Del.C. § 7201, states as its purpose the protection of the coastal zone. Likewise, the Subaqueous Lands Act, 7 Del.C. § 7201, states as its purpose the protection of subaqueous lands against use or change not in the public interest. It would be inconsistent to exclude the future occurrence of events from the scope of these acts, because one cannot prevent environmental degradation after it has already occurred. Thus, WSI's claims relating to present or future injuries under the relevant laws are within the zone of interest as enunciated in the Data Processing test.
[15]  See supra, notes 3 and 4.
[16]  The references in WSI's brief to United States v. Students Challenging Regulatory Agency Procedures, 412 U.S. 669, 93 S. Ct. 2405, 37 L. Ed. 2d 254 (1973) (commonly known as SCRAP I), and Duke Power Co. v. Carolina Environmental Study Group, Inc., 438 U.S. 59, 98 S. Ct. 2620, 57 L. Ed. 2d 595 (1978), as controlling law in the area of environmental standing, are misleading and incorrect. These cases have long been called into question, and narrowed to the point of invalidation. Whitmore v. Arkansas, 495 U.S. 149, 110 S. Ct. 1717, 109 L. Ed. 2d 135 (1990); Lujan v. National Wildlife Federation, 497 U.S. 871, 110 S. Ct. 3177, 111 L. Ed. 2d 695 (1990); Lujan v. Defenders of Wildlife, ___ U.S. ___, 112 S. Ct. 2130, 119 L. Ed. 2d 351 (1992).
[17]  Thus, WSI misstates the law when it claims that "Under Duke Power, WSI is not required to show that there is some nexus between its alleged injury ... and the claim on the merits." (App.Br. 22) As previously stated, Duke is old law and Lujan, which was decided well before WSI's brief was due in this Court, makes that point perfectly clear.
[18]  In fact, the record suggests that WSI's environmental claims are weaker than those of the Sierra Club in Sierra Club v. Morton. For example, WSI has only actively pursued this course of action in the present forum. In the court below, the EAB, and before the Secretary, the record clearly illustrates that this environmental claim played a very distant second fiddle to its main concern  pecuniary loss because of increased competition. Indeed, this issue received only cursory attention in all previous stages of the proceedings, and has only now come to the fore because WSI's standing has been seriously challenged under appropriate case law.
[19]  For example in the cited case, the District Court held that a shipping company had standing to challenge the government's approval of the use of VLC's. The company claimed the government had violated NEPA because the granting of permission constituted a major federal action substantially affecting the environment. The corporation claimed the substantial impact on the environment was the increase in the likelihood of a major oil spill caused by the presence of these huge cargo ships. The court held this claimed injury was not conjectural or hypothetical, and that the corporation had standing. Overseas Shipholding Group, 767 F. Supp. 287.
[20]  This renders moot the question whether WSI erroneously appealed to the EPA rather than the Coastal Zone Industrial Control Board.

=== CASE 9736843 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:08:18.652416+00 ===

DYKMAN, J.
This is a ch. 227, Stats., review of a decision by State Public Defender Board (Board). The Board sustained the State Public Defender's decision to reduce the number of out-of-court hours attorney John Gibson had billed to the State Public Defender for defending an indigent defendant. The issue is whether the Board's conclusions are reasonable and its findings *811are supported by substantial evidence. We conclude they are. Accordingly, we affirm.
BACKGROUND
Gibson contracted with the State Public Defender to represent Walter Anchico, an indigent defendant charged with second-degree sexual assault. According to the State Public Defender's files, the case was opened February 28, 1986 and was closed January 6, 1987. The trial was originally scheduled for March 24, 1986, was rescheduled to June 15, 1986, and finally began on September 16, 1986. Anchico was convicted after a three-day jury trial. He was sentenced on January 6, 1987.
Gibson billed the State Public Defender $15,849.66, claiming compensation for 38.9 in-court hours and 422.3 out-of-court hours. The bill was accompanied by a seventeen-page document, indicating the character of the services Gibson rendered and the amount of the time spent on each service. The State Public Defender reviewed Gibson's bill and paid him a total of $9,923.05, reducing his out-of-court hours to 245.2. Included with the payment was a form entitled "Explanation of Private Attorney Bill Reduction," indicating the reasons for the bill reduction. Two reasons were indicated for the reduction, only one of which is relevant to this appeal:
Attorney time was billed in excess of what the agency considered reasonable on this case. Reducing a bill is always a difficult action to take and may be necessary even where time is accurately billed. The reductions do not reflect criticism of the attorney's dedication, but rather acknowledge the limits of the state's ability to pay.
*812Gibson sought review of the State Public Defender's decision by the Board. See sec. 977.08(4), Stats.;1 and Wis. Adm. Code, sec. SPD 4.03(3). Gibson and Marcus Johnson, Trial Division Chief Officer for the State Public Defender, appeared before the Board. Johnson and Gibson were each allowed thirty minutes for oral arguments, and both presented documentary evidence.
The Board sustained the State Public Defender's decision, concluding that Gibson's original bill was unreasonable because the out-of-court hours were excessive, the amount and character of the services rendered were excessive, and the billing exceeded the customary charges for a case of this nature. Gibson sought judicial review, and the circuit court affirmed the Board's decision. He appeals.
SCOPE OF REVIEW
We review the Board's findings, conclusions, and decision independently of the circuit court. Doersching v. Funeral Directors, 138 Wis. 2d 312, 322, 405 N.W.2d 781, 785 (Ct. App. 1987). The scope of our review is defined in sec. 227.57, Stats.
We will set aside or modify an agency action if the agency has erroneously interpreted a provision of law. Sec. 227.57(5), Stats. We may not substitute our judg*813ment for that of the agency regarding the weight of the evidence on any disputed finding of fact. However, if the agency's action depends on a finding of fact not supported by substantial evidence in the record, we must set aside the action and remand the case to the agency. Sec. 227.57(6).
The substantial evidence test is met if the evidence and the inferences from that evidence are such that a reasonable person might have made the same finding the agency did. Bucyrus-Erie Co. v. ILHR Department, 90 Wis. 2d 408, 418, 280 N.W.2d 142, 147 (1979). Substantial evidence may support conflicting findings. If it does, we must accept the agency's choice, notwithstanding the reasonableness of contrary findings. Robertson Transport Co. v. Public Serv. Comm., 39 Wis. 2d 653, 658, 159 N.W.2d 636, 638 (1968).
DISCUSSION
This is the first case on the reasonableness of an appointed counsel's fees since the legislature created the State Public Defender Board to review attorney fee determinations by the State Public Defender. See 1977 Wis. Laws, ch. 29, sec. 1600, creating ch. 977, Stats. (1977), effective July 1,1977. Prior to that time, the trial court was responsible for determining the reasonableness of an appointed counsel's fees. State v. Sidney, 66 Wis. 2d 602, 225 N.W.2d 438 (1975).
In Sidney, the supreme court listed several factors a trial court should consider in determining the reasonableness of an appointed counsel's fees. These factors included,
the amount and character of the services rendered, the labor, the time, and trouble involved, the charac*814ter and importance of the litigation, the amount of money or value of the property affected, the professional skill and experience called for, and the standing of the attorney in his profession.
Id. at 607, 225 N.W.2d at 441 (quoting Touchett v. E Z Paintr Corp., 14 Wis. 2d 479, 488, 111 N.W.2d 419, 423 (1961)); see also SCR 20:1.5 (setting forth factors to consider in determining the reasonableness of attorney fees). While Sidney does not control here, its analysis is relevant to our inquiry. We will look to the Sidney factors in reviewing the Board's decision.
At the hehring before the Board, Marcus Johnson explained why the State Public Defender reduced the number of out-of-court hours. According to Johnson, Gibson's out-of-court hours were excessive given that Anchico was charged with a single count of second-degree sexual assault,2 that the trial lasted three days, and that Gibson had twenty-seven years of experience practicing law in Wisconsin. Johnson concluded from his review of Gibson's bill that Gibson's out-of-court hours were excessive primarily in four areas: client consultation, trial preparation for the first trial date, trial preparation for the second trial date, and postconviction activity.
Based on his four years of experience reviewing bills submitted to the State Public Defender, Johnson stated that the number of hours spent in court could be used to judge the reasonableness of the out-of-court hours billed.3 In a case like the Anchico case, the average ratio *815of out-of-court to in-court hours ranges from 2-to-l to 4-to-1. To illustrate the hours ratio, Johnson discussed two cases, the bills from which he had recently reviewed. In the first case, the defendant had been charged with first degree murder, possession of a weapon by a felon, armed robbery, and arson. There the hours ratio was 2-to-l. In the second case, the defendant was charged with arson, a class B Felony. There the hours ratio was 3-to-l. In contrast, Gibson's bill reflected a 10-to-l hours ratio, and he was compensated based on a 6-to-l hours ratio.4
*816In response, Gibson explained that the Anchico case was unusual due to the past sexual relationship between Anchico and the victim.5 The unusualness of the sexual relationship between Anchico and the victim required that Gibson spend many hours researching the rape shield law, sec. 972.11, Stats., and preparing evidentiary motions. Gibson stated that the case was so unusual that the ratio Johnson spoke of was inapplicable. Other difficulties arose because Anchico did not speak English well and because he was a difficult person to work with.
The Board asked Gibson why he needed to spend over 400 additional hours on trial preparation after the case had been set for trial on March 24. Gibson explained that he did not believe the case would be tried on March 24 and that he was not prepared for trial on that date. He said he spent another sixty hours preparing for trial after the case was rescheduled a second time because he learned that the state had changed its theory of the case two days before trial. Gibson was asked why he spent so many hours in client consultation time and in preparation time before the sentencing hearing. Gibson explained that the hours were necessary because Anchico, who was not released on bail, was having a difficult time in jail and because a witness was giving damaging information to the probation officer who was preparing the presentence report.
*817Gibson submitted to the Board a four-page memo, in which he addressed the time reduction the State Public Defender made on his bill. For example, Gibson had billed 3.8 hours for a conference with the Assistant District Attorney and Anchico. The State Public Defender reduced Gibson's hours to 1.8. In the memo, Gibson explained,
This client was a very articulate, verbal, intelligent and well-educated person, but English is not his first language. There are many, many instances in the course of events leading up to the trial which showed me that he didn't understand things that I and others had assumed he understood. It was time-consuming to interview and re-interview him, but I had to be sure that he understood me and I understood him.
Based on the record before the Board, we conclude that its decision to reduce the number of out-of-court hours Gibson billed was reasonable and supported by substantial evidence. Johnson's statements before the Board indicate that Gibson's bill was thoroughly reviewed and that the bill was reduced based on considerations consistent with the Sidney factors. The fact that Gibson was compensated based on an hours ratio significantly greater than the average hours ratio for similar cases indicates that allowance was made for the unusualness of this case.
By the Court. — Judgment affirmed.
Section 977.08(4), Stats., provides:
At the conclusion of each case, any private local attorney who has been appointed shall submit a copy of his or her bill to the state public defender. The state public defender shall review the bill and reject it or approve it in whole or in part. The state public defender shall then pay the bill according to the rates under sub. (4m). Any attorney dissatisfied with the decision of the state public defender regarding the bill may have the decision reviewed by the board . . ..
Johnson's assertion was incorrect. Anchico was convicted of two counts of second degree sexual assault under sec. 940.225(2)(a), Stats. State v. Anchico, No. 87-1414-CR unpublished slip op. (Wis. Ct. App. Aug. 25, 1988).
In its brief, the State Public Defender argues that evidence of the reasonableness of its decision is found in Wis. Adm. Code, *815sec. SPD 3.02 (1984), which lists estimated costs of retaining private counsel to determine indigent status for public defender representation. The State Public Defender makes the same argument with respect to the standard established for budgetary determinations for public defenders under sec. 977.08(5), Stats., which indicates that a public defender should handle 184.5 felony cases per year. We will not consider this evidence because it is not a part of the record before the Board. Sec. 227.57(1), Stats, (review limited to record before the agency). Even were we to consider this evidence, we question its relevance. 184.5 three-day trials would take 553.5 days to try. Matters resolved short of trial bear little relationship to the Anchico case.
The State Public Defender reduced specific out-of-court hours on Gibson's bill rather than simply reducing the total number of out-of-court hours. At the hearing, Johnson explained,
we get a sense and then we start to figure out how we can reduce it and then at some point, if something is reduced from 4.8 to 2.8 it's just reduced because there's the big block of time as opposed as going through and say you billed 1.6 hours here so we'll take off 3 tenths here. We have to make those kind of reductions in order to be fair in reviewing the bill.
While we do not condone the State Public Defender's method of reducing the number of hours as applied in this case, the fact that it reduced specific hours does not render the bill reduction unreasonable.
Anchico and [the victim] began dating in November, 1984. Their relationship ended in August, 1985, although they continued to see each other occasionally until December 20,1985, the date on which the assault was alleged to have occurred. Throughout the relationship, Anchico and [the victim] routinely engaged in sexual activity, some of it physically "rough," as well as practices which might be considered unusual, if not aberrant, by many people.
State v. Anchico, No. 87-1414-CR, unpublished slip op. at 2 (Wis. Ct. App. Aug. 25, 1988).

=== CASE 9736844 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:08:18.656503+00 ===

SUNDBY, J.
(dissenting). The public defender acknowledges that this is a ch. 227, Stats., review of a decision of the State Public Defender Board. Yet, the public defender argues that under sec. 977.08(4), Stats., the Board has "complete discretion” to pay whatever the Board considers reasonable. The public defender takes *818several positions which are inconsistent. First, the public defender claims that a dispute between the public defender and a retained attorney is "a matter of pure contract law." Second, the public defender argues that unless the Board's decision is found to be "wholly arbitrary and without rational basis," it must be affirmed as a legitimate exercise of the Board's administrative powers. Finally, the public defender argues that under secs. 227.57(2) and (6), Stats., the Board's decision should be affirmed if it is supported by substantial evidence in the record.
Section 977.08(4), Stats., provides that at the conclusion of each case, the appointed attorney shall submit his or her bill to the public defender, who shall review the bill and reject it or approve it in whole or in part. "Any attorney dissatisfied with the decision of the state public defender regarding the bill may have the decision reviewed by the board." Wisconsin Adm. Code, sec. SPD 4.03(3) provides that the hearing before the Board "shall be considered a 'class 3' proceeding and is governed by ss. 227.07 to 227.09, Stats." These statutes were renumbered secs. 227.44, 227.45 and 227.46 by secs. 32, 33, 33g, 1985 Wis. Act 182. These sections provide for an eviden-tiary hearing, at which witnesses are sworn and are subject to cross-examination. Gibson does not complain that he was denied the hearing contemplated by secs. 227.44, 227.45 and 227.46. He does, however, complain that the Board did not explain the basis for its decision.
Wisconsin Adm. Code, sec. SPD 4.03(5) provides: "The board's written decision shall constitute findings of fact and conclusions of law within the meaning of s. 227.10, [Stats.]." Section 227.10 was renumbered sec. 227.47 by sec. 33r, 1985 Wis. Act 182. Section 227.47 provides in part: "Every proposed or final decision of an agency . . . following a hearing and every final decision *819of an agency shall be in writing accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions of law. The findings of fact shall consist of a concise and separate statement of the ultimate conclusions upon each material issue of fact without recital of evidence . .
Gibson complains that the Board did not explain the basis for its decision.
The Board concluded:
(7) That the original attorney billing is unreasonable since:
(a) Out-of-court hours are excessive;
(b) Amount and character of services rendered are excessive;
(c) Billing exceeds customary charges for case of this nature.
The Board did not explain why the attorney's out-of-court hours are excessive, why the amount and character of services rendered are excessive, or what are customary charges for a case of this nature.
The Board's decision is similar to the decision of the Public Service Commission which was found wanting in Madison Gas & Elec. Co. v. Public Serv. Comm., 109 Wis. 2d 127, 137, 325 N.W.2d 339, 344 (1982). The Public Service Commission had determined that it was "just and reasonable" to adjust for MG&E's cost of excess generating capacity. The court found that this did not meet the test by which the exercise of discretion is measured. "Discretion is more than a choice between alternatives without giving the rationale or reason behind the choice." Id. at 136-37, 325 N.W.2d at 344 (quoting Reidinger v. Optometry Examining Bd., 81 Wis. 2d 292, 297, 260 N.W.2d 270, 273 (1977)).
The requirement that an administrative agency state the reasons for its decision is more than statutory^; *820it embodies the essential requirement of due process. Edmonds v. Board of Fire & Police Commrs., 66 Wis. 2d 337, 347-49, 224 N.W.2d 575, 580-81 (1975).
I would reverse the judgment and direct the trial court to remand the matter to the Board to allow it to explain the basis for its decision. I therefore respectfully dissent.

=== CASE 2207634 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:21.786495+00 ===

183 Mich. App. 326 (1990)
454 N.W.2d 610
TEMPLE
v.
KELEL DISTRIBUTING CO, INC
Docket No. 109716.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided April 16, 1990.
Richard L. Ruby, and Ronald M. Rothstein, of Counsel, for plaintiff.
Ulanoff, Ross & Wesley, P.C. (by Stuart A. Ulanoff), for defendant.
Before: GRIFFIN, P.J., and REILLY and R.B. BURNS,[*] JJ.
GRIFFIN, P.J.
This is a wrongful death action arising out of a motor vehicle collision. Defendant appeals as of right from a judgment of $316,000 *328 entered pursuant to a jury verdict[1] and an award of attorney fees as mediation sanctions totalling $145,343.14. We affirm the judgment but reverse and remand as to the award of attorney fees.
I
The initial liability issue involves whether the instant action is barred by the exclusive remedy of the Workers' Disability Compensation Act, MCL 418.131; MSA 17.237(131). Defendant's motion for summary disposition, which alleged that plaintiff's decedent was an employee of the defendant, was denied by the lower court. Of pivotal significance is the fact that plaintiff's decedent's employment status was adjudicated prior to trial by the Bureau of Workers' Disability Compensation. The worker's compensation bureau is the proper forum in which to resolve factual issues relating to employment which trigger the purview of the Workers' Disability Compensation Act. Dixon v Sype, 92 Mich. App. 144; 284 NW2d 514 (1979), and Bednarski v General Motors Corp, 88 Mich. App. 482; 276 NW2d 624 (1979).
Although defendant has appealed an adverse ruling that plaintiff's decedent was not an employee at the time of the accident, the decision nevertheless has res judicata effect. City of Troy v Hershberger, 27 Mich. App. 123; 183 NW2d 430 (1970). Defendant's collateral attack in the instant appeal is therefore impermissible.
II
Defendant next asserts that the lower court committed error requiring reversal in admitting *329 irrelevant and highly inflammatory evidence which swayed the passions of the jurors. We agree that the evidence complained of was irrelevant (MRE 401) and unfairly prejudicial (MRE 403). Nevertheless, the record reveals that defense counsel failed to object to the questions by which the damaging evidence was elicited.
As a general rule, error may not be predicated upon a ruling which admits evidence unless there has been a timely objection and a substantial right affected:
(a) Effect of Erroneous Ruling. Error may not be predicated upon a ruling which admits or excludes evidence unless a substantial right of the party is affected, and
(1) Objection. In case the ruling is one admitting evidence, a timely objection or motion to strike appears of record, stating the specific ground of objection, if the specific ground was not apparent from the context.... [MRE 103(a)(1).]
In the instant case, the damaging testimony came from the investigating police officer, Ronald Novak, when the officer was asked what, if anything, James Kelel, president of Kelel Distributing, said at the accident scene shortly after the collision. The damaging information which was elicited must have been expected by defense counsel, who most certainly would have talked to his client and the investigating officer about such statements prior to trial. Surprise is not claimed.
Much later in the trial, while Mr. Kelel was subject to cross-examination, the line of inquiry was renewed. In response, defense counsel made the following statement and objection:
Mr. Lovernick: Excuse me. And perhaps I'm somewhat lax in not objecting to the Officer's *330 testimony earlier. Whether that comment was made or not, whether it was callous or heartless, I'm not here to judge the remark.
The Court: What's the objection?
Mr. Lovernick: The objection goes to the fact that it has no relevancy to this particular issue in the case.
The Court: Do you agree, Mr. Ruby, that it's not relevant?
Mr. Ruby: I believe it goes to credibility, Your Honor.
The Court: The objection is overruled. Let's go on.
Although we agree with the defendant that this belated objection to relevancy should have been sustained, we note that at the time the objection was raised, the statement was already in evidence. Accordingly we find no error requiring reversal. MCR 2.613(A).[2]
III
Defendant's primary issue on appeal is that the lower court abused its discretion by awarding attorney fees as mediation sanctions in the sum of $145,343.14. We agree.
The defendant's rejection of a mediation evaluation, which was considerably less than the judgment, entitles the plaintiff to an award of reasonable attorney fees necessitated by the rejection. The applicable court rule is MCR 2.403. Because the mediation took place on December 10, 1987, *331 amendments to MCR 2.403 effective beginning December 1, 1987, apply. Of controlling import is an amendment to MCR 2.403 which was adopted by the Supreme Court on September 25, 1987, effective December 1, 1987. The amendment at issue specifies that a "reasonable attorney fee" awarded as a mediation sanction must be "based on a reasonable hourly or daily rate":
For the purpose of this rule, actual costs include those costs taxable in any civil action and a reasonable attorney fee based on a reasonable hourly or daily rate as determined by the trial judge for services necessitated by the rejection of the mediation evaluation. [MCR 2.403(O)(6).]
MCR 2.403(O)(6) differs from its predecessor in that the phrase "based on a reasonable hourly or daily rate" is an addition to the text of the former rule. The amendment grew out of the work of the Mediation Evaluation Committee appointed by the Supreme Court on April 4, 1986. A detailed evaluation of the Committee's proposals may be found at 426B of the Michigan Reports (advance sheets only).
The commentary by the Mediation Evaluation Committee to its proposed amendment of MCR 2.403 is instructive. The Committee's "Note" following the proposed rule change states that the amendment was intended to require mediation sanctions to be based on a reasonable daily or hourly rate rather than on a contingent fee:
Language is added to subrule (O)(4) (as renumbered) to make clear that the attorney fee component of costs must be determined on the basis of a daily or hourly rate, rather than on the basis of a contingent fee. [MCR 2.403(O)(4), note, 426B Mich 21.]
*332 Additionally, the subsequent "Discussion" by the Committee clearly reveals that the intent of the Committee was to halt the practice by some judges of awarding mediation sanctions based on a contingent fee:
There is no unanimity in interpreting what a "reasonable attorney fee" means for the purposes of making an award of costs. Some judges have, for example, awarded a plaintiff whose lawyer has the case on a contingent basis an attorney fee calculated as a percentage of the verdict, typically one-third, which can amount to six or seven-figures. The committee did not think this was widespread, but decided that it would be best to modify the rule to prevent it. [426B Mich 25.]
In the instant case, the lower court granted, without explanation, plaintiff's counsel's request for attorney fees in the sum of $145,343.14. At the hearing, plaintiff's counsel conceded that the requested attorney fee was not based on an hourly rate or daily rate but claimed that it was reasonable based on the existence of a contingent fee contract, the skill and labor involved, the length of the professional relationship, the standing and experience of the attorney, and the difficulty of the case. Although an unsigned order filed below on June 1, 1988, also recites these factors, the grounds for the award were never specified by the lower court.
Plaintiff's counsel claimed below that he incurred 136 hours of legal work as a consequence of defendant's rejection of the mediation evaluation. Accepting as true the reasonableness of the number of hours claimed, the award represents an hourly rate in excess of $1,000 an hour. We hold that such a rate for legal work is patently unreasonable.
On remand, we direct the lower court's attention *333 to the 1988 Economics of the Law Practice Survey, 67 Mich B J No. 11B (1988).[3] In determining a reasonable hourly or daily rate for purposes of the mediation rule, the lower court should utilize the empirical data contained in the Law Practice Survey as well as data contained in other reliable studies or surveys. Such data should be utilized and coordinated with the other relevant criteria such as the professional standing and experience of the attorney; the skill, time, and labor involved; the amount in question and the results achieved; the difficulty of the case; the expenses incurred; and the nature and length of the professional relationship with the client. See Wood v DAIIE, 413 Mich. 573, 588; 321 NW2d 653 (1982), and Crawley v Schick, 48 Mich. App. 728, 737; 211 NW2d 217 (1973).
IV
The judgment in plaintiff's favor is affirmed. The award of attorney fees as mediation sanctions in the sum of $145,343.14 is reversed and vacated. On remand, the lower court shall award plaintiff a reasonable attorney fee based on a reasonable hourly or daily rate. We do not retain jurisdiction.
NOTES
[*]  Former Court of Appeals judge, sitting on the Court of Appeals by assignment.
[1]  The jury's verdict of $416,000 was reduced $100,000 by the court as a setoff of a prior settlement with another defendant.
[2]  MCR 2.613(A) states:
(A) Harmless Error. An error in the admission or the exclusion of evidence, an error in a ruling or order, or an error or defect in anything done or omitted by the court or by the parties is not ground for granting a new trial, for setting aside a verdict, or for vacating, modifying, or otherwise disturbing a judgment or order, unless refusal to take this action appears to the court inconsistent with substantial justice.
[3]  According to the 1988 survey conducted by the State Bar of Michigan, the hourly billing rates for plaintiff personal injury attorneys range from $80 per hour (25th percentile) to $135 per hour (90th percentile).
We note that advice to clients as to fee arrangements other than a contingent fee is mandatory:
Advice to Client. An attorney must advise a client, before entering into a contingent fee arrangement, that attorneys may be employed under other fee arrangements in which the attorney is compensated for the reasonable value of the services performed, such as on an hourly or per diem basis. The method of compensation used by an individual attorney remains the attorney's option, and this rule does not require an attorney to accept compensation in a manner other than that chosen by the attorney. [MCR 8.121(E).]

=== CASE 9736845 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:08:20.278406+00 ===

STONE, J.
Petitioner seeks to restrain the Superior Court of Fresno County from proceeding with a criminal prosecution against her. An information was filed June 24, 1968, charging her with grand theft in violation of Penal Code section 487. The question here is whether petitioner may claim immunity from prosecution upon said charge by reason of an intervening proceeding under the Unemployment Insurance Code. Petitioner, who refused to answer questions in a proceeding before the appeals board upon the ground the answers *731would incriminate her, was ordered to answer by the referee. She now claims immunity under Unemployment Insurance Code section 1955. The pertinent facts are as follows:
Petitioner and her husband, Francisco Escamilla, worked at the Farmers Supply Market in Reedley; she was arrested on May 2 upon suspicion of grand theft from her employer; the next day Francisco was discharged from his employment as a box boy, and he applied for unemployment insurance. When notified of the application, his employer objected, claiming that Francisco had been guilty of misconduct in that he had not been a dependable employee and that in the market owner ’s belief Francisco knew of his wife’s defalcations.
The Department of Employment ruled that Francisco was entitled to unemployment insurance benefits upon the ground that he was not discharged for acts amounting to misconduct. Farmers Supply Market filed a notice of appeal, and on August 16, 1968, a hearing was held before a referee acting on behalf of the Unemployment Insurance Appeals Board. The employer contended that Francisco would have been discharged for acts of misconduct much earlier but it was feared this might impair the criminal investigation of his wife’s activities at the market.
Petitioner voluntarily appeared at the hearing, acting as interpreter for her husband. However, she had her own separate counsel, and when she was called to the stand by her husband's attorney and asked questions concerning thefts from her employer, her attorney objected. For example, to the question, "Mrs. Escamilla, did your husband have knowledge of you taking some money from your employer ? ”; her attorney interposed: "I am going to advise my client not to answer that on the grounds the answer may tend to incriminate her.” The referee at first agreed that the witness need not answer, but called a conference when the husband’s attorney insisted that the language of Unemployment Insurance Code section 1955, providing that no person shall be excused from testifying on the grounds that it may incriminate him, meant only that "this testimony here could not be used in any other proceeding. ’ ’
What transpired in the conference is not reported, but the record reflects the following when the hearing resumed:
"Referee: While off the record the parties examined Section 1955 of the California Unemployment Insurance Code. Would you proceed Mr. Aycock.
"Mr. Aycock: Q. Mrs. Escamilla, did you ever tell your *732husband, Francisco, that you had or were taking money from your employer ?
“Mr. Krum : I will assert the 5th Amendment privilege of— on behalf of my client, Esther Escamilla, on the grounds the answer may tend to incriminate her.
“Mr. Aycock : I would request Madam Referee that—
“Referee: You want a ruling on it?
“Mr. Aycock: Yes, that she be requested to answer under Section 1955. I believe Mr. Krum would probably agree under the code section as it appears that such testimony would not be admissible against her in a criminal proceeding after she is compelled to testify here and it would, I believe, be of benefit to my client.
“Referee: Would you proceed Mrs. Escamilla, answer the question.
“Mr. Krum: You’re ordering her to answer the question?
“Referee: I’m ordering her to answer the question.”
Later, when asked, “Alright, now, what did you do with that money, did you spend any of it on your husband at all, ’ ’ petitioner’s attorney said: “I will object or assert the privilege against self-incrimination on behalf of my client and advise her not to answer that question unless ordered to.” The referee stated: “You’re directed to answer.”
The effect of the referee’s order rests upon an interpretation of section 1955, which provides, in pertinent part: “No individual shall be prosecuted or subjected to any penalty or forfeiture for or on account of any transaction, matter, or thing concerning which he is compelled, after having claimed his privilege against self-incrimination, to testify or produce evidence, documentary or otherwise.”
The facts of this case are strikingly similar to People v. King, 66 Cal.2d 633 [58 Cal.Rptr. 571, 427 P.2d 171], where the Insurance Commissioner compelled a witness to appear pursuant to Insurance Code section 1020, which makes no provision for a grant of immunity to a witness who gives incriminating testimony. The witness answered all questions put to him, without asserting the privilege against self-incrimination. Later, criminal charges were brought involving matters about which he had testified. In a proceeding under Penal Code section 995 he sought to set aside the indictment upon the ground that having been compelled to testify in hearings before the commissioner, he was entitled to immunity under the provisions of another section of the Insurance Code, namely, section 12924, subdivision (b), which provides: “. . . *733no person shall he prosecuted or punished by any criminal action or proceeding for or on account of any act, transaction, matter or thing concerning which he is so compelled to testify under oath. ...” The lower court refused to grant the motion to set aside the indictment, but granted a subsequent motion to quash the indictment. The Supreme Court affirmed, holding that .the witness was entitled to immunity and, further, that the statute did not require him to assert his privilege against self-incrimination before testifying. (P. 637.)
We deem the case at bench much stronger, in that petitioner did assert her constitutional privilege against self-incrimination and, despite this, was ordered to testify.
At first blush the argument of real party in interest, that where a criminal action is pending in the superior court a hearing officer for a state agency has no authority or power to grant immunity to the accused, seems persuasive. However, the argument overlooks the inherent sovereignty of the state; it may, through the Legislature, delegate to a hearing officer the power to grant immunity to a witness either before or after criminal charges are filed. The Legislature has not limited the power delegated to a hearing officer to grant immunity under Unemployment Insurance Code section 1955 to situations where no criminal proceedings are pending; we cannot read such a limitation into the plain language of the statute. As a practical matter, when a witness charged with a criminal offense claims immunity upon the ground that his testimony may tend to incriminate him, the seriousness of an order requiring him to waive his immunity and testify is patent. Where no charge is pending when the privilege is asserted, it is problematical whether a charge will be made and the privilege become significant; a pending trial removes all doubt.
Moreover, the order of the referee that Mrs. Escamilla testify, despite the assertion of her right not to incriminate herself under the Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution, gives her claim to immunity under section 1955 constitutional overtones that transcend the jurisdiction of the superior court. The whole purpose of the Miranda v. Arizona (384 U.S. 436 [16 L.Ed.2d 694, 86 S.Ct. 1602, 10 A.L.R.3d 974]) line of cases is to ensure that an accused knows his rights under the Fifth Amendment so he can assert them if he wishes. Here, petitioner was ordered to testify despite the assertion of her right not to do so.
*734It is argued that since petitioner voluntarily appeared at the hearing, and not under the compulsion of a subpoena, she is not entitled to the protection of section 1955. In the King case the witness not only testified voluntarily, he claimed no immunity before testifying.
Real party in interest also asserts that because the questions upon which petitioner’s right to immunity rests were asked by her husband’s attorney and followed by her own attorney’s claim of privilege, petitioner’s claim of immunity is based upon fraud or collusion.
Although the dissent appears to adopt this theory, we cannot reconcile the facts with the fundamental principles of fraud. There can be no doubt that petitioner wanted immunity, but so does every admitted criminal who turns state’s evidence. Fraud that would warrant a court in nullifying immunity once it is granted as the basis for a waiver of constitutional rights would, at the very least, require that the authority granting the immunity be misled either by a misstatement of the facts or by a withholding of facts. It is clear from the record that the attorney for petitioner’s husband, as well as her own attorney, knew that she hoped for immunity. Knowledge of the pending prosecution of petitioner was well known; as already noted, the referee held a conference to discuss the import of section 1955 after petitioner asserted her constitutional right not to testify. It was clear to everyone present, including the referee, that petitioner intended to claim immunity from the pending prosecution. There was no fraud or concealment; apparently the referee made a mistake of law in her interpretation of the import of section 1955, but that circumstance cannot be equated with fraud.
When the Legislature creates an immunity statute it acts with full knowledge that the statute may protect a wrongdoer from prosecution. With this in mind, the Legislature establishes standards by which the right to immunity is to be measured. It is not within the province of a court to alter the standards so fixed, nor in the court’s discretion to grant or deny immunity once those standards are met. To do so would be to substitute immunity according to the chancellor’s foot, for standards established by the Legislature.
Any person may knowingly and intelligently waive his constitutional rights, but no court or referee can force him to waive them without a compensating protection which, here, was the right not to be prosecuted or subjected to any penalty or forfeiture from any matter about which petitioner was *735compelled to testify. (Unemp. Ins. Code, § 1955.) It is unfortunate that the testimony petitioner was ordered to give after claiming immunity added nothing to the unemployment case; there was really no compelling reason for the referee to order petitioner to answer. But immunity cannot rest on an after-the-fact appraisal of the circumstances, for this would be to substitute judicial discretion for legislative standards.
Real party in interest contends that since Unemployment Insurance Code section 1954 provides: “Obedience to subpenas issued in accordance with this chapter may be enforced by application to the superior court as set forth in Article 2, Chapter 2, Part 1 of Division 3 of Title 2 of the Government Code,” only the superior court can compel a witness to testify and thereby clothe him with immunity under section 1955. To so hold would do violence to the clear and unambiguous wording of section 1955. The Legislature did not condition immunity upon an order of the superior court pursuant to section 1954; neither did it place any other procedural or jurisdictional limitations upon a referee’s discretion whether to order a witness to testify.
Finally, the district attorney cannot negate the immunity provided by section 1955 by offering to stipulate not to use against petitioner in the criminal prosecution, the testimony given by her at the Unemployment Insurance Appeals Board hearing. The statutory immunity here derives from the giving of testimony under the circumstances delineated by section 1955, not upon whether the testimony once given, is or is not used against the witness. The district attorney cannot, by devising his own voluntary exclusionary rule, unring the bell. Section 1955, as heretofore pointed out, does not simply forbid the use of testimony given under order of the referee; it provides that no individual shall be prosecuted or subjected to any penalty or forfeiture.
Let a peremptory writ of prohibition issue.
Gargano, J., concurred.

=== CASE 9736846 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:08:20.28331+00 ===

CONLEY, P. J.
I dissent. In my opinion, this is an example of an inexcusable attempt to secure an “immunity bath” by a person previously informed against for a major crime. Esther Escamilla and her husband, Francisco Escamilla, were employees of Farmers Supply Market in Reedley; she worked for the person having the franchise to sell liquor, and he for the proprietors of the general store. On May 2, *7361968, she was arrested on suspicion of grand theft from her employer and a specific felony charge was set forth in an information, which alleged that she had stolen over $200 from her employer; information received at the hearing hereinafter mentioned was that she had converted to her own use some $1,500 of her employer’s money during the time that she and her husband, on relatively meager combined salaries, were maintaining the upkeep of five automobiles, a new house, bail for Francisco on a charge of driving while intoxicated, and paying various other expenses. In turn, the husband was discharged from his employment as a box boy in the market for inattention to duties, involving an arrest for drunken driving and a collision with another car, and he thereafter applied for unemployment insurance. When notified of this application, his employer objected, claiming that Francisco had been guilty of misconduct in that he had not been a dependable employee. In the formal charge there was no mention of the suspicion of his wife’s theft, although evidence received at the hearing indicated that the employer was somewhat alienated against him by the fact that the wife had stolen substantially from the holder of the liquor concession.
A hearing was held before a referee at which the husband was represented by an attorney, and the wife also took her lawyer with her to the hearing. There can be but one legitimate conclusion from the evidence heard by the referee, namely, that the attempt to give Mrs. Escamilla the “immunity bath,” which she very evidently desired, was a contrived effort, and that the ruling which it is claimed, in effect, quashed the criminal charge against the wife, was forced upon the referee. Certain apparently inconsequential questions were objected to by Mrs. Escamilla’s lawyer on the ground that she did not have to answer them, because the answers might tend to incriminate her. These objections were originally all sustained by the referee, but the attorney for Francisco insisted time after time that she be permitted to give answers to these far-flung queries. And, finally,' Mrs. Escamilla was asked straight-out by the attorney for her husband if she stole any money from the employer. She was so anxious to further the attempt to secure immunity that she answered the question before her attorney had a chance to object on the ground that it might tend to incriminate her. Finally, the attorney for the employee told the referee that Mrs. Escamilla would not have to cover the same ground in testimony at any other time, and thus induced her to permit the incriminating question. Our *737law has no sympathy with connivance or collusion by a defendant. (See Hampton v. Municipal Court, 242 Cal.App.2d 689, 693 [51 Cal.Rptr. 760].)
Unquestionably, the answers given by Mrs. Escamilla did tend to incriminate her. But it seems clear that the circumstances of the case show that the answers were not involuntary within the meaning of the law relative to the acquirement of immunity. (In re Connolly, 16 Cal.App.2d 709, 718 [61 P.2d 490].) However, it is an understandable view that, under the specific code sections relating to this inquiry, the referee did not have a right to compel Mrs. Escamilla to answer, but that it was a matter for the superior court to rule upon under the applicable code sections.
Essentially, immunity is given by the state in a proper case to require a knowledgeable witness to give testimony relative to incriminating matters touching other persons involved in the crime being considered. It is not designed to furnish a gratuity for lawbreakers. The laws concerning the granting of immunity ordinarily limit the availability of this device by prescribing various requirements as conditions precedent to its enforcement. (The Privilege Against Self-incrimination in the Federal Courts (1957) 70 Harv.L.Rev. 1454, 1462.) Because of the situation thus involved it usually has been required that the state approve the granting of immunity through the courts, which have general jurisdiction over crimes. In the instant case, at the hearing before the referee for the Unemployment Insurance Commission the District Attorney of Fresno County was in no way involved. The Superior Court of Fresno County had previously ruled on the information charging Mrs. Escamilla with grand theft, and it is now contended that the referee for the Unemployment Insurance Commission was enabled to stop the prosecution of Mrs. Escamilla for a major crime in connection with an inquiry that was not vitally involved and, hence, was wholly unnecessary.
The sections of the Unemployment Insurance Code give the method of enforcement of answers in a proceeding of this kind where immunity is involved, and they were not followed. A number of requirements are set forth in order to enforce the principle that immunity is not to be lightly given, but is a matter for the state to consider through the courts having jurisdiction to try accusations of crime. The apposite sections require several conditions prior to the granting of immunity: the first is the necessity that the person seeking clearance of *738an accusation of crime shall be subpoenaed or, in other words, placed in a position where he or she might be forced to testify contrary to the right of silence granted by the Constitution. It is conceded that there was no such subpoena in this case. Mrs. Escamilla, surrounded by a staff of attorneys, came to court willingly and in accordance with plan. The excuse tendered for this fact was that her husband spoke Spanish, although he testified in English in part and has lived in this community for a number of years, and that his wife would act as his interpreter.
Incidentally, Mrs. Escamilla was by no means an experienced or proficient interpreter. She did not know or apply elementary principles of interpreting. For example, instead of translating the exact answers made by her husband, she would say, “He says,” or “He did not do so and so.” This failure to do a workmanlike job is noteworthy because of the fact that, as is said by the Attorney General’s deputy, the Unemployment Insurance Commission always supplies an interpreter where necessary without cost to those interested in the hearing.
One applicable provision of law is contained in section 1955 of the Unemployment Insurance Code as follows: “No person shall be excused from attending and testifying or from producing books, papers, correspondence, memoranda and other records as required by a subpena issued pursuant to this chapter on the ground that the testimony or evidence, documentary or otherwise, required of him may tend to incriminate him or subject him to a penalty or forfeiture. No individual shall be prosecuted or subjected to any penalty or forfeiture for or on account of any transaction, matter, or thing concerning which he is compelled, after having claimed his privilege against self-incrimination, to testify or produce evidence, documentary or otherwise. Nothing in this section exempts any individual from prosecution and punishment for perjury committed in so testifying.” There can be no question that the hearing officer may issue subpoenas, administer oaths, and conduct the hearing as authorized in section 1955. However, the enforcement of subpoenas, in my opinion, must be required, if at all, under section 1954 of the Unemployment Insurance Code, by the superior court. That section reads as follows: “Obedience to subpenas issued in accordance with this chapter may be enforced by application to the superior court as set forth in Article 2, Chapter 2, Part 1 of Division 3 of Title 2 of the Government Code.” If every referee repre*739senting the many commissions of the state may do away with criminal charges, as in this ease, the laws of the commonwealth are, in the last analysis, uncertain and subject to control by a variety of persons under circumstances that will inevitably induce contempt for a system which approves such results.
Incidentally, the District Attorney of Fresno County has undertaken, in open court, not to use the acknowledgment of crime made by the defendant at the hearing.
I would deny the application for a writ.
A petition for a rehearing was denied May 8, 1969. Conley, P. J., was of the opinion that the petition should be granted. The petition of the real party in interest for a hearing by the Supreme Court was denied June 4, 1969. McComb, J., Mosk, J., and Sullivan, J., were of the opinion that the petition should be granted.

=== CASE 2207724 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:22.776461+00 ===

454 N.W.2d 264 (1990)
Angela K. KLECKER, a/k/a Angela K. Krenke and Angela K. Judson, Petitioner, Appellant,
v.
George KLECKER, Respondent.
No. C9-89-1773.
Court of Appeals of Minnesota.
April 10, 1990.
Bruce R. Mikeworth, Owatonna, for appellant.
Dean K. Rietz, Rietz, Rietz & Rietz, Owatonna, for respondent.
Considered and decided by LANSING, P.J., and HUSPENI and KALITOWSKI, JJ.
OPINION
HUSPENI, Judge.
Where appellant Angela K. Klecker (a/k/a Angela K. Krenke and Angela K. Judson) and respondent George Klecker shared custody of their minor child in an arrangement which was actually joint physical *265 custody, appellant maintains that the trial court's denial of her motion to alter the custodial arrangement to primary physical custody in her or alternatively for an altered schedule of physical custody was based on an improper application of Minn. Stat. § 518.18(d) and improper consideration of the child's best interests. We reverse and remand.
FACTS
An amended judgment and decree dissolving the parties' marriage was entered December 24, 1986. Pursuant to the parties' agreement it stated:
2. [Appellant] and respondent are awarded joint legal and physical custody of their child, Jesse Klecker, born December 1, 1983. Both shall have equal rights and responsibilities with respect to their child, including the right to participate in decisions affecting the child's education, health care and religious training.
The parties agree that under the provisions of the amended decree each of them has had physical custody of the minor child approximately 50% of the time. In January 1988, appellant married Brian Judson of Escanaba, Michigan. Appellant and Judson now have an infant son. Because the economic and career opportunities were deemed better in Michigan than in Minnesota, appellant and her new family decided to move there.
In April 1989, appellant moved the trial court for a court ordered custody evaluation and for an amendment to the terms of the judgment and decree which would
provide that the physical care, custody, and control of the parties' minor child * * * be awarded to [appellant] subject to [r]espondent's right of reasonable visitation.
Appellant also requested that she be granted temporary custody of the child in Michigan until a final ruling on her motion could be made.
On April 12, 1989, the trial court approved an agreement of the parties in which respondent agreed to participate in the custody evaluation and to let appellant have temporary physical custody of the child in Michigan from May 15, 1989, until a June 2, 1989 hearing. Appellant subsequently moved
to amend her [m]otion * * * to provide as an alternative, for an [o]rder as follows:
1. That [appellant], as a joint legal and physical custodian of the parties' minor child be allowed to change the child's residence while in her physical custody from the State of Minnesota to the State of Michigan; and
2. To alter the physical custody schedule * * * to provide for the child's physical custody being with his mother during the school year and with his father during the summer months, * * *
(Emphasis added.) Appellant's motion to amend her original motion was granted.
On May 30, 1989, the custody evaluation which consisted of two parts was completed. The first section of the report, prepared by the South Central Human Relations Center, recommended that the child spend the school year with appellant and that summers and other vacations be spent with respondent. The second section of the report was prepared by the Steele County Department of Court Services. It made essentially the same recommendation.
At the June 2, 1989 hearing on appellant's amended motion, counsel argued but testimony was not taken. The trial court's interim order, dated that day, stated:
Counsel for both parties stated that neither [appellant] nor [r]espondent had any additional information to provide to the Court regarding the subject matter of the aforesaid report from the Steele County Department of Court Services. * * * [B]oth counsel stipulated that the facts relating to the issues raised were sufficiently set forth in the aforesaid report and that the matter could be decided without further evidence by the Court following leave to submit responsive memoranda.
On August 25, 1989 the trial court issued an order finding that "[appellant] has not met the statutory thresholds as set forth in *266 Minn.Stat. [§]§ 518.17, 518.18(d) (1986)." While the order denied "[appellant's] request for a change of custody," it did alter the custody schedule, requiring the child to spend the school year with respondent, and summers with appellant. The trial court's order concluded stating "[appellant] and [r]espondent shall retain joint legal and physical custody of the minor child."
ISSUES
1. Was the trial court's failure to modify custody under Minn.Stat. § 518.18(d) (1986) erroneous?
2. Did the trial court appropriately consider the minor child's best interests?
ANALYSIS
I.
Minnesota Statute § 518.18(d) (1988) reads in pertinent part:
(d) * * * [T]he court shall not modify a prior custody order unless it finds * * * that a change has occurred in the circumstances of the child or the custodian and that the modification is necessary to serve the best interests of the child. In applying these standards the court shall retain the custodian established by the prior order unless:
(i) The custodian agrees to the modification;
(ii) The child has been integrated into the family of the petitioner with the consent of the custodian; or
(iii) The child's present environment endangers the child's physical or emotional health or impairs the child's emotional development and the harm likely to be caused by a change of environment is outweighed by the advantage of a change to the child.
(Emphasis added.) The trial court here applied section 518.18(d) and found its requirements were not met. However, we note the inherent inconsistency in applying Minn.Stat. § 518.18(d) to a joint physical custody arrangement where neither parent is, in fact, the primary physical custodian, and conclude that modification of such joint physical custody was not contemplated by this statute. See Hegerle v. Hegerle, 355 N.W.2d 726, 731 (Minn.Ct.App.1984) (burden of proving a significant change in circumstances is on "the noncustodial parent"); Unif. Marriage and Divorce Act § 409, and Comment, 9A U.L.A. 628-29 (1973) (similar references to "the custodian" suggest a similar presumption that the section was not designed to apply to a joint physical custody award). See also Keith v. Keith, 429 N.W.2d 276, 279-80 (Minn.Ct. App.1988) (["The high thresholds for custody modification present in Minn.Stat. § 518.18 were] enacted to promote and ensure stability and security in the lives of children * * *. [A] statute which was intended to be the guardian of a child's need for stability and security should [not] be invoked as a weapon to perpetuate a custodial arrangement that threatens and endangers it" and suggesting application of the best interest standard) (Huspeni, J. concurring specially); Sydnes v. Sydnes, 388 N.W.2d 3, 6 (Minn.Ct.App.1986) (Recognizing the "unworkability" of Minn.Stat. § 518.18(d) in an actual joint physical custody situation and that the "best interests of the child" is the proper standard to be applied in such "unusual fact situation[s]").[1]
In this case, the trial court found
The parties, since their separation in December of 1985, have divided equally the amount of time their son is in the custody of each of them. Both [parents] have been active in parenting their minor child. *267 This finding is not clearly erroneous. The parties exercised actual joint physical custody at the time of the modification motion. Therefore, Minn.Stat. § 518.18(d) was inapplicable. We agree with the observation of the Sydnes court that in cases of actual joint physical custody, the focus must remain where the legislature placed it: on the best interests of the minor child as those best interests may be determined by application of section 518.17.[2]See Pikula v. Pikula, 374 N.W.2d 705, 711 (Minn.1985) ("The guiding principle in all custody cases is the best interest of the child").
II.
The trial court ordered that physical custody remain with both parties jointly, but modified that arrangement to provide that the child spend the school year with respondent and summers with appellant in Michigan. Because section 518.18(d) was not applicable to the evenly divided joint physical custody which existed at the time the motions were brought, we agree that the trial court correctly invoked the provisions of section 518.17 in reallocating the amount of time the child will spend with each parent. While appellant does not dispute the applicability of section 518.17, she does argue that:
the trial court did not adequately address the relevant factors which are to be considered and evaluated by the court as set forth in [that statute].
We agree.
The family court rules require that
[a]ll orders and decrees in family court proceedings shall contain particularized findings of fact sufficient to support the determination of custody and visitation * * *.
Minn.R.Fam.Ct. 7.05 (Supp.1987) (emphasis added). See also Stich v. Stich, 435 N.W.2d 52, 53 (Minn.1989) ("Effective appellate review of the exercise of [the trial court's] discretion is possible only when the trial court has issued sufficiently detailed findings of fact to demonstrate its consideration [of all relevant factors]"); Moylan v. Moylan, 384 N.W.2d 859, 865 (Minn. 1986) ("While the record may support a trial court's decision, it is nevertheless inadequate if that record fails to reveal that the trial court actually considered the appropriate factors").
Regarding the best interest analysis in removal situations, Sydnes, 388 N.W.2d at 6, states:
Of particular importance to young children are the "best interest" factors stressing stability and continuity of care and environment. See Minn.Stat. § 518.17, subd. 1(c), ["the interaction and interrelationship of the child with a parent or parents * * * [and] any other person who may significantly affect the child's best interests"] (d), ["the child's adjustment to home, school, and community"] (e), ["the length of time the child has lived in a stable, satisfactory environment and the desirability of remaining continuity"] (f) ["the permanence, as a family unit, of the existing or proposed custodial home"] (1984); Pikula v. Pikula, 374 N.W.2d 705, 711-12 (Minn.1985).
(Emphasis added.) Regarding these portions of Minn.Stat. § 518.17, subd. 1, the trial court found:
V.
The child, Jesse Klecker, is well adjusted to the Respondent's home where he spends one half of his time and to the local community. A move to the State of Michigan would take the parties' child away from his grandparents and other relatives, his friends and his home town. The present environment of the child provides stability and continuity.
The trial court failed to make findings on all the factors emphasized in Sydnes. Specifically, the trial court failed to address the factor regarding a comparison of the relative permanency of proposed homes. See Minn.Stat. § 518.17, subd. 1(f). Additionally, *268 while Sydnes indicated that for young children certain of the best interest factors were more important than others, it did not indicate that the remainder of the factors listed in Minn.Stat. § 518.17, subd. 1 do not have to be considered.
We conclude that remand is necessary to permit the trial court to make findings sufficient to facilitate meaningful review. With regard to the specific facts of this case, the trial court on remand should address the relative permanency of each of the parties' homes, the amount of time the minor child will spend in the actual care of each parent in either home, and the minor child's opportunity to interact and relate with the child of appellant and her new husband. In addition, while "[t]he trial court is not * * * bound to adhere to * * * expert testimony if it believes it is outweighed by other evidence," Pikula, 374 N.W.2d at 710, we note the presence of two custody evaluations here. The substance of those reports contains discussion of many of the statutory factors set forth in Minn.Stat. § 518.17. We believe findings relative to those two reports would be pertinent.
DECISION
In the instant case, the custodial arrangement present at the time of the modification request involved actual joint physical custody. Therefore, the trial court did not err in refusing to modify the parties' actual joint custody arrangement under Minn.Stat. § 518.18(d). While application of the best interests analysis under Minn. Stat. § 518.17, subd. 1 was proper, the trial court failed to make sufficient findings under this statute to support its decision. Therefore, we vacate the trial court's custody order and remand for additional findings.
Reversed and remanded.
NOTES
[1]  In Sumner v. Sumner, 353 N.W.2d 251 (Minn. Ct.App.1984), this court stated:
[W]here one parent with joint physical custody seeks to modify the custody so that the other parent will no longer have joint physical custody, the parent seeking modification must meet the statutory burden [of Minn.Stat. § 518.18(d)].
Sumner, 353 N.W.2d at 253. However, Sumner does not define the nature of the custody arrangement being modified.
In Keith v. Keith, 429 N.W.2d 276 (Minn.Ct. App.1988), application of section 518.18(d) to stipulated joint physical custody was unchallenged. The majority did not address the issue.
[2]  In Knott v. Knott, 418 N.W.2d 505, 508 (Minn. Ct.App.1988), relied upon by respondent, each parent had sole physical custody of two of the four children, a fact situation qualitatively different from this case. Nonetheless, Knott is consistent with the analysis set out in this opinion.

=== CASE 9736849 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:08:23.575961+00 ===

Michael J. Kelly, P.J.
Plaintiff Eva Heshelman appeals from a jury verdict of no cause of action in favor of defendants Kenneth Lombardi, M.D., and Battle Creek Medical Associates, P.C. Plaintiff sued defendants for alleged medical malpractice arising from Dr. Lombardi’s failure to diagnose and treat her heart attack. Following a four-day trial, the jury found that Dr. Lombardi had not been negligent in his diagnosis or treatment of plaintiff and rendered a verdict for defendants.
Plaintiff testified that on February 26, 1985, at around 11:00 a.m. she felt sudden chest pains and pain in her left arm. Plaintiff was fifty-nine years old and had a prior history of atherosclerotic artery disease. Plaintiff had undergone an operation in 1982 to remove atherosclerotic obstructions. Plaintiff’s family had a history of heart disease. Plaintiff also smoked and had been smoking for the past thirty-five years.
After feeling chest pains, plaintiff went to see Dr. Lombardi. She testified that when she arrived at Lombardi’s office she was perspiring and had almost fainted. When Lombardi examined her, she told him that she was suffering pain in her chest and in her left arm. According to plaintiff, Lombardi did not question her in detail about her symptoms. Plaintiff testified that Lombardi told her that the causes of her complaints were that she was working too hard, was overweight, and was smoking too much. Dr. Lombardi did not give plaintiff an electrocardiogram._
*75When plaintiff returned home, her pain did not subside. At around 7:00 p.m. that evening, plaintiff went to a hospital emergency room, where she was diagnosed as suffering from a myocardial infarction. Plaintiffs heart was damaged as a result of this infarction. A cardiac catheterization indicated that her right coronary artery was totally occluded. An angiogram performed in April of 1987 indicated that the artery was still occluded but that her other blood vessels were normal and her overall heart function was good.
At trial, plaintiffs expert, Dr. Crane, testified that a physician confronted with a patient complaining of chest pains should first check the patient’s medical history. Crane faulted Dr. Lombardi’s failure to obtain adequate information on plaintiffs history. Crane testified that Lombardi’s failure to adequately check plaintiffs history led to inadequate treatment and diagnosis. In Dr. Crane’s opinion, an electrocardiogram performed at the time of Lombardi’s examination would have demonstrated a cardiac abnormality.
Dr. Lombardi testified that when he examined plaintiff she complained only of mild tightness in her chest and did not mention pain in her arms. Lombardi testified that he had taken a proper history from plaintiff and that his method of charting was common practice. Lombardi said he examined plaintiff and listened to her heart and that she was not sweating or exhibiting other symptoms of a heart attack. Lombardi diagnosed plaintiff as having a respiratory infection. Lombardi testified that he was familiar with the standard of care applicable to specialists in internal medicine and that he had not violated that standard of care.
Defendants also presented an expert witness, Dr. Dykman, who testified regarding plaintiffs damages. Dr. Dykman specifically stated that he was *76not testifying regarding the standard of care or any breach thereof.
Following the jury verdict in favor of defendants, plaintiff moved for a new trial based upon alleged instructional error and the verdict being against the great weight of the evidence. The court denied plaintiff a new trial. Plaintiff appeals as of right, raising four issues.
i
The first issue we address is whether the jury’s verdict was against the great weight of the evidence. Plaintiff claims that the trial court erred in not granting her a new trial on this basis. We find no error.
Whether to grant a motion for a new trial is within the trial court’s discretion. Termaat v Bohn Aluminum & Brass Co, 362 Mich 598, 602; 107 NW2d 783 (1961). The standard of review is whether the verdict was against the overwhelming weight of the evidence. Troyanowski v Village of Kent City, 175 Mich App 217, 223; 437 NW2d 266 (1988). In determining whether the evidence was overwhelming, this Court should give deference to the trial court’s unique ability to judge the weight and credibility of the testimony and should not substitute its judgment for that of the jury unless the record reveals a miscarriage of justice. Id.
Review of the record does not indicate that the verdict was contrary to the overwhelming evidence. The trial presented a credibility contest between plaintiff Eva Heshelman and defendant Dr. Lombardi. Plaintiff testified as to one set of facts, which indicated that she suffered from severe symptoms and that Lombardi gave her only a cursory examination. Lombardi testified that plaintiff complained only of mild tightness in her *77chest and, after a complete examination, she exhibited no symptoms of heart problems. Plaintiffs expert testified that, based upon plaintiffs testimony, Dr. Lombardi violated the necessary standard of care by not obtaining an adequate history from plaintiff and that an electrocardiogram would have revealed plaintiffs condition. Lombardi testified that he did not violate the standard of care and that his examination of plaintiff did not indicate that an electrocardiogram was necessary. The jury evidently found Dr. Lombardi’s testimony more credible and found that he had not been negligent in his treatment of plaintiff. We are bound by the assessment of the witnesses’ credibility made by the jury and the trial court.
ii
Plaintiff argues that the trial court erred in instructing the jury, claiming several instructional errors. We find no error requiring reversal.
The court gave the following instruction regarding the testimony of expert witnesses.
In this case, a number of doctors have given their opinions as experts in the field of internal medicine. Experts are permitted to give their opinions as to matters on which they are experts. You should consider each expert opinion received in evidence, but you are not bound to follow the opinion of an expert. You may give each opinion whatever weight you believe it deserves.
In determining whether or not to believe the opinion of an expert or which opinion to believe, you should consider the reasons and facts upon which the expert bases his or her opinion and whether those facts are true. You should also consider the qualifications and believability of the expert in light of all the evidence in the case.
*78This instruction is essentially the same as CJI 5:2:12, now CJI2d 5.10.
Plaintiff argues that this instruction was erroneous under MCR 2.516(D)(3), which provides:
(3) Whenever the sji committee recommends that no instruction be given on a particular matter, the court shall not give an instruction on the matter unless it specifically finds for reasons stated on the record that
(a) the instruction is necessary to state the applicable law accurately, and
(b) the matter is not adequately covered by other pertinent standard jury instructions.
Plaintiff points out that the comments to SJI2d 4.10 recommend that no instruction on "weighing expert testimony” be given. Plaintiff reasons that the court erred by giving this instruction regarding expert testimony without stating reasons on the record for this particular instruction.
We note that CJI 5:2:12, upon which the complained-of instruction was patterned, is followed by commentary also recommending that no instruction be given regarding "weighing expert testimony.” From this, it is evident that the committee did not consider CJI 5:2:12 to be such a "weighing” instruction and one not to be recommended. Thus, the instruction given by the trial judge, which tracked CJI 5:2:12, was not a disfavored weighing instruction, and the court did not need to comply with MCR 2.516(D)(3) in order to read it to the jury.
Plaintiff claims that the court erred in giving SJI2d 30.04, which provides:
There are risks inherent in medical treatment that are not within a doctor’s control. A doctor is not liable merely because of an adverse result. *79However, a doctor is liable if the doctor is negligent and that negligence is a proximate cause of an adverse result.
Plaintiff argues that this instruction was inappropriate because plaintiff never argued that the mere fact of her injuries was proof of malpractice. In Jones v Porretta, 428 Mich 132, 146; 405 NW2d 863 (1987), our Supreme Court noted that where a plaintiff makes such an argument a similar instruction could be given.
Where proofs put the significance of an adverse result in issue, it may be more appropriate to explain the physician’s duty of care by advising the jury that there are inherent risks in medical treatment which are beyond the physician’s control.
Despite the fact that this instruction may not have been entirely appropriate for this fact situation, we find that any error which resulted was minimal and had no effect on the verdict. At worst, this instruction was "nothing more than an innocuous recitation of what a reasonable juror already understands.” Jones, supra, p 144. This instruction did not have any significant effect on the verdict.
Plaintiff also argues that the trial court improperly refused to give SJI2d 6.01, regarding failure to produce evidence or a witness. SJI2d 6.01a provides:
The [plaintiff/defendant] in this case has not offered [the testimony of______/ -]. As this evidence was under the control of the [plaintiff/defendant] and could have been produced by [him/her], and no reasonable excuse for the [plaintiff’s/defendant’s] failure to produce the evidence was given, you may infer *80that the evidence would have been adverse to the [plaintiff/defendant].
Plaintiff argues that, because defendants had their expert witness, Dr. Dykman, review plaintiff’s medical records to form an opinion regarding whether Dr. Lombardi breached the standard of care and then did not present Dykman’s testimony regarding malpractice, plaintiff was entitled to the inference that his testimony would have been damaging to defendants.
Review of the record reveals that the parties deposed Dr. Dykman in March of 1988 and that at that time he had not formed an opinion as to whether malpractice had occurred. Due to this lack of information regarding Dykman’s opinion, plaintiff’s counsel asserted that he would object to the admission of testimony by Dykman regarding the breach of the standard of care unless he was given this information prior to trial. The day before trial, Dykman testified by way of a video deposition regarding Dr. Lombardi’s treatment of plaintiff and whether it breached the standard of care. Because plaintiff’s counsel did not have adequate time to conduct further discovery regarding Dykman’s opinion as to malpractice, defense counsel offered Dykman’s testimony only with regard to plaintiff’s damages, and not in regard to the standard of care or its breach. In his cross-examination of Dykman, plaintiff’s counsel emphasized that his testimony did not go to the standard of care or its breach, and did not question Dykman as to whether any malpractice occurred.
There is no indication that defendants concealed the evidence of Dykman’s opinion from plaintiff because it was damaging to defendants. This case is not analogous to the situation where a witness is unavailable due to the actions of a party. Plain*81tiff had the opportunity to question Dr. Dykman regarding his opinion as to breaches of the standard of care, but chose not to do so. Plaintiff was not entitled to the inference that Dykman’s testimony regarding whether malpractice occurred would have favored plaintiff. The trial court properly refused to give SJI2d 6.01a.
hi
Plaintiff argues that this case must be remanded for an evidentiary hearing because of newly discovered evidence which had been concealed by the misconduct of defense counsel. Plaintiff argues that this evidence is favorable and that its absence entitles her to a new trial. The newly discovered evidence in question is the previously mentioned opinion of Dr. Dykman regarding malpractice. Plaintiff argues that Dykman had concluded that malpractice occurred; defendants claim that Dykman had concluded that no malpractice occurred. The available record does not reveal the nature of Dykman’s opinion in this matter.
Plaintiff did not object to this alleged concealment at trial, despite the fact that plaintiff’s counsel was evidently aware of any concealment. Nor did plaintiff object to this claimed concealment of evidence in his motion for a new trial. Since plaintiff made no objection below, the issue was not addressed by the trial court and there is no record from which to review the issue. Thus, plaintiff has not properly preserved this issue for appeal. Janda v Detroit, 175 Mich App 120, 129; 437 NW2d 326 (1989).
Additionally, we note that MCR 2.611(A)(1)(f) provides:
A new trial may be granted to all or some of the *82parties, on all or some of the issues, whenever their substantial rights are materially affected, for any of the following reasons:
(f) Material evidence, newly discovered, which could not with reasonable diligence have been discovered and produced at trial.
The evidence in question was not newly discovered. As previously noted, plaintiff could have questioned Dr. Dykman regarding this matter, but chose not to. With any degree of reasonable diligence, plaintiff could have discovered this evidence and produced it or obtained a ruling at trial.
iv
Plaintiff argues that reversal is required because the trial court permitted defense counsel to cross-examine plaintiffs expert, Dr. Crane, regarding an unrelated malpractice suit brought against Crane. We agree that this was erroneous, but find that reversal is not required.
We first address defendants’ contention that, by failing to raise the issue in her motion for a new trial, plaintiff did not properly preserve it for review. We disagree. Defendants rely on Palmiter v Monroe Co Bd of Road Comm’rs, 149 Mich App 678, 692, n 2; 387 NW2d 388 (1986), and Krzysiak v Hinton, 104 Mich App 134, 139; 304 NW2d 823 (1981), for the proposition that an issue is waived unless raised in a motion for a new trial.
In Krzysiak, supra, p 139, the Court stated that, where the plaintiffs challenged, for the first time on appeal, the trial court’s refusal to give certain voir dire questions, the plaintiffs were obligated to raise this issue in their motion for a new trial in order to preserve it for appeal.
*83Plaintiffs were obligated to raise this issue in their motion for new trial and failure to do so constitutes waiver of the question on appeal. Failure to raise the issue in the motion for new trial deprives us on appeal of the benefit of the trial court’s view regarding its reason for denial.
Our interpretation of the Krzysiak Court’s language indicates that the panel did not find the issue unpreserved solely due to the failure to raise it in the new trial motion, but because the challenging party did nothing below to create a record regarding the issue raised on appeal, either by objection or motion on the record.
Certain motions, such as challenges to verdicts on the ground that they are against the great weight of the evidence, must be raised in a motion for a new trial in order to preserve them for appeal. People v Cage, 83 Mich App 534, 538; 269 NW2d 213 (1978); People v Mattison, 26 Mich App 453, 459; 182 NW2d 604 (1970). The purpose behind this rule is clear: if these issues were not previously raised in this manner, there would be no record regarding them to review on appeal. However, issues regarding the admission or exclusion of evidence are properly preserved by a timely objection on the record. MRE 103 provides in relevant part:
(a) Effect of Erroneous Ruling. Error may not be predicated upon a ruling which admits or excludes evidence unless a substantial right of the party is affected, and
(1) Objection. In case the ruling is one admitting evidence, a timely objection or motion to strike appears of record, stating the specific ground of objection, if the specific ground was not apparent from the context; or
(2) Offer of Proof. In case the ruling is one excluding evidence, the substance of the evidence *84was made known to the court by offer or was apparent from the context within which questions were asked.
(b) Record of Offer and Ruling. The court may add any other or further statement which shows the character of the evidence, the form in which it was offered, the objection made, and the ruling thereon. It may direct the making of an offer in question and answer form.
A timely objection on the record, with a response by opposing counsel and a ruling by the trial judge, should create an adequate record from which to review the admission or exclusion of evidence. There is no additional requirement that a party restate his evidentiary objections anew in his motion for a new trial. We reject the contrary assertions from Palmiter and Krzysiak.
The scope of cross-examination, like the admission of evidence, is a matter within the trial court’s discretion, and the court’s determination should not be reversed absent an abuse of that discretion. Wilson v Stilwill, 411 Mich 587, 599; 309 NW2d 898 (1981). During his cross-examination of Dr. Crane, defense counsel questioned him regarding a medical malpractice case in which he had been sued. The trial court permitted this line of questioning over plaintiffs objection, ruling that it was admissible as it went to the weight and credibility of Dr. Crane’s testimony.
We find that the trial judge abused his discretion by permitting this line of questioning. Evidence of prior malfeasance by a witness is admissible only under very specific circumstances and for very specific reasons. MRE 608(b); MRE 404(b). Under MRE 608(b), specific instances of a witness’ conduct may be inquired into on cross-examination only where they are probative of truthfulness or *85untruthfulness and only to inquire into that witness’ or another witness’ truthful character. The fact that Dr. Crane was named a defendant in a malpractice suit is in no way probative of his truthfulness. Nor was this fact probative of Dr. Crane’s competency or knowledge. Highly competent and knowledgable physicians have been sued for malpractice. Mere unproven accusations of malpractice stated in a complaint cannot be used as a basis for attacking a physician’s knowledge and credibility. Such allegations of malpractice are analogous to unproven charges of criminal activity. Arrests and charges not resulting in conviction may not be used for impeachment. People v Falkner, 389 Mich 682, 695; 209 NW2d 193 (1973). Similarly, the mere fact that someone has been named as a defendant in a malpractice lawsuit may not be used to impeach his credibility as an expert witness. See Ecco, Ltd v Balimoy Mfg Co, Inc, 179 Mich App 748, 752; 446 NW2d 546 (1989).
Despite this error, we find that reversal is not required. To determine whether an error is harmless, two inquiries must be made: (1) whether the error is so offensive to the maintenance of a sound judicial process that it can never be regarded as harmless and (2) whether this Court can declare a belief that the error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. People v Robinson, 386 Mich 551, 563; 194 NW2d 709 (1972). The admission of this improper impeachment question and Dr. Crane’s answers was not so offensive to the maintenance of a sound judicial process that we could never regard it as harmless. See People v Allen, 429 Mich 558, 612; 420 NW2d 499 (1988). We also conclude that, in light of the testimony presented at trial, the suppression of this question and Dr. Crane’s answer would have had no effect on the jury’s verdict. Any error did not prejudice plaintiff’s case *86and, therefore, was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.
Affirmed.
Sullivan, J., concurred.

=== CASE 9736850 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:08:23.580982+00 ===

G. S. Allen, J.
(concurring). While I concur with the majority’s opinion, I write separately to express my disagreement with defendants’ interpretation of Krzysiak v Hinton, 104 Mich App 134; 304 NW2d 823 (1981), and Palmiter v Monroe Co Bd of Road Comm’rs, 149 Mich App 678, 692, n 2; 387 NW2d 388 (1986). I do not construe Krzysiak or Palmiter, supra, as authority for the proposition that the failure to raise in a motion for a new trial the propriety of a trial court’s ruling on requested jury instructions or the admissibility of evidence in itself renders the question unpreserved for appellate review. In Krzysiak, counsel did not object on the record when the trial court declined to ask certain voir dire jury questions. Thus, in the absence of something in the record by way of an objection, a motion, or a subsequent motion for a new trial, the issue of the propriety of the court’s ruling is unpreserved.
The Palmiter panel’s reliance on Krzysiak was made only by way of a footnote. Because the reference was fleeting and thereafter the Court discussed the issue on its merits, I consider Palmiter enfeebled authority for the rule stated.

=== CASE 2207645 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:21.906137+00 ===

271 Cal. App. 2d 124 (1969)
GREAT-WEST LIFE ASSURANCE COMPANY, Petitioner,
v.
THE SUPERIOR COURT OF LOS ANGELES COUNTY, Respondent; HAROLD S. JONES et al., Real Parties in Interest.
Civ. No. 33848.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. Four.
Mar. 26, 1969.
Adams, Duque & Hazeltine and Loyd P. Derby for Petitioner.
John D. Maharg, County Counsel, and Jean Louise Webster, Deputy County Counsel, for Respondent.
Douglas Fendler for Real Parties in Interest.
FILES, P. J.
This proceeding is here because neither the superior court nor the municipal court is willing to try a pending interpleader action, each court having concluded that the other has exclusive jurisdiction. A writ of mandate is an appropriate remedy for such an impasse. (St. James Church v. Superior Court (1955) 135 Cal. App. 2d 352, 355 [287 P.2d 387].)
On June 5, 1964, plaintiff filed a complaint in interpleader in the municipal court, naming as defendants Harold S. Jones, Carol Jones, Dale Lee, and Fendler, Gershon & Warner, *125 a partnership. This complaint alleged that plaintiff had made contracts with defendant Harold Jones whereby the latter was entitled to commissions on the renewal of insurance business submitted by him, that as of that date $327.97 was due and owing to him under the contract, "and that additional sums may become due and owing from plaintiff to said defendant under said contracts. ..." The complaint further alleged that each of the defendants claimed to be entitled to all or some of the proceeds. The complaint prayed that the defendants be compelled to interplead their claims, and that the court adjudge that upon payment of the proceeds into court, plaintiff be discharged of any liability to any of the parties.
On September 30, 1964, Carol Jones filed a disclaimer. The answer of Harold Jones claimed all the proceeds of the contracts. The answer of the Fendler firm claimed that it had a lien entitling it to receive all of the proceeds of the contract until it has been paid $2,725 plus interest and costs, including attorney fees. The answer of Dale Lee alleged that by assignment from Jones he was entitled to receive $1,500 plus interest and costs from the proceeds of the contract.
From time to time during the pendency of the action as additional amounts came due under the contract, plaintiff deposited the money with the court.
On March 5, 1968, plaintiff made a motion for a judgment discharging it from liability for the amounts deposited, dismissing it from the action and awarding it costs and attorney fees payable out of the fund on deposit. Accompanying the notice of motion was a declaration stating that the sum then on deposit with the court was $4,343.86.
The order of the municipal court, filed March 11, 1968, provides:
(1) that this is a proper case for interpleader;
(2) that plaintiff is discharged from further liability to certain named defendants "to the amount of said deposit";
(3) that as further sums accrue on the contracts plaintiff is ordered to deposit them with the clerk of the court;
(4) plaintiff will receive out of the money on deposit its costs and reasonable attorney fees "to be set by the Court at the trial of this matter."
On May 16, 1968, plaintiff's attorney filed a declaration that additional amounts had been deposited with the court, bringing the total on deposit to more than $5,000. Thereupon, *126 at plaintiff's request, the municipal court made an ex parte order transferring the action to the superior court.
On October 16, 1968, the master calendar department of the superior court transferred the case to a trial department for trial. The trial judge conferred with counsel in chambers, and then announced that he did not believe the superior court had any jurisdiction, and for that reason he would not try the case.plaintiff thereupon petitioned this court for a writ of mandate.
The California Constitution, article VI, section 10, provides "Superior Courts have original jurisdiction in all causes except those given by statute to other trial courts."
Code of Civil Procedure section 89, subdivision (b), gives to the municipal courts original jurisdiction "in actions of interpleader, where the amount of money, or the value of the property involved, does not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000)."
As a background for applying that statute to the instant case it is helpful to review some of the principles governing interpleader.
Code of Civil Procedure section 386 provides that when conflicting claims are made upon a person, he may bring an action against the conflicting claimants to compel them to interplead and litigate their claims. The statute further provides that the amount which the interpleading party admits to be due may be deposited with the clerk of the court at the time of the filing of the complaint without first obtaining an order of the court therefor; and that the interpleading party may be discharged from liability to all of the claimants. The procedure for discharging an interpleading plaintiff is not spelled out in the statute,  [fn. 1] but has developed through the case law.
An action in interpleader has been described as "... a twofold contest: First, as to the right of the plaintiff to bring the suit and to force the defendants to interplead; and, if such right is maintained, the litigation among the defendants ... Whether the plaintiff shall be permitted to maintain such an action is first determined, and, if his right is sustained, an interlocutory decree is entered, requiring the defendants to litigate their claims inter sese." (San Francisco Sav. Union v. Long (1898) 123 Cal. 107, 109 [55 P. 708].) *127
Following the entry of the interlocutory decree the plaintiff ceases to be a party to the litigation. (San Francisco Sav. Union v. Long, supra, at p. 110; San Francisco Sav. Union v. Long (1902) 137 Cal. 68 [69 P. 687]; Woodmen of the World v. Rutledge (1901) 133 Cal. 640, 643 [65 P. 1105]; Van Orden v. Anderson (1932) 122 Cal. App. 132, 140 [9 P.2d 572]; see 2 Witkin, Cal. Procedure (1954) Pleading,  129, p. 1111; 28 Cal.Jur.2d, Interpleader,  22, p. 465.)
[1] An examination of the proceedings in this case in the light of the foregoing rules explains the jurisdictional doubt which has developed. The complaint filed in 1964 alleged that only the sum of $327.97 was owing under the contracts, and that "additional sums may become due" in the future. As of that time the only "amount involved," so far as could be ascertained from the pleading was an amount within the jurisdiction of the municipal court. When additional amounts came due under the contracts and were deposited in court, plaintiff made no change in its pleading.
When the amount on deposit reached $4,343.86 plaintiff applied for a judgment in interpleader dismissing it from the case. That application, if granted, would have terminated the first part of the twofold contest. But the order made by the municipal court on March 11, 1968, was not the interlocutory judgment referred to in the cases cited above. The order made differs from the typical interlocutory judgment in interpleader in these respects:
(a) It purports to discharge plaintiff from the claims of three of the defendants, but fails to mention the fourth defendant, Dale Lee.
(b) The order specifically directs plaintiff to deposit additional moneys with the clerk of the municipal court as they become due. This leaves open the propriety of interpleading further amounts. The right to interplead depends upon "facts showing a reasonable probability of double vexation." (Hancock Oil Co. v. Hopkins (1944) 24 Cal. 2d 497, 510 [150 P.2d 463].) A finding that plaintiff is subject to the risk of double vexation for the amount then on deposit is not the same as a finding that there may be conflicting claims to all sums that may become due under the contracts in any amount forever. There may well come a time when the amount deposited with the court is so far in excess of what Jones' alleged assignees and creditors are claiming that plaintiff cannot continue to allege that further deposits are necessary for its protection. *128 Thus the declaration of the municipal court that this was a proper case for interpleader could only refer to the interpleader of the amount then on deposit; and the requirement that plaintiff make further deposits was an acknowledgment that plaintiff was remaining an active party litigant.
(c) The order states that "reasonable attorneys' fees" will be paid to plaintiff out of the fund, but defers until "the trial of this matter" (i.e., the second phase of the twofold contest) the determination of the amount. Code of Civil Procedure section 386.6 provides that when the interpleading plaintiff is discharged and dismissed from the action the court may award him costs and attorney fees from the fund on deposit, and reserve for later determination the question of which of the adverse claimants shall bear the burden. The order made here is not the one contemplated by section 386.6, for it leaves undetermined the amount of the fee, a question on which the plaintiff is entitled to be heard.
It thus appears that despite the so-called order of interpleader, the first phase of the twofold contest remained partially undetermined and of necessity plaintiff remained an active participant in the case.
On May 16, 1968, plaintiff made its request for transfer to the superior court, accompanied by a declaration showing that it had deposited with the clerk amounts in excess of $5,000. The complaint remained as it had been filed originally, showing the amount of $327.97 as the amount interpleaded.
Code of Civil Procedure section 464 provides that the plaintiff may be allowed, on motion, to make a supplemental complaint, alleging facts material to the case occurring after the former complaint.
The deposit of sums which brought the total over $5,000 was a fact occurring after the filing of the complaint which was material to the case in the most fundamental sense. A request for leave to file a supplemental complaint alleging this fact would have served to present the jurisdictional issue clearly. It is settled that the municipal court has jurisdiction to grant leave to a plaintiff to amend his complaint in such a way as to force a transfer of the cause to the superior court for jurisdictional reasons (Thomasian v. Superior Court (1953) 122 Cal. App. 2d 322, 335 [265 P.2d 165]); and there is no reason to doubt that the municipal court may authorize the filing of a supplemental complaint which has the same effect.
In the case at bench there has been no objection by anyone *129 to the conduct of plaintiff in depositing with the clerk the moneys which brought the total above $5,000. Indeed the court, by its "order of interpleader" filed March 11, 1968, ordered that further sums be deposited as they became due.plaintiff's declaration filed May 16, 1968, in support of the request for transfer, formally called attention to the amount in excess of $5,000. The order of the municipal court transferring the action was a judicial recognition that the amount of money involved was in excess of $5,000.
The difficulty which remains in the superior court is that the complaint fails to show on its face the jurisdictional fact, i.e.--the amount involved--although both the municipal and superior courts have knowledge of the fact by inspection of their own records. This irregularity can be overcome by a prompt application by plaintiff in the superior court for leave to file a supplemental complaint.plaintiff's counsel have, in their petition here, offered to do this.
Let a writ of mandamus issue directing the respondent superior court to (1) make an order directing the filing of a supplemental complaint which alleges the amount of money then involved in the interpleader action, and (2) exercise its jurisdiction to hear and determine the action.
Jefferson, J., and Dunn, J., concurred.
NOTES
[fn. 1]  1. Code of Civil Procedure section 386.5 provides for the discharge and dismissal of a stakeholder defendant.

=== CASE 2207649 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:21.94038+00 ===

271 Cal. App. 2d 638 (1969)
STATE BOARD OF FUNERAL DIRECTORS AND EMBALMERS, Plaintiff and Appellant,
v.
MORTUARY IN WESTMINSTER MEMORIAL PARK et al., Defendants and Respondents.
Civ. No. 9137.
California Court of Appeals. Fourth Dist., Div. One.
Apr. 10, 1969.
Thomas C. Lynch, Attorney General, and Megan A. Wagner, Deputy Attorney General, for Plaintiff and Appellant.
Wenke, Pilskaln, Kemble & Marx, William F. Wenke, Clock, Waestman & Clock, Henry H. Clock and Abe Mutchnik for Defendants and Respondents.
AULT, J. pro tem.  [fn. *]
This action was brought by the plaintiff, State Board of Funeral Directors and Embalmers, to enjoin the defendants, Mortuary In Westminster Memorial Park, a corporation (Mortuary), and Westminster Memorial Park, a corporation (Cemetery), from jointly engaging in allegedly false and misleading advertising in violation of Business and Professions Code sections 17500, 17505, 7617 and 7629. Defendants have separately answered the complaint and each has cross-complained for declaratory relief, requesting a judicial declaration that the specific advertisements referred to in the complaint are not in violation of the Business and Professions Code. After trial, the court found and concluded the advertisements were not in violation of the code sections, refused to issue an injunction, and entered judgment accordingly. From this judgment plaintiff has appealed. *640
The two respondents are separately owned and operated corporations. The mortuary is licensed by the appellant board, and the cemetery operates under a Certificate of Authority issued by the State Cemetery Board. The mortuary owns the land upon which its building is located in the City of Westminster, County of Orange. The mortuary property is completely surrounded by the property owned and operated by the cemetery. The building housing the administrative offices of the cemetery is adjacent to the mortuary building and the two are connected by a breezeway. One receptionist serves both respondents and they share the cost of her services. No contention is made that the two businesses are not operated separately; the objection is to their advertising.
In 1959 or 1960 respondents began to engage in joint advertising. The specific ads to which the complaint is addressed are:
a. In the yellow pages of the classified telephone directory for Orange County:
"Westminster"
Memorial Park
Undertaking & Cemetery
Together""
b. Sign posted near the entrance to the cemetery grounds:
"Westminster"
Memorial Park
Mortuary--Cemetery""
c. Newspaper advertisement in Santa Ana Register:
"Everything in one Beautiful Place"
Westminster Memorial Park
Mortuary--Cemetery""
The applicable sections of the Business and Professions Code read: " 17500. It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or association, or any employee thereof with intent directly or indirectly to dispose of real or personal property or to perform services, professional or otherwise, or anything of any nature whatsoever or to induce the public to enter into any obligation relating thereto, to make or disseminate or cause to be made or disseminated before the public in this State, in any newspaper or other publication, or any advertising device, or by public outcry or proclamation, or in any other manner or means whatever, any statement concerning such real or personal property or services, professional or otherwise, or concerning any circumstances or matter of fact connected with the proposed performance or disposition thereof, *641 which is untrue or misleading, and which is known, or which by the exercise of reasonable care should be known, to be untrue or misleading, or for any such person, firm, or corporation to so make or disseminate or cause to be so made or disseminated any such statement as part of a plan or scheme with the intent not to sell such personal property or services, professional or otherwise, so advertised at the price stated therein, or as so advertised."
" 17505. No person shall state, in an advertisement of his goods, that he is a producer, manufacturer, processor, wholesaler, or importer, or that he owns or controls a factory or other source of supply of goods, when such is not the fact, and no person shall in any other manner misrepresent the character, extent, volume, or type of his business."
" 7617. The business of a funeral director shall be conducted and engaged in at a fixed place or establishment."
"No person, partnership, association, corporation or other organization, shall open or maintain a place or establishment at which to engage in or conduct, or hold himself or itself out as engaging in or conducting, the business of a funeral director without a license."
" 7629. No funeral establishment shall be conducted or held forth as being conducted or advertised as being conducted under any name which might tend to mislead the public or which would be sufficiently like the name of any other licensed funeral director so as to constitute an unfair method of competition."
"Any funeral director desiring to change the name appearing on his license may do so by applying to the board and paying the fee fixed by this chapter."
[1a] Appellant's Contentions
1. Respondents' advertising is misleading and violates section 17500 of the Business and Professions Code in that the use of only one name in their advertisements conceals the fact that there are two separately owned and operated corporations on the premises, each licensed by a separate licensing agency and authorized only to perform the services permissible under their respective licenses.
2. Respondents' advertising misrepresents the character, extent and/or type of their respective businesses in violation of Business and Professions Code section 17505.
3. Respondent funeral director is advertising under a name *642 which might tend to mislead the public in violation of Business and Professions Code section 7629.
4. Respondent cemetery is holding itself out as conducting the business of a funeral director without a license in violation of Business and Professions Code section 7617.
[2] There is no dispute or conflict in the evidence. Thus, the finding of the trial court that the advertisements are not in violation of the applicable sections of the Busness and Professions Code amounts to a conclusion of law. As such, it is not binding on this court and our decision involves an independent judgment. (San Diego Trust & Sav. Bank v. County of San Diego, 16 Cal. 2d 142, 153 [105 P.2d 94, 133 A.L.R. 416]; Leis v. City & County of San Francisco, 213 Cal. 256, 258 [2 P.2d 26].)
[1b] The cases cited by appellant are not helpful to its position. The factual situations involved in them are so distinguishable as to make them almost unrelated to the question presented here. Great emphasis is placed upon the fact that only one name, "Westminster Memorial Park," is used in the advertisements and it is urged this gives the false impression of sole ownership, of one entity which offers both mortuary and cemetery services. The fact is "Westminster Memorial Park" is part and parcel of the official name of both respondents. It is the exact name under which the cemetery is licensed by the state; the mortuary is licensed by appellant board as "Westminster Memorial Park Mortuary." Of more importance is the fact that both respondents are located in Westminster Memorial Park.
Appellant's contentions and arguments are tenuous and require a strained and unjustified interpretation of the advertisements. Nothing in them is directed toward ownership entities or licensing, and it is doubtful that any person reading the advertisements would think about these matters one way or another. What a person of ordinary intelligence would imply is that both mortuary and cemetery services are available at the same location. Nothing in the advertisements indicates the mortuary is doing cemetery business or the cemetery is doing mortuary business.
[3] The appellate courts of this state in a series of cases have held that mortuaries may properly be operated on cemetery premises. (Wing v. Forest Lawn Cemetery Assn., 15 Cal. 2d 472 [101 P.2d 1099, 130 A.L.R. 120]; Forest Lawn etc. Assn. v. State Board of Embalmers & Funeral Directors, 134 *643 Cal.App. 73 [24 P.2d 887]; Sunset View Cemetery Assn. v. Kraintz, 196 Cal. App. 2d 115 [16 Cal. Rptr. 317]; Vesper v. Forest Lawn Cemetery Assn., 20 Cal. App. 2d 157 [67 P.2d 368].) [4] Where a mortuary and a cemetery are situated together, it would appear proper for them to make this convenient fact known to the public through the simple advertisements and sign here involved without reference to their separate corporate structures and the details of their separate licensing arrangement with the State of California. No one is likely to be deceived.
The judgment is affirmed.
Brown (Gerald), P. J., and Coughlin, J., concurred.
NOTES
[fn. *]  *. Assigned by the Chairman of the Judicial Council.

=== CASE 9736851 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:08:26.241875+00 ===

ROWLEY, President Judge:
Gerald J. Sternick appeals from the order of the trial court granting appellee Deborah Lee Lupkin’s motion for a new trial. In this appeal, he challenges the propriety of that decision. After a thorough review of the record and the applicable case law, we affirm the order.
Appellant and appellee were involved in a motor vehicle accident on June 22, 1989 when appellant’s vehicle struck the rear end of appellee’s vehicle. On November 16, 1990, appellee filed a civil complaint against appellant seeking damages for injuries she sustained in the accident. At the outset of trial, appellant conceded the issue of liability, and the trial focused solely on the issue of damages. The jury returned a verdict for zero damages. The trial court granted appellee’s subsequent motion for a new trial, and appellant fled this timely appeal.
Appellant sets forth various reasons why the trial court erred in granting appellee’s motion for a new trial. In considering those arguments, we apply the following standard of review:
*303It is a fundamental and longstanding precept that the decision to order a new trial is one that lies within the discretion of the trial court. E.g. Spang & Co. v. United States Steel Corp., 519 Pa. 14, 24, 545 A.2d 861, 865 (1988); Colosimo v. Pennsylvania Electric Co., 513 Pa. 155, 163, 518 A.2d 1206, 1210 (1986); Smyth v. Philadelphia & West Chester Traction Co., 263 Pa. 511, 516, 107 A. 20, 21 (1919). This means that the trial court has considerable latitude within which to act, but there are also very specific limits to what it can do.
The term ‘discretion’ imports the exercise of judgement, wisdom and skill so as to reach a dispassionate conclusion, and discretionary power can only exist within the framework of the law, and is not exercised for the purpose of giving effect to the will of the judge. Discretion must be exercised on the foundation of reason, as opposed to prejudice, personal motivations, caprice or arbitrary actions. Discretion is abused when the course pursued represents not merely an error of judgement, but where the judgement is manifestly unreasonable or where the law is not applied or where the record shows that the action is a result of partiality, prejudice, bias or ill will.
P.L.E. New Trial § 2. One way of summing up all the qualities described in this definition of a valid exercise of discretionary power is to say that the decision had merit. Conversely, if the reason for performing a discretionary act had no merit, then the trial court abused its discretion. Thus, when viewed in terms of the degree of scrutiny that should be applied, an inquiry into an abuse of discretion is operationally equivalent as one into the merit of the trial court’s decision.
Coker v. S.M. Flickinger Co., Inc., 533 Pa. 441, 447-48, 625 A.2d 1181, 1184-85 (1993). If the trial court indicates that the reasons it gives for granting a new trial are the only basis for that decision, this Court can only examine those reasons. Id. at 448-19, 625 A.2d at 1185. In that situation, “circumstances may still demand a review of the entire record. However, the purpose for doing so is not to locate a valid reason for *304affirming the order. The inquiry is strictly directed at determining whether the trial court’s stated reasons and factual basis can be supported.” Id. at 452, 625 A.2d at 1187. This Court cannot substitute its judgment for that of the trial court. Botek v. Mine Safety Alliance Corp., 531 Pa. 160, 166, 611 A.2d 1174, 1176-77 (1992).
In the present case, the trial court stated its reasoning as follows: “Defendant offered no evidence that plaintiff did not suffer any injuries or that she did not suffer a wage loss. Thus, without evidence contradictory to the existence or to the initial cause of plaintiffs injuries, the jury was not free to reject plaintiffs claim.” Trial Court Order (McCloskey, P.J.) at 2.
In support of his assertion that the trial court erred, appellant first contends that the jury was free to disregard appellee’s complaints of pain because there was no objective medical proof to support those complaints. Initially, we note that, contrary to appellant’s assertion that there was no objective proof of pain other than appellee’s own complaints, Dr. James Barrett testified that during his examination of appellee’s neck he felt trigger points, or lumps of painful muscle tissue. He testified that if he feels a trigger point when examining a patient, he knows that the area should be painful, even if the patient does not tell him that he or she feels pain. Dr. Barrett also testified that he felt muscle spasms in appellee’s lower back. Additionally, Dr. Barrett testified that soft tissue injuries often do not show up on X-rays and other tests.
Moreover, not only did appellee herself present evidence of her injuries and resulting expenses, but appellant’s own expert medical witness, Dr. Stephen F. Latman, M.D., also testified to the existence of appellee’s injuries. He testified that after examining appellee and reviewing records and the results of tests he performed, he concluded that she suffered a soft tissue injury which normally takes from six weeks to three months to heal. He also testified, however, that he himself *305examined many patients who had soft tissue injury which resulted in chronic pain syndrome.1
Furthermore, Dr. Latman testified that as of the date on which he examined appellee, June 17, 1991, he would recommend that she perform only light or sedentary work. Specifically, he testified, “[Sedentary work is] not strenuous work. I recommended that she would have the opportunity to sit or stand according to her symptoms and that she not be required to lift more than ten pounds.” Deposition Transcript of Dr. Stephen F. Latman, M.D., 11/18/91, at 51.
The circumstances of the present case are similar to those in another case considered by a panel of this Court. In Hawley v. Donahoo, 416 Pa.Super. 469, 611 A.2d 311 (1992), the plaintiff was involved in an automobile accident with the defendant, and the defendant conceded liability and conceded that the plaintiff suffered a compression fracture of the L-3 vertebra. The jury, however, awarded zero damages. The plaintiff appealed, and this Court reversed.
The Court recognized that where pain is subjective and has no identifiable medical source, the jury must believe that the pain in fact exists before the plaintiff will be compensated. However, the Court discussed why that rule did not apply in Hawley:
While the jurors are the sole judges of credibility, and appellant’s inconsistent and perhaps exaggerated testimony could have been perceived as an indication of appellant’s interests of opportunity beyond pain which could dilute their belief in the existence of the occasion itself, the jury is not free to ignore an obvious injury. As our Supreme Court stated in Thompson v. Iannuzzi, 403 Pa. 329, 169 A.2d 777 (1961): “It is true that the jury is the final arbiter of facts but it may not, in law, ignore what is patent to the eye, obvious to the mind and clear to the normal process of *306ordinary computation.” Id. at 332, 169 A.2d at 778-789. Based on the uncontested evidence of the compression fracture, we find that appellant suffered compensable pain from a known medical source which was more than a mere transient rub of life.
Id. 531 Pa. at 474, 611 A.2d at 313-14.
In the present case, the record reveals that not only did appellant’s own expert medical witness corroborate appellee’s claims that she had been injured, but he also testified that he would recommend restricted working conditions. Although appellant’s witness disagreed with appellee’s assertions concerning the severity of the injury, he did not contest the existence of an injury. Furthermore, as the above discussion in Hawley reveals, even if the jury believed appellant’s contention that appellee exaggerated her injuries, they were not free to award zero damages where there was an obvious injury. In light of the fact that appellant’s own witness testified that appellee had been injured to such a degree that she would require a sedentary job, the trial court did not abuse its discretion in determining that a new trial was warranted.
Appellant also argues, “[T]he fact that Ms. Lupkin was in a second and unrelated accident, where she rammed into the rear end of a stopped vehicle, provided an alternative basis for the jury to reason that her symptoms were unrelated to the first accident and the product of her own fault.” Appellant’s Brief at 26.2 This argument is based on the fact that appellee was involved in an accident on September 28, 1990. We disagree with appellant that the jury could reasonably have concluded that appellee’s injuries were caused, solely in the second accident.
First, appellant’s own witness testified that appellee’s injuries resulted from the accident which occurred on June 22, 1989. That testimony was not rendered irrelevant merely because appellee did not tell Dr. Latman about the second accident. As appellee testified, when her doctor examined her *307after the second accident, he determined that there was no change in her condition. Furthermore, once he knew about the second accident, Dr. Latman could have, but did not, change his conclusions. Similarly, Dr. Latman did not qualify his conclusions on the basis that he did not have the results of tests previously performed on appellee.
Moreover, appellee presented substantial evidence that she had been injured prior to September 28, 1990, including the need for an eight-day hospital stay immediately following the first accident and various medications and physical therapy throughout the months prior to the second accident. It would have been patently unreasonable for the jury to conclude that appellee’s medical problems which began on June 22, 1989 were caused by an accident which occurred on September 28, 1990.
Finally, appellant did not adequately question appellee’s wage loss claim merely because he presented evidence that the plant where she worked prior to the accident closed soon after the accident. The relevant inquiry in a personal injury action is whether and to what extent the plaintiffs economic horizons have been shortened. Ruzzi v. Butler Petroleum Co., 527 Pa. 1, 588 A.2d 1 (1991); Sherhan v. Besteder, 347 Pa.Super. 11, 500 A.2d 130 (1985). A plaintiffs wages immediately prior to the accident are an indication of his or her earning capacity if he or she had not been injured. Therefore, that evidence is relevant even though the plaintiff would not have that job even if the accident had not occurred. In the present case, it would have been unreasonable for the jury to conclude that appellee’s economic horizons had not been shortened merely because the plant where she worked prior to the accident had closed.
For the above reasons, we conclude that the trial court did not abuse its discretion in granting appellee’s motion for a new trial. We therefore affirm the order.
Order affirmed.
BECK, J., files a dissenting statement.
. Dr. Latman testified, "Chronic pain syndrome is a condition which a patient has pain for a long period of time, and we cannot make a definite diagnosis. We can’t put our finger on what’s causing the pain.” Deposition Transcript of Stephen F. Latman, M.D., 11/18/91, at 56.
. We note that it was not established that appellee was at fault in the second accident.

=== CASE 9736852 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:08:26.246272+00 ===

*308BECK, Judge,
dissenting.
The trial court summarized its rationale for granting a new trial as follows:
Defendant offered no evidence that plaintiff did not suffer any injuries or that she did not suffer a wage loss. Thus, without evidence contradictory to the existence or to the initial cause of plaintiffs injuries, the jury was not free to reject plaintiffs claim.
Trial Court Order, p. 2. I believe that the trial court abused its discretion in impliedly requiring the defendants to disprove damages, when the burden of going forward properly lies with the plaintiff, and I must dissent.
It is well established that the “duty of assessing damages is within the province of the jury, and as triers of fact, they weigh the veracity and credibility of the witnesses and their testimony.” Cree v. Horn, 372 Pa.Super. 296, 539 A.2d 446, 450 (1988) (quoting Lewis v. Pruitt, 337 Pa.Super. 419, 487 A.2d 16, 22 (1985)). This is true where the plaintiffs evidence is uncontradicted by the defendant, or even where the defendant has presented no evidence at all. Brodhead v. Brentwood Ornamental Iron Co., 435 Pa. 7, 11, 255 A.2d 120 (1969); Morgan v. Philadelphia Electric Co., 299 Pa.Super. 545, 445 A.2d 1263, 1265 (1982).
The jury in this case was free to disbelieve the plaintiffs evidence of injury and its cause, and their verdict “should not be interfered with unless it clearly appears that the amount awarded resulted from caprice, prejudice, partiality, corruption or some other improper influence.” Gradel v. Inouye, 491 Pa. 534, 421 A.2d 674 (1980). In granting a new trial as to damages, the trial judge improperly substituted his own judgment for that of the jury, and this court should reverse. See Tonik v. Apex Garages, Inc., 442 Pa. 373, 275 A.2d 296 (1971).
The defendant’s medical witness, Dr. Latman, testified that the plaintiff apparently suffered from “chronic pain syndrome”, a “condition which [sic] a patient has pain for a long period of time, and we cannot make a definite diagnosis. We can’t put our finger on what’s causing the pain.” Deposition *309of Stephen F. Latman, M.D., p. 56. This defense witness testified that there was no objective evidence of the plaintiffs injuries to support her subjective complaints of pain. The majority concedes that in such cases, before the jury may award damages, it has to believe that there is pain. Nonetheless, the majority have affirmed the trial court’s decision to vacate the jury’s verdict.
The majority relies upon Hawley v. Donahoo, 416 Pa.Super. 469, 611 A.2d 311 (1992), for its holding. In Hawley, the plaintiff suffered a compression fracture of the L-3 vertebra, and the jury awarded zero damages. This court reversed because “the jury is not free to ignore an obvious injury.” Id. at 474, 611 A.2d at 313-14. The question in this case is whether plaintiffs alleged soft tissue injury was an “obvious injury” like the compression fracture in Hawley.
Our supreme court recently decided that injuries which “obviously” are accompanied by pain include a broken bone, stretched muscle, twist of skeletal system, injury to nerve, organ or function, and all consequences of injury traceable by medical science and common experience as sources of pain and suffering. Boggavarapu v. Ponist, 518 Pa. 162, 542 A.2d 516, 518 (1988). If the injury is subjective, and has no known medical source, the jury “are not to be faulted ... if they do not believe all they are told and all that their common experience does not accept.” Id. The jury, as always, may believe “all, some, or none of the evidence, and with their verdict the matter ends.” Id. at 169, 542 A.2d at 519.
A low verdict is adequate, and no new trial is necessary, where the jury heard conflicting testimony on the degree of injury. Dawson v. Fowler, 384 Pa.Super. 329, 558 A.2d 565 (1989). Dr. Latman testified that the plaintiff exaggerated her symptoms, and that there were no objective observations of injury. Latman Deposition, 27, 57. There also was evidence that the plaintiff did not credibly describe her symptoms, and that the accident was minor. Latman Deposition, 14, 21-22; N.T. 2/4/89, 178. The record reveals similarly contrasting testimony with respect to the plaintiffs actual lost wages. N.T. 2/4/89, 119-22. Faced with the conflicting testi*310mony of the witnesses, and their relative veracity and demean- or, the jury was permitted to disbelieve the plaintiffs claims. See Holland v. Zelnick, 329 Pa.Super. 469, 478 A.2d 885 (1984) (issue of whether plaintiff actually was suffering any pain and whether any such pain was caused by the defendants’ conduct is question for the jury).
Because I believe that the trial court’s grant of a new trial under the facts of this case was an abuse of discretion, I would reverse its order and reinstate the jury’s verdict.

=== CASE 9736870 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:08:47.90678+00 ===

JUSTICE RARICK delivered the opinion of the court: Dr. Thad Vuagniaux, a licensed chiropractic physician, was reprimanded by the Department of Professional Regulation (the Department) and fined the sum of $2,500 for violating the advertising provisions set forth in section 26 of the Medical Practice Act of 1987 (225 ILCS 60/26 (West 1998)). On administrative review of the Department’s decision, the circuit court of Madison County reversed. In so doing, it found various sections of the Medical Practice Act, including section 26’s advertising restrictions, to be unconstitutional and void. The Department appealed. Because the circuit court’s judgment held statutes of the State of Illinois to be invalid, the appeal was taken directly to our court. 134 Ill. 2d R. 302(a). For the reasons that follow, we affirm in part, reverse in part and remand for further proceedings. Although the record in this case is voluminous, the facts necessary to the disposition are straightforward. Thad Vuagniaux graduated from Logan Chiropractic College in 1993 and was licensed as a chiropractor by the State of Illinois in 1994. At all relevant times, Vuagniaux has maintained a practice in Madison County, Illinois, located in the St. Louis, Missouri, metropolitan area. Two years after receiving his license, Vuagniaux published a series of advertisements for his practice in the St. Louis Post-Dispatch. The advertisements, which ran throughout 1996, appeared in editions of the paper circulated in Illinois. Each ad addressed a different ailment. The ailments discussed were migraine headaches, asthma, fibromyalgia, carpal tunnel syndrome, Crohn’s Disease/irritable bowel syndrome, learning disorders, “TMJ Dysfunction,” whiplash and vertebral subluxations, and Meniere’s Disease/vertigo. Vuagniaux’s ads described the causes and symptoms of the foregoing conditions and linked each of them to interference with the brain stem. The ads stated that a procedure termed “Specific Chiropractic” corrects or removes interference to the brain stem, enabling sufferers to recover normal function and achieve their “fullest health potential without the use of drugs or surgery.” Vuagniaux’s ads publicized that he employed “Specific Chiropractic” in his practice. In fact, the first two ads represented that he was one of only two “Certified Brain Stem Specialists” in the St. Louis metropolitan area. Those ads included, under his photo, the notation that he is a “Kale Certified Brain Stem Specialist” and an officer of the “Kale International Research Council.” Vuagniaux’s third ad deleted the references to his being certified or a specialist and indicated simply that he was one of only two “Specific Chiropractors” in the St. Louis area. The same claim appeared in the fourth ad, but was deleted from the fifth and all subsequent ads. Publication of Vuagniaux’s ads elicited complaints from other chiropractors. After investigating the matter, the Department initiated disciplinary proceedings against Vuagniaux pursuant to section 22 of the Medical Practice Act of 1987 (225 ILCS 60/22 (West 1998)). The Department’s complaint, which contained three counts, asked that Vuagniaux’s license be suspended, revoked, or otherwise disciplined on the grounds that his ads violated the provisions of the Medical Practice Act governing advertising. Advertising by persons licensed under the Medical Malpractice Act is subject to section 26 of the statute (225 ILCS 60/26 (West 1998)). Section 26 permits licensees to advertise the availability of their professional services in the public media or on the premises where the services are rendered. The statute provides, however, that any such advertising is limited to certain types of information. Information that may be published under the statute includes the licensee’s “name, title, office hours, address and telephone number” (225 ILCS 60/ 26(a) (West 1998)); his “usual and customary fees for routine professional services” (225 ILCS 60/26(c) (West 1998)); his “areas of specialization, including appropriate board certification or limitation of professional practice” (225 ILCS 60/26(b) (West 1998)); announcement of the “opening of, change of, absence from, or return to business” (225 ILCS 60/26(d) (West 1998)); announcement of changes in professional licensed staff (225 ILCS 60/26(e) (West 1998)); and issuance of business or appointment cards (225 ILCS 60/26(1) (West 1998)). Counts I and III of the Department’s complaint both charged violations of the foregoing provisions. Count III made a general allegation that Vuagniaux’s ads all contravened the Medical Practice Act because they are “not limited in the information provided to the information permitted in [section 26].” Count I focused specifically on the ads representing Vuagniaux as a “Certified Brain Stem Specialist” and a “Kale Certified Brain Stem Specialist.” According to the Department, those ads violated the Act because the specialties identified in the ad were not legitimate. In the words of the complaint, “[t]here is no appropriate board certification as a Certified Brain Stem Specialist or a Kale Certified Brain Stem Specialist in Chiropractic medicine.” In addition to limiting the types of information a licensee may include in his advertising, section 26 of the Medical Practice Act also forbids a licensee from using statements in his advertising that contain “false, fraudulent, deceptive or misleading material or *** statements which play upon the vanity or fears of the public.” 225 ILCS 60/26 (West 1998). Count II of the Department’s complaint was premised on that prohibition. It alleged that Vuagniaux’s claims that chiropractic treatment of the brain stem will treat asthma, Meniere’s disease, learning disorders and the other conditions mentioned in the various ads “are deceptive or misleading and play upon the fears of the public.” After the Department served Vuagniaux with its administrative complaint, Vuagniaux sought declaratory and injunctive relief from the circuit court of Madison County to prevent the disciplinary proceedings against him from going forward. Vuagniaux’s complaint, as amended, raised a variety of issues regarding the fairness and constitutionality of the process by which chiropractors in Illinois are subject to discipline and the standards by which their conduct is judged. Among the claims he made were (1) that subjecting chiropractors to regulation by the Department’s Medical Disciplinary Board, which by statute includes but a single chiropractor among its seven voting members, denies chiropractors their rights to due process and equal protection, (2) that the advertising provisions in section 26 of the Medical Practice Act are uncertain and vague, and the Department has failed to enact standards for assessing whether those provisions have been violated, (3) that the Department has failed to adopt meaningful rules of discovery, and (4) that the Department should not be allowed to limit the location of evidentiary hearings in disciplinary matters to Chicago and Springfield. At the same time he pursued this civil action, Vuagniaux vigorously contested various developments in the Department’s disciplinary action against him. Among the actions he took was to move for exclusion of Dr. Lacy Cook, the sole chiropractic member of the Medical Disciplinary Board, from further participation in his case. Vuagniaux based that motion on claims that Cook would be prejudiced against him and the chiropractic theories he followed. Although the administrative law judge assigned to the case found no actual prejudice by Cook, the administrative law judge granted Vuagniaux’s motion and excluded Cook to avoid the appearance of prejudice. Once Cook was excluded from the case, the Department moved for appointment of a “Special Chiropractor” to the Medical Disciplinary Board so that the Board would include a chiropractic member when it considered Vuagniaux’s case. The administrative law judge referred the motion to the Board for its consideration. The Board granted the motion and named Dr. Roger Pope, a doctor of chiropractic, to serve in Cook’s place on the Board for the purposes of these proceedings. Vuagniaux raised objections to Pope’s appointment in both the disciplinary proceeding and the civil action. The principle basis for Vuagniaux’s objection was that the Board’s appointment violated the Medical Practice Act, which specifies that members of the Medical Disciplinary Board are “to be appointed by the Governor by and with the advice and consent of the Senate.” 225 ILCS 60/7(A) (West 1998). Vuagniaux further claimed that the appointment would infringe on his right to confront and cross-examine witnesses. Vuagniaux’s objection to Pope’s inclusion on the Board went unheeded. A motion he filed in the administrative proceeding for judgment on the pleadings or, in the alternative, to dismiss, was denied. Vuagniaux then moved for a preliminary injunction in his civil action. When that motion was also denied, an administrative hearing on the Department’s disciplinary complaint was convened. The hearing took place over a series of dates during the summer of 1998. In the course of the hearing, the administrative law judge allowed the Department to delete from count II of its complaint the allegations pertaining to whiplash and vertebral subluxations. Experts witnesses were called by both sides, and Vuagniaux testified on his own behalf. Following the hearing, the administrative law judge issued her findings and recommendations in accordance with section 35 of the Medical Practice Act (225 ILCS 60/35 (West 1998)). The administrative law judge concluded that the Department had proved all three counts of its complaint by clear and convincing evidence and recommended to the Medical Disciplinary Board that Vuagniaux be fined the sum of $2,500. The Medical Disciplinary Board adopted the administrative law judge’s findings of fact and conclusions of law. It also agreed with the administrative law judge’s recommendation that Vuagniaux be fined $2,500. Unlike the administrative law judge, however, the Board believed that the sanctions imposed on Vuagniaux should also include a reprimand. The Board’s recommendation, made with the concurrence of five members, including the specially appointed chiropractor, Pope, was adopted by the Department’s director. In an order signed by the director and dated December 16, 1998, the Department reprimanded Vuagniaux’s license and ordered him to pay a $2,500 fine. Vuagniaux sought administrative review of the Department’s decision pursuant to article III of the Code of Civil Procedure (the Administrative Review Law) (735 ILCS 5/3 — 101 et seq. (West 1998)) in the circuit court of Madison County. On Vuagniaux’s motion, the circuit court subsequently consolidated that action with Vuagniaux’s suit for declaratory and injunctive relief and allowed Vuagniaux to make various amendments to his complaint for declaratory and injunctive relief. Following those amendments, the Department moved for summary judgment against Vuagniaux on his suit for a declaratory judgment and injunction. As grounds for its motion, the Department argued that where, as here, the Administrative Review Law is applicable and provides a remedy, the circuit court may not redress a party’s grievance through any other type of action. The circuit court found this argument to be meritorious, granted the Department’s motion for summary judgment, and dismissed Vuagniaux’s complaint for declaratory and injunctive relief with prejudice. The proceedings for administrative review remained pending. Vuagniaux was allowed to amend his complaint for administrative review to include a number of different claims, including claims he had previously asserted in his action for declaratory and injunctive relief. Following a hearing, the circuit court entered an order setting aside the Department’s decision and dismissing the Department’s complaint against Vuagniaux. The court gave numerous reasons for reaching that decision. Among these were that appointment of Dr. Pope to replace Dr. Cook on the Medical Disciplinary Board was not authorized by law and was unconstitutional, that the statutory composition of the Board violates due process and equal protection, that the Department’s administrative complaint was defective, that the Department had failed to properly prove its case against Vuagniaux, and that the provisions of the Medical Practice Act regulating advertising are unconstitutionally vague and violate “Vuagniaux’s right to engage in free commercial and educational speech.” This appeal by the Department followed. The Department took its appeal directly to us based on the circuit court’s determination that provisions of the Medical Practice Act were invalid. See 134 Ill. 2d R. 302(a). Although the constitutionality of those provisions has been the focus of the parties’ arguments in our court, a fundamental principle of judicial decisionmaking is that questions regarding the constitutionality of statutes should be considered “only where essential to the disposition of a case, i.e., where the case cannot be determined on other grounds.” Bonaguro v. County Officers Electoral Board, 158 Ill. 2d 391, 396 (1994). Having reviewed the record and the applicable law, we have concluded that the disciplinary action undertaken by the Department in this case suffered from a basic flaw which rendered its decision invalid for reasons wholly unrelated to the constitutionality of the Medical Practice Act. The problem with the proceedings is that the Medical Disciplinary Board, the administrative body charged with enforcing the provisions of the Act pertaining to discipline, was not properly constituted when it considered Vuagniaux’s case on the merits and recommended that his license be disciplined. It was improperly constituted because it included Pope, the chiropractor appointed by the Board to replace Cook after Cook was excluded from further participation in the case by the administrative law judge. As Vuagniaux has consistently argued, and as the circuit court correctly determined, Pope’s appointment was impermissible because the Board had no statutory or constitutional authority to make it. The Medical Practice Act plainly provides that all members of the Medical Disciplinary Board are “to be appointed by the Governor by and with the advice and consent of the Senate.” 225 ILCS 60/7(A) (West 1998). There is no situation under the Act where anyone other than the Governor, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, may appoint a person to be a member of the Board. Upon expiration of the Board members’ terms, their successors must be appointed by the Governor by and with the consent of the Senate. If a vacancy occurs before the expiration of a Board member’s term, it is the Governor, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, who is authorized to fill the vacancy. 225 ILCS 60/ 7(B) (West 1998). There are two circumstances in which the Governor can take action with regard to Board members without involving the Senate. The first is where the Board has recommended that a member be removed for misfeasance, malfeasance, or wilful neglect of duty. In such a case, the Governor may remove the offending member on his own, after notice and a public hearing, unless the member expressly waives the right to such notice and hearing in writing. 225 ILCS 60/7(B) (West 1998). The second is where a vacancy occurs while the Senate is in recess. There, the basic constitutional provisions governing recess appointments apply and the Governor is authorized to “make a temporary appointment until the next meeting of the Senate, when he shall make a nomination to fill such office.” Ill. Const. 1970, art. V, § 9. While participation by the Senate is unnecessary in the foregoing situations, participation by the Governor is always required. Neither the Medical Practice Act nor the Illinois Constitution of 1970 permit appointment or involuntary removal of Board members without gubernatorial action. As an administrative agency, the Medical Disciplinary Board is and was constrained by these limitations. It has no general or common law authority. The only powers it possesses are those granted to it by the legislature, and any action it takes must be authorized by statute. Business & Professional People for the Public Interest v. Illinois Commerce Comm’n, 136 Ill. 2d 192, 243-44 (1989). Because the Board had no authority to appoint Pope, it was not lawfully constituted at the time it recommended that Vuagniaux be reprimanded and fined. The Department’s decision, which was based on the Board’s recommendation, is therefore invalid and cannot be given effect. See Gilchrist v. Human Rights Comm’n, 312 Ill. App. 3d 597, 603 (2000). Unlike the administrative body whose decision was challenged in Daniels v. Industrial Comm’n, 201 Ill. 2d 160 (2002), the Department makes no claim that its decision can be legitimized on the grounds that Pope was a de facto officer. Under the de facto officer doctrine, a person actually performing the duties of an office under color of title is considered to be an officer de facto, and his acts as such an officer are valid so far as the public or third parties who have an interest in them are concerned. People ex rel. Chillicothe Township v. Board of Review, 19 Ill. 2d 424, 426 (1960). Pursuant to the doctrine, litigants may not assert collateral challenges to the officer’s qualifications to hold office as a means of contesting the legality of the officer’s acts. Daniels v. Industrial Comm’n, 201 Ill. 2d at 174 (McMorrow, J., specially concurring, joined by Freeman, J.). The case before us does not involve the effects of an officer’s acts on a member of the public or a third party, and the officer’s qualifications to act are not being contested in a collateral proceeding. The challenge to Pope’s authority to act as a member of the Board was raised in the proceeding in which Pope was appointed, at the time the appointment was made, by a doctor whose case was directly affected by the appointment, to the tribunal responsible for considering the disciplinary charges against the doctor, and before the tribunal considered the doctor’s case on the merits or made its recommendations. The de facto officer doctrine is therefore inapplicable. In attempting to justify Pope’s appointment, the Department does not dispute that the Medical Practice Act contains no provisions authorizing its actions. It argues, however, that the Board has implicit authority to make temporary appointments for a particular case where a permanent Board member is excluded from participating or voluntarily recuses himself. This argument is untenable. As discussed earlier in this opinion, administrative bodies such as the Board are creatures of statute and possess no general or common law powers. Any power or authority claimed by an administrative agency must find its source within the provisions of the statute by which the agency was created. The agency’s authority must either arise from the express language of the statute or “devolve by fair implication and intendment from the express provisions of the [statute] as an incident to achieving the objectives for which the [agency] was created.” Schalz v. McHenry County Sheriffs Department Merit Comm’n, 113 Ill. 2d 198, 202-03 (1986). There being no explicit statutory authorization for the Board to appoint replacement members when one of its existing members cannot hear a case, the appointment of Pope can be upheld under the foregoing standard only if authority for such an appointment can fairly be implied from the express provisions of the Medical Practice Act as an incident to achieving the objectives for which the Board was created. In our view, no such implication can be made. By statute, only four of the Board’s seven voting members are needed for a quorum, and vacancies in the membership of the Board “shall not impair the right of a quorum to exercise all the rights and perform all the duties of the *** Board.” 225 ILCS 60/7(E) (West 1998). If the Board may continue to conduct its work with a vacancy, it may surely continue its work where, as here, a particular Board member is for some reason unable to participate in a particular matter. Its power to function is no more impeded than ours is when one of our members is unable to take part in the consideration and disposition of a case. Just as the absence of one of our members due to disqualification or recusal does not entitle us to bypass the normal judicial selection mechanism and invite another judge from another court to join us temporarily, the removal of a Board member from participation in a specific disciplinary action does not empower the remaining Board members to sidestep the statutory nomination and confirmation process and invite another doctor to join them as a substitute. We therefore do not believe that the power to appoint temporary Board members can fairly be implied from the Medical Practice Act as an incident to achieving the Board’s statutory purposes. Having concluded that Pope’s appointment exceeded the Board’s statutory and constitutional authority and that the decision of the Department based on the recommendation of the improperly constituted Board cannot stand, we agree with the circuit court that the Department’s decision to fine Vuagniaux and reprimand his license must be set aside. Unlike the circuit court, however, we believe that the appropriate remedy in this case is to remand the matter to the Department for reconsideration by a legally constituted Board. See Daniels v. Industrial Comm’n, 201 Ill. 2d 160 (2002); Gilchrist v. Human Rights Comm’n, 312 Ill. App. 3d 597 (2000) (causes remanded to administrative agencies for new hearings when original agency decisions were found to have been made by or with the participation of public officers whose appointments were not authorized by statute). In ordering a remand for further proceedings by the Department, we hasten to add that the unauthorized appointment of Pope does not render the entire disciplinary proceeding a nullity. It merely invalidates the actions taken by the Department following Pope’s appointment to the Board. Because the Board’s initial decision to pursue charges against Vuagniaux preceded Pope’s participation on the Board, it is unaffected. Because the evidentiary hearings regarding those charges followed Pope’s appointment, however, they are invalid and are to be disregarded. If the Department still wishes to pursue disciplinary charges against Vuagniaux, it must afford him the opportunity for a new set of hearings. Our decision to afford Vuagniaux such relief eliminates the need for us to address issues regarding the sufficiency of the evidence presented by the Department in the original proceedings or the procedural rulings made there. It also renders premature consideration of whether the advertising provisions of the Medical Practice Act violate rights to free speech guaranteed by the first amendment to the United States Constitution (U.S. Const., amend. I) and corresponding protections under the Constitution of Illinois. Whether governmental restrictions on advertising by medical professionals contravene the first amendment is judged by the standards governing commercial speech. See Desnick v. Department of Professional Regulation, 171 Ill. 2d 510 (1996); Snell v. Department of Professional Regulation, 318 Ill. App. 3d 972 (2001). Restrictions on commercial speech are analyzed under the test set forth in Central Hudson Gas & Electric Corp. v. Public Service Comm’n, 447 U.S. 557, 566, 65 L. Ed. 2d 341, 351, 100 S. Ct. 2343, 2351 (1980). A court first asks whether the commercial speech concerns unlawful activity or is misleading. If the answer to that question is in the affirmative, the speech is not protected by the first amendment. If the answer is in the negative, that is, if the speech concerns lawful activity and is not misleading, the court next asks whether the asserted governmental interest in regulating the speech is substantial. If the interest is substantial, the court must determine whether the regulation directly advances the governmental interest asserted. The court must also assess whether the regulation is more extensive than necessary to serve the governmental interest. Thompson v. Western States Medical Center, 535 U.S. 357, 367, 152 L. Ed. 2d 563, 573, 122 S. Ct. 1497, 1504 (2002). When analyzing challenges to a regulation’s constitutionality based on the first amendment, courts differentiate between an as-applied challenge and an overbreadth challenge. An as-applied challenge asserts that the particular acts which gave rise to the litigation fall outside what a properly drawn regulation could cover. An overbreadth challenge, on the other hand, attacks a regulation’s facial validity, enabling persons to whom a statute may constitutionally be applied to challenge the statute on the ground that it may conceivably be applied unconstitutionally to others in situations not before the court. Desnick v. Department of Professional Regulation, 171 Ill. 2d at 519-20. The overbreadth challenge is not available to plaintiffs contesting the validity of a statute regulating commercial speech. Board of Trustees of the State University of New York v. Fox, 492 U.S. 469, 106 L. Ed. 2d 388, 109 S. Ct. 3028 (1989). That is so because commercial speech is considered “more hardy, less likely to be ‘chilled,’ and not in need of surrogate litigators.” Board of Trustees of the State University of New York, 492 U.S. at 481, 106 L. Ed. 2d at 404, 109 S. Ct. at 3035. Accordingly, any party challenging the constitutionality of a restriction on commercial speech must normally demonstrate his standing by first showing that his particular conduct is protected under the first amendment. Desnick v. Department of Professional Regulation, 171 Ill. 2d at 520. Such a showing necessarily requires a developed factual record. No such record can be said to exist here. Having been generated following the Board’s unlawful appointment of Pope, the present record and findings of fact are a nullity. Before the Department can discipline Vuagniaux, new hearings must conducted, and the matter must be taken up again, this time by a lawfully constituted Board. Until that occurs and valid findings of fact are issued, we have no basis for evaluating whether enforcement of the advertising provisions against Vuagniaux would violate his rights to free speech. In addition to challenging the advertising provisions under the first amendment, Vuagniaux asserts that they are unconstitutionally vague. The vagueness arguments Vuagniaux raises appear to turn, in large part, on the particular facts of this case. To that extent, their resolution must await new hearings on remand, just as with his first amendment challenges. We note, however, that Vuagniaux also purports to advance a facial challenge to the advertising provisions. Statutes regulating commercial speech are subject to attack on the grounds that they are unconstitutional on their face, not simply as applied, where the constitutional challenge is based on vagueness. Jacobs v. Florida Bar, 50 F.3d 901, 907 (11th Cir. 1995); see, e.g., Posadas de Puerto Rico Associates v. Tourism Co. of Puerto Rico, 478 U.S. 328, 92 L. Ed. 2d 266, 106 S. Ct. 2968 (1986). The vagueness doctrine is founded on considerations of due process. As a matter of due process, a law is void if it is so vague that persons “ ‘of common intelligence must necessarily guess at its meaning and differ as to its application.’ ” Ardt v. Illinois Department of Professional Regulation, 154 Ill. 2d 138, 157 (1992), quoting Connally v. General Construction Co., 269 U.S. 385, 391, 70 L. Ed. 322, 328, 46 S. Ct. 126, 127 (1926). In Ardt v. Illinois Department of Professional Regulation, 154 Ill. 2d 138, this court considered the void for vagueness doctrine in a disciplinary action brought against a dentist for violation of the advertising provisions of the Dental Practice Act. We held there that a statute does not violate the due process clauses of the United States or Illinois Constitution on grounds of vagueness if it is explicit enough to serve as a guide to those who must comply with it. Because we concluded that the advertising provisions at issue in the case and the regulations promulgated in connection with them provided dentists sufficient guidance to enable them to avoid advertising prohibited information, we found that the challenged provisions were not unconstitutionally vague. Ardt v. Illinois Department of Professional Regulation, 154 Ill. 2d at 157. The portion of the advertising provisions attacked by Vuagniaux as facially invalid under the void-for-vagueness doctrine in this case is section 26(b) of the Medical Practice Act, which permits doctors to include in their advertising information pertaining to their “areas of specialization, including appropriate board certification or limitation of professional practice.” 225 ILCS 60/ 26(b) (West 1998). Vuagniaux takes issue with this statute because it does not define the phrase “appropriate board certification” or include a list of certifications considered to be appropriate. Although the circuit court was persuaded by Vuagniaux’s argument, its decision enjoys no deference on appeal. We consider de novo whether a statute is constitutional. In undertaking our review, we presume that statutory enactments are constitutional. The burden is on the party challenging the statute to clearly establish any constitutional invalidity. The burden is a formidable one, and this court will uphold a statute’s validity whenever it is reasonably possible to do so. People ex rel. Lumpkin v. Cassidy, 184 Ill. 2d 117, 123 (1998). Due process does not mandate absolute standards or mathematical precision in the formulation of statutory enactments. Although it does require that a regulation not be vague, indefinite or uncertain, the doctrine recognizes that different situations require different levels of specificity. A regulation need not be more specific than is possible under the circumstances. People v. Izzo, 195 Ill. 2d 109, 114 (2001). Section 26(b) of the Medical Practice Act, the provision challenged by Vuagniaux as vague, pertains to physicians. “Board certification” is a standard and widely used term in the practice of medicine. For a physician to be “board certified” is commonly understood to mean that he has passed an examination administered by a medical specialty board, has fulfilled all requirements of that board for certification as a specialist, and has been certified by the board as a specialist. See 1 Schmidt, Attorneys’ Dictionary of Medicine 12 (Cum. Supp. 2002). Section 26(b)’s use of the word “appropriate” in connection with “board certification” does not add any ambiguity to the term. Section 26(b) pertains to advertising of the physician’s area of specialization. When the statute says that a physician may include “appropriate board certification” in his ads, it means simply that he may make mention of whatever board certification he has received that is relevant to the particular area of specialization he is advertising. The Medical Practice Act governs different types of physicians engaged in a spectrum of specialties whose standards are administered by a variety of different medical boards. The statute’s generic reference to board certifications without specifying each particular board or each particular type of certification is a reflection of this situation. Enumeration of every possible board certification would be cumbersome. It could also prove unduly restrictive, preventing doctors in new or emerging specialties from advertising legitimate board certifications that had not yet made it onto the officially prescribed fist. We note, moreover, that there is nothing to indicate that the present statutory and regulatory scheme is proving difficult to follow or administer. To our knowledge, the only physician to have run afoul of the advertising provision on “board certification” is Vuagniaux. Considering that the “brain stem specialist” certification Vuagniaux claimed in his ads was not bestowed by any medical board, but came instead from the educational institution where Vuagniaux learned the technique, it is difficult for us to see how he could reasonably have been misled into the thinking that his certification qualified as an “appropriate board certification” under the statute. A definitive answer as to whether the provision was vague as applied to him must, of course, await the new proceedings following remand. At this point, however, it is clear that Vuagniaux cannot meet his burden of showing that the statute is void for vagueness on its face. The circuit court’s judgment presents two additional questions whose resolution remains necessary in light of our decision to remand for further proceedings. The first concerns disposition of a motion to dismiss filed by Vuagniaux during the disciplinary action. The circuit court concluded that counts II and III of the Department’s complaint were insufficient as a matter of law and that Vuagniaux’s motion for judgment on the pleadings or to dismiss should have been granted at the administrative level because those counts “did not set forth facts informing [Vuagniaux] wherein his ads violated the applicable law.” We cannot sustain that ruling. Administrative complaints are not required to state the charges with the same precision, refinements, or subtleties as pleadings in a judicial proceeding. Abrahamson v. Illinois Department of Professional Regulation, 153 Ill. 2d 76, 93 (1992). Section 10 — 25(a)(4) of the Illinois Administrative Procedure Act (5 ILCS 100/10 — 25(a)(4) (West 1998)), which is adopted by and incorporated into the Medical Practice Act (225 ILCS 60/47 (West 1998)), provides that “[e]xcept where a more detailed statement is otherwise provided for by law,” the notice served on a party in a contested case shall include “a short and plain statement of the matters asserted, the consequences of a failure to respond, and the official file or other reference number.” 5 ILCS 100/10 — 25(a)(4) (West 1998). No additional specificity is mandated by the Medical Practice Act itself. It requires simply that the Department notify the accused doctor in writing of the charges made and the time and place where the hearing on the charges will be conducted, that it direct the doctor to file his written answer to the charges under oath within a specified time, and that it advise the doctor that if he fails to file such an answer, a default will be taken against him and his license will be subject to such disciplinary action as the Department may deem proper. 225 ILCS 60/36 (West 1998). In applying these provisions, the courts have held that charges filed before an administrative agency “need only be drawn sufficiently so that the alleged wrongdoer is reasonably apprised of the case against him to intelligently prepare his defense.” See Siddiqui v. Department of Professional Regulation, 307 Ill. App. 3d 753, 757 (1999). The complaint filed against Vuagniaux met that standard. It specifically identified the allegedly improper advertisements, identified where and when they were published, set forth the statutory provisions they were alleged to have violated, and described why they were claimed to be in violation of the law. These allegations provided Vuagniaux with ample notice of the nature of the charges against him. If Vuagniaux was in any way impaired in his ability to defend himself, it is not apparent in the materials we have before us. The complaint is therefore not subject to dismissal on the pleadings. The final aspect of the circuit court’s judgment we must address before the matter is remanded is its determination that the disciplinary mechanism established by the Medical Practice Act violates constitutional rights to due process and equal protection because it subjects physicians who are chiropractors to discipline by physicians who are not chiropractors. According to Vuagniaux, only chiropractors should be permitted to stand in judgment of other chiropractors. Because the Medical Practice Act calls for the Disciplinary Board to include only one chiropractor among its seven voting members (see 225 ILCS 60/7(A) (West 1998)), Vuagniaux contends that the law is inherently flawed and that the Board, as constituted under the law, should not be permitted to take disciplinary action against him. In challenging the statutory composition of the Disciplinary Board, Vuagniaux asserts no first amendment claims. The infringement claimed is on his ability to pursue his profession, not his freedom of speech. Legislation infringing on the right to pursue a profession is examined under the rational basis test. Potts v. Illinois Department of Registration & Education, 128 Ill. 2d 322, 330 (1989). Rational basis review is limited and “ ‘highly deferential.’ ” Arangold Corp. v. Zehnder, 204 Ill. 2d 142, 147 (2003), quoting Committee for Educational Rights v. Edgar, 174 Ill. 2d 1, 33 (1996). Under the rational basis test, a statute will be upheld if it bears a rational relationship to a legitimate legislative purpose and is neither arbitrary nor discriminatory. Potts v. Illinois Department of Registration & Education, 128 Ill. 2d at 330. Vuagniaux assails the composition of the Disciplinary Board on the grounds that it prevents chiropractors from being judged by their peers and subjects them to discipline by doctors who do not understand their work and are prejudiced against them. We disagree. While chiropractors may once have been ostracized by certain segments of the medical community, the Medical Practice Act treats them as full and equal members of the medical profession. Under the law, those holding the degree of doctor of chiropractic possess precisely the same professional stature as those holding degrees as doctors of medicine or doctors of osteopathy. All are regarded as physicians. Although more of the physicians on the Disciplinary Board are doctors of medicine, the record in this case indicates that the apportionment of membership on the Disciplinary Board was intended to reflect the relative number of each type of physician practicing in the state. Medical doctors outnumber chiropractors on the Board simply because medical doctors outnumber chiropractors in the profession. It is a matter of proportional representation, not antichiropractic prejudice. The physicians on the Disciplinary Board who are doctors of medicine may not be conversant with the methods and practices employed by physicians who are doctors of chiropractic. Likewise, physicians who are chiropractors will not normally be knowledgeable about the methods and practices employed by physicians who are doctors of medicine. The law understands this, just as it understands that practitioners in one speciality of medicine or chiropractic may know little of the work of practitioners in another specialty. That is why it does not restrict members of the Disciplinary Board to reliance on their personal training and experience in judging fellow physicians. Under the Medical Practice Act and the regulations enacted in accordance with that Act, provision is made for full hearings in contested cases where experts in the relevant field can testify, as they were called to testify in this case. Through relevant expert testimony, Board members can obtain the specialized knowledge needed to assess a particular case, just as jurors are educated and guided by expert testimony in complex civil and criminal matters. Under these circumstances, we believe that the legislature had a rational basis for structuring the Disciplinary Board the way it did and that the composition of the Board is neither arbitrary nor discriminatory. While Vuagniaux asserts that the disciplinary system would work better and achieve superior results if only medical doctors could consider charges against medical doctors and only chiropractors could consider charges against chiropractors, his arguments are purely theoretical. They also present their own set of problems. For example, if disciplinary action against a physician could only be conducted by other physicians with his same training and background, as Vuagniaux urges, one might be required to similarly conclude that specialists within each of the basic physician groups could only be subject to discipline by physicians who practiced the same specialty. If that were so, numerous additional disciplinary boards would be necessary to accommodate all the different specialties. Bureaucracy would proliferate. Regardless of the relative merits of the system proposed by Vuagniaux, however, such considerations are of no consequence in evaluating the law in its present form. The legislature is presumed to have investigated the question and ascertained what is best for the good of the medical profession and for the good of the people among whom medical professionals practice. Whether the course chosen by the legislature is wise or whether it is the best means to achieve the desired result is not a proper subject of judicial inquiry. It is for the legislature, and not the courts, to balance the advantages and disadvantages of the law’s requirements. Potts v. Illinois Department of Registration & Education, 128 Ill. 2d at 333. For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the circuit court is affirmed in part and reversed in part, and the cause is remanded to the Department for further proceedings consistent with this opinion. Affirmed in part and reversed in part; cause remanded.

=== CASE 9736871 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:08:47.911837+00 ===

CHIEF JUSTICE McMORROW, dissenting: Although neither party has raised the issue, this court has an obligation to consider, sua sponte, its jurisdiction over the present appeal. See, e.g., People v. Fuller, 187 Ill. 2d 1, 7 (1999). Because I conclude that we do not have jurisdiction under Trent v. Winningham, 172 Ill. 2d 420 (1996), and Hearne v. Illinois State Board of Education, 185 Ill. 2d 443 (1999), I respectfully dissent. In Trent, the plaintiff, Barbara Trent, sought retroactive child support from the father of her child under section 14(b) of the Illinois Parentage Act of 1984 (750 ILCS 45/14(b) (West 1992)). The trial court denied Trent’s claim for support, holding that she was not entitled to the support, that the claim was time-barred and, in the alternative, that section 14(b) was unconstitutional. Trent, 172 Ill. 2d at 422. Trent appealed to this court, asserting that a direct appeal was appropriate under Supreme Court Rule 302(a) (134 Ill. 2d R. 302(a)) because section 14(b) had been held unconstitutional. This court did not reach the merits of Trent’s claim for support. Instead, after examining our jurisdiction sua sponte, we concluded that the circuit court’s constitutional ruling could not serve as a basis for direct review under Rule 302(a) because the circuit court had also denied the plaintiff relief on alternative, nonconstitutional grounds. In so holding, we noted that when a judgment of the circuit court is based upon a finding that legislation is unconstitutional, Rule 302(a) mandates the parties to bypass the normal appellate process and proceed directly to this court. We explained that this direct review process becomes problematic when the judgment of the circuit court contains alternative, non-constitutional grounds, as this court is then compelled to consider issues it might otherwise decline to address “in deference to our appellate court where the issues would have been reviewable as a matter of right.” Trent, 172 Ill. 2d at 426. We also noted that when a circuit court holds legislation unconstitutional, the stability of the legal system is undermined. We admonished courts “not to compromise that stability in the first place by declaring legislation unconstitutional when the particular case does not require it,” i.e., when alternative, nonconstitutional grounds can resolve the case. Trent, 172 Ill. 2d at 425. Because the circuit court in Trent had denied plaintiff relief on two, nonconstitutional grounds, the constitutional holding was not necessary for the resolution of the case. Based on the concerns noted above, we concluded that Rule 302(a) jurisdiction was improper. Trent, 172 Ill. 2d at 426. We vacated the circuit court’s order and remanded the cause to the circuit court with instructions to enter a new, modified order, without the holding that section 14(b) was unconstitutional. Trent, 172 Ill. 2d at 427. Our decision in Trent was reaffirmed in Hearne. In Hearne, a Chicago schoolteacher who had been dismissed by the board of education filed suit in the circuit court contesting his dismissal. Upon administrative review, the circuit court set aside the dismissal, finding that the weight of the evidence supported reinstatement. Hearne, 185 Ill. 2d at 451. However, the court also held a portion of the Illinois School Code unconstitutional and ordered the teacher reinstated on this alternative basis as well. Hearne, 185 Ill. 2d at 451-52. The school board filed a motion to reconsider in which it argued that, under Trent, the circuit court should not have reached the constitutional claim. Hearne, 185 Ill. 2d at 452. The circuit court denied the motion, stating that it was appropriate to reach the constitutional question in order to correct a “fundamentally unfair” process created by the legislation and to relieve other courts from the burden of having to interpret a “vague and ambiguous statute.” Hearne, 185 111. 2d at 452. Based on the finding of unconstitutionality, direct appeal was sought in this court under Rule 302(a). Applying our holding in Trent, we concluded that the circuit court’s constitutional ruling did not provide a proper basis for direct review. We expressly rejected the circuit court’s rationale for reaching the constitutional issue, noting that the circuit court’s constitutional ruling granted the teacher “additional and alternative relief’ which was “not necessary to resolve plaintiffs claim for administrative review.” Hearne, 185 Ill. 2d at 456. As in Trent, we remanded the cause to the circuit court with instructions to vacate its order. We further instructed the circuit court to reenter a modified order which excluded the holding that a portion of the School Code was unconstitutional. Hearne, 185 Ill. 2d at 457. See also McLean v. Department of Revenue, 184 Ill. 2d 341, 351 (1998) (the rationale of Trent did not apply where the finding of statutory unconstitutionality was not an alternative basis for granting or denying relief). The present case is controlled by Trent and Hearne. Here, the circuit court granted complete relief to Vuagniaux on several nonconstitutional grounds. The circuit court held that the decision of the Department had to be set aside because, among other reasons, the appointment of Dr. Pope to replace Dr. Cook on the Medical Disciplinary Board was not authorized by the Medical Practice Act (225 ILCS 60/7 (West 1998)), the Department’s administrative complaint was defective, and the Department had failed to prove its case by clear and convincing evidence. However, the circuit court also held, in the alternative, that the decision of the Department had to be set aside because sections 22(A)(13) and (A)(26) of the Medical Practice Act (225 ILCS 60/22(A)(13), (A)(26) (West 1998)) were unconstitutionally vague and violated Vuagniaux’s right to engage in “free commercial and educational speech,” and because section 7 of the Medical Practice Act (225 ILCS 60/7 (West 1998)), which sets forth the composition of the Medical Disciplinary Board, violated Vuagniaux’s rights to due process and equal protection. As in Hearne, the circuit court in this case granted Vuagniaux “alternative relief’ (Hearne, 185 Ill. 2d at 456) based on its holdings that provisions of the Medical Practice Act were unconstitutional, even though none of these holdings were necessary for the circuit court’s disposition of the case. Accordingly, under Hearne and Trent, the proper resolution of this case is to vacate the circuit court’s order and to remand the cause to the circuit court with instructions to enter a new order which excludes the holdings of unconstitutionality. See Hearne, 185 Ill. 2d at 457; Trent, 172 Ill. 2d at 427. I believe that Hearne and Trent are relevant to the present case. Because the majority does not acknowledge either decision or explain why the principles set forth in those decisions are inapplicable, I respectfully dissent. JUSTICES FREEMAN and CARMAN join in this dissent.

=== CASE 9736872 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:08:49.409924+00 ===

OPINION
NIX, Chief Justice.
In this appeal, Appellant R. raises several constitutional challenges to the procedures that were followed when he was denied his request to expunge his record of a report indicating that there was substantial evidence showing that he committed child abuse. For the reasons that follow, we reject his constitutional claims.
This case arose out of the following set of facts. In January 1987, the Montgomery County Office of Children and Youth received a report of suspected child abuse alleging that R. sexually abused his daughter. A caseworker investigated the report by interviewing the child and her mother, but R. refused to be interviewed. The caseworker also obtained a psychiatric, psychological and medical evaluation of the child. Based upon the caseworker’s investigation, the Montgomery County Office of Children and Youth filed its report classifying the matter as “indicated” for child abuse.1
Initially,' R. wrote to the Department of Public Welfare (DPW) to request an expungement of the “indicated” report. *445The DPW denied that request. Soon thereafter, R. sought relief through the statutorily provided administrative channels by filing an appeal with the DPW’s Office of Hearings and Appeals.
There were five days of hearings during which the child, her then-treating psychiatrist, and the agency’s consultant testified. The child gave her testimony in camera over R.’s objections. The first four days of hearings were presided over by Hearing Examiner John F. Liebau, while Hearing Examiner Thomas G. Devlin presided over the final day of hearings. Hearing Examiner Devlin also issued the Adjudication and Recommendation that the request for expungement be denied. That report was adopted in full by the Office of Hearings and Appeals.
A divided panel of the Commonwealth Court affirmed the Department’s adjudication. Thereafter, R. sought allowance for appeal, which was granted with respect to two issues. The first is whether R. was denied due process when a hearing examiner made credibility determinations of witnesses he did not see or hear testify. The second is whether permitting his daughter to testify in camera denied R. any constitutional rights to confront a witness. Upon review of R.’s arguments addressing these two issues, we affirm the judgment below.
We begin by considering the first issue. Appellant argues that, because Hearing Examiner Devlin neither saw nor heard the testimony of witnesses who appeared during the first four days of hearings, he should not be permitted to decide the case and make recommendations. Appellant supports this contention by relying on Commonwealth ex rel. Davis v. Davis, 268 Pa.Super. 401, 408 A.2d 849 (1979). In Davis, the Superior Court explained that when facts, and inferences that, can be drawn from them, depend on the credibility of the testifying witnesses, a decision can only be made by a judge before whom the witnesses appeared. Id. at 403, 408 A.2d at 850. However, R.’s reliance on Davis is misplaced because that case involved a judicial proceeding, while the instant matter involves an administrative hearing, which must comply *446with a different set of standards to satisfy due process requirements.
Those standards were cogently articulated in Peak v. Unemployment Compensation Bd. of Review, 509 Pa. 267, 501 A.2d 1383 (1985). In Peak, the Unemployment Compensation Board of Review rejected a referee’s decision to award benefits to a claimant, and the claimant challenged the Board’s action as a violation of due process. The claimant argued that, because the referee’s decision was based on the resolution of a question of credibility, the Board, which did not hear the evidence, could not reject the referee’s decision without explaining its reasons for doing so. We disagreed.
First, we emphasized that the Board, not the referee, was statutorily designated as the ultimate finder of fact. Id. at 276-77, 501 A.2d at 1388 (citing Miller v. Unemployment Compensation Bd. of Review, 45 Pa.Commw. 539, 541, 405 A.2d 1034, 1036 (1979)). We said that the Legislature could constitutionally confer this power on the Board as long as there was sufficient protection against the risk of an arbitrary decision by the Board to reverse any referee’s assessment of testimonial credibility. Id. at 277, 501 A.2d at 1388-89 (citing Moore v. Ross, 687 F.2d 604 (2d Cir.1982), cert. denied, 459 U.S. 1115, 74 L.Ed.2d 969 (1983)). In concluding that sufficient safeguards existed to protect the claimant in Peak, we said that
we perceive no due process violation in permitting the Board to reassess a referee’s credibility determinations, so long as the Board is subject to judicial review on the substantial evidence test and is required to explain its decision in sufficient detail to permit meaningful appellate review.
Id. at 278, 501 A.2d at 1389. R. had the benefit of both safeguards in his expungement hearings.
We begin by noting that the Office of Hearings and Appeals functions as the finder of fact in expungement hearings. It was designated as such by the Secretary of the Department of Public Welfare, 55 Pa.Code § 3490.106(c), who is authorized to *447appoint a designee to perform her statutorily assigned duties to find facts and decide whether to expunge an indicated report.2
Because the Office of Hearings and Appeals, not the hearing examiner, is the ultimate finder of fact in this case, it is of no moment that the hearing examiner who issued the Adjudication and Recommendation did not hear the testimony given during the first four days of hearings. The hearing examiners are assistants who are constitutionally permitted to help the agency by taking, sifting through, and analyzing evidence. Morgan v. United States, 298 U.S. 468, 481, 56 S.Ct. 906, 912, 80 L.Ed. 1288, 1295 (1936). The critical issue is whether there are sufficient safeguards, as measured by Peak, to protect against arbitrary action by the Office of Hearings and Appeals.
Both conditions articulated in Peak for satisfying due process requirements are met here. First, as with any administrative agency adjudication, a reviewing court must determine, inter alia, whether substantial evidence exists to support the decision. 2 Pa.C.S. § 704. Second, the reasons the Office of Hearings and Appeals denied R.’s request to expunge his record are clear enough to permit meaningful appellate review. The Office summarily adopted the recommendation of Hearing Examiner Devlin, whose nine-page report thoroughly describes the basis for his recommendation. Therefore, we *448find that R. was not denied due process when the Office of Hearings and Appeals accepted the recommendation of a hearing examiner who presided over one of the five days during which testimony was heard.
Next, we consider R.’s contention that, because his daughter testified in camera, he was denied a constitutional right to confront a witness face-to-face. He supports this claim by relying, in part, on this Court’s decisions in Commonwealth v. Ludwig, 527 Pa. 472, 594 A.2d 281 (1991), and Commonwealth v. Lohman, 527 Pa. 492, 594 A.2d 291 (1991). However, those cases do not control the instant matter because in each one we discussed the constitutional protections that criminal defendants enjoy under Section 9 of Article I of the Pennsylvania Constitution.3 That provision is explicitly addressed to “criminal prosecutions.” However, R. was not criminally prosecuted; he had his expungement request considered in an administrative hearing. Therefore, Section 9 of Article I does not apply, and R.’s reliance on Ludwig and Lohman is misplaced.
R. also argues that, because he was not permitted to be present when his daughter testified, he was denied his rights to due process as guaranteed by the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution and Sections 1 and 11 of Article I of the Pennsylvania Constitution. However, none of these three provisions is offended by what occurred here.
We begin by considering the Fourteenth Amendment. It provides, in pertinent part, “nor shall any State deprive any person of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law....” U.S. Const, amend. XIV, § 1. In Matthews v. *449Eldridge, 424 U.S. 319, 96 S.Ct. 893, 47 L.Ed.2d 18 (1976), the United States Supreme Court formulated a methodology for assessing whether state action offends the Fourteenth Amendment’s due process guarantees. The Court stressed that procedural due process calls for protections tailored to the demands of the particular situation, making it necessary to balance competing interests. Id. at 334, 96 S.Ct. at 902, 47 L.Ed.2d at 33 (quoting Morrissey v. Brewer, 408 U.S. 471, 481, 92 S.Ct. 2593, 2600, 33 L.Ed.2d 484 (1972)). The Court identified three distinct factors that must be considered:
First, the private interest that will be affected by the official action; second, the risk of an erroneous deprivation of such interest through the procedures used, and the probable value, if any, of additional or substitute procedural safeguards; and finally, the Government’s interest, including the function involved and the fiscal and administrative burdens that the additional or substitute procedural requirements will entail.
Id. at 335, 96 S.Ct. at 903, 47 L.Ed.2d at 33 (citing Goldberg v. Kelly, 397 U.S. 254, 263-71, 90 S.Ct. 1011, 1018-22, 25 L.Ed.2d 287 (1970)).
Before proceeding to perform the Matthews analysis, it will be helpful to articulate the precise nature of R.’s challenge. As an initial matter, we note that no objection is raised to the fact that a hearing occurs after an indicated report is issued. The focus of R.’s complaint is that the conduct of his expungement hearing did not conform to the requirements of due process. Procedural due process claims have generally come in one of two forms. They most frequently consist of challenges to the adequacy of the government’s established procedure for imposing a deprivation.4 The minority of cases *450involve instances in which the deprivation arose out of either an official’s negligent conduct or an intentional act that did not conform to an established procedure.5 The case before us does not fall into either one of these categories because no established procedure is being challenged, nor is any official being accused of acting negligently or beyond the scope of his authority. In this case, R. raises a challenge to the manner in which his daughter testified when the established procedure does not specify the way it should be done. Pennsylvania’s Administrative Agency Law, which governs the manner in which expungement hearings are conducted, 55 Pa.Code § 3490.106(d), provides that
Commonwealth agencies shall not be bound by technical rules of evidence at agency hearings, and all relevant evidence of reasonably probative value may be received. Reasonable examination and cross-examination shall be permitted.
2 Pa.C.S. § 505 (emphasis added). Thus, the sole purpose of our analysis is to determine whether, acting pursuant to a non-specific requirement that reasonable examination and cross-examination be permitted, the hearing examiner allowed R.’s daughter to testify in a manner that ran afoul of the Fourteenth Amendment’s due process guarantees. With this in mind, we proceed to perform the Matthews analysis.
First, we consider the private interests that are affected by the DPW’s decision. In doing so, we are mindful that due process is required under the Fourteenth Amendment only if the state seeks to deprive a person of a life, liberty or property interest. Significantly, the existence of a liberty or *451property interest is partly determined by reference to state law.
[TJhere exists a variety of interests which are difficult of definition but are nevertheless comprehended within the meaning of either “liberty” or “property” as meant in the Due Process Clause. These interests attain this constitutional status by virtue of the fact that they have been initially recognized and protected by state law, and [the United States Supreme Court has] repeatedly ruled that the procedural guarantees of the Fourteenth Amendment apply whenever the State seeks to remove or significantly alter that protected status.
Paul v. Davis, 424 U.S. 693, 710-11, 96 S.Ct. 1155, 1165, 47 L.Ed.2d 405, 419 (1976) (footnote omitted).
R. describes three ways in which he will be adversely affected. He initially claims that the information contained in his indicated report is available to numerous persons and agencies. He also says that the existence of an indicated report of child abuse may lead to the denial of employment with a public or private child care agency. Finally, he complains about the fact that information in an indicated report may be furnished in the course of the mandatory investigations of proposed adoptive parents. We will analyze each of these concerns individually to determine the extent to which they relate to interests that are entitled to due process under the Fourteenth Amendment.
R.’s contention that he may be denied a job in a child care agency stems from the requirement that, in the event he seeks employment in an occupation involving direct contact with children, the DPW must certify to the prospective employer whether an indicated report was made within the proceeding one-year period.6 R. does not explain, nor do we perceive, *452how a statute that operates in this way implicates a liberty or property interest recognized under Pennsylvania law. In addition, R.’s concern does not relate to either a liberty or property interest as those terms were defined by the United States Supreme Court in Board of Regents v. Roth, 408 U.S. 564, 92 S.Ct. 2701, 33 L.Ed.2d 548 (1972).
In Roth, a state university refused to extend a teacher’s one-year employment contract and offered no reasons for doing so. The teacher challenged the action as a denial of due process, and the Supreme Court rejected her claim. The Court said that the university’s action did not implicate any liberty interest because the employee was free to seek another job. Id. at 573-74, 92 S.Ct. at 2707, 33 L.Ed.2d at 559. The same can be said here. The Legislature has not barred R. from seeking employment or being hired to a position involving direct contact with children. To that extent, no liberty interest is at stake.
Nor can we say that R. has any protectable property interest in any prospective employment opportunities.
To have a property interest in a benefit, a person clearly must have more than an abstract need or desire for it. He must have more than a unilateral expectation of it. He must, instead, have a legitimate claim of entitlement to it.
*453Id. at 577, 92 S.Ct. at 2709, 33 L.Ed.2d at 561.7 In Roth, the Court found that the employee did not have sufficient property interest to receive a hearing because neither his contract nor any statute or rule secured his interest in any reemployment. Similarly, here R. cites nothing that would indicate that he has a legitimate claim of entitlement to any job. Therefore, this concern does not relate to any interest entitled to due process protections.
We are also constrained to disregard R.’s concerns that information in an indicated report must be furnished in the event he seeks to adopt a child. As with persons seeking employment in a position involving direct contact with children, the Legislature requires that the DPW certify whether a prospective adoptive parent was named in an indicated report of child abuse during the proceeding one-year period.8 R. does not explain, nor do we perceive how a statute that operates in this way implicates an interest recognized under Pennsylvania law. In addition, when R.’s claim is measured by the federal standard articulated in Roth, neither a federal liberty, nor a federal property interest is implicated. No liberty interest is implicated because the Legislature has not foreclosed the possibility that a person named in an indicated report can seek to adopt a child. See Roth, 408 U.S. at 573-74, 92 S.Ct. at 2707, 33 L.Ed.2d at 559. No property interest *454is at stake because R. has no legitimate claim of entitlement to adopt a child; it is no more than an abstract desire on his part. See id. at 577, 92 S.Ct. at 2709, 33 L.Ed.2d at 561. Therefore, this concern does not relate to any interests entitled to the Fourteenth Amendment’s due process guarantees.
Lastly, we examine R.’s concern that his indicated report of child abuse is available to numerous persons and agencies. The implication is that R. lives under the cloud of a stigma that threatens his reputation. The United States Supreme Court has already held that reputation is not an interest which, standing alone, is sufficient to invoke the procedural protections of the Fourteenth Amendment’s due process clause. Paul v. Davis, 424 U.S. 693, 96 S.Ct. 1155, 47 L.Ed.2d 405 (1976). However, in Pennsylvania, reputation is an interest that is recognized and protected by our highest state law: our Constitution. Sections 1 and 11 of Article I make explicit reference to “reputation,” providing the basis for this Court to regard it as a fundamental interest which cannot be abridged without compliance with constitutional standards of due process and equal protection. Hatchard v. Westinghouse Broadcasting Co., 516 Pa. 184, 193, 532 A.2d 346, 350 (1987) (citing cases).
Having determined that R. has a protected interest that will be affected by his expungement hearings, we must assess the extent to which he will be deprived of that interest. Because we are dealing with R.’s reputation, our inquiry must necessarily focus on the extent to which the information contained in an indicated report is readily available and/or accessible. We are specifically concerned with the circumstances under which R.’s identity will be revealed.
We have already examined two such instances. The first would occur in the event he applies for a job involving direct contact with children. The second would occur in the event he sought to become an adoptive parent. In either case, the existence of an indicated report would be revealed solely to the prospective employer or adoption agency, whichever applies. In addition, the information would only be disclosed if *455the report was issued during the twelve months prior to the time R. submitted his application for a job or adoptive child.
Indicated reports of child abuse are also recorded in a confidential statewide registry. The identity of the perpetrators of such reports is revealed in a limited set of situations.
General Rule. — Reports specified in section 6399 (relating to confidentiality of reports) shall only be made available to:
(1) An authorized official of a child protective service in the course of official duties, multidisciplinary team members assigned to the case and duly authorized persons providing services pursuant to section 6370(a) (relating to services for protection of child at home or in custody).
(2) A physician examining or treating a child or the director or a person specifically designated in writing by the director of any hospital or other medical institution where a child is being treated when the physician or the director or the designee of the director suspects the child of being an abused child.
(3) A guardian ad litem for the child.
(4) An authorized official or agent of the department in accordance with department regulations or in accordance with the conduct of a performance audit as authorized by section 6343 (relating to investigating performance of child protective service).
(5) A court of competent jurisdiction pursuant to a court order.
(6) A standing committee of the General Assembly, as specified in section 6384 (relating to legislative oversight).
(7) The Attorney General.
(9) Law enforcement officials in the course of investigating cases of:
(i) Homicide, sexual abuse, sexual exploitation or serious bodily injury perpetrated by persons whether or not related to the victim.
*456(n) Child abuse perpetrated by persons who are not family members.
(iii) Repeated physical injury to a child under circumstances which indicate that the child’s health or welfare is harmed or threatened.
(10) Law enforcement officials who shall receive reports of abuse in which the initial review gives evidence that the abuse is homicide, sexual abuse, sexual exploitation or serious bodily injury perpetrated by persons whether or not related to the victim, or child abuse perpetrated by persons who are not family members. Reports referred to law enforcement officials shall be on forms provided by and according to regulations promulgated by the department.
(11) County commissioners, to whom the department shall forward specific files upon request, for review when investigating the competence of county children and youth employees.
23 Pa.C.S. § 6340(a). It is apparent from these legislatively imposed controls that R. is not being stigmatized in the eyes of the general public. To the contrary, his identity is disclosed to a small number of persons in a very narrow range of situations with the understanding that it will not be revealed to any unauthorized individuals. Therefore, any adverse effects on his reputation are very limited.
Next, we consider the risk of an erroneous deprivation of R.’s interest through the use of the procedures employed at his expungement hearing, and the probable value, if any, of additional safeguards. R. restricts his challenge to the fact that his daughter was permitted to testify in camera. He contends that this violated his constitutionally protected right to confront and cross-examine her because he was not able to see or hear her testify or to communicate with his attorney. However, we find little fault with the procedures used to elicit testimony from his daughter.
In making our assessment, we are mindful of the nature of the inquiry being conducted at an expungement hearing and *457the role that cross-examination plays in it. An expungement hearing is devoted to determining whether information in an indicated report is either inaccurate or is being maintained in a manner inconsistent with the Child Protective Services Act. 23 Pa.C.S. § 6341(c), (d). This factual determination will partly depend on the credibility and veracity of testimonial evidence. Cross-examination plays a crucial role in this regard because it enables the accused to expose testimonial weaknesses which would cause a fact finder to discount the weight of the testimony of an adverse witness. Goldberg v. Kelly, 397 U.S. 254, 270, 90 S.Ct. 1011, 25 L.Ed.2d 287, 300 (1970) (quoting Greene v. McElroy, 360 U.S. 474, 496-97, 79 S.Ct. 1400, 3 L.Ed.2d 1377, 1390 (1959)). However, cross-examination can take a variety of forms. The primary concern is that the accused be apprised of the evidence used to prove the government’s case so that he may have an opportunity to challenge it. Id.
Our review of the record discloses that R. was afforded these basic guarantees. When R.’s daughter testified in camera, she did so in the presence of R.’s attorney. After she finished testifying on direct examination, a transcript of her testimony was provided for R. and his attorney to review together in preparation for cross-examination. This procedure allowed R. to know precisely what evidence the government was using to prove its case, and gave R. an opportunity to challenge that evidence.
As for R.’s contention that he was denied an opportunity to communicate with his attorney, R. calls our attention to one point in the proceedings. The record shows that after the cross-examination of R.’s daughter was complete, R.’s attorney was refused a request to review his notes with his client. No reason is offered for this action, nor do we perceive of any. However, in view of the extent to which R. was otherwise able to communicate with his attorney, we conclude that this isolated incident had a very limited impact on the risk that he would be erroneously denied his request to expunge his record of the indicated report.
*458R.’s claim that he should have been able to see and hear his daughter as she testified is based on two cases in which the United States Supreme Court said that due process often requires confrontation and cross-examination of adverse witnesses. Goldberg v. Kelly, 397 U.S. 254, 269, 90 S.Ct. 1011, 1021, 25 L.Ed.2d 287, 300 (1970) (citing cases); Willner v. Committee on Character and Fitness, 373 U.S. 96, 103, 83 S.Ct. 1175, 1180, 10 L.Ed.2d 224, 229 (1963). However, neither of those two cases specify the manner in which a “confrontation” must occur. Indeed, by indicating that confrontation and cross-examination are not always required, they reaffirm the basic principle that due process calls for procedures tailored to meet the demands of the particular situation. Matthews, 424 U.S. at 334, 96 S.Ct. at 902, 47 L.Ed.2d at 33 (quoting Morrissey v. Brewer, 408 U.S. 471, 481, 92 S.Ct. 2593, 2600, 33 L.Ed.2d 484 (1972)).
The relevant inquiry, according to Matthews, is whether allowing R. to see and hear his daughter as she testified would have reduced the risk that he would suffer an erroneous deprivation of his reputational interest. The answer to this question must take into account the two ways in- which the procedure could be implemented. One option is to use a closed circuit television to permit the child to testify outside the presence of the accused. However, this would not offer safeguards any greater than those provided by the procedure employed here. The only material difference with closed circuit television is that a video camera operator would take the place of the stenographer. There is no reason to think that this would have an effect on what the child said or how credibly she said it. As a result, the factual determination would be no more reliable than it already is.
The second option would be for the child to testify in the presence of the accused. It is generally believed that a witness is less likely to lie when he must testify while facing the accused. E.g., Coy v. Iowa, 487 U.S. 1012, 1019, 108 S.Ct. 2798, 2802, 101 L.Ed.2d 857, 866 (1988). However, that is not necessarily the case when the witness is a child testifying that someone abused him or her. Such an experience could cause *459significant emotional distress in the child witness and actually disserves the truth-seeking process. Maryland v. Craig, 497 U.S. 836, 857, 110 S.Ct. 3157, 3170, 111 L.Ed.2d 666, 686 (1990) (citing Coy, 487 U.S. at 1032, 108 S.Ct. at 2808, 101 L.Ed.2d 857 (Blackmun, J., dissenting)). Thus, it is debatable whether the procedure employed here created a risk that R. would suffer an erroneous deprivation. This left the ultimate decision in the hands of the hearing examiner, who was in the best position to determine whether to act on an assertion by the guardian ad litem that the child was apprehensive about having to confront her father.
The last factor to consider is the government’s interest, including the function involved and the fiscal and administrative burdens that the additional or substitute procedural requirements will entail. The government has stated its interests in the Child Protective Services Law as follows:
Abused children are in urgent need of an effective child protective service to prevent them from suffering further injury and impairment. It is the purpose of this chapter to encourage more complete reporting of suspected child abuse and to establish in each county a child protective service capable of investigating such reports swiftly and competently, providing protection for children from further abuse and providing rehabilitative services for children and parents involved so as to ensure the well-being of the child and to preserve and stabilize family life wherever appropriate.
23 Pa.C.S. § 6302.
It is the government’s pursuit of this declared interest that creates the deprivation being complained of here. In pursuit of the “urgent need of an effective child protective service to prevent [the child] from suffering further injury and impairment,” id., the hearing examiner has the authority to respond to the assertion that a child will suffer from a face-to-face confrontation with the accused. After a hearing and a determination that a claim of abuse has a substantial basis, the DPW shares the information only with persons and agencies performing investigative and child protective functions. Consequently, our examination of the controls placed on the *460availability of this information9 discloses that the Legislature has circumscribed access to it to such an extent that no one other than those persons in a position to serve the government’s interest is authorized to learn of R.’s identity. See, 28 Pa.C.S. § 6340(a). Thus, the limited deprivation R. suffers is strictly designed to serve the state’s interest.
Thus, we are presented with a situation in which the government identifies a case of “indicated” abuse and makes this information available only to persons performing an investigatory or child protective function, when the accuracy of the information was determined at an administrative hearing where the perpetrator of the abuse had a meaningful opportunity to cross-examine the child, but where he was denied an. opportunity to communicate with his attorney at one point in the proceedings. On balance, the procedures that were utilized created a very limited risk that R. would suffer an erroneous deprivation. However, in view of the narrow range of situations in which R.’s identity is revealed and the governmental interest these few permissible disclosures are designed to serve, the deprivation itself was likewise very limited. Under the circumstances, we conclude that R. received all the process he was due under the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution.
Now we consider whether R. was denied due process guarantees provided by the Pennsylvania Constitution. R. cites Sections 1 and 11 of Article I as the source of these rights. Even though the term “due process” appears nowhere in those sections, due process rights are considered to emanate from them.10
First we examine Section 1. It provides that
[a]ll men are born equally free and independent, and have certain inherent and indefeasible rights, among which are *461those of enjoying and defending life and liberty, of acquiring, possessing and protecting property and reputation, and of pursuing their own happiness.
Pa. Const, art. I, § 1. This Court has never synthesized a procedure for assessing whether an interest protected by Article I, Section 1 has been deprived in violation of the provision’s due process guarantees. However, we have recognized how closely those guarantees resemble those provided by the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution.
In Wilcox v. Pennsylvania Mutual Life Ins. Co., 357 Pa. 581, 55 A.2d 521 (1947), we said that the inherent and indefeasible right to acquire, possess and protect property “amounts substantially to the provision contained in the 14th Amendment to the Federal Constitution, that no State shall ‘deprive any person ... of property, without due process of law.’ ” Id. at 590, 55 A.2d at 526. We reaffirmed this view in Best v. Zoning Bd. of Adjustment, 393 Pa. 106, 141 A.2d 606 (1958). After noting that “Section 1 of Article I of the Pennsylvania Constitution establishes the right of ‘acquiring, possessing and protecting property ...’”, we said that “[t]he requirements of this section are not distinguishable from those of Section 1 of the Fourteenth Amendment to the Federal Constitution — nor shall any State deprive any person ... of property, without due process of law.... ’” Id. at 110-11, 141 A.2d at 609 (footnotes omitted).11
Wilcox and Best required this Court to determine the limits of the Legislature’s power to affect property rights. *462That is why we focused on the similarities between Section 1 and the Fourteenth Amendment in the area of deprivations of property. However, this Court has noted that the “Declaration of Rights places reputation ‘in the same class with life, liberty and property.’” Hatchard v. Westinghouse Broadcasting Co., 516 Pa. 184, 194, 532 A.2d 346, 351 (1987) (quoting Meas v. Johnson, 185 Pa. 12, 19, 39 A. 562, 563 (1898)). Therefore, the due process guarantees that apply to deprivations of property under Section 1 apply with equal force to deprivations of reputation and Section l’s other protected interests. Moreover, those guarantees are identical to those which extend to interests protected by the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. In view of this, we adopt the Matthews methodology to assess due process claims brought under Section 1 of Article I of the Pennsylvania Constitution.
The first part of the Matthews analysis involves identifying the protected interest that is implicated and assessing the extent to which it is being deprived. When we analyzed R.’s federal claim, we had to consider whether Pennsylvania law conferred on R. a right that,was implicated by the concerns he raises. We concluded that R.’s interest in preserving his reputation was the sole interest recognized by state law at issue here. Since we have already performed the Matthews analysis to determine that R. suffered no Fourteenth Amendment violation, we hold that R. was not denied due process as guaranteed by Section 1 of Article I of the Pennsylvania Constitution.12
*463R. cites Article I, Section 11 as an additional source of due process rights under the Pennsylvania Constitution. However, R.’s expungement hearings fall beyond the scope of the proceedings to which Section 11 is addressed. Section 11 provides that
[a]ll courts shall be open; and every man for an injury done him in his lands, goods, person or reputation shall have remedy by due course of law, and right and justice administered without sale, denial or delay. Suits may be brought against the Commonwealth in such manner, in such courts and in such cases as the Legislature may by law direct.
Pa. Const, art. I, § 11. By its very terms, Section 11 speaks to the accessibility of the courts and the administration of justice in them. Since R.’s request to expunge his indicated report was denied as the result of an administrative hearing, not a judicial proceeding, R.’s claim that Section 11 was violated has no merit.
Accordingly, we affirm the Order of the Commonwealth Court.
LARSEN, J., did not participate in the decision of this case.
CAPPY, J., concurs in the result.
PAPADAKOS, J., files a concurring and dissenting opinion.
MONTEMURO, J., who was an appointed justice of the court at the time of argument, participated in the decision of this case in his capacity as a Senior Justice.
. An "indicated” report is one based on an administrative determination that there exists substantial evidence from medical evidence, the agency’s investigation, or an admission of the accused that the child in question had been abused. 23 Pa.C.S. § 6303. A report can also be filed as "founded,” in which case there has been a judicial determination that the child has been abused, or as "unfounded,” in which case there has been neither a judicial nor an administrative finding of abuse. Id.
. The Legislature conferred the power to find facts and render decisions as follows:
(c) Review of refusal of request. — If the secretary refuses the request [to amend, seal or expunge a report] or does not act within a reasonable time, but in no event later than 30 days after receipt of the request, the subject shall have the right to a hearing before the secretary or a designated agent of the secretary to determine whether the summary in the Statewide central register or the contents of any report filed pursuant to section 6313 should be amended, sealed or expunged on the grounds that it is inaccurate or that it is being maintained in a manner inconsistent with this chapter.
(d) Order. — The secretary or designated agent may make any appropriate order respecting the amendment or expungement of such records to make them accurate or consistent with the requirement of this chapter.
23 Pa.C.S. § 6341(c), (d).
. In all criminal prosecutions the accused hath a right to be heard by himself and his counsel, to demand the nature and cause of the accusation against him, to meet the witnesses face to face, to have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his favor, and, in prosecutions by indictment or information, a speedy public trial by an impartial jury of the vicinage; he cannot be compelled to give evidence against himself, nor can he be deprived of his life, liberty, or property, unless by the judgment of his peers or the law of the land....
. See, e.g., Cleveland Bd. of Education v. Loudermill, 470 U.S. 532, 105 S.Ct. 1487, 84 L.Ed.2d 494 (1985) (termination of employment); Parham v. J.R., 442 U.S. 584, 99 S.Ct. 2493, 61 L.Ed.2d 101 (1979) (confinement of child in mental hospital); Memphis Light, Gas & Water Div. v. Craft, 436 U.S. 1, 98 S.Ct. 1554, 56 L.Ed.2d 30 (1978) (termination of utility service); Ingraham v. Wright, 430 U.S. 651, 97 S.Ct. 1401, 51 L.Ed.2d 711 (1977) (corporal punishment of junior high school students); Goss v. Lopez, 419 U.S. 565, 95 S.Ct. 729, 42 L.Ed.2d *450725 (1975) (suspension of students from public school); Wolff v. McDonnell, 418 U.S. 539, 94 S.Ct. 2963, 41 L.Ed.2d 935 (1974) (forfeiture of prisoner's goodtime credits); Fuentes v. Shevin, 407 U.S. 67, 92 S.Ct. 1983, 32 L.Ed.2d 556 (1972) (repossession of property); Goldberg v. Kelly, 397 U.S. 254, 90 S.Ct. 1011, 25 L.Ed.2d 287 (1970) (termination of welfare benefits).
. See, e.g., Hudson v. Palmer, 468 U.S. 517, 104 S.Ct. 3194, 82 L.Ed.2d 393 (1984) (prison guard deliberately and maliciously destroys property during search of inmate’s cell).
. The relevant statutory provision reads as follows:
Information relating to prospective child-care personnel
(a) Applicability. — This section applies to all prospective employees of child-care services, prospective foster parents, prospective adoptive parents, prospective self-employed family day-care providers and other persons seeking to provide child-care services under contract with a child-care facility or program. This section does not apply to *452administrative or other support personnel unless their duties will involve direct contact with children.
(b) Information submitted by prospective employees. — Administrators of child-care services shall require applicants to submit with their applications the following information obtained within the preceding one-year period:
(2) A certification from the department as to whether the applicant is named in the central register as the perpetrator of a founded or indicated report of child abuse. An indicated report shall not be included until the department adopts regulations specifying the manner in which the investigation required by sections 6366 (relating to continuous availability to receive reports) through 6372 (relating to protecting well-being of children detained outside home) is to be conducted.
23 Pa.C.S. § 6344(a), (b)(2).
. See also Guthrie v. Borough of Wilkinsburg, 505 Pa. 249, 478 A.2d 1279 (1984) (“The mere theoretical effect on possible promotions or future employment prospects is too abstract to constitute a property interest.”).
. The relevant statutory provision reads as follows:
(d) Prospective adoptive or foster parents. — With regard to prospective adoptive or prospective foster parents, the following shall apply:
(1) In the course of causing an investigation to be made pursuant to section 2535(a) (relating to investigation), an agency or person designated by the court to conduct the investigation shall require prospective adoptive parents to submit the information set forth in subsection (b)(1) and (2) for review in accordance with this section.
(2) In the course of approving a prospective foster parent, a foster family care agency shall require prospective foster parents to submit the information set forth in subsection (b)(1) and (2) for review by the foster family care agency in accordance with this section.
23 Pa.C.S. § 6344(d).
. See pp. 149-150 supra.
. Section 9 of Article I is also recognized as guaranteeing due process to individuals. Lyness v. Commonwealth, State Bd. of Medicine, 529 Pa. 535, 541, 605 A.2d 1204, 1207 (1992) (citing Robert E. Woodside, Pennsylvania Constitutional Law 120-21 (1985)). As we have already indicated, its guarantees only apply to criminal proceedings.
. Our conclusion in Wilcox and Best is reflected in later cases. See Krenzelak v. Krenzelak, 503 Pa. 373, 382, 469 A.2d 987, 991 (1983) (citing with approval Wilcox); Rubin v. Bailey, 398 Pa. 271, 157 A.2d 882 (I960) (citing federal court's rejection of claim that the challenged statute violated federal due process to justify affirmance of trial court’s decision to lift preliminary injunction of statute therein challenged for violating due process under Section 1 of Article I of the Pennsylvania Constitution); Minnich v. Rivera, 509 Pa. 588, 590 n. 2, 506 A.2d 879, 881 n. 2 (1986) aff'd 483 U.S. 574, 107 S.Ct. 3001, 97 L.Ed.2d 473 (1987) (noting that the Court’s analysis of Fourteenth Amendment due process claim applies equally to due process concerns under Section 1 of Article I of the Pennsylvania Constitution).
. The absence of a federal due process violation will not always predetermine the disposition of a state due process claim. It does so in this case because reputation, the only interest at stake here, receives due process protections solely by virtue of its status as an interest recognized and protected by Pennsylvania law. Paul v. Davis, 424 U.S. at 710-11, 96 S.Ct. at 1165, 47 L.Ed.2d at 419. Thus, the weight that reputational interest carries in the Matthews analysis of the federal claim is strictly a reflection of the protections it enjoys under Pennsylvania law. As a result, the Matthews analysis would yield the same result irrespective of whether R.’s state or federal due process claim is being examined. That will not necessarily be the case if the interest being deprived is one that receives greater protections under our State Constitution than it does under the Federal Constitution. See Commonwealth v. Sell, 504 Pa. 46, 63-64, 470 A.2d 457, 467 (1983) (reaffirming *463the view that the Pennsylvania Constitution is an independent source of rights, and that it can provide greater protections than those guaranteed by the Federal Constitution).

=== CASE 9736873 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:08:49.41582+00 ===

PAPADAKOS, Justice,
concurring and dissenting.
I agree with the majority that the statute under review clearly entrusts the factfinding function to the Secretary or his designee, in this case, the Director of the Office of Hearings and Appeals, and not to the individual hearing examiner. Our decision in Peak v. Com., Unemployment Compensation Board, 509 Pa. 267, 501 A.2d 1383 (1985), is controlling and *464compels the conclusion that such a statutory review process is permissible and that it satisfies due process.
However, Appellant complains that he was denied his constitutional right to due process when, during his administrative hearing, he was not permitted to confront his accuser. I must agree with his position and I, therefore, dissent.
During Appellant’s expungement hearing, the testimony of his daughter, the alleged sexual abuse victim, was taken in camera over his objection that he was being denied his right of confrontation and effective cross-examination. No claim was ever made that his daughter would be unable to testify when faced by Appellant, and no reason was given for denying Appellant’s request. Furthermore, the guardian ad litem appointed to represent the child witness acknowledged that, although the daughter was apprehensive, she understood that she would be facing Appellant, and she was prepared to do so. After Appellant’s objection was overruled, a continuance was requested so that an appeal could be taken from this determination. This request was similarly denied.
Appellant was given the opportunity to review the transcript of the daughter’s direct testimony prior to cross-examination. However, during cross-examination, Appellant’s attorney requested an opportunity to review the notes of testimony with Appellant. This request was also denied by the hearing examiner.
Appellant contends that the right to confrontation is a due process right guaranteed by the Pennsylvania Constitution which extends to administrative as well as criminal proceedings.
This Court has held that the right of confrontation guaranteed to criminal defendants by Article I, § 9, of the Pennsylvania Constitution mandates that testimony in criminal proceedings be given face-to-face. Commonwealth v. Ludwig, 527 Pa. 472, 594 A.2d 281 (1991); Commonwealth v. Lohman, 527 Pa. 492, 594 A.2d 291 (1991).
In Ludwig, a sexual abuse case, the accuser, her foster mother, and the video camera operator were in a room sepa*465rate from the court room. The judge, prosecutor, defense counsel, defendant, and jury were all in the court room and linked to the child by microphone and video monitor. The child could not see people in the court room, but could hear them and respond to their questions.
In Lohman, also a case involving sexual abuse, the accusers gave their testimony in chambers in the presence of the judge, prosecutor, defense counsel, and camera operator. The jury was in the court room, and the defendant, without the jury’s knowledge, was in a separate room, able to communicate with his counsel over a direct two-way telephone line.
This court found that the procedures employed by the trial courts in Ludwig and Lohman violated the defendants’ guaranteed constitutional right to “face to face” confrontation. The question left for us to determine is whether this basic constitutional guarantee is mandated in administrative cases such as this, where the issue also involves an allegation of sexual abuse and where the procedures employed are more obtrusive to the factfinding process than those used in Ludwig and Lohman.
There should be little doubt that the basic principles of due process are fully applicable to hearings before administrative tribunals. Soja v. Pennsylvania State Police, 500 Pa. 188, 455 A.2d 613 (1982); Wiley v. Woods, 393 Pa. 341, 141 A.2d 844 (1958). Indeed, in almost every setting where important decisions turn on questions of fact, due process requires an opportunity to confront and to cross-examine adverse witnesses. Soja.
The United States Supreme Court has often elaborated on this principle.
Certain principles have remained relatively immutable in our jurisprudence. One of these is that where governmental action seriously injures an individual, and the reasonableness of the action depends on fact findings, the evidence used to prove the Government’s case must be disclosed to the individual so that he has opportunity to show that it is untrue. While this is important in the case of documentary *466evidence, it is even more important where the evidence consists of the testimony of individuals whose memory might be faulty or who, in fact, might be perjurers or persons motivated by malice, vindictiveness, intolerance, prejudice, or jealousy. We have formalized these protections in the requirements of confrontation and cross-examination. They have ancient roots. They find expression in the Sixth Amendment.... This Court has been zealous to protect these rights from erosion. It has spoken out not only in criminal cases, ... but also in all types of cases where administrative ... actions were under scrutiny. (Emphasis added).
Goldberg v. Kelly, 397 U.S. 254, 269, 90 S.Ct. 1011, 1021, 25 L.Ed.2d 287, 300 (1970).
Likewise, we have held that adjudicatory action cannot be validly taken by any tribunal, whether judicial or administrative, except upon a hearing wherein each party has the opportunity to know of the claims of his opponent, to hear the evidence introduced against him, to cross-examine witnesses, to introduce evidence on his own behalf, and to make argument. Callahan v. Pennsylvania State Police, 494 Pa. 461, 431 A.2d 946 (1981).
The primary interest secured by the confrontation clause is the right to cross-examination because it is through cross-examination that the credibility and truthfulness of a witness’ testimony are tested.
Another critical purpose of cross-examination is to draw out discrediting demeanor which may be viewed by the factfinder and used by the factfinder in his assessment of the credibility of the witness. For this reason the cross-examiner is permitted not only to delve into the witness’ direct testimony to test the witness’ perceptions and memory, but also to impeach and discredit the witness. This may be accomplished by revealing possible biases, prejudices, or other ulterior motives as they might relate directly to issues or personalities in the case.
*467When the right to cross-examination is hindered, as in the present case, the entire fact finding process becomes confused and its reliability is drawn into question. Here, Appellant’s counsel was prohibited from contacting Appellant during cross-examination. When Appellant’s counsel had completed as much cross-examination as was possible, he noted to the hearing examiner that key items were divulged during cross-examination which were never discussed during direct examination. Based on this, counsel requested an opportunity to print a set of testimony notes to be reviewed with Appellant. Counsel’s request was denied. This frustrated the cross-examination process since Appellant had no opportunity to give input to counsel regarding the witness’ testimony.
More importantly, Appellant was denied the ability to see the witness testify, hear the testimony against him, or adequately communicate with his counsel regarding that testimony.
What we said in Ludwig is particularly relevant in cases like this. “We are cognizant of society’s interest in protecting victims of sexual abuse. However, that interest cannot be preeminent over the accused’s constitutional right to confront the witnesses against him face to face.” 527 Pa. at 480, 594 A.2d at 285.
I believe that the nature of this case and its similarity to Ludwig and Lohman requires similar treatment. The unjustifiable limitations placed upon Appellant would never have been permitted in a criminal proceeding and cannot be permitted in an administrative hearing, the outcome of which can have serious repercussions for Appellant. The indicated report of child abuse carries with it a finding of fact that Appellant committed “serious physical or mental injury” on his daughter. This report, if not expunged, is evidence which can be released to others who are investigating alleged instances of child abuse allegedly committed by Appellant, such as other child protective services, the Attorney General, courts, law enforcement officers and the other specified individuals listed at 23 Pa.C.S. § 6340. Since this information can *468be used in the course of criminal investigations (23 Pa.C.S. §§ 6340(a)(9), (10),1 we would be remiss if we did not insure that the findings of child abuse are as reliable as possible, as when an accused confronts his accuser and participates in the cross-examination. Neither of these basic truth-testing devices were available to Appellant and require a reversal.
The scholarly attempt of the majority opinion to deny Appellant a basic human right, a level playing field, obfuscates the simple fact that Appellant’s reputation and livelihood are placed in great jeopardy by the permanent recording of an Indicated Report of Abuse. Such a report, available to so many public agencies, in effect convicts the Appellant and sentences him to a denial of employment opportunities in areas where children are concerned.
Accordingly, I dissent and would reverse the order of the Commonwealth Court and remand for a new hearing.
. 23 Pa.C.S. § 6340(a) provides in pertinent part:
(a) General rule — Reports ... shall only be made available to:
(9) Law enforcement officials in the course of investigating cases of:
(i) Homicide, sexual abuse, sexual exploitation or serious bodily injury perpetrated by persons whether or not related to the victim.
(ii) Child abuse perpetrated by persons who are not family members.
(iii) Repeated physical injury to a child under circumstances which indicated that the child’s health or welfare is harmed or threatened. (10) Law enforcement officials who shall receive reports of abuse in which the initial review gives evidence that the abuse is homicide, sexual abuse, sexual exploitation or serious bodily injury perpetrated by persons whether or not related to the victim, or child abuse perpetrated by persons who are not family members.

=== CASE 9736853 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:08:27.67573+00 ===

REGAN, J.
Defendant was found guilty by a jury of a violation of section 23101 of the Vehicle Code (felony drunk driving) and of a violation of section 23123 of the Vehicle Code (keeping open container with alcoholic beverage in vehicle on a highway). He appeals from the judgment of conviction.
Defendant, while driving his Mercury automobile upon a public highway, veered across the center line and collided with a Falcon automobile driven by Lieutenant Colonel James Willett causing injuries to be suffered by Colonel Willett and his wife, who was a passenger in the Willett automobile. The evidence at the trial established that defendant was intoxicated ; his speech was incoherent and unintelligible, and a blood sample taken from defendant showed a .23 percent alcohol content. A partially filled bottle containing bourbon whiskey was lying on the right front floor board of defendant’s auto with the bottle cap off. Defendant admitted two prior felony convictions.
Defendant contends the punishment and sentence imposed violates section 654 of the Penal Code, which section provides in pertinent part as follows: “An act or omission which is made punishable in different ways by different provisions of this Code may be punished under either of such provisions, but in no ease can it be punished under more than one . . . .”
Defendant contends that he is being improperly punished *790for two offenses (i.e., drunken driving with bodily injury and possession of an open bottle of liquor in a car) that arose from his driving a motor vehicle upon a public road. Defendant argues that he was charged with multiple offenses arising from a single “act.” The act consisted of driving a motor vehicle upon a public road, and all of the offenses of which he was charged stemmed from and were caused by the single act.1
In In re Hayes, filed March 17, 1969, 70 Cal.2d 604 [75 Cal.Rptr. 790, 451 P.2d 430], the Supreme Court found that the imposition of sentences for violations of Vehicle Code section 14601 (driving a motor vehicle with knowledge of a suspended license) and Vehicle Code section 23102 (driving while under the influence of intoxicating liquor), arising from a single act of driving, did not violate the proscription against multiple punishment contained in section 654. The court notes (at p. 607) : “We cannot overlook the crucial element: section 654 refers not to any physical act or omission which might perchance be common to all of a defendant’s violations, but to a defendant’s criminal acts or omissions. (See, e.g., In re Johnson (1966) 65 Cal.2d 393, 395 [54 Cal. Rptr. 873, 420 P.2d 393]; People v. Quinn (1964) 61 Cal.2d 551, 555 [39 Cal.Rptr. 393, 393 P.2d 705]; People v. Brown (1958) supra, 49 Cal.2d 577, 590 [320 P.2d 5]; People v. Branch, supra, 119 Cal.App.2d at p. 496 [260 P.2d 27].) Indeed, section 654 itself makes this distinction evident, since it refers to any act or omission ‘made punishable’ by different statutes. The netural act of driving, like the mere act of possessing in the foregoing cases, when viewed in a vacuum, is not ‘made punishable’ by any statute.
“The proper approach, therefore, is to isolate the various criminal acts involved, and then to examine only those acts for identity. In the instant case the two criminal acts are (1) driving with a suspended license and (2) driving while intoxicated ; they are in no sense identical or equivalent. Petitioner is not being punished twice—because he cannot be punished at all—for the 1 act of driving. ’ He is being penalized once for his act of driving with an invalid license and one for his independent act of driving while intoxicated. ’ ’
The court concluded with the following (at p. 611):
“In summation, then, section 654 of the Penal Code pro*791scribes multiple punishment for a single ‘act or omission which is made punishable’ by different statutes, i.e., a single criminal act or omission. Since the mere act of driving is made punishable by no statute, it is not the type of act or omission referred to in section 654. The acts ‘made punishable’ which this petitioner committed were (1) driving with a suspended license and (2) driving while intoxicated, two separate and distinct criminal acts; that they were committed simultaneously and that they share in common the neutral noncriminal act of driving does not render petitioner’s punishment for both crimes in conflict with Penal Code section 654.”
In the case before us the acts made punishable which defendant committed, i.e., felony drunk driving and driving with an open container of alcoholic beverage, are two separate and distinct criminal acts. Defendant’s punishment for both crimes does not conflict with Penal Code section 654.
Defendant next contends that the nonconsensual withdrawal of a blood sample from his person deprived him of certain statutory rights, and also of his constitutional rights and, accordingly, the results of the blood-alcohol test should not have been received in evidence. The blood sample was taken from defendant by Dr. Carl Romans at the Placer County Hospital. Dr. Romans stated that defendant was fully conscious and in possession of his mental faculties at the time of the blood-alcohol test and that defendant did not object to the removal of the blood sample from his arm. Defendant testified the taking of the blood sample was over his objection. He argues that when he objected, section 13353 of the Vehicle Code creating a statutory penalty for refusal to submit to the blood sample came into play and he agreed to accept this penalty (suspension of his driver’s license) and thus he could not be subjected to the blood test. Consequently, its admission into evidence was error.
Assuming that defendant did object as he so testified, no force or violence was used. The doctor, on voir dire, stated that defendant did not object to the test, which was administered in a medically acceptable manner. Thus, an attempt to interject a Rochin-type situation must fail. (See Schmerber v. State of California (1966) 384 U.S. 757 [16 L.Ed.2d 908, 86 S.Ct. 1826]; Breithaupt v. Abram (1957) 352 U.S. 432 [1 L.Ed.2d 448, 77 S.Ct. 408]; People v. Sudduth (1966) 65 Cal.2d 543 [55 Cal.Rptr. 393, 421 P.2d 401].)
This court considered an almost identical situation in Peo*792ple v. Fite (1968) 267 Cal.App.2d 685 [73 Cal.Rptr. 666]. In Fite the defendant contended that the legislative intent behind section 13353 precluded the taking and introduction of a chemical test taken over an arrestee’s objections. The court rejected this argument and held (at p. 690) that: “section 13353 complements rather than supersedes section 23101, and that the enactment of the implied consent law in no way affected the admissibility of blood alcohol tests under established case law.” (See also, People v. Hanggi (1968) 265 Cal.App.2d Supp. 969 [70 Cal.Rptr. 540].) And on page 691 this court states: “Nowhere do we find any legislative indication that by the enactment of the implied consent law, the Legislature thereby intended to preclude the taking of blood samples as an incident to a lawful arrest over a person’s refusal in the absence of force or violence. ’ ’
Finally defendant contends the trial court’s instructions were erroneous. In order to prove felony drunk driving in violation of section 23101, the state has the burden of establishing beyond a reasonable doubt the following elements:
(1) That the defendant drove a vehicle on a public highway;
(2) That he was under the influence of intoxicating liquor;
(3) That he did some act forbidden by law or neglected a duty imposed by law in driving the vehicle; and
(4) That such act or neglect proximately caused bodily injury to a person other than himself.
As to element (3), the People here relied upon section 21650 of the Vehicle Code, which, in general, provides that on all highways a vehicle shall be driven upon the right half of the roadway. Defendant contends that prejudicial error was committed by giving an ambiguous instruction on the doctrine of “imminent peril” as it relates to the third element. The basis of defendant’s argument is that the failure to properly instruct on the doctrine constituted a failure to instruct on an essential element of his defense. (See People v. Clark (1962) 202 Cal.App.2d 513 [20 Cal.Rptr. 803]; see also, Jolley v. Clemens (1938) 28 Cal.App.2d 55, 67-68 [82 P.2d 51].) Defendant is relying upon his own testimony that Mrs. Willett was driving, that she backed the ear out across the road, and that the car then pulled into the road, traveling in the opposite direction from defendant. In order to avoid the accident the defendant cut the wheel to the left and hit the brakes.
In Clark, supra, the court notes (at p. 517) that a defendant is entitled to instructions on his theory of the ease as *793disclosed by the evidence, no matter how weak or incredible such evidence may be.
Here, however, the record discloses no attempt by counsel to have the jury instructed on “imminent peril.”  It is the duty of the trial court to instruct on the general principles of law which are necessary for the jury’s understanding of the ease, whether such instructions are requested or not. In the absence of a request, however, he need not instruct on specific points or special theories that may fit the facts of the case. (People v. Sutton (1964) 231 Cal.App.2d 511, 515-516 [41 Cal.Rptr. 912]; People v. Bowens (1964) 229 Cal. App.2d 590, 594-595 [40 Cal.Rptr. 435]; People v. Jones (1964) 225 Cal.App.2d 434, 437-438 [37 Cal.Rptr. 406].)  By his failure to request additional instructions or any clarification thereof, he waived his right to complain of any such omission on appeal. (People v. Partin (1967) 254 Cal. App.2d 89, 98 [62 Cal.Rptr. 59]; People v. Robinson (1960) 180 Cal.App.2d 745, 752 [4 Cal.Rptr. 679].)
Furthermore, the instruction given by the court adequately covers defendant’s theory of the accident. The jury did not believe defendant’s testimony and properly so in view of defendant's condition, the physical evidence left by the Willetts’ ear, and the fact that defendant was impeached by his admission of two prior felonies. Thus, even assuming that a specific instruction should have been given on imminent peril, the evidence of guilt is overwhelming, and therefore such an alleged error would not have been prejudicial to defendant. (See People v. Watson (1956) 46 Cal.2d 818 [299 P.2d 243].)
The judgment is affirmed.
Bray, J.,* concurred.
Defendant cites in support of Ms claim of error the holding in In re Hayes (1968) (Cal.) 69 Cal.Rptr. 310, 442 P.2d 366, wherein the court construed section 654, Penal Code. However, a rehearing was granted and the court, on March 17, 1969, issued a new and changed opinion.
Retired Presiding Justice of the Court of Appeal sitting under assignment by the Chairman of the Judicial Council.

=== CASE 9736854 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:08:27.68038+00 ===

PIERCE, P. J.
I dissent. An examination of the record convinces me there was a single continuous chain of circumstances and that Wren had a single intent and objective—to get drunk and drive a car in that condition.
On the afternoon of December 31, 1967, Wren was at the Auburn home of his wife’s brother. The men watched two football games on T.V. Between games they loaded the brother-in-law’s pickup with furniture which was to be taken to the home of his father-in-law near Lincoln, where Wren and his wife were staying. Wren and his brother-in-law each had one *794mixed drink during the second game. After the game Wren, accompanied by his wife, drove the pickup to the father-in-law’s home. On the way they stopped and bought a fifth of whisky. This bottle was opened when they reached that home. Wren and his brother-in-law, who had arrived in his own car, unloaded the furniture and each had one more mixed drink. They then drove into Lincoln in Wren’s car, stopping for gas and oil and then at a grocery store where defendant bought the fifth of whisky subsequently found in his vehicle. They returned to the father-in-law’s house, stopping en route at a service station where Wren, his brother-in-law, the station’s owner, and a mutual friend each had a drink from the previously unopened bottle. The bottle was placed in the glove compartment on the ride back to the house where it was used for another round of mixed drinks. Wren and the brother-in-law then left in Wren’s ear, taking the bottle with them. Before driving off Wren stood beside the vehicle drinking from the bottle. There is a conflict in Wren’s testimony as to how much was consumed. He stated and repeated that he “killed” the bottle and that he drank until the bottle was ‘ ‘ empty. ’ ’ But on the same page of the transcript he testified (by indicating with his fingers) that 3 inches of liquor remained. The bottle with its top off was then placed on the floor of the car and the two men drove off. (When the officer discovered it at the time of the arrest, it was found there with an unspecified quantity of liquor remaining.) Wren admitted he had become intoxicated. Other evidence indicates he was very intoxicated. The brother-in-law was not before the court. The accident happened shortly after leaving the house.
It is not unlawful to get intoxicated. But it becomes so the instant one gets into and operates a moving motor vehicle and intoxication is the first and vitally important element of the crime of felony drunk driving.
I do not think that In re Hayes (1969) 70 Cal.2d 604 [75 Cal.Rptr. 790, 451 P.2d 430], is applicable to this case. At the outset (on p. 605) the opinion states: “Section 654 provides that ‘An act or omission which is made punishable in different ways by different provisions of this code may be punished under either of such provisions, but in no case can it be punished under more than one. . . .’ The interdiction is not limited to the provisions of the Penal Code but embraces penal provisions in other codes as well, including those found in the Vehicle Code. (Neal v. State of California (1960) 55 Cal.2d 11, 18 fn. 1 [9 Cal.Rptr. 607, 357 P.2d 839]. . . .
*795“The key to application of section 654 is the phrase ‘act or omission’: a defendant may be punished only once for each distinct ‘act or omission’ committed. There have been numerous attempts in the cases to define a single ‘act’ with varying degrees of clarity. Section 654 has been held to apply, for example, where the multiple violations are ‘necessarily included offenses’ [citation] and where there is a single ‘intent and objective’ underlying a course of criminal conduct (Neal v. State of California (1960) supra, 55 Cal.2d 11) but not where there are multiple victims, (id.). Most of the eases construing section 654 can be resolved by application of one or the other of these theories. [Citations.] ...”
Footnote 1 (on p. 606 of 70 Cal.2d) of the Hayes decision says: “Our analysis herein is in no way intended to preclude application of the above tests where appropriate, any more than those tests themselves are mutually exclusive. It is only because we find all of the foregoing formulae inapplicable that we resort to the present approach. If under any of the enunciated tests the proscription of section 654 applies, a contrary result under another test is irrelevant.” (Italics ours.)
There is no similarity whatever between the facts here and the Hayes facts. Here, although defendant had had three mixed drinks earlier, the fifth of whisky later found in the car and which had been bought for the purpose was the source of Wren’s intoxication. That intoxication plus the driving caused the ultimate result—a felonious accident. In Hayes the suspended license had had nothing whatever to do with the drunken driving.
I can see no reason why the “single intent and objective” test of Neal v. State of California, 55 Cal.2d 11 [9 Cal.Rptr. 607, 357 P.2d 839], cannot properly be applied here. Of course, the getting intoxicated before and during the drive and the operation of the vehicle were not a single physical act. “Few if any crimes, however, are the result of a single physical act. ‘ Section 654 has been applied not only where there was but one ‘act’ in the ordinary sense . . . but also where a course of conduct violated more than one statute and the problem was whether it comprised a divisible transaction which could be punished under more than one statute within the meaning of section 654.’ (People v. Brown, supra [49 Cal.2d 577 (320 P.2d 5)] 591).” (Neal v. State of California, supra, 19.) Neal seems to spell out the test rather clearly. Divisibility depends upon the intent and objective of the actor. “If all of the offenses were incident to one objective, *796the defendant may be punished for any one of such offenses but not more than one.” (Id., p. 19.) Illustrative cases are cited: People v. Logan (1953) 41 Cal.2d 279, 290 [260 P.2d 20] (where defendant committed a robbery after first knocking out the victim with a baseball bat); People v. Greer (1947) 30 Cal.2d 589, 600 [184 P.2d 512] (rape and lewd and lascivious conduct arising out of one act of sexual intercourse). The Neal opinion illustrates the distinction by citing People v. Slobodion (1948) 31 Cal.2d 555, 561-563 [191 P.2d 1] (a sexual perversion accomplished as an act separate and distinct from and not incidental to lewd and lascivious conduct) . The facts of Neal, supra, are also apt. There arson by applying and lighting gasoline was the means selected to murder two occupants of a home. Cases and instances could be multiplied. In People v. Manago (1964) 230 Cal.App.2d 645 [41 Cal.Rptr. 260], defendant had possession of a razor as a weapon to use in the event of apprehension while he committed a burglary. This is to be contrasted (although I find difficulty in accepting the sufficiency of the severability) in People v. Hudgins (1965) 236 Cal.App.2d 578 [46 Cal.Rptr. 199] (hear. den.) where defendant went berserk armed with a pistol and shot a man he believed was having an affair with his wife. There the court upheld both second degree murder and violation of the dangerous weapons control law. It said on page 587 that it would have upheld a double punishment contention “if the two offenses were committed by one act or in a series of acts having but a single purpose, but such was not the case. ’ ’ It found the toting of the gun and the act of using it severable. (The facts stated in the opinion in People v. Hudgins, supra, do not make clear how long defendant had been carrying the gun or the circumstances under which it was being carried.)1
Returning to our case, it is, of course, true that if Wren had been carrying an open bottle of liquor around in his car for some time, he could have been punished for the Vehicle Code section 23123 violation, and also, if he used it later as a *797means of getting drunk, for drunken driving. The two acts would have been divisible.
It is, I suppose, arguable that when Wren and his brother-in-law took the already opened whisky bottle out of the car and into the father-in-law’s home where a round of drinks were served therefrom that that completed one criminal violation of Vehicle Code section 23123 and that commencement of the subsequent journey was a new adventure. To me that would be a strained interpretation. (See fn. 1.) Also, under the prosecution’s case, it was not the act for which Wren was tried.
The rationalization of the “course of conduct with a single intent and objective’’ rule interpreting section 654 is obvious. It is to prevent overly zealous prosecutors from “loading’’ counts into an accusatory pleading when the common sense of a given situation shows (in capital letters) that defendant had but one criminal act in mind—an act which it is possible to pinpoint (and, of course, one where there was but one victim). I am confident the court in Hayes did not intend to state a rule that in every case where a noncriminal act (e.g., the driving of an automobile) coincides with the simultaneous accomplishment of two separately punishable criminal acts and the commission of one such act is the means of effecting the other, and where the single intent and objective test can therefore be applied—as it has been applied since Neal in many opinions—such test must be rejected and double punishment permitted. What the court did hold was that when two simultaneous hut unrelated criminal acts have in common a noneriminal act (and purpose), they may be separately punished. If it meant any greater change of established law, then it has indeed wreaked havoc to give enthusiastic prosecutors unbridled powers to pad accusatory pleadings as constituent-conscious Legislatures continue to add new special penal statutes to describe already proscribed conduct. My confidence in the limitations of Mayes remains unshaken notwithstanding my two learned brothers disagree with me.
Appellant’s petition for a hearing by the Supreme Court was denied June 11, 1969. Traynor, C. J., and Peters, J., were of the opinion that the petition should be granted.
It must be admitted that some courts have been more easily satisfied than others as to when severability or divisibility of purpose exists. Since the purpose and end of the statute (§ 654) is effectually to soften a criminal penalty, I would shun a too narrow finding of facts to break the "indivisible transaction’ ’ chain. (See Pen. Code, § 4; Walsh v. Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control (1963) 59 Cal.2d 757, 764-765 [31 Cal.Rptr. 297, 382 P.2d 337]; People v. Fair (1967) 254 Cal.App.2d 890, 892-893 [62 Cal.Rptr. 632]; People v. Wilkinson (1967) 248 Cal.App.2d Supp. 906, 909 [56 Cal.Rptr. 261].)

=== CASE 2207668 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:22.153095+00 ===

183 Mich. App. 216 (1989)
454 N.W.2d 130
PEOPLE
v.
POUNCEY
Docket No. 106520.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided December 13, 1989.
Frank J. Kelley, Attorney General, Louis J. Caruso, Solicitor General, John D. O'Hair, Prosecuting Attorney, Timothy A. Baughman, Chief of Research, and Olga Agnello, Assistant Prosecuting Attorney, for the people.
Sean M. Taylor, for defendant.
Before: MacKENZIE, P.J., and MARILYN KELLY and T.M. BURNS,[*] JJ.
Limited leave to appeal granted, 435 Mich ___.
PER CURIAM.
The people charged defendant with first-degree murder. MCL 750.316; MSA 28.548. Following trial, a jury convicted him of second-degree murder and of possession of a firearm during the commission of a felony. MCL 750.317; MSA 28.549, MCL 750.227b; MSA 28.424(2). The trial judge sentenced him to ten to fifteen years for the murder conviction and two years for the felony-firearm. Defendant appeals as of right. We reverse and remand for a new trial.
This case arises from a shooting incident which occurred on May 4, 1987, at approximately 11:00 A.M. The day before the incident, defendant caught Derrick Bland in the act of stealing his car. The next day another car, belonging to defendant's friend, Gerald White, was stolen. Defendant, White, and Eric Johnston checked with the police and with the person who had sold the car to White. They were unable to locate it.
They then went to Bland's house. According to *218 defendant, they spoke to Bland's brother, Zachary. He told them Bland was not there. They came back a short time later and found Bland home. White asked Bland about the car, and he denied taking it. Defendant showed him a monkey wrench they had found and asked if it was his. Bland said it was not.
They left again and went to another house where White intended to get money. As White left the house, Bland, Zachary, and Steve Powers pulled up. There was an argument about the missing car. White went back into the house. Powers came toward defendant with his hands raised, threatening to beat him up. Defendant ran into the house, grabbed a shotgun and reemerged. He said he wanted to scare them off. Johnston and Powers were still arguing. Defendant fired a shot. He claimed he intended to hit the ground. Instead, he hit Powers in the abdomen and killed him.
Defendant contends that the trial court erred when it refused to give an instruction on voluntary manslaughter. The trial judge instructed the jury on first- and second-degree murder. She instructed also on involuntary manslaughter which is death from a firearm intentionally aimed without malice, and careless, reckless discharge of a firearm resulting in death.
Voluntary manslaughter is a cognate lesser included offense of murder. An instruction must be given on it when requested and supported by the evidence. People v King, 98 Mich. App. 146; 296 NW2d 211 (1980). Failure to give the requested instruction, where the evidence supports it, is error. People v Beach, 429 Mich. 450; 418 NW2d 861 (1988).
Murder may be reduced to voluntary manslaughter where there is such provocation that an ordinary person would kill in the heat of passion *219 without time for reason to resume control. People v Younger, 380 Mich. 678, 681; 158 NW2d 493 (1968). Defendant may still be found to have the intent to kill or an intent to do serious bodily harm. People v Townes, 391 Mich. 578, 589; 218 NW2d 136 (1974).
In this case, there was evidence of provocation and passion. Several witnesses testified that defendant and Powers had been arguing and that Powers wanted to fight. The evidence was sufficient to support a conviction of voluntary manslaughter. The instruction should have been given.
Moreover, the failure to give the instruction was not harmless error. Defendant was originally charged with first-degree murder. The jurors convicted him of second-degree murder. Thus, they must have found there was no premeditation or deliberation. They were left with a choice between second-degree murder and involuntary manslaughter. Involuntary manslaughter is an unintentional killing; there must be no intent to cause death or serious bodily harm. Townes, 141. Hence, the jurors could have concluded that defendant's acts were intentional but mitigated. Under the instructions given, they were compelled to convict of second-degree murder, because there was no other choice which included an intent to kill or to harm.
Although we reverse based on the previous issue, we briefly address defendant's remaining issues for the benefit of the parties on retrial.
Defendant argues that the court erred by admitting evidence that, after Powers had been shot, White stomped on his head. Defense counsel moved to suppress this evidence, claiming that it was more prejudicial than probative. The court denied the motion, concluding that the evidence was part of the res gestae of the offense.
We do not believe that the stomping was part of *220 the res gestae. It was not necessary to reveal it in order to give the killing its proper effect. People v Kayne, 268 Mich. 186, 191-192; 255 NW2d 758 (1934). It may have been slightly probative of defendant's intent. However, it occurred after the shooting and was committed by someone else. There is no evidence that defendant told White to stomp on Powers. On the other hand, evidence of such malice was extremely prejudicial to defendant. We conclude that the probative value was outweighed by the prejudicial effect. MRE 403. The court abused its discretion in admitting the evidence. People v Watkins, 176 Mich. App. 428, 430; 440 NW2d 36 (1989).
Finally, we conclude that the court did not err in excluding evidence of Powers' armed robbery conviction when offered to prove he was the aggressor. MRE 404(b); People v Nichols, 125 Mich. App. 216, 218-221; 335 NW2d 665 (1983).
Reversed.
NOTES
[*]  Former Court of Appeals judge, sitting on the Court of Appeals by assignment.

=== CASE 2207674 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:22.223907+00 ===

454 N.W.2d 651 (1990)
FARMERS STATE BANK OF RUSSELL, Respondent,
v.
WESTERN NATIONAL MUTUAL INSURANCE COMPANY, Appellant.
No. C9-89-1787.
Court of Appeals of Minnesota.
May 1, 1990.
Leland Bush, Tyler, for respondent.
Robert L. Gjorvad, Runchey, Louwagie & Wellman, Marshall, for appellant.
Considered and decided by CRIPPEN, P.J., and GARDEBRING and SCHULTZ, JJ.
OPINION
HAROLD W. SCHULTZ, Acting Judge.[*]
Appellant Western National Mutual Insurance Company challenges a judgment obligating it to reimburse Farmers State Bank as the loss payee on an insurance policy. The trial court found that an insurer is entitled to rescind the policy coverage as to the insured but is obligated to continue *652 coverage for the loss payee who is innocent of any misrepresentations.
FACTS
LeRoy Steenhoven repairs and resells vehicles. His nephew, Jeff Steenhoven, offered to purchase a repaired 1986 Ford Ranger pickup prior to commencing his duties with the Air Force in Alaska. At the time he made this offer, Jeff was residing with LeRoy.
On October 15, 1987, LeRoy and Jeff went to Farmers State Bank where Jeff obtained a loan to purchase the pickup. Jeff talked to an insurance agent in the bank but rejected the insurance quotes as too high. The Steenhovens promised to obtain insurance coverage for the pickup that day. They went to Western National Insurance where LeRoy requested that the pickup be added as a covered vehicle to his existing policy. It is undisputed that he did not inform the agent that Jeff was the title owner of the pickup.
The pickup was destroyed in an accident on October 17, 1987. LeRoy filed a claim with Western National. During the investigation, Western National discovered that LeRoy was not the title owner of the pickup and rescinded its insurance policy on the basis that LeRoy's misrepresentations were made with the intent to defraud or substantially increased the insurer's risk of loss.
Farmers State Bank brought suit for payment pursuant to its status as loss payee on the insurance contract. After trial to the court, judgment was entered in favor of Farmers State Bank. Western National appeals from the judgment.
ISSUE
Did the court err in finding that violations of Minn.Stat. § 60A.08, subd. 9 do not avoid coverage for the loss payee on the insurance contract?
ANALYSIS
Upon review of a legal question, it is the appellate court's function to independently analyze the issue as the trial court's resolution of a question of law is not binding on a reviewing court. See A.J. Chromy Construction Co. v. Commercial Mechanical Services, Inc., 260 N.W.2d 579, 582 (Minn. 1977). The parties, in effect, asked the trial court to assume that violations of Minn.Stat. § 60A.08, subd. 9 had occurred and to determine whether insurance coverage would remain effective for the loss payee in spite of those violations. The trial court was therefore presented with a question of law.
The "Loss Payable Clause" in the insurance contract between LeRoy and Western National provides:
Loss or damage under this policy shall be paid, as interest may appear, to you and the loss payee shown in the Declarations or in this endorsement. This insurance with respect to the interest of the loss payee, shall not become invalid because of your fraudulent acts or omissions unless the loss results from your conversion, secretion or embezzlement of your covered auto. However, we reserve the right to cancel the policy as permitted by policy terms and the cancellation shall terminate this agreement as to the loss payee's interest. We will give the same advance notice of cancellation to the loss payee as we give to the named insured shown in the Declarations. When we pay the loss payee we shall, to the extent of payment, be subrogated to the loss payee's rights of recovery.
While the loss payable clause deals with the relationship between the insurer and the loss payee, Minn.Stat. § 60A.08, subd. 9 focuses on the relationship between the insurer and the insured. Subdivision 9 provides in part:
No oral or written misrepresentation made by the assured, or in the assured's behalf, in the negotiation of insurance, shall be deemed material, or defeat or avoid the policy, or prevent its attaching, unless made with intent to deceive and defraud, or unless the matter misrepresented increases the risk of loss.
Minn.Stat. § 60A.08, subd. 9 (1988). This subdivision of the statute does not mention *653 the effect of such misrepresentations by the insured on the rights of a loss payee.
The Minnesota Supreme Court addressed the issue of the rights of a loss payee in American National Bank & Trust Co. v. Young, 329 N.W.2d 805 (Minn.1983). In that case, Young had obtained a loan from American for the purchase of a plane and identified American as the loss payee on his insurance policy with Avemco. The court found in Young that the language in the loss payee clause constituted a "standard mortgage clause" which evidences a separate agreement between the insurer and loss payee. Young, 329 N.W.2d at 810. The court quoted with approval from an earlier opinion which held that:
[T]he two contracts combined in the policy and the mortgage clause are separable and independent from the beginning. When the first fails, or if it never attaches, the second begins and proceeds subject to its own conditions and limitations.
Id. (quoting Allen v. St. Paul Fire and Marine Insurance Co., 167 Minn. 146, 150, 208 N.W. 816, 818 (1926)). The court noted this issue has been considered in cases involving fire insurance policies, but stated that "no distinction appears to be made between fire insurance and chattel policies * * * hence, the same principles apply to insurance coverage on an airplane." Young, 329 N.W.2d at 811. The court concluded coverage existed for the loss payee as two separate contracts of insurance were extended by Avemco and the acts of the insured could not defeat the rights of the loss payee. Id. at 813.
Similarly, the insurance contract between LeRoy and Western National provides that no actions by the insured, apart from conversion, secretion, or embezzlement of the insured vehicle, will invalidate the interest of the loss payee. The loss payee clause in the insurance contract written by Western National is a standard mortgage clause which constitutes a separate agreement between the insurer and the loss payee.
Minn.Stat. § 60A.08, subd. 9 does not provide that misrepresentations of an insured will void the policy from its inception. Rather the language is general; it states that no misrepresentations will "defeat or avoid the policy, or prevent its attaching" unless they are fraudulent or would increase the risk of loss. Appellant argues that an insurer has the ability to void an insurance contract, citing Howard v. Aid Association for Lutherans, 272 N.W.2d 910 (Minn.1978). Howard, however, involves a life insurance contract. There is a vital distinction between cases involving life insurance and automobile insurance. Nielsen v. Mutual Service Casualty Insurance Co., 243 Minn. 246, 255, 67 N.W.2d 457, 462 (1954). There is no support, either in case law or in Minn.Stat. § 60A.08, subd. 9, for appellant's assertion that an insurance contract may be void from its inception due to misrepresentations by the insured.
The terms of the insurance policy itself provide that no actions of the insured, apart from those specified, will affect the rights of the loss payee. The policy also states that the insurer may terminate the policy upon written notice to the named insured. Nothing in the insurance contract allows an insurer to void the policy at any time.
Minn.Stat. § 60A.08, subd. 9 allows an insurer to defeat or avoid a policy if misrepresentations made by the insured are fraudulent or increase the risk of loss. The statute does not address the rights of a loss payee in a situation where the statute applies to defeat the insured's interest in the policy. The insurance contract between LeRoy and Western National includes a loss payable clause which protects the rights of the loss payee. Such clauses allow recovery by a loss payee even where the insured has misrepresented material facts.
DECISION
The trial court did not err in granting judgment in favor of Farmers State Bank as loss payee on an insurance contract where the policy is invalidated as to the insured.
Affirmed.
NOTES
[*]  Acting as judge of the Court of Appeals by appointment pursuant to Minn. Const. art. VI, § 2.