=== CASE 9737247 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:20:00.359668+00 ===

SIMS, J.
I dissent.
In its reply to the answer to its petition the City acknowledges : ‘ ‘ Petitioner does not base its claim of credit upon any *786contention that respondent Engler was not entitled to permanent disability because he had resumed work during the period for which permanent disability indemnity was awarded. Certainly, an injured employee may be entitled to permanent disability indemnity while he is actually working. There is no question of ‘double recovery’ in such circumstances. He receives permanent disability indemnity for the residual effect of his injury; he receives his salary for the services which he performs for his employer. ’ ’
It is established that the award represents an allowance of a rating of 13% percent permanent disability for an injury incurred July 6, 1957, which entitled the employee to 54 weeks of disability payments at the rate of $35 per week in the total sum of $1,890. According to Labor Code section 4650 these payments should have been made “on the eighth day after the injury becomes permanent or the date of last payment for temporary disability, whichever date first occurs.’’
The City’s petition alleges that the injury caused disability which caused the employee to be off work for intermittent periods, that he was compensated by full pay, and that he last received medical treatment, which was furnished by the City, on October 25, 1965.
At the hearing it was stipulated that all temporary disability indemnity has been paid in full during some period subsequent to his injury (July 6, 1957), but during the year 1957.
On this record it would appear that the employee was entitled to receive 54 weeks of disability payments during a period commencing no later than January 1, 1958. The question is, can this right be taken away from him because it was not adjudicated until November 14, 1966 by the referee’s decision and affirmed until April 2, 1968 by the Appeals Board, and because in the interim the City had paid him a retirement disabiity pension for a period commencing October 1, 1965 ? It appears that if he had been paid the $1,890 in 1957,1958 or 1959, or at any time prior to October 1, 1965, the City could not deduct it from his retirement-allowance commencing October 1, 1965 under the first sentence of charter section 168.1.6 because of the provisions of Municipal Code section 267. On the other hand, if the compensation benefits had outlived his retirement, the retirement allowance would properly have been reduced each month by the amounts received as compensation thereafter, but there would be no offset as to compensation payments already received.
*787Under the second sentence if the retirement allowance had started at the time of the cessation of temporary disability and a determination of the right to permanent disability and the payments therefor were delayed for months or years, the City unquestionably would be entitled to offset the payments made for retirement allowance as a credit against the subsequently adjudicated permanent disability payments.
In this case, however, if the partial disability payments had been made when they were supposed to have been made, the first sentence, not the second, would govern. Should this result be thwarted because of the delay in litigation ?
The “double payment” here is payment of salary in 1957-1958 or 1959, together with a permanent disability allowance. The City concedes this can be done. (See Smith v. Industrial Acc. Com. (1955) 44 Cal.2d 364, 367 [282 P.2d 64]; Department of Motor Vehicles v. Industrial Acc. Com. (Dinan) (1939) 14 Cal.2d 189, 191-192 [93 P.2d 131]; and City of Palo Alto v. Industrial Acc. Com. (Gaudin) (1965) 232 Cal.App.2d 305, 310 [42 Cal.Rptr. 822].) The retirement allowance for which the City claims credit is that payable under section 168.1.3 of the charter which provides: “Any member of the Police Department who becomes incapacitated for the performance of his duty, by reason of bodily injury received in, or illness caused by the performance of his duty, shall be retired, ...” (Italics added.) It was stipulated that the “defendant employee was retired on disability retirement by the . . . City . . . for the same injury alleged in the application” which was filed to determine permanent disability and the right of the City to a credit against any award made. The retirement which commenced October 1, 1965 therefore resulted from the compensable injury. It is questionable, however, if the awards were to compensate for the same disability. The compensation award was for a permanent partial disability which apparently did not interfere with the employee’s capacity to perform his duties until some eight years after the accident. The construction urged by the City would deprive the employee of any compensation for the eight-year period in which he was permanently, although only partially disabled from an injury suffered in the course of his employment. Such a construction should be avoided as unreasonable if the reconciliation of the general and local law so permits.
The present decision leaves the question of whether the employee gets the “double payment” to be determined by the *788relationship between the time the award is made and the time of his retirement. The second date, as demonstrated above, is a relevant factor, but the former should not control. In the absence of specific language to the contrary, a payment for a subsequent period should not discharge a payment which accrued and was payable, but withheld, whether wrongfully or in ignorance of liability, for a prior period.
There is nothing inconsistent with this conclusion in the cases which have reviewed the allowance of credit for retirement or death benefits paid under a retirement system against a subsequently obtained compensation award. (See City of Los Angeles v. Industrial Acc. Com. (Fraide) (1965) 63 Cal.2d 242 [46 Cal.Rptr. 97, 404 P.2d 801]; Healy v. Industrial Acc. Com. (1953) 41 Cal.2d 118 [258 P.2d 1] ; and City of Oakland v. Workmen’s Comp. App. Bd. (Reimers) (1968) 259 Cal.App.2d 163 [66 Cal.Rptr. 283].) Nor do the eases, which have discussed a reduction of pension payments because of a compensation award, authorize such a deduction for compensation payments which have accrued and are payable for a period antedating the accrual of the payments under the retirement system. (See Stafford v. Los Angeles etc. Retirement Board (1954) 42 Cal.2d 795 [270 P.2d 12] ; Lyons v. Hoover (1953) 41 Cal.2d 145 [258 P.2d 4] ; Barnett v. Brizee (1968) 258 Cal.App.2d 97 [65 Cal.Rptr. 493] ; O’Brien v. City of San Jose (1960) 180 Cal.App.2d 609 [4 Cal.Rptr. 744] ; and Holt v. Board of Police etc. Comrs. (1948) 86 Cal.App.2d 714 [196 P.2d 94].) From all that appears in any of the foregoing cases the compensation and retirement system benefits accrued substantially simultaneously. In any event, in none of the cases, other than O’Brien, is the issue of concurrency raised or discussed. O’Brien, as stated by the majority, turned upon the construction of the provisions of the city charter which limited the disability retirement benefits to such sums as when added to the monthly compensation benefits would produce the total contemplated allowance. The court held that since the compensation benefits arose prior to the time of commencement of the retirement allowance, the City was liable for the full amount of the latter benefits without credit for prior compensation benefits. As an alternative ground of decision the court in O’Brien applied the principle of Lyons v. Hoover, supra, to the effect that retirement system death benefits payable to one dependent could not be reduced by the payment of compensation death benefits to other dependents, and observed: “So, here, we think that, because *789the Industrial Accident Commission award, on its face, was all payable for a period prior to petitioner’s retirement, no part of it can be used as the measure of any reduction in petitioner’s pension. [Citations.]” (180 Cal.App.2d at p. 615.) So here the City should not be able to claim the contrary credit, that compensation payments awarded for a period which expired before the disability retirement benefits accrued may be reduced by such payments.
I would affirm the decision of the Appeals Board.
The petition of respondent Workmen’s Compensation Appeals Board for a hearing by the Supreme Court was denied February 19, 1969. McComb, J., and Peters, J., were of the opinion that the petition should be granted.

=== CASE 9737248 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:20:00.671586+00 ===

Per Curiam.
This Court convened this special panel under MCR 7.215(H)(3) to resolve the conflict between the prior vacated opinion in this case, Lamoria v Health Care & Retirement Corp, 230 Mich App 801; 584 NW2d 589 (1998), and Rymar v Michigan Bell Telephone Co, 190 Mich App 504; 476 NW2d 451 (1991), regarding the “reasonable time to heal” doctrine under the Handicappers’ Civil Rights Act (HCRA), MCL 37.1101 et seq.; MSA 3.550(101) et seq.
The original Lamoria panel, in compliance with MCR 7.215(H)(1), followed this Court’s holding in Rymar that an employee who on the date of his discharge is unable to perform the requirements of his job because of a disability may still have a claim under the hcra if he would have regained the capacity to do the work within a reasonable time. If not for the precedential effect of Rymar, the Lamoria majority1 would have affirmed the trial court’s grant of summary disposition for defendants regarding plaintiff’s HCRA claim. We agree with the Lamoria majority and hold for the reasons it expressed that the hcra does not require that an employer allow a disabled employee a reasonable time to heal. We therefore affirm the trial court’s grant of summary disposition regarding plaintiff’s HCRA claim. In all other respects, we adopt the opinion of the prior Lamoria panel as our own.
*563Affirmed in part and reversed in part. Plaintiff, as the prevailing party, may tax costs under MCR 7.219.
Judge Fitzgerald concurred, but wrote separately to express his belief that Rymar was correctly decided.

=== CASE 9737250 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:20:02.33581+00 ===

REGAN, J.
Defendant appeals from the judgment of conviction ' of a violation of section 285 of the Penal Code (incest), contending he was denied a fair trial in that the trial court failed, sua sponte, to give the jury instructions to view the prosecutrix’ testimony with caution.
It will serve no useful purpose to recite in detail the acts defendant perpetrated upon his 19-year-old daughter, Jean. Suffice it to say the evidence in support of defendant’s guilt is substantial, convincing and in important instances corroborated. The facts set forth in respondent’s brief, at pages 3 to 11, are complete and substantially accurate and are incorporated herein by reference.
Defendant’s sole contention is that the trial court did not, on its own motion, give a cautionary instruction which usually reads as follows: “ [A] charge such as that made .against the defendant in this case is one which, generally speaking, is easily made, and, once made, difficult to. disprove. ’ ’
In prosecutions for sexual crimes the court should instruct on its own motion that the charge is easily made and difficult to disprove, and that for this reason the testimony of the prosecuting witness should be examined with caution. (People v. Merriam, 66 Cal.2d 390, 394-395 [58 Cal.Rptr. 1, 426 P.2d 161]; People v. Nye 38 Cal.2d 34, 40 [237 P.2d 1] ; People v. Putnam, 20 Cal.2d 885, 889 [129 P.2d 367]; People v. Sutton, 224 Cal.App.2d 708, 710 [37 Cal.Rptr. 23]; People v. McGhee, 123 Cal.App.2d 542, 543 [266 P.2d 874].) It has been specifically held that it is incumbent upon the court to give the cautionary instruction on its own motion in incest cases. (People v. Sutton, supra, at p. 711.)
The Attorney General concedes that the failure to give the cautionary instruction was error. The issue on this appeal is whether the error in the court failing to give the cautionary instruction, sua sponte, is prejudicial. (See People v. Sutton, supra, 224 Cal.App.2d at p. 711.). The circumstances of each case must detemine whether the failure to give the instruction is prejudicial. (People v. Nye, supra, 38 Cal.2d at p. 40.) As recently stated by the Supreme Court in People v. Merriam, supra, 66 Cal.2d at page 395: “It remains to be determined, *191however, whether in the circumstances of this case the trial court’s erroneous refusal of the cautionary instruction resulted in prejudice to the defendant. It has been said that such refusal does not constitute prejudicial error if ‘the evidence clearly points to the defendant’s guilt or . . . the testimony of the prosecuting witness is amply corroborated, or there are other factors in the ease which show that the defendant has been given a fair trial. ’ (People v. Owsley (1946) 76 Cal.App.2d 166, 169-170 [172 P.2d 561].) ”
Defendant argues that the case was an extremely close one, and thus that the failure to give the instruction was highly prejudicial. He points to the following factors: (1) defendant’s acquittal on one count; (2) Jean’s eight-year history of psychiatric treatment; (3) the heated argument Jean had with her father a day prior to initially reporting the events; (4) her experience as a prior child molestee; (5) her lack of chastity; and (6) the psychological bias and prejudices that she would naturally have against her father because of a sixteen-year absence between her third and nineteenth years during which time she lived in nine foster homes over a period of thirteen years.
On the other hand, there is a much stronger showing that no prejudice occurred to defendant as a result of the trial court’s failure to give the cautionary instruction. First of all. the testimony of the complaining witness was clear, assured, and a straight-forward account of the incidents, free from indications of inconsistency, improbability, or fabrication. (See People v. Merriam, supra, 66 Cal.2d at p. 395.) Furthermore, a vigorous cross-examination failed to throw doubt upon her testimony. (See People v. Sutton, supra, 224 Cal.App.2d at p. 714.) In this respect, it should be noted that cases which have held the failure to give the instruction to be prejudicial usually involved testimony of the complaining witness which was inconsistent or inherently improbable. (See People v. Sutton, supra, 224 Cal.App.2d at p. 712.)
Secondly, this is not a case where the testimony of the complaining witness is uncorroborated.1 To the contrary, the *192evidence corroborating Jean’s testimony is abundant. The testimony of prosecution witnesses, Mrs. Hostetler and Mrs. Leonard, clearly showed defendant’s preoccupation with sex as regards to his daughter and his predisposition to have sexual relations with her in one form or another. Defendant’s statements that the prosecuting witness “knew he could get it up,” that she had too much pubic hair growing inside her, and that it was not against his law to “screw” his own relatives all tend to show that defendant had, in fact, admitted to engaging in sexual relations with his daughter. (See People v. Adinolfi, 106 Cal.App. 261, 264 [289 P. 176].)
There was additional testimony by Mrs. Leonard that she had observed defendant make sexual overtures by fondling his daughter’s breasts and her upper thighs. This, together with semen stains found on the couch where defendant slept with his daughter, lends ever further credence to Jean’s story. (Cf. People v. Nye, supra, 38 Cal.2d at p. 41.) And the evidence was uneontroverted that the defendant had slept on the couch with his daughter on several occasions. (See People v. Smith, 23 Cal.App. 382, 384 [138 P. 107].) There is strong corroborating evidence of the prosecutrix’ story. (Cf. People v. Merriam, supra, 66 Cal.2d at pp. 395-396.)
Finally, the following instruction was given to the jury:
“It is the law that the testimony of an accomplice ought to be viewed with distrust. This does not mean that you may arbitrarily disregard such testimony, but you should give to it the weight to which you find it to be entitled after examining it with care and caution and in the light of all the evidence in the case. ’ ’
Thus, the jury was warned to view Jean’s testimony with caution in view of the fact that she was an accomplice in the crime of incest. Moreover, appropriate instructions were given by the court which cautioned the jury against being influenced by passion or prejudice, and required that it judge the case according to the evidence as presented at trial and the law as expounded by the court. (See People v. Merriam, supra, 66 Cal.2d at p. 396.)
It is not reasonably probable that had the instruction been given the result would have been different.
The judgment of conviction is affirmed.
Friedman, J., concurred.
In People v. McGhee, supra, 123 Cal.App.2d 542, 544, the court states: ‘ ‘ The reasons given for requiring the cautionary instruction in cases involving sex offenses, particularly where the testimony of the complaining witness is uncorroborated . . . are (1) the fact that the only available direct witnesses are ordinarily the complaining witness and the defendant, and hence the charge is easy to make and difficult to disprove; (2) eases involving sex crimes generally arouse passion and prejudice in the minds of decent people, including jurors; (3) the ease with *192which the charge can be made to satisfy spite, vengeance, vindictiveness and other base motives. ’ ’ (Italics added.)
This language was cited with approval in People v. Merriam, supra, 66 Cal.2d at page 394.

=== CASE 9737251 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:20:02.342657+00 ===

*193PIERCE, P. J.
I concur. I recoil, however, against the perpetuation of the rule that in every sex crime the trial court must instruct (in the language of CALJIC No. 527) “a charge such as that made against the defendant in this case is one which, generally speaking, is easily made, and, once made, difficult to disprove” and that the failure so to instruct sua sponte in every case is error. I have no quarrel with the rule that the instruction must be given sua sponte when as a matter of fact “the only available direct witnesses are . . . the complaining witness and the defendant, and hence the charge is easy to make and difficult to disprove” or where it is true that the “charge can be made to satisfy spite, vengeance, vindictiveness and other base motives.” These are two of the three reasons for the mandatory rule expressed in People v. Merriam (1967) 66 Cal.2d 390, 394 [58 Cal.Rptr. 1, 426 P.2d 161], Merriam did not say the instruction must be given in every prosecution for a sex offense. It speaks of a requirement that it be given in “many” such prosecutions. It does cite People v. Sutton (1964) 224 Cal.App.2d 708 [37 Cal.Rptr. 23], which was an incest case. (There it was held the error was not prejudicial.) It is my belief it should not be deemed error when the reasons for giving the instruction are inapplicable. The reasons are inapplicable here. The daughter was not the complaining witness. Her aunt and a family friend were. The daughter had reluctantly reported the incestuous acts. Evidence of guilt, other than the testimony of the two actors, was, as the majority opinion points out, overwhelming. To rule under such circumstances that a trial judge commits error—even harmless error—in omitting a cautionary instruction (given on his own motion) seems unrealistic.
The People of the State of California collectively also have rights. I conceive those rights to extend to impartial rulings and instructions by a trial judge in a criminal case. In the opposite context it has frequently been pointed out that a jury naturally attaches great importance to every statement by the judge during a trial. Just as a trial judge must be careful not to say anything that might be construed as a superimposition of his beliefs of guilt upon the beliefs of the jury, the People have the same right to strict neutrality. The statement under discussion is one which carries a built-in connotation that the jury must more carefully scrutinize the victim’s testimony than it does the defendant’s. Within the reasons expressed in Merriam and the other cases cited in the *194majority opinion the cantionary instruction is a necessary safeguard to preserve the constitutional rights of an accused. When the reasons fail, the rule should fall.
To require the cautionary instruction in every sex case regardless of the facts, and then back up under the cloak of article VI, section 13, of the California Constitution is anachronistic. It is also to demean our trial bench. Effectually, it is the reviewing court speaking to the trial judge and saying: We do not trust you, notwithstanding the fact that you have listened to and have observed all of the witnesses, to make any judgment whatever on the necessity of the cautionary instruction. Therefore, regardless of the facts, we declare the omission of the instruction to be automatic error. If later, in our superior wisdom, we find the instruction not to have been necessary we will still call it error, but via the “miscarriage of justice ’ ’ route, denominate it harmless error.
I find no instance in which the California Supreme Court has made the dogmatic ruling that in every sex-offense trial, regardless of the facts, the requirement of the cautionary instruction is absolute and automatic, although other Court of Appeal decisions seem so to regard it. I do not believe it should be so ruled here.
A petition for a rehearing was denied December 2, 1968, and appellant's petition for a hearing by the Supreme Court was denied December 30, 1968. Peters, J., was of the opinion that the petition should be granted.

=== CASE 2209550 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:40.838912+00 ===

267 Cal. App. 2d 30 (1968)
DALE LEE, Plaintiff and Appellant,
v.
A. E. JOSEPH, Defendant and Respondent.
Civ. No. 31949.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. Five.
Oct. 30, 1968.
Eugene P. Taylor for Plaintiff and Appellant.
Harold Rubins for Defendant and Respondent.
STEPHENS, J.
On January 22, 1965, Economic Services Inc., d.b.a. Walker Oil Co., executed and delivered to the plaintiff a promissory note for $2,000 secured by a deed of trust on certain property. The deed of trust was properly recorded. At the time of the issuance of this note and deed of trust, this property was subject to three prior deeds of trust, an attachment lien, and a claim based on an abstracted judgment. The second trust deed on the property secured a note executed to the defendant, and he was beneficiary of the deed of trust. On October 5, 1964, a notice of default had been recorded on this second deed of trust, and a trustee's sale had been set for January 27, 1965. There had been offers from Mr. William Walker and the plaintiff on behalf of Walker to reinstate the note and trust deed, but these had been refused by the defendant.  [fn. 1] These offers had preceded the issuance of the note to the plaintiff. After the issuance of the note to the plaintiff, the plaintiff, on January 23, 1965, offered to pay off *32 the note to the defendant and requested that the defendant's rights under the deed of trust be transferred to him.  [fn. 2] The defendant refused. On Monday morning, January 25, 1965, the plaintiff appeared at the office of the First Western Bank, the trustee on defendant's deed of trust, and tendered the amount due on the note, requesting an assignment of defendant's rights under the deed of trust. The bank refused to transfer the rights to the plaintiff, but did agree that upon payment it would cancel the note and reconvey the deed of trust to the grantor. The plaintiff refused this offer. After this refusal, the plaintiff brought an action to compel subrogation to the rights of the defendant, and to enjoin the sale of the property at the scheduled trustee's sale. A temporary restraining order was issued and a lis pendens filed. Subsequently, the restraining order was dissolved, the lis pendens was ordered off record, and the sale proceeded on February 24, 1965. The defendant bought the property at the sale. Thereafter the plaintiff brought a second suit for the imposition of an involuntary trust on the property; a lis pendens filed in connection with this suit still remains of record.
These two actions were consolidated for trial. At the trial, over a continuing objection by the plaintiff, the trial court allowed testimony which indicated that the note and deed of trust issued to the plaintiff were not given for adequate consideration. Without going into the evidence in detail, suffice it to say that the testimony indicated, and the trial judge so found, that the plaintiff was in fact acting in a representative capacity for the trustor (plaintiff is an attorney); that there was no consideration given for the note; and that the money tendered to pay the note to the defendant was actually the money of Mr. Walker. The plaintiff appeals from the judgment rendered in favor of defendant in both actions.
[1] We find there was substantial evidence to support a conclusion that the note was not issued for adequate consideration, and the plaintiff was not a bona fide junior lienholder.  [fn. 3]*33 The trial court found for the defendant in each action, trial by jury having been waived.
The contentions of plaintiff on this appeal are that: "I. A Junior lienholder has the right of redemption from a senior *34 lienholder, at any time after the claim is due, and before foreclosure of his right of redemption, and becomes thereby subrogated to all the benefits of the senior lien"; "II. The trial court erred in permitting an attack upon the status of Plaintiff as lienholder junior to the Defendant"; "III. The trial court erred to the prejudice of the Plaintiff by failing to rule on the continuing objections and motions to strike made by the Plaintiff to the introduction of evidence which constituted a collateral attack on the position of Plaintiff as a junior lienholder."
The crux of each of the three contentions is that the defendant does not have available the defense that plaintiff was not in fact a holder of a bona fide junior lien.
The right of redemption of a junior lienor is provided by sections 2903, 2904 and 2905 of the Civil Code.  [fn. 4] It was the finding of the trial court that the whole scheme was to create a sham lien. It is axiomatic that a purported obligation unsupported by consideration is no obligation at all and constitutes but a sham obligation. (2 Jones, Mortgages,  1363, p. 835.) The purported lien of plaintiff, if but one in behalf of *35 the owner, was no lien at all, for likewise it is axiomatic that the owner of a piece of property cannot have a lien upon it.
It appears that the scheme was one intended to squeeze out intermediate junior lienholders. There was evidence that the money tendered by Lee was in fact Walker's,  [fn. 5] and the reasonable inference is that Walker's interest was not solely to redeem, for he could have done so after the sale. Subrogation is a creature of equity. (Fifield Manor v. Finston, 54 Cal. 2d 632, 638 [7 Cal. Rptr. 377, 354 P.2d 1073, 78 A.L.R. 2d 813]; Meyers v. Bank of America etc. Assn., 11 Cal. 2d 92, 94-96 [77 P.2d 1084].) We hold that a holder of a senior lien has the defense available to him of the lack of bona fides of a purported junior lienholder seeking redemption under sections 2903, 2904, and 2905 of the Civil Code.
[2] We note also that the finding of the trial court (No. 14)  [fn. 6] effectively found that the offer by Lee was not an effective tender. In Martin v. Hildebrand (1920) 183 Cal. 270, 271-272 [191 P. 676], it was held that an offer of the amount due a mortgagee coupled with a demand of "an assignment of said note and mortgage" was not a tender discharging a mortgage or barring its foreclosure. The court stated (p. 272): "It was an offer to purchase the note and mortgage, not an offer to pay or discharge the mortgage debt. Such an offer does not operate either to extinguish the obligation for the debt or to terminate the lien of the mortgage."
The judgment is affirmed.
Kaus, P. J., and Aiso, J. pro tem.,  [fn. *] concurred.
"We are concerned here with a Second Deed of Trust securing a Note to Mr. A. E. Joseph. The claim asserted by Mr. Dale Lee under his Note and Deed of Trust as pleaded is far down the list. The evidence is that there are a number of creditors' lien rights intervening between the Second Trust Deed and that under which Mr. Lee claims."
"If the plaintiff has a bonafide Note and Deed of Trust there is no doubt that he is entitled to the relief sought. The Court has concluded that the rights he asserts, if any, are not bonafide."
"The evidence is clear that after the obligation due Mr. A. E. Joseph was in default, the debtor attempted to have the loan reinstated. It was not reinstated due to bad performance of the obligation under the Note and Deed of Trust. So far as the evidence here indicates, Mr. Walker, the Walker Oil Co., and Economic Services, Inc. are one and the same."
"We are convinced that Mr. Walker having been turned down upon his application for reinstatement devised the scheme of giving the Note and Trust Deed to Lee, his attorney, who in his own name and without disclosing his principal did attempt to secure the subrogation sought while at any time Walker could have paid and discharged the obligation of the Note and Trust Deed held by Mr. A. E. Joseph. The testimony is clear that he refused to do this. He did not bid in at the foreclosure sale; he still had the right of redemption following the sale."
"Purpose and design is, therefore, evident. The acquisition of the Trust Deed and Note by way of assignment would enable foreclosure to be made by Lee wiping out all of the subordinate creditors of Walker and his enterprise who claim liens against the property. It is intimated that Mr. A. E. Joseph and his counsel realized that such a procedure by Walker acting through a dummy might be in fraud of creditors. ... They refused to do anything that was not strictly called for by the Deed of Trust, namely, reconveyance of the property and cancellation of the note upon payment. The uncontradicted evidence that an offer was made to pay a bonus of $2,000.00 'under the table' gives a key to the character of the transaction with which we are now concerned."
"Mr. Lee asks us to believe that the $2,000.00 Note secured by the Trust Deed here involved was tendered him both for services to Mr. Walker and for his agreement not to press the judgment which he had secured for Brinks. There is no evidence that this arrangement was officially made by him on behalf of Brinks. It permits us to infer it was a contract by which he was to receive $2,000.00 'under the table' to defer action which otherwise he was bound to take on behalf of his client, Brinks. Either this arrangement never existed--in which case Lee's testimony is untrue--or, if true, it existed in contravention of his duty to Brinks, so far as the evidence indicates. When a Court scrutinizes such a contract made by an attorney in reference to his duties, it should not hesitate to strike it down as being void and in contravention of good public policy. To be given $2,000.00 to secure slight delay in collection of a $2,080.00 judgment is inherently improbable."
"The testimony that the $2,000.00 Note also was in recognition of services by Lee to Walker, and following the assertions relative thereto, is like chasing a rat through a pile of rocks. The nature and character of such services is most sketchy. Again, a problem of credibility arises and we do not believe the testimony. No attorney, as alert as Mr. Lee showed himself to be upon the witness stand, would ever have been so imprecise in regard to his services or his basis for compensation."
"Even if a bare legal right may appear to have been established by presumptions, this Court asked for an equitable remedy must do equity as well, and will not permit its processes to be used as an instrument of fraud."
"The evidence is uncontradicted that the First Trust Deed held by Seaside Oil Company and paramount to the Second Trust Deed held by Mr. Joseph likewise was in default. Mr. Joseph made arrangements to reinstate the First Trust Deed or else the Second would have been wiped out carrying with it any rights which the Lee Trust Deed purported to maintain."
"In an action such as this to compel specific performance by way of assignment of the Second Trust Deed, the plaintiff would have had to do equity extending to the obligations assumed by Mr. Joseph under the First. This has not been done."
"Every person, having an interest in property subject to a lien, has a right to redeem it from the lien, at any time after the claim is due, and before his right of redemption is foreclosed, and, by such redemption, becomes subrogated to all the benefits of the lien, as against all owners of other interests in the property, except in so far as he was bound to make such redemption for their benefit."
Civil Code section 2904:
"One who has a lien inferior to another, upon the same property, has a right:"
"1. To redeem the property in the same manner as its owner might, from the superior lien; and,"
"2. To be subrogated to all the benefits of the superior lien, when necessary for the protection of his interests, upon satisfying the claim secured thereby."
Civil Code section 2905:
"Redemption from a lien is made by performing, or offering to perform, the act for the performance of which it is a security, and paying, or offering to pay, the damages, if any, to which the holder of the lien is entitled for delay."
NOTES
[fn. 1]  1. Walker's three months' reinstatement period had then expired. (Civ. Code,  2924c.)
[fn. 2]  2. There was conflicting testimony as to whether the tender was conditional on an "assignment" or only "subrogation." The trial court determined the conflict by its finding 14: "The Court finds that no offer of payment of the note of defendant was ever made to defendant by anyone except on condition that the defendant assign his said promissory note and deed of trust."
[fn. 3]  3. Under rule 12(a), the record on appeal was augmented by inclusion of the superior court file, which contains a Memorandum and Order for Judgment in which the trial judge said (and his findings carried forth his declarations):
[fn. 4]  4. Civil Code section 2903:
[fn. 5]  5. Lee specifically testified he had not even an equitable interest in the tendered monies.
[fn. 6]  6. See footnote 2, page 32.
[fn. *]  *. Assigned by the Chairman of the Judicial Council.

=== CASE 9737252 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:20:04.494263+00 ===

CATHELL, Judge.
Bar Counsel, on behalf of the Attorney Grievance Commission, petitioner, and at the direction of the Review Board, filed a petition with this Court seeking disciplinary action against Sol Sheinbein, respondent,1 pursuant to Maryland Rule 16-709(a).2 The petition alleges that respondent violated provisions of Rule 8.4 of the Maryland Rules of Professional Conduct (MRPC) based on complaints from Bar Counsel and Henry R. Quintero.3 The relevant provisions of Rule 8.4 provide that:
“It is professional misconduct for a lawyer to:
(b) commit a criminal act that reflects adversely on the lawyer’s honesty, trustworthiness or fitness as a lawyer in other respects; ...
(d) engage in conduct that is prejudicial to the administration of justice.”
*229Pursuant to Maryland Rule 16—709(b) and 16-711(a),4 this Court referred the matter to Judge S. Michael Pincus of the Circuit Court for Montgomery County to conduct an evidentiary hearing and to make findings of fact and conclusions of law with respect to respondent’s case. Respondent was duly served and he filed a timely answer to the petition. On March 20, 2002, that evidentiary hearing took place. Judge Pincus heard testimony from two witnesses, Paul T. Stein, attorney for Samuel Sheinbein and later for respondent, and Detective Paula Hamill, the primary detective investigating the murder of Alfredo Tello, Jr.5 The remaining evidence admitted at the hearing included the application for a search warrant and the warrant that had been served upon respondent prior to any of respondent’s actions giving rise to the instant proceeding. Additionally, respondent’s admissions were also among the evidence considered. Specifically, the hearing judge admitted the following:
“[T]he Statement of Charges in State of Maryland v. Sol Sheinbein, District Court of Maryland for Montgomery County, Case No. 6D00071133; an Arrest Warrant on Charging Document, Warrant No. D980442735 in State of Maryland v. Sol Sheinbein, District Court of Maryland for Montgomery County, Case No. 6D00071133; Application for Statement of Charges in State of Maryland v. Sol Shein*230bein Case No. 6D00071133; an Application for Search and Seizure Warrant in Montgomery County, Maryland dated September 19, 1997, and the resultant Search and Seizure Warrant issued on September 19, 1997, for the residence located at 2940 Birch Tree Lane, Silver Spring, Montgomery County, Maryland, then the residence of the Respondent and his family, which included his son Samuel. Finally the Court received, as part of Petitioner’s evidence, the transcript of the Secret Grand Jury Proceeding conducted on September 25, 1997, which contained the eighty-two page transcript of the testimony of the Respondent, Sol Sheinbein on that date.”
After the hearing, Judge Pincus found, by clear and convincing evidence, that respondent violated MRPC 8.4. Respondent filed in this Court several exceptions to Judge Pincus’ findings of fact and conclusions of law. We overrule these exceptions and accept the hearing judge’s findings of fact and conclusions of law. Considering respondent’s egregious conduct, the appropriate sanction is disbarment.
I. Facts
A. The Hearing Judge’s Findings of Fact
From the evidentiary record below, we include part of Judge Pincus’ findings of fact relevant to our inquiry and we hold that they were established by clear and convincing evidence:
“1. On or about September 16 or 17, 1997, Alfred Enrique Tello, Jr. was the victim of a murder that took place in Montgomery County, Maryland.
2. On September 19, 1997, at approximately 11:00 a.m., the body was discovered in the garage on the premises located at 14041 Breeze Hill Lane in Montgomery County, Maryland.
4. Upon discovery [of the body] the homicide division of Montgomery County Police Department was notified.
*23111. During a canvas of the neighborhood pursuant to the discovery of the body, investigators located a witness who observed a dark green car (possibly a Camaro) and an older white car (possibly a Toyota) parked in front of the Breeze Hill Lane location.
12. Two individuals were observed and described as one being a white male with an unkempt appearance, and another who was described as a dark-complected white or possible Hispanic male, 5'11" in height with an athletic build weighing between 180 and 200 pounds and having dark hair. This witness identified these individuals as having been in the front yard of the residence on either September 16 or 17, 1997.
15. These male subjects were described as being, white male, age 19 to 21, 5'10" with dark hair, athletic build, wearing a dark tee shirt and dark pants and the other subject as a white male, 20 years of age, with medium brown hair, husky build, wearing tan pants and a white tee shirt.
16. The investigators, based upon the witnesses observations, searched the pathway from Birch Tree Lane, and with the use of cadaver dogs, traced what appeared to be droplets of blood from the Breeze Hill Lane address to a location on Birch Tree Lane that ended at the street across from 2940 Birch Tree Lane, the residence of Samuel Sheinbein.
17. The Sheinbein residence on Birch Tree Lane is directly behind the residence at 14041 Breeze Hill Lane where the victim’s body was found.
18. Investigators identified that Robert Israel Sheinbein, the brother of Samuel Sheinbein, and elder son of the Respondent herein, owned a Pontiac Firebird and listed the 2940 Birch Tree Lane address on his registration.
22. Homicide investigators ascertained Samuel Sheinbein was seventeen years of age, 5'10" in height with a muscular *232build and presented an appearance to be Hispanic or a light skinned black.
23. They also determined, from the son of the owner of the Breeze Hill Lane property, that Sheinbein lived on Birch Tree Lane, behind the Breeze Hill Lane property, and drove a dark green Pontiac Firebird with tinted windows, not unlike the body style of the Camaro one witness identified as being in the street in front of the Breeze Hill Lane premises.
24. All of the above information was incorporated into an affidavit in support of an application for a search warrant presented to a District Court judge in Montgomery County on September 19,1997.
25. The search warrant was requested to perform a search of the premises located at 2940 Birch Tree Lane, Silver Spring, Montgomery County, Maryland in connection with the investigation of the murder of Mr. Tello.
26. The warrant was sought to search the Sheinbein residence for evidence of a crime of first degree murder ... and any other evidence relating to the crime of first degree murder.
28. On September 19, 1997, the search warrant and supporting affidavit, incorporating the above referred facts with greater specificity and additional disclosures, was presented to the Respondent herein.
29. The Respondent at the time of the execution of the search warrant read the contents and observed the search of his residence, particularly the garage.
30. The search of Respondent’s premises took approximately five hours and as a result investigators seized receipts, a box for a circular saw, rubber gloves, a shirt with apparent blood stains, and a police scanner.
31. At the time of the execution of the search warrant, when the documents were presented to the Respondent, and after the items ■«'■ere observed and seized pursuant to the warrant, a homicide detective indicated to the Respondent *233the seriousness of the matter under investigation and requested the Respondent contact her if he heard from his son, which he indicated he would do.
32. At the time of the presentment of the search warrant and its execution, the Respondent was asked if he owned a ‘red Ron Rico’ garden cart. Respondent indicated he did but, when his garage was searched the cart was not found.
33. That cart in fact was the one recovered at the homicide scene.
34. The following day, September 20, 1997, at 1:30 p.m., the homicide detective who had served the search warrant upon the Respondent spoke with him by telephone. She inquired whether or not Respondent had heard from his son Samuel and was informed he had not.
35. At that timé she was advised Respondent had retained counsel.
36. That was the last time she spoke with Respondent.
37. A warrant was issued for the arrest of Samuel Sheinbein on the evening of September 20, 1997. Before the arrest warrant could be executed and served upon Samuel Sheinbein, Samuel fled Maryland and left the United States to travel to Israel, upon the suggestion of the Respondent and with his aid and assistance. (Grand Jury Transcript, p. 65, lines 3-13, p. 65, lines 15-25, p. 67, lines 1-17)
38. The Respondent paid for the plane ticket to Israel, albeit a round trip ticket, and brought the passport of his son, Samuel Sheinbein, to him in New York to enable him to leave the United States.
39. The Respondent, pursuant to a grant of immunity, testified before the Grand Jury for the State of Maryland in Montgomery County on September 25,1997.
40. Prior to that grant of immunity, Respondent and his family had invoked their Fifth Amendment privilege against self-incrimination and, after being brought before a judge of the Circuit Court of Montgomery County, where they again collectively asserted their Fifth Amendment privilege, a ruling was made to compel their testimony.
*23442. The Respondent admitted to the Grand Jury, during his sworn testimony, that he was aware of his son’s acquaintance with a friend by the name of Aaron Needle, a co-defendant in the murder of Alfred Enrique Tello, Jr. The Respondent’s testimony, in connection with his son Samuel’s relationship to Aaron Needle, indicated he did not wish his son to associate with Needle due to their both having run afoul of the juvenile authorities.
43. Respondent’s protestations to the contrary notwithstanding he learned, shortly prior to the death of Mr. Tello, that Needle and his son Samuel were associating again, and were in fact associating quite closely and frequently.
44. The Respondent, in his testimony to the Grand Jury, under oath, indicated he was unaware of his son’s association with the victim, Alfred Enrique Tello, Jr., also known as Freddie Tello.
45. The Respondent further testified that, in response to a specific question, he was uncertain whether or not a Makita circular saw or box for such a saw was in his garage.
46. The Respondent admitted he did not have much dealing within the garage, that it was in fact the domain almost exclusively of his son Samuel.
47. Under questioning at the Grand Jury, the Respondent under oath did testify that a blue tarp was known to have been purchased for the use of his son in protecting a jet ski which they had purchased for him.
48. The Respondent further testified under oath before the Grand Jury that on Wednesday, September 17, 1997, at approximately 9:00 p.m. he returned to his home where his son Samuel was found. At that time he had been contacted on his cell phone by his son Samuel and requested to bring home a pizza for their dinner. He did so but, upon his return Samuel said to him ‘boy that was quick’ and upon entering the house Respondent noticed a very strong odor.
49. He observed a fan standing in the kitchen to dissipate the smell and inquired of Samuel, relating to the fan, ‘what *235the hell is that?’ Samuel replied he had accidentally discharged the battery for his jet ski and that, while recharging it, he connected it improperly and, as a result, while he was in his bedroom, the battery caught fire and that was the cause of the smell.
50. Respondent testified his son, upon questioning why he had not attempted to charge the battery in the garage, indicated a cord couldn’t reach and therefore he did it in the kitchen.
51. Respondent did not seek to investigate and, although the smell permeated the entire house, including the upstairs bedroom area, went about his business without further inquiry.
52. The Respondent’s testimony went on to reveal that later on the night of Wednesday, September 17, 1997, at approximately 1:15 a.m., the morning of Thursday, September 18, 1997, he observed a car parking across the street from his house. He noted this was unusual as all the homes had sufficient driveway and garage space and did not require on the street parking for his neighbors.
53. He observed an individual exit the car and walk up the street towards the right of his house.
54. Respondent saw the driver walking on his property, to the side of his garage, and then returning to the trunk of his car, opening the trunk, taking out a bag, which appeared like a shopping bag, and again approached his property to the side of the garage.
55. At that time he called the police and, anticipating their arrival, opened the front door. When the Respondent opened the door he was confronted by the individual who he then recognized to be Aaron Needle.
56. At that time the police arrived and Needle explained, in response to what he was doing there, that he was doing ‘nothing, Sir nothing’ but that he came by to see Samuel and ‘give him something’.
*23657. The Respondent elected not to proceed any further, identified the individual as someone he knew to the police and thereupon they left.
58. The Respondent then questioned Needle about what he was returning to Samuel. Needle indicated he was returning Samuel ‘his garbage bags’.
59. The Respondent’s testimony went on to relate he invited Needle into his home and observed, what appeared to be, a box of garbage bags, and a yellow snake light.
60. Upon further inquiry to Needle, Needle explained he had in fact come over to meet "with Samuel and go out with him. He indicated he and Samuel were going to see ‘Maria’. Needle identified her as a Puerto Rican girl who Samuel had met and wanted to visit while her parents were away.
61. After the disclosures of the investigator, the review of the supporting affidavit and the search warrant, the Respondent had' sufficient knowledge to believe his son was a suspect and probable perpetrator of the murder of Mr. Tello.
62. In addition to the facts contained in the affidavit to support the application for the search warrant, and the observance of the items seized in his own garage, Respondent also observed ashes on his garage floor, which investigators concluded was the situs of the dismembering and attempted immolation of the body of Alfred Enrique Tello, Jr.
At the time the Application for Search Warrant and Search Warrant were presented to the Respondent by Defective Hamill on September 17, 1997 6, Detective Hamill learned the Respondent was a lawyer and was advised by him that he had an earlier contact from Samuel by phone. On more than one occasion, on the evening of September 19, 1997, between 9:30 and approximately midnight, Detective *237Hamill was assured by the Respondent that he would contact her whenever he heard from his son and otherwise alert her of his whereabouts. His representation to the contrary, he failed to do so although he did speak to Detective Hamill by phone at approximately mid-day on Saturday, September 20, 1997. During that conversation, although his son Robert had a telephone conversation with Samuel, the substance of which was relayed to the Respondent, he [respondent] failed to alert her [Detective Hamill] of that contact. Instead, he informed her the family had retained Paul T. Stein, Esquire, on behalf of Samuel and that, in the future, should there be any contact with Samuel, it should be through counsel.
63. Respondent’s eldest son, Robert, received a telephone call at or about 10:00 a.m., September 20, 1997. He relayed the substance of that conversation to his parents that Samuel would call back at approximately 3:00 p.ha. At that time both Robert and the Respondent spoke to Samuel. They urged him to come home which he indicated he was not prepared to do as he was in Ocean City. Respondent neither informed counsel, Paul T. Stein, Esquire, nor Detective Hamill, of his contact with Samuel at this time, nor did he otherwise convey the fact that he believed his son to be in Ocean City, Maryland.
64. At some time between 1:00 p.m. and 3:00 p.m. on September 20, 1997, Samuel did again call Robert. Samuel was to call back at which time he would speak to his father. When he did so his father indicated Samuel should ‘get away from Aaron’.
65. Respondent contends his son Samuel expressed suicidal ideation in connection with Aaron Needle also having expressed a desire to commit suicide. It was at this time the Respondent told his son he should go to Israel.
66. In furtherance of the efforts to facilitate Samuel’s flight from the United States, the Respondent purchased airplane tickets for Samuel to depart from New York just pri,or to midnight September 21st and arrive in Tel Aviv, *238Israel at approximately 10:00 a.m. Eastern time on Monday, September 22nd.
67. When the Respondent met with Samuel on September 21st he was told he should take the Firebird, which Samuel and Needle drove to New York, and which contained a sawed off shotgun, stun gun and various handwritten notes from Samuel and Needle.
The Court finds that at no time while the Respondent was in the company of his son, Samuel, is there any indication that Needle was also present or any longer in Samuel’s company.
68. Respondent did in fact turn over this evidence of the crime to his counsel who in turn made it available to the investigating authorities.
Although the Respondent was unaware of the issuance of the arrest wdrrant on September 21, 1997, he was aware, from his observations of the results of the search warrant, his scrutiny of the application for the Search Warrant, and his discussions with Detective Hamill, that his son was a focus of the investigation and was a person who the investigating authorities expressed a great desire to interview at least as a witness if not a suspect. Nonetheless, Respondent obtained Samuel’s passport prior to leaving Maryland and brought it to New York where he met his son. Also, prior to the Respondent’s suggestions that his son leave the United States for Israel, he was aware his son had admitted to killing Tello. (Transcript, p. 50, lines 16-25, p. 51-56, lines 1-14).” [Alterations added.][Emphasis added.]
B. The Hearing Judge’s Conclusions of Law
The hearing judge subsequently concluded that respondent violated MRPC 8.4(b) and (d). First, the hearing judge found that respondent’s actions satisfied the elements of the common law offense of obstructing or hindering a police officer, which include:
*239“(1) A police officer engaged in the performance of a duty;
(2) An act, or perhaps an omission, by the accused[, here the Respondent,] which obstructs or hinders the officer in the performance of that duty;
(3) Knowledge by the accused [, Sol Sheinbein,] of facts comprising element (1); and
(4) Intent to obstruct or hinder the officer by the act or omission constituting element (2).”
Cover v. State, 297 Md. 398, 413, 466 A.2d 1276, 1284 (1983) (alterations added). Judge Pincus specifically found that respondent was “well aware of the duty that the police officer, Detective Paula Hamill, was in the process of performing, i.e. the investigation of the death of Alfred Enrique Tello, Jr.” and that respondent knew of the Detective’s desire to question his son, who respondent knew to be responsible for the death of Mr. Tello. In addition, respondent knew that his subsequent arrangements to assist his son to flee to Israel, would frustrate that officer’s performance of her duties. Judge Pincus did not find respondent’s argument, that respondent’s intent was merely to save his son from Mr. Needle’s influence and his son’s alleged threats of suicide, to be credible and we are not prepared to disturb that credibility determination. He found that the facts satisfied the requisite elements of common law obstruction, and ruled that respondent had violated MRPC 8.4(b).
The hearing judge determined that respondent also violated MRPC 8.4(d) by “engagfing] in conduct that is prejudicial to the administration of justice.” This conclusion was based on the court’s assessment that respondent’s actions were criminal in nature and impaired the public’s confidence in the entire legal profession. Reciting several egregious facts, the hearing judge concluded that respondent’s sending his son to Israel in spite of the knowledge that his son was an “integral party to a criminal investigation” was “in direct contravention to the oath he swore in open court when he was admitted to the Bar of the Court of Appeals of Maryland on June 24,1971.”
*240On May 22,' 2002, respondent filed in this Court several exceptions to Judge Pincus’ findings of fact and conclusions of law. Petitioner did not file any exceptions.
II. Discussion
This Court reviews attorney disciplinary proceedings according to the standard articulated in Attorney Grievance Commission v. Gavin, 350 Md. 176, 189, 711 A.2d 193, 200 (1998):
“This Court has original and complete jurisdiction over attorney disciplinary proceedings. Md. Rule 16-709b; Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Adams, 349 Md. 86, 93, 706 A.2d 1080, 1083 (1998); Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Glenn, 341 Md. 448, 470, 671 A.2d 463, 473 (1996); Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Kent, 337 Md. 361, 371, 653 A.2d 909, 914 (1995); Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Powell, 328 Md. 276, 287, 614 A.2d 102, 108 (1992). Under our independent review of the record, we must determine whether the findings of the hearing judge are based on clear and convincing evidence. The ‘hearing court’s findings of fact are prima facie correct and will not be disturbed unless they are shown to be clearly erroneous.’ Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Garland, 345 Md. 383, 392, 692 A.2d 465, 469 (1997) (citing Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Goldsborough, 330 Md. 342, 347, 624 A.2d 503, 505 (1993)). Accordingly, the ultimate decision as to whether a lawyer has violated professional rules rests with this Court. Garland, 345 Md. at 392, 692 A.2d at 469; Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Breschi, 340 Md. 590, 599, 667 A.2d 659, 663 (1995).”
The case sub judice presents this Court with a factual scenario that has not been previously before this Court.
A. Absence of Self-Defense in Findings of Fact
Respondent takes no exception, to the hearing judge’s Findings of Fact 1 through 67. Respondent does however except to the last sentence of Finding of Fact 68. The sentence in question states, “Also, prior to the Respondent’s suggestions that his son leave the United States for Israel, he was aware *241his son [Samuel Sheinbein] had admitted to killing Tello.” (Alteration added). The basis for respondent’s exception is that the hearing judge omitted a portion of respondent’s Grand Jury testimony, which, according to respondent, causes the remaining language to be misleading. The testimony in question relates to respondent’s knowledge of the details of Samuel Sheinbein’s involvement in the Tello killing, as admitted by respondent’s son.
We overrule this exception, as the hearing judge’s omission of this testimony is irrelevant and, thus, not clearly erroneous. A hearing court’s findings of fact are ‘‘prima facie correct and will not [be] disturb! ed] unless they are shown to be clearly erroneous.” Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Goldsborough, 330 Md. 342, 347, 624 A.2d 503, 505 (1993). The disputed omission of any mention of the son’s assertion of self defense has little bearing on the outcome of this proceeding and is therefore, as to this proceeding, irrelevant.7 It is undisputed that respondent knew, prior to his actions in encouraging and aiding his son in absconding to Israel, that his son had committed a homicide. Respondent’s inappropriate conduct stems from sending his son to Israel with the knowledge that Samuel had committed a homicide in Maryland, not from the precise circumstances of Mr. Tello’s death or whether a jury might ultimately credit his son’s assertion of self defense.8 The disputed finding does no more than state *242this in more concise terms; it does not suggest any improper interpretation.
B. Rule 8(b)
This Court has held that Bar Counsel’s standard of proof for a theory that respondent’s actions violate the MRPC by constituting a crime, albeit no criminal conviction results, is to show that the underlying conduct constitutes a crime by clear and convincing evidence; not by the criminal “beyond a reasonable doubt” standard. See Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Childress, 364 Md. 48, 55, 770 A.2d 685, 689 (2001); Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Garland, 345 Md. 383, 390, 692 A.2d 465, 468 (1997); and Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Proctor, 309 Md. 412, 418, 524 A.2d 773, 776 (1987). Using the clear and convincing standard, we hold that Bar Counsel presented sufficient facts to illustrate that respondent committed the crimes of obstructing or hindering a police officer. As such, respondent’s conduct violates MRPC 8.4(b).
1. Common Law Obstruction
Respondent excepts to the hearing judge’s finding that he committed the common law offense of obstructing or hindering a police officer through his actions of Sunday, September 21, 1997. His actions include suggesting to his son, Samuel, that Samuel flee to Israel, transporting of his son’s passport from Maryland to New York City to facilitate the fleeing, purchasing of his son’s plane ticket to Israel and ensuring that his son boarded that plane, all the while knowing that his son had killed Mr. Tello. We overrule this exception.
The Maryland common law elements for the offense of obstructing or hindering a police officer are:
“(1) A police officer engaged in the performance of a duty;
(2) An act, or perhaps an omission, by the accused which obstructs or hinders the officer in the performance of that duty;
(3) Knowledge by the accused of facts comprising element (1); and
*243(4) Intent to obstruct or hinder the officer by the act or omission constituting element (2).”
Cover, 297 Md. at 413, 466 A.2d at 1284. The primary focus of respondent’s exception is to the hearing judge’s finding in reference to the fourth element, respondent’s intent to obstruct or hinder Detective Hamill.
There is no challenge to the establishment of either elements (1) or (3), that Detective Hamill was “a police officer engaged in the performance of a duty” and that respondent had “knowledge ... of facts comprising element (1),” respectively. Id. Respondent, in fact, had direct personal knowledge that Detective Hamill was involved in the investigation of Mr. Tello’s death. Respondent not only had specific conversations with Detective Hamill regarding her investigation of Mr. Tello’s death, but he examined the search warrant and the application for the warrant.
Judge Pincus specifically found that the application for the search warrant was examined by respondent while the search was being executed. The application clearly describes the details of the finding of Mr. Tello’s body, (an obvious homicide), the observations of witnesses of two persons transporting something in a cart with a blue tarp cover similar to a cart and tarp owned by respondent in the direction of the house where the victim’s body was found, that the cart was found in proximity to the body along with the blue tarp, that a trail of blood droplets led back to the vicinity of respondent’s house, that respondent’s son met the witnesses’ description of one of the persons pushing the cart and that the respondent’s son, at a relevant time, had obtained the location of the key that could be used to enter the house where the body was found from the son of the owner of that house.
The application clearly stated that the warrant to search respondent’s house was being requested for the purpose of seeking evidence “of the crime of murder.” Respondent not only read these documents, but observed the search warrant’s execution and even verbally agreed to alert the Detective of his son’s whereabouts. Furthermore, respondent even knew, *244from his son’s own admissions, that his son was in fact the person who killed Mr. Tello. We reject any suggestion that there was a lack of clear and convincing evidence establishing respondent’s knowledge that a homicide had occurred and that his son was a primary suspect in a murder. Thus, these two elements are satisfied.
Similarly, there is no doubt that respondent’s actions in devising and facilitating his son’s departure to Israel obstructed and hindered Detective Hamill in the performance of her lawful duties. These actions denied Detective Hamill any opportunity to pursue investigatory leads and to contact, question, and subsequently arrest Samuel Sheinbein. Respondent was fully aware that his actions and omissions would impede Detective Hamill’s investigation. These facts more than suffice to satisfy the first three elements of the common law offense of obstructing or hindering an officer.
To satisfy the fourth element, there must be a showing, by clear and convincing evidence,9 that respondent intended to obstruct or hinder Detective Hamill’s performance of her lawful duties. Respondent suggests that the hearing judge’s finding of intent ignored our precedents that have held that this element requires a finding that the accused have the specific intent to obstruct or hinder the officer. Respondent further alleges that his actual intent, in keeping information from Detective Hamill and assisting his son to flee to Israel, was “to prevent his son from committing suicide or being killed in some sort of confrontation with the police.” Respondent claims that he conjured the plan that, “as a last resort,” put his son in a place, Israel, “where his son would not be contemplating suicide or running around with a gun in his car.” Respondent then cites to events occurring after his son had already fled to Israel and his lack of knowledge regarding the arrest warrant for his son as evidence to explain respondent’s intent.
The hearing judge said:
*245“[T]he Court determines and concludes that the Respondent had the commensurate requisite intent to obstruct or hinder Detective Hamill in the performance of her duty. It is long established that:
‘Unless there is evidence presented to the contrary, the law presumes that a person intends the nature [sic] and probable consequences of his acts. Thus, the requisite criminal intent may be inferred from the defendants [sic] voluntary and knowing commission of an act which is forbidden by law or from the defendant’s omission to do an act required by law.’ ” 10
We first look at the hearing judge’s findings in regard to the credibility of respondent and determine whether those findings are clearly erroneous. Only then can we determine what respondent knew on Sunday, September 21, 1997, when he committed the acts resulting in this disciplinary action. The hearing judge specifically found that, “While the Respondent’s position is that his intent may have been to save his son from the influence of Aaron Needle and the alleged threat of Samuel’s suicidal ideation, the Court does not find these assertions to be credible.” The question that we must answer is whether this finding of the hearing judge meets the clearly erroneous test.
The record is replete with facts that support the hearing judge’s finding that respondent was not credible in testifying before the Grand Jury that his intent was limited to saving his son from Mr. Needle, suicide, or a shootout with the police. The most relevant facts come from respondent’s own testimony11 in front of the Grand Jury for Montgomery County, *246which is testimony that, in and of itself, undermines the credibility of respondent’s intent argument. Although respondent may have had no actual knowledge of his son’s pending arrest warrant at the time he arranged the flight to Israel, he certainly knew that the police, in all likelihood, would eventually seek to arrest him. The following exchange occurred at the Grand Jury proceeding:
“Q[uestion of Prosecutor] Okay. Now Sunday night, obviously, the trip is set up for Samuel to go to Israel. When did Robert go to Israel?
A[nswer of Respondent] Okay. On Monday, we decided that there was no — on Sunday, there was no arrest warrant whatsoever for Samuel, none whatsoever; that he was not a wanted person, he was not a fugitive. He was not on the run officially by the police—
Q Right.
A — but he would be; that’s obvious.”
Respondent’s Grand Jury Testimony at 69 (emphasis added) (alterations added). Here respondent plainly admitted that he knew that his son would “obviously” be on the run from an arrest warrant although not yet “on the run officially.” Coupling this with respondent’s testimony that he brought his son’s passport to him in New York City, suggests that his overriding concern was to assist his son to circumvent the law by absconding.
*247In addition, respondent’s own testimony debunks his theory that he bought a round trip ticket in contemplation of Samuel’s return after Samuel was no longer in danger. Respondent’s testimony suggests that the price of the ticket was his true concern. In his Grand Jury testimony, respondent testified, “I went to Tower Air in New York City, and I purchased the ticket, a one-way ticket — well, a round-trip ticket is cheaper than one-way — on Tower Air.”
The transcript of respondent’s testimony also shows that respondent knew that Samuel was no longer in the presence of Aaron Needle or Needle’s influence when respondent and his family met Samuel in New York City. The fact that Samuel was by himself is contrary to respondent’s theory that Needle presented an imminent danger to Samuel. In addition, the hearing judge specifically found that Samuel turned over the car and the shotgun when his brother, mother and respondent came to New York. At that time, when in the presence of his family, Samuel was not in apparent imminent danger of committing suicide. The totality of the facts illustrates that respondent’s true intent was to facilitate his son’s escape from the United States, and at least placing in doubt the ultimate apprehension of his son by a jurisdiction in which respondent knew his son faced imminent and serious criminal charges. As the hearing judge found, “ ‘the requisite criminal intent may be inferred from the defendant’s voluntary and knowing commission of an act which is forbidden by law.’ ”
Here, respondent severally hindered, even prevented, Detective Hamill from investigating Samuel Sheinbein in connection with the death of Mr. Tello. Because respondent’s explanations as to his intent were not found to be credible, we look again to see what else the record reveals as to what exactly respondent knew at the time he helped Samuel go to Israel in order to ascertain whether there is clear and convincing evidence as to whether respondent’s specific intent was to take actions which he knew would hinder or obstruct Detective Hamill. The record supplies ample evidence in that regard.
*248First and foremost, at the time he helped Samuel abscond to Israel, respondent knew that his son had killed Mr. Tello and that the killing was considered by the police to be a murder. It is of no consequence to this disciplinary proceeding that Samuel professed that the killing was in self-defense. The fact remains that respondent knew that Samuel committed the homicide of Mr. Tello. Whether that killing was justified is for a jury to decide, not respondent. Respondent, by his own testimony, also knew that it was imminent that the police would seek out and arrest Samuel. He was fully aware that the investigation had focused on his house and his son because of the information contained in the application for a search warrant, which he had read. Respondent thoroughly planned his son’s getaway. He brought his son’s passport from Maryland to New York. As far as the record reveals, there is no evidence that his son even had a thought of fleeing to Israel until his father arrived in New York. Respondent was the person who first made the suggestion to his son.12 Respondent then proceeded to purchase a plane ticket for his son and proceeded to make arrangements for his son to stay with relatives in Israel. All of these events took place before respondent sent his son to Israel, but after he knew his son had committed a homicide that was considered by the police to be a murder. Respondent relies mainly on the fact that he knew of no arrest warrant for his son at the time of his actions. However, he, himself, admitted that his son “was not on the run officially by the police — but would be; that’s obvious.” He was well aware of both the inappropriateness of his son’s flight and of the impact it would have on Detective Hamill’s criminal investigation.
In conclusion, we hold that respondent had the specific intent to obstruct or hinder the investigation and probable arrest of his son by sending him to Israel.
*2492. Violation of Rule 8.4(b)
We hold that there was clear and convincing evidence that supports the hearing judge’s conclusion that respondent committed the common law crime of obstructing or hindering a police officer.13 We hold that respondent’s conduct necessarily violates Rule 8.4(b). Rule 8.4(b) states:
“It is professional misconduct for a lawyer to:
(b) commit a criminal act that reflects adversely on the lawyer’s honesty, trustworthiness or fitness as a lawyer in other respects.”
Obstructing or hindering a police investigation of an alleged murder has a profound impact on a “lawyer’s honesty, trustworthiness or fitness as a lawyer in other respects.” It is difficult to perceive that any other contention is even possible.
Types of crimes that we have held to violate Rule 8.4(b) include: (finding a violation of Rule 8.4(b) where an attorney was convicted of simple possession of cocaine) Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Black, 362 Md. 574, 766 A.2d 119 (2001); (finding a violation of Rule 8.4(b) where the attorney was guilty of failure to pay income taxes) Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Atkinson, 357 Md. 646, 745 A.2d 1086 (2000); (attorney violated Rule 8.4(b) by committing acts of domestic violence against his wife) Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. *250Painter; 356 Md. 293, 739 A.2d 24 (1999). In line with these cases, in the circumstances here present, a lawyer’s ensuring that a police investigation is thwarted by sending a main suspect known by him to be the killer in a murder case to a distant country necessarily reflects adversely on that lawyer’s trustworthiness.
C. Rule 8.4(d) — Prejudice to the Administration of Justice
Generally, this Court has found conduct to be prejudicial to the administration of justice in violation of Rule 8.4(d) when there has either been conduct that is criminal in nature or conduct that relates to the practice of law. In the case sub judice, we find that respondent’s actions are so appalling that either shoe will fit; respondent’s acts are both criminal in nature and directly harmful to the legal profession.
A criminal conviction is not a prerequisite for finding a violation of Rule 8.4(d) and conduct prejudicial to the administration of justice. Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Breschi, 340 Md. 590, 600, 667 A.2d 659, 664 (1995).14 Based on our discussions, supra, of how respondent’s actions constitute the crimes of obstructing and hindering a police officer, it necessarily follows that respondent’s criminal conduct is prejudicial to the administration of justice in violation of Rule 8.4(d).
Finding respondent’s criminal conduct prejudicial to the administration of justice finds support in a disciplinary proceeding from the state of Alaska, albeit, the attorney there being disbarred had been convicted of criminal offenses. In *251the case at bar, respondent cannot be tried in Maryland because he remains in Israel. In In re Webb, 602 P.2d 408 (Alaska 1979), the Supreme Court of Alaska found an attorney’s conviction for being an accessory after the fact to be inherently prejudicial to the administration of justice. In that case, the court said:
“Duncan Webb’s criminal conduct resulting in his conviction of the felony offense of accessory after the fact to first degree murder is a serious crime within the meaning of Rule 23 of the Alaska Bar Rules and constitutes engaging in illegal conduct involving moral turpitude in violation of DR 1-102(A)(3) of the Code of Professional Responsibility as well as engaging in conduct that is prejudicial to the administration of justice in violation of DR 1-102(A)(5) of the Code of Professional Responsibility.”
Id. at 410 (emphasis added). That court went on to quote facts from Mr. Webb’s criminal case in a footnote that said:
“ ‘Webb did more than simply lie. After the commission of a most brutal and coldblooded murder, he concealed or aided the murderers with knowledge that they had committed first degree murder and with intent that they might avoid or escape from arrest, trial, or conviction.’ ”
Id. at 410, n. 10 (quoting Webb v. State, 580 P.2d 295, 304 (Alaska 1978)). Here, respondent did more than lie or hide the truth from Detective Hamill. He took intentional steps to improperly aid his son to avoid the consequences of his son’s criminal conduct. Simply stated, his actions were prejudicial to the administration of justice.
Regardless of the criminal nature of respondent’s actions, his thwarting of Detective Hamill’s investigation was prejudicial to the administration of justice. “This Court has recognized that a lawyer is subject to professional discipline under the Rules of Professional Conduct for conduct the lawyer engages in outside his or her role as a lawyer.” Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Childress (Childress I), 360 Md. 373, 383, 758 A.2d 117, 122 (2000). “We have also held that a criminal conviction is not a condition precedent for a finding of *252a violation of Rule 8.4(d) and conduct prejudicial to the administration of justice.” Id. at 385, 758 A.2d at 123. In Childress I, we did not address the outer margins of Rule 8.4(d), as the admitted conduct was “arguably criminal conduct.” Id. at 385-86, 758 A.2d at 123. We went on to say that the harm, or potential harm, from that respondent’s conduct was “patent.” Id. at 386, 758 A.2d at 123.
When we have found a lawyer’s non-criminal conduct to prejudice the administration of justice, that lawyer’s conduct generally concerned his or her own legal practice or relationship with his or her clients,15 but this has not always been the case.16 In the case sub judice, respondent’s patent law practice and his clients appear to be unaffected by respondent’s private actions, whether those actions are criminal or otherwise, in reference to his son’s criminal plight. Taking a broad view of the situation allows us to see that it is clear that, although respondent’s interference with Detective Hamill’s *253investigation does not directly affect his practice or clients, it has considerable consequences on other facets of the justice system.
By assisting his son in the egregious manner that he did, respondent essentially interfered with the natural progression of the criminal justice system. Instead of Detective Hamill completing a full investigation of respondent’s son, turning the case over to the Montgomery County State’s Attorney’s Office for consideration of prosecution and, if prosecuted, ultimately having a jury of respondent’s son’s peers decide Samuel Sheinbein’s fate, respondent effectively usurped the role of twelve Maryland citizens and substituted it with his own paternal instincts. Respondent made it impossible for the justice system to work. A jury of his peers may have believed that Samuel Sheinbein acted in self defense and might have rendered a verdict of not guilty. As a direct consequence of the actions of the respondent, we will never know how the Maryland criminal justice system would have treated Samuel Sheinbein. This is inappropriate.
This Court has long held lawyers to a higher standard of conduct than the average citizen. See Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Alison, 317 Md. 523, 565 A.2d 660 (1989). In Alison, we stated:
“Upon admission to the Bar, a lawyer accepts and agrees to be bound by rules of conduct significantly more demanding than the requirements of law applicable to other members of society. As the Preamble to the Rules of Professional Conduct states:
‘A lawyer is a representative of clients, an officer of the legal system and a public citizen having special responsibility for the quality of justice.
‘A lawyer’s conduct should conform to the requirements of the law, both in professional service to clients and in the lawyer’s business and personal affairs. A lawyer should use the law’s procedures only for legitimate purposes and not to harass or intimidate others. A lawyer *254should demonstrate respect for the legal system and for those who serve it, including judges, other lawyers and public officials.’ ”
Id. at 535, 565 A.2d at 665-66. In Alison, we found Mr. Alison’s conduct, which included disorderly conduct, harassment, use of inappropriate language in court and verbal abuse of officers of the court, to be conduct that was prejudicial to the administration of justice. We said, “[t]hat such conduct does not at the moment of its occurrence delay the proceedings or cause a miscarriage of justice in the manner being tried is not the test. Conduct of this type breeds disrespect for the courts and for the legal profession.” Id. at 536, 565 A.2d at 666. If a lawyer’s belligerent conduct and improper interference with a court proceeding breeds contempt for the legal profession, so too must the serious improper perversion of the judicial process at the hands of a lawyer in the position in which respondent found himself. Inherent in an attorney’s duty is the upholding of the law, even above his own or his family’s interests. As such, “[pjublic confidence in the legal profession is a critical facet to the proper administration of justice.” Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Clark, 363 Md. 169, 183, 767 A.2d 865, 873 (2001).
Here, a lawyer, who was familiar with the inner workings of the system and had sworn to uphold its laws, did everything in his power to ensure that his son circumvent that system and flee to another country, thus stalling an ongoing, legal police investigation and possible prosecution. Maryland has a paramount interest in maintaining the integrity of the judicial process of its courts. See Alison, 317 Md. at 537, 565 A.2d at 666 (citing Cox v. Louisiana, 379 U.S. 559, 563-64, 85 S.Ct. 476, 480-81, 13 L.Ed.2d 487, 492 (1965)). Respondent’s actions totally stymied the criminal justice system and subsequently the judicial process in Maryland in respect to a serious criminal offense. It is difficult to see, as respondent suggests, how respondent’s blatant interference with an ongoing police investigation “would not seriously impair public confidence in the entire legal profession” and not, as a result, impair public confidence in the integrity of the courts. When *255an officer of the legal system improperly thwarts the mechanisms within it, he shows a disrespect for that system and the public confidence in the legal profession as a whole necessarily suffers a devastating blow. There can be no question that the public confidence in the legal profession has been adversely affected by respondent’s conduct.
III. Sanction
We enumerated the purposes behind and the factors to be considered in our sanctioning process in Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Clark when we stated:
“This Court is mindful that the purpose of the sanctions is to protect the public, to deter other lawyers from engaging in violations of the Maryland Rules of Professional Conduct, and to maintain the integrity of the legal profession. See Attorney Grievance Comm’n of Maryland v. Hess, 352 Md. 438, 453, 722 A.2d 905, 913 (1999) (quoting Attorney Grievance Comm’n of Maryland v. Webster, 348 Md. 662, 678, 705 A.2d 1135, 1143 (1998)). We have stated that ‘[t]he public is protected when sanctions are imposed that are commensurate with the nature and gravity of the violations and the intent with which they were committed.’ Attorney Grievance Comm’n of Maryland v. Awuah, 346 Md. 420, 435, 697 A.2d 446, 454 (1997). Therefore, the appropriate sanction depends upon the facts and circumstances of each particular case, including consideration of any mitigating factors. See Attorney Grievance Comm’n of Maryland v. Atkinson, 357 Md. 646, 656, 745 A.2d 1086, 1092 (2000); Attorney Grievance Comm’n of Maryland v. Gavin, 350 Md. 176, 197-98, 711 A.2d 193, 204 (1998).”
Clark, 363 Md. at 183-84, 767 A.2d at 873. In addition, we have stated that “[ijmposing a sanction protects the public interest ‘because it demonstrates to members of the legal profession the type of conduct which will not be tolerated.’ ” Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Mooney, 359 Md. 56, 96, 753 A.2d 17, 38 (2000) (quoting Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Ober, 350 Md. 616, 631-32, 714 A.2d 856, 864 (1998)) (citation omitted).
*256This Court is not aware of any existing Maryland case that bears directly upon the appropriate sanction for conduct such as that in the case at bar, in that the facts here present are of first impression for this Court. However, a few instances where this Court held that disbarment was appropriate provide some guidance. We have consistently disbarred attorneys for the misappropriation of money. See Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Vanderlinde, 364 Md. 376, 773 A.2d 463 (2001) (disbarring attorney for misappropriation of funds unrelated to the attorney’s practice of law); Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Sabghir, 350 Md. 67, 710 A.2d 926 (1998) (disbarring attorney for misappropriation and fraud relating to money); Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Hollis, 347 Md. 547, 702 A.2d 223 (1997) (disbarring attorney for misappropriating over $80,000); Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. White, 328 Md. 412, 614 A.2d 955 (1992) (disbarring attorney who misappropriated over $14,000 of client’s money); Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Ezrin, 312 Md. 603, 541 A.2d 966 (1988) (disbarring attorney for embezzling over $200,000 from his firm); and Fellner v. Bar Association of Baltimore City, 213 Md. 243, 131 A.2d 729 (1957) (disbarring attorney for inserting slugs in lieu of quarters in parking meters). We have also disbarred attorneys for various crimes. See Maryland State Bar Ass’n v. Hirsch, 274 Md. 368, 335 A.2d 108 (1975), cert. denied, 422 U.S. 1012, 95 S.Ct. 2638, 45 L.Ed.2d 676 (1975) (disbarring attorney for bribery); Maryland State Bar Ass’n v. Agnew, 271 Md. 543, 318 A.2d 811 (1974) (disbarring attorney for willful evasion of income taxes). This Court regards the interference with the judicial process resulting in a murder suspect escaping prosecution under Maryland law to be as serious, or even more so, than the aforementioned conduct.17
*257Our sister states of Colorado, Alaska and Oregon provide guidance more directly on point. While the seriousness of the underlying disputes are different, there are close similarities to the present case and People v. Chappell, 927 P.2d 829 (Colo.1996), where the Colorado Supreme Court disbarred an attorney who advised and materially assisted her client in a custody proceeding to flee the jurisdiction after the attorney learned that a court-appointed expert was recommending that her client’s husband be granted sole custody. The attorney knew that the recommendation was not mandatory, but was likely to be followed by the court. The facts in Chappell, relevant to the case sub judice are:
“[T]he respondent [attorney Lorraine Chappell] told her client that the court would probably accept Dr. LaCrosse’s [the court appointed attorney] recommendations. The wife states that the respondent advised her as her attorney to stay, but as a mother to run. The respondent also informed her client about a network of safehouses for people in her situation, and helped her to liquidate her assets and empty her bank accounts. The respondent contacted a friend of her client and asked the friend to pack her client’s belongings from the marital home and to put them in storage. The friend states that the respondent let her into the home with a key, and gave her money, provided to the respondent by her client, to pay for the moving and storage. The respondent kept the storage locker key according to the friend.
“The respondent appeared for the temporary orders hearing on March 11, 1994 without her client. The respondent’s request for a one week continuance was granted. Nevertheless, the court allowed the husband to testify concerning the temporary orders. The respondent argued against a change in the interim orders and stated that the child was doing well in his own home. When the trial judge questioned her as to the whereabouts of her client, the respondent replied that she was unable to answer because of the attorney-client privilege. The court then ordered an imme*258diate change of custody to the husband, as well as continued support payments....
“A permanent orders hearing was held in March 1995. The -wife testified that the respondent had explained ‘the underground’ to her, had assisted in emptying her bank accounts, and had advised her on how to avoid being caught....
“The respondent’s conduct violated R.P.C. 1.2(d) (a lawyer ‘shall not counsel a client to engage, or assist a client, in conduct that the lawyer knows is criminal or fraudulent’); R.P.C. 3.3(a)(2) (a lawyer shall not knowingly fail to disclose a material fact to a tribunal when disclosure is necessary to avoid assisting a criminal or fraudulent act by the client); R.P.C. 8.4(b) (it is professional misconduct for a lawyer to commit a criminal act by aiding the lawyer’s client to commit a crime); and R.P.C. 8.4(c) (it is professional misconduct for a lawyer to engage in conduct involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit or misrepresentation).”
Id. at 829-31 (alterations added). While Chappell involved a respondent who was convicted of a crime arising out of her conduct and made affirmative misrepresentations to a tribunal, the underlying conduct of respondent in the case at bar is essentially the same. Like respondent, Ms. Chappell conceived the idea for another to flee the jurisdiction, initiated the plan and affirmatively assisted the fugitive in obtaining her goal of remaining undetected. Ms. Chappell informed her client of the feasibility of fleeing Colorado, financially assisted her departure and helped with arrangements for places for her client to stay. Here, respondent did essentially the same thing. He came up. with the plan, brought Samuel his passport, bought him an airline ticket to Israel and contacted his cousin there to set up a place for Samuel to stay. He also subsequently fled to Israel, placing himself beyond the easy reach of Maryland authorities.
We find further support in the case of In re Webb, 602 P.2d at 410, a case arising out of the Supreme Court of Alaska, *259where that court disbarred an attorney for his conviction of accessory after the fact to murder. Mr. Webb lied to police on several occasions and aided the murderers, with knowledge of their crime, and “with intent that they might avoid or escape from arrest, trial, or conviction.” Webb v. State, 580 P.2d at 304. Mr. Webb asserted that his actions were the direct result of duress, as he claimed the murderers threatened his life. The jury convicted him for accessory after the fact and the appellate court later said:
“It is true that Webb will probably be disbarred and, if so, will no longer be able to engage in the practice of law. He has brought great dishonor upon the legal profession. His criminal conduct, employing conscious dishonesty, deserves greater condemnation than if it were committed by one not obligated to adhere to high standards of honor and integrity.”
Id. (footnote omitted). The subsequent disciplinary action, in turn, resulted in the disbarment of Mr. Webb for his actions in assisting felons to escape justice. In re Webb, 602 P.2d at 410.
In In re Garvey, 325 Or. 34, 932 P.2d 549 (1997), the Supreme Court of Oregon disbarred a lawyer engaged in serious criminal conduct, holding that the conduct was prejudicial to the administration of justice. While several claims of misconduct, including negligence with respect to several of his clients, were alleged against Mr. Garvey, the court found disbarment would have been appropriate even if only Mr. Garvey’s criminal conduct was considered, as “Oregon lawyers who have engaged in serious criminal misconduct have been disbarred, whether or not they have been convicted of a crime.” 18 Id. at 44, 932 P.2d at 553. In Garvey, the court found a serious crime had been committed when Mr. Garvey brought his client, inmate Jeff Gordon, money to facilitate his client’s escape from jail and later lied about those facts under *260oath. Id. at 39, 932 P.2d at 551. Although Mr. Garvey was convicted for his crimes, he failed to appear for his sentencing and was a fugitive from justice at the time of his disciplinary hearing. Id. at 40, 932 P.2d at 551. The Oregon court said:
“[T]he accused aided his client’s escape from a correctional facility, thereby substantially harming the court procedures in that client’s criminal case. In those ways, the accused’s acts prejudiced the administration of justice.
“The criminal acts of the accused caused actual and substantial injury to the public and the legal system. He aided a client in breaking the law and lied to the grand jury.”
Id. at 42, 932 P.2d at 552-53. Although Mr. Garvey’s criminal conduct included lying under oath and assisting his client to escape from jail, it is essentially akin, in magnitude, to respondent’s conduct of assisting his son to abscond to Israel. In the case sub judice, although yet to be convicted of a crime, (in part because respondent, like Mr. Garvey, is a fugitive), respondent knowingly and directly aided a murder suspect’s fleeing from Maryland authorities.
Respondent argues that his situation presents “extenuating circumstances” that led to his abhorrent behavior. He focuses on the timing of the situation and that it precluded “mature reflection as to a ‘proper’ course of action.” This argument neglects to mention the time and care respondent showed in devising an escape route for his son. He thought enough in advance to bring his son’s passport from Maryland to New York City in contemplation of his son’s need to leave the country. Respondent also suggests that he “cooperated” with the authorities by turning oyer information and evidence to the police, such as the car his son and Needle drove to New York and its contents, which included a shotgun, stun gun, and letters written by the two young men. This alleged “assisting” of Detective Hamill’s investigation occurred only after respondent had encouraged and assisted his son to flee beyond *261the reach of Maryland’s jurisdiction. The prejudice to the administration of justice had already occurred.
Our own court’s precedent, case law from our sister states, Bar Counsel’s recommendation of disbarment and the unique and egregious factual scenario presented by respondent’s utter abandonment of proper professional conduct in the face of the circumstances of Mr. Tello’s murder leads this Court to only one conclusion: that respondent is no longer fit to practice law.
This is not a case of this Court passing moral or criminal judgment on a father for trying to protect his youngest son, nor is it the Court punishing a surrogate for a crime where the accused has escaped the reach of Maryland’s law. In fact, respondent is currently beyond the reach of the state’s jurisdiction. It is merely the process by which this Court protects the public from attorneys whose actions fly in the face of their legal obligations to the public and to their own profession. We shall disbar respondent.
IT IS SO ORDERED; RESPONDENT SHALL PAY ALL COSTS AS TAXED BY THE CLERK OF THIS COURT INCLUDING THE COSTS OF ALL TRANSCRIPTS PURSUANT TO MARYLAND RULE 16-715(c), FOR WHICH SUM JUDGMENT IS ENTERED IN FAVOR OF THE ATTORNEY GRIEVANCE COMMISSION OF MARYLAND AGAINST SOL SHEINBEIN.
. Mr. Sheinbein was admitted to the Maryland Bar on June 24, 1971 and is engaged in the practice of patent law from Israel, his current place of residence.
. Rule 16-709(a) states that ”[c]harges against an attorney shall be filed by the Bar Counsel acting at the direction of the Review Board.” We note that this reference is to Md. Rule 16-709(a) as stated in the 2001 edition of the Maryland Rules. What was formerly comprised in Rule 16-709 is now encompassed in several different rules in the 2002 edition.
. See BC Docket Nos.2000-113-16-6; 2000-222-00-6.
. Rule 16-709(b) states that the “Court of Appeals by order may direct that the charges be transmitted to and heard in any court and shall designate the judge or judges to hear the charges and the clerk responsible for maintaining the record in the proceeding.”
Rule 16-711 (a) states that a "wrillen statement of the findings of facts and conclusions of law shall be filed in the record of the proceedings and copies sent to all parties.”
We note that these references to Md. Rules 16-709(b) and 16-711 (a) are as stated in the 2001 edition of the Maryland Rules. What was formerly comprised in Rule 16-709 is now encompassed in several different Rules in the 2002 edition. What was Rule 16-711 (a) is now encompassed in Rule 16-759.
. Respondent's alleged misconduct concerns his actions in sending his son, Samuel Sheinbein, to Israel after respondent had been told by his son that the son had killed Mr. Tello and after respondent knew that Samuel was being investigated by Detective Hamill in relation to the murder of Mr. Tello.
. We note that the hearing judge erred when transcribing this date into these findings of fact. Consistent with the transcript of Detective Hamill’s testimony, the date the warrant was presented to respondent was September 19, 1997.
. The only possible relevance of this self-defense testimony would be as to whether respondent had the requisite intent to hinder Detective HamilTs investigation. The hearing judge spoke to this and it will be discussed by this Court infra.
. Although respondent stated that his son claimed self-defense, that issue is for a jury to decide. Samuel was eventually charged wilh a felony. In addition, in 1999, Samuel Sheinbein pled guilty in an Israeli court to killing Mr. Tello and was sentenced to twenty-four years in an Israeli prison. He is eligible for parole after sixteen years of imprisonment and he is eligible to apply for weekend furlough privileges after only four years. See Jesse Hallee, The Sheinbein Legacy: Israel’s Refusal to Grant Extradition as a Model of Complexity, 15 Am. U. Int’l L.Rev., 667, 705-06, 706, n. 214 (2001).
. See Childress, 364 Md. at 55, 770 A.2d at 689; Garland, 345 Md. at 390, 692 A.2d at 468; and Proctor, 309 Md. at 418, 524 A.2d at 776.
. Judge Pincus quoted'from the Maryland Criminal Jury Instructions and Commentary, Second Edition, § 3.01 General Intent, p. 185 (citing Sandstrom v. Montana, 442 U.S. 510, 99 S.Ct. 2450, 61 L.Ed.2d 39 (1979)).
. Respondent was not present at the March 20, 2002 hearing in front of Judge Pincus; he is presently in Israel. There is currently an *246outstanding warrant for respondent’s arrest. See Arrest Warrant on Charging Document, Warrant No. D980442735 in State of Maryland v. Sol Sheinbein, District Court of Maryland for Montgomery County, Case No. 6D00071133. Therefore, respondent’s testimony in this record is the transcript from respondent's grand jury testimony that was heard in front of the Montgomery County Grand Jury on September 25, 1997. Judge Pincus heard no live testimony from respondent. However, Judge Pincus was still in the best position to assess the credibility of the evidence, as he did observe the demeanor and live testimony of the remaining witnesses. See Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Bakas, 323 Md. 395, 402, 593 A.2d 1087, 1091 (1991) (stating how, in the context of an attorney grievance proceeding, a hearing judge is in the best position to assess the credibility of witnesses).
. During respondent’s Grand Jury testimony, the prosecutor directly asked respondent, “Whose idea was it to go to Israel?” Respondent replied, "It was mine.”
. Maryland Rule 16-759 requires that this Court conduct a “de novo" review of the hearing court judge's conclusions of law. The Rule then states that this Court “may” pay certain deference to the hearing judge's findings and conclusions if we choose to do so. We are not bound to them if ihere is clear and convincing evidence indicating additional findings are appropriate. The rule in paragraph (B) provides, as relevant to our discussion, that the “Court may confine its review to the findings of fact challenged by the exceptions." However, as to conclusions of law, the review is completely “de novo." In ihe case sub judice the charges were general, i.e., that respondent had violated the provisions of Rule 8.4(b) and (d); without specifying particular criminal offenses respondent was alleged to have committed. “[T]he ultimate decision as to whether a lawyer has violated professional rules rests with this Court.” Gavin, 350 Md. at 189, 711 A.2d at. 200 (citing Garland, 345 Md. at 392, 692 A.2d at 469; Breschi, 340 Md. at 599, 667 A.2d at 663).
. Although respondent in this case has not been convicted of any crime, there are charges pending in Montgomery County. See Statement of Charges in State of Maryland v. Sol Sheinbein, District Court of Maryland for Montgomery, Case No. 6D00071133; an Arrest Warrant on Charging Document, Warrant No. D980442735 in State of Maryland v. Sol Sheinbein, District Court of Maryland for Montgomery County, Case No. 6D00071133; Application for Statement of Charges in State of Maryland v. Sol Sheinbein, Case No 6D00071133. Respondent is also a citizen of Israel and currently resides there.
. See Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Goldsborough, 330 Md. 342, 624 A.2d 503 (1993) (finding a violation of Rule 8.4(d) where the lawyer had punished his clients and co-workers by spanking); but see Childress I, 360 Md. at 385, 758 A.2d at 123 (Where Judge Raker, for the court, wrote, "While it is true that a review of our cases might suggest that Rule 8.4(d) has been applied only to conduct which is related to the practice of law, directly or indirectly, or where there has been a criminal conviction or conduct which is criminal in nature, in this case we need not address the margins of Rule 8.4(d) and whether a lawyer's non-criminal, purely private conduct might be a basis for discipline under the Rule’’).
. In Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Richardson, 350 Md. 354, 712 A.2d 525 (1998) we said:
"The respondent argues that to be conduct that is prejudicial to the administration of justice, the act must be one that hinders or otherwise interferes with a judicial proceeding of which he is a party or represents a party. This Court has never so narrowly defined Rule 8.4(d). We have instead recognized that conduct that impacts on the image or the perception of the courts or the legal profession, see Attorney Griev. Comm'n v. Alison, 317 Md. 523, 536, 565 A.2d 660, 666 (1989) and that engenders disrespect for the courts and for the legal profession may be prejudicial to the administration of justice. Lawyers are officers of the court and their conduct must be assessed in that light.”
Id. at 368, 712 A.2d at 532.
. Respondent argues that we are not "dealing with something like misappropriation, drunk driving or drug abuse, where one need not be told that the conduct is wrong, it is clearly patently wrong, and reflects not only on the individual, but on the profession." This Court fails to see how a lawyer (or even the least educated citizen amongst us) needs to be told that assisting a suspect in a homicide investigation, who he knows committed the homicide, to flee the country is anything but patently wrong.
. The Garvey court said, "Application of those guidelines to the conduct of the accused establishes that under the ABA standards, the appropriate sanction here is disbarment, even without regard to the rule violations involving the Chavez and Garcia [non-criminal] matters.” Id. at 44, 932 P.2d at 553 (alteration added).

=== CASE 9737253 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:20:04.506169+00 ===

Dissenting Opinion by
ELDRIDGE, J.,
in which RAKER, J., joins.
The majority today holds that Bar Counsel presented sufficient facts to establish that the respondent committed the crime of obstructing or hindering a police officer and that, therefore, his conduct violated MRPC 8.4(b).1 The majority *262states that “Respondent’s inappropriate conduct stems from sending his son to Israel with the knowledge that Samuel [his son] had committed a homicide in Maryland.” Furthermore, the majority also finds respondent’s actions to be “so appalling” and “egregious” that his conduct is prejudicial to the administration of justice in violation of MRPC 8.4(d).2 In fact, the extreme language and tone of the majority opinion might lead a reader to conclude that the respondent was the one who committed the homicide. Despite the majority’s characterizations of the respondent’s conduct, I do not believe that his conduct, when viewed separately from the underlying crime committed by his son, constitutes misconduct by a criminal act under MRPC 8.4(b) or conduct prejudicial to the administration of justice under MRPC 8.4(d).
I.
As stated by the majority, quoting from Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Gavin, 350 Md. 176, 189, 711 A.2d 193, 200 (1998), under the Maryland Rules, “ ‘[t]his Court has original and complete jurisdiction over attorney disciplinary proceedings.’ ”3 In our independent review of the record, we must *263determine whether the findings of the hearing judge, Judge Pincus, are based upon clear and convincing evidence. Under ordinary circumstances, a “hearing court’s findings of fact are prima facie correct and will not be disturbed unless they are shown to be clearly erroneous.” Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Garland, 345 Md. 383, 392, 692 A.2d 465, 469 (1997). Such deference is paid because “[t]he hearing judge is in the best position to evaluate the credibility of the witnesses and to decide which one to believe and ... to pick and choose which evidence to rely upon.” Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Monfried, 368 Md. 373, 390, 794 A.2d 92, 101 (2002). Usually, it is the hearing judge who is uniquely positioned to evaluate all aspects of a witness’s demeanor — including the expression of his countenance, how he sits or stands, whether he is inordinately nervous, his coloration during critical examination, the modulation or pace of his speech and other non-verbal communication. These factors may convince the observing judge whether the witness is testifying truthfully or falsely. These *264same factors, however, are entirely unavailable to a reader of the transcript. Cold paper records supply none of this information.
Thus, contrary to the majority’s view, the instant case does not require us to give the normal deference to the hearing judge’s findings on the respondent’s credibility. Because the respondent was not present at the hearing below, Judge Pincus based his credibility determinations solely upon the transcript of the respondent’s testimony at the Grand Jury proceedings, the same cold record before us today. As such, the members of this Court are just as capable of assessing the respondent’s credibility as the hearing judge, and no special deference is warranted for Judge Pincus’s findings concerning the respondent’s credibility.
The majority also overlooks the principle that “[t]he ‘clear and convincing’ standard of Rule [BV10 d] applies to the measure of proof imposed upon the Attorney Grievance Commission in factual determinations essential to establishing its case against the attorney. * * * It does not apply to factual matters sought to be established by the attorney in defense of the attorney’s position.... As to this, the preponderance of evidence standard is the applicable measure of proof.” Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Bakas, 322 Md. 603, 606, 589 A.2d 52, 53 (1991), quoting Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Bailey, 285 Md. 631, 644, 403 A.2d 1261, 1268 (1979). See also Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Garfield, 369 Md. 85, 99 n. 13, 797 A.2d 757, 765 n. 13 (2002). Therefore, while it is incumbent upon Bar Counsel to prove each of the charges by clear and convincing evidence, respondent need only establish facts in his defense by a preponderance of the evidence.
II.
As discussed above, when alleging that an attorney’s actions violate the MRPC by constituting a crime, the standard of proof imposed upon Bar Counsel is to prove each element of *265the offense by clear and convincing evidence.4 See Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Childress, 364 Md. 48, 55, 770 A.2d 685, 689 (2001). In light of this standard, the evidence presented by Bar Counsel was insufficient to establish the requisite specific intent to hinder Detective Hamill in the performance of her investigation. Moreover, I strongly doubt that the respondent’s actions constituted the offense of hindering or obstructing a police officer. Instead, the effect of the respondent’s conduct, at most, was to prevent or delay a homicide prosecution by the State’s Attorney in Montgomery County in favor of a homicide prosecution, a conviction, and a 24-year prison sentence in Israel.
We noted in Cover v. State, 297 Md. 398, 400, 466 A.2d 1276, 1277 (1983), that, although the crime of hindering a police officer in the performance of the officer’s duties was a statutory one in many States, it remained a common law offense in Maryland. See also DiPino v. Davis, 354 Md. 18, 32, 729 A.2d 354, 361 (1999); Busch v. State, 289 Md. 669, 675, 426 A.2d 954, 957 (1981); Roddy v. Finnegan, 43 Md. 490, 505 (1876); Howard v. State, 32 Md.App. 75, 82, 359 A.2d 568, 573 (1976). Determining the scope of the crime of “hindering,” “obstruction,” or “interfering” is difficult, however, as the cases addressing this offense do not make any attempt to define or circumscribe the precise types of activities included in these vague terms.5
*266Thus, the Cover Court, in analyzing whether the State had proven the elements of the crime of obstruction or hindering a police officer, found it helpful to separate conduct capable of hindering a police officer into three categories, moving progressively from the more direct obstructions to the more attenuated ones. The Court in Cover, 297 Md. at 405-406, 466 A.2d at 1280, quoting Lidstone, The Offence of Obstruction: (2) Obstructing Freedom,?, [1983] Crim. L.Rev. 29, stated (footnotes omitted):
“Positive direct obstruction: ‘[T]hose cases in which the constable acts directly against the citizen or his property and is physically resisted.’ Id. at 30.
“Passive direct obstruction: Those cases ‘in which the constable seeks to make the citizen act directly, and the citizen refuses or fails to act as required.’ Id.
“Positive indirect obstruction: Those cases in which ‘the police are not acting directly against the citizen but are acting indirectly against other citizens who are, or may be, about to commit offences against the criminal law, and the citizen does an act which obstructs them in their general duty to prevent or detect crime, intending to frustrate the police operation.’ Id.”
In the case at bar, the charged conduct at issue falls into this last attenuated category — an alleged indirect hindering.
The only actions of the respondent, forming the basis for the majority’s conclusions, are respondent’s “assisting] his son to circumvent the law by absconding.” Bar Counsel had also alleged that respondent’s failure to notify Detective Hamill of his contacts with Samuel was an omission hindering Detective Hamill in the performance of her duties. This notion can be disposed of by noting that when these actions transpired, it is undisputed that the respondent had not been notified that an arrest warrant had issued for Samuel Sheinbein. Detective Hamill testified that respondent’s attorney, Paul T. Stein, was informed of the arrest warrant the day after Samuel went to Israel. Until an arrest warrant issued, there was no legal duty imposed upon the respondent to *267inform Detective Hamill of his son’s contacts and whereabouts. As such, this omission cannot be the basis of the second element of the charge of obstruction or hindering. The cases finding an obstruction or hindering resulting from an omission or failure to follow police instructions are clearly distinguishable. These cases typically involve refusal to follow an officer’s order to move or disperse. See, e.g., City of Chicago v. Meyer, 44 Ill.2d 1, 253 N.E.2d 400 (1969), cert. denied, 397 U.S. 1024, 90 S.Ct. 1262, 25 L.Ed.2d 534 (1970); City of Chicago v. Lynd, 47 Ill.2d 205, 265 N.E.2d 116 (1970), cert. denied, 402 U.S. 923, 91 S.Ct. 1383, 28 L.Ed.2d 662 (1971).
After a comprehensive review of the obstruction or hindering cases, this Court in Cover v. State, supra, 297 Md. at 413, 466 A.2d at 1284, articulated the elements of the offense:
“(1) A police officer engaged in the performance of a duty;
“(2) An act, or perhaps an omission, by the accused which obstructs or hinders the officer in the performance of that duty;
“(3) Knowledge by the accused of facts comprising element (1); and
“(4) Intent to obstruct or hinder the officer by the act or omission constituting element (2).”
Furthermore, we acknowledged that it is often difficult to determine what acts or omissions constitute obstructing or hindering the performance of an officer’s duty. Ibid.
The respondent does not challenge the establishment of the first and third elements of the offense, namely that Detective Hamill was a police officer engaged in the performance of her duties and that respondent had knowledge of her involvement in the matter. Nevertheless, Bar Counsel failed to establish the second element, i.e., an act or omission that obstructs or hinders, and the fourth element, i.e., a specific intent to hinder or obstruct.
*268A.
The underlying case against respondent’s son presented a situation where two different sovereigns had jurisdiction to prosecute Samuel Sheinbein for his involvement in the homicide.6 Without question, the State of Maryland had jurisdiction to prosecute Samuel based on territoriality. Under this concept, Maryland had plenary power to make its substantive laws applicable to any person or occurrence within its territorial boundaries and plenary power to enforce its laws within its territorial boundaries. Additionally, however, the State of Israel had jurisdiction to prosecute Samuel based on his Israeli nationality.7 As a basis for the jurisdiction to prescribe, the nationality principle historically referred to a nation’s authority to control the conduct of its citizens, no matter where that conduct took place. See Restatement (Third) of Foreign Relations Law of the United States, § 402(2) (1987). *269See also Blackmer v. United States, 284 U.S. 421, 437 n. 2, 52 S.Ct. 252, 254 n. 2, 76 L.Ed. 375, 382 n. 2 (1932).
Thus, the question inevitably arises, in a situation where two sovereigns have jurisdiction over a particular offense, whether an attorney or parent, who has counseled his or her client or child to proceed to the jurisdiction with the lesser penalty, has committed any misconduct? The answer to this question is clearly “No.” Submission to custody in one jurisdiction, whether the result of an attorney’s advice, or a parent’s advice, or the client’s uncounseled choice, or a decision by the Attorney General, necessarily hinders prosecution in the other jurisdiction. Hence, even assuming arguendo that the respondent had sent his son to Israel with the specific intent of opting for Israel’s prosecution over prosecution in Maryland, the action is not criminal. In sum, respondent’s “devising and facilitating his son’s departure to Israel,” in the language of the majority opinion, does not bring him within the ambit of the offense of obstruction or hindering.
Indeed, when more than one sovereign has jurisdiction to prosecute a person for homicide, it appears to be entirely appropriate for those on the prosecution side to send the alleged perpetrator to the sovereign likely to impose the most severe punishment.8 According to the majority opinion, however, it is not appropriate for those on the defense side to send the alleged perpetrator to the sovereign likely to impose a less severe punishment. If prosecutors are free to forum-shop for a jurisdiction with more severe penalties, or a broader capital punishment statute, when choosing where to prosecute the accused, the defense should not be punished for sending the accused to a jurisdiction with less severe maximum penalties.
*270It would be a different case if there were any evidence in the record that the respondent had either tried to evade prosecution in Israel or had sent his son to a country with no jurisdiction to prosecute the homicide.9 But that is not the case before us. Not only did the respondent dispatch his older son, Robert, to bring Samuel back to Maryland to face charges, but once Samuel arrived in Israel, there was no attempt to hide him from the Israeli authorities, or to send him out of Israel to any number of neighboring countries. It was only a matter of days before the Israeli police took custody of Samuel, unobstructed and unhindered.10
Additionally, the majority claims that the respondent’s conduct “denied Detective Hamill any opportunity to pursue investigatory leads.” Yet, the respondent allowed Detective Hamill to execute the search warrant at his home and cooperated with her by providing her with Samuel’s credit card number, as well as his son’s cellular phone number. In light of these facts, the only other “investigatory leads” for Detective Hamill to cull would result from questioning Samuel.
Two points should be made with regard to this. First, even if the respondent had contacted Detective Hamill upon hear*271ing from his son, the likelihood that any attempt at questioning Samuel would have elicited investigatory leads is remote. Unlike a witness, who can be compelled to testify under the sanction of contempt, Samuel was free to invoke his constitutional privilege against self-incrimination, and likely would have, as his entire family had done prior to the respondent’s testifying before the Grand Jury. See Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law at 6. This is especially likely since the record reflects that the respondent retained an attorney, Paul T. Stein, for his son the morning after the search warrant was executed. Under Massiah v. United States, 377 U.S. 201, 84 S.Ct. 1199, 12 L.Ed.2d 246 (1964), even if the opportunity for questioning Samuel had presented itself, once the arrest warrant issued Detective Hamill could not have questioned Samuel without his attorney present. Thus, with his attorney present during questioning, it is extremely doubtful that Samuel would have given Detective Hamill any investigatory leads.
Secondly, it bears repetition that, at most, the effect of the respondent’s conduct was to prevent or delay a homicide prosecution by the State’s Attorney in Montgomery County in favor of a prosecution, conviction, and sentencing in Israel. Samuel’s departure to Israel on the evening of September 21st could not have “denied Detective Hamill any opportunity to pursue investigatory leads,” because the record reveals that the arrest warrant was issued on September 20th. By the time Samuel departed, Detective Hamill’s investigation was complete; the evidence necessary for an arrest had already culminated into a warrant, and the State’s case against Samuel Sheinbein had entered the prosecution phase. Although a Maryland State’s Attorney may have been hindered in prosecuting a high profile case, there simply was no hindering of a police officer.11
*272B.
Another necessary element of obstruction or hindering a police officer is the “[i]ntent to obstruct or hinder the officer by the act or omission constituting [the second] element.” Cover v. State, supra, 297 Md. at 413, 466 A.2d at 1284. Here, a holding of obstruction or hindering must turn on whether Bar Counsel established, by clear and convincing evidence, that respondent had the requisite specific intent to hinder Detective Hamill’s investigation by sending Samuel to Israel. We have recently explained the meaning of specific intent in Chen v. State, 370 Md. 99, 111 n. 5, 803 A.2d 518, 524 n. 5 (2002), quoting Harris v. State, 353 Md. 596, 603, 728 A.2d 180, 183 (1999):
“ ‘[S]pecific intent is not simply the intent to do the immediate act but embraces the requirement that the mind be conscious of a more remote purpose or design which shall eventuate from the doing of the immediate act. Though assault implies only the general intent to strike the blow, assault with intent to murder, rob, rape or maim requires a fully formed and conscious purpose that those further consequences shall flow from the doing of the immediate act.’ ” (Additional quotation marks omitted).
Thus, in this case, the mere act of sending Samuel to Israel alone is not enough. It must be shown, by clear and convincing evidence, that the respondent sent Samuel to Israel with the conscious purpose of frustrating Detective Hamill’s investigation.
The respondent’s Grand Jury testimony discloses that his actual intent in sending Samuel to Israel was (a) to prevent him from committing suicide; (b) to distance his son from the influence of Aaron Needle; and (c) to avert the possibility of a violent confrontation with the police. His testimony also reveals that he implored his son to surrender to the Maryland police but that Samuel was adamant in his refusal to do so. Moreover, the respondent further testified before the Grand Jury that, upon being apprised of the issuance of an arrest warrant, he sent his eldest son, Robert, to Israel to collect *273Samuel and bring him back to Maryland to face the authorities. Given the confluence of factors that presented themselves in a relatively short period of time, respondent claims that he had little time tor reflection. He then stated, “I took his passport with me in the event nothing else worked.” Respondent’s Grand Jury Testimony at 66-67.
Rased on his reading of the respondent’s Grand Jury testimony, the hearing judge found that the testimony of the respondent’s actual intent was not credible. The judge relied on the oft-quoted presumption that “a person intends the natural and probable consequences of his acts. Thus, the requisite criminal intent may be inferred from the defendants’ voluntary and knowing commission of an act which is forbidden by law or from the defendant’s omission to do an act required by law.” As explained earlier, however, the respondent did not commit an act forbidden by law nor did he omit to do an act required by law. Additionally, Israel’s ultimate refusal to extradite was neither a natural nor probable consequence of the respondent’s sending his son there. Finally, since the hearing judge could only look to the transcript from the Grand Jury, his finding with respect to the respondent’s credibility is not entitled to any special deference.
The majority nevertheless states that “[t]he record is replete with facts” supporting the hearing judge’s finding that the respondent was not credible in testifying before the Grand Jury about his actual intent. Among other things, the majority claims that two separate comments made by the respondent during his Grand Jury testimony undermine his credibility. First, the majority cites the following exchange (respondent’s Grand Jury Testimony at 69.):
“Q[uestion of prosecutor] Okay. Now Sunday night, obviously, the trip is set up for Samuel to go to Israel. When did Robert go to Israel?
A[nswer of respondent] Okay. On Monday, we decided that there was no — on Sunday, there was no arrest warrant whatsoever for Samuel, none whatsoever; that he was not a *274wanted person, he was not a fugitive. He was not on the run officially by the police—
Q Right.
A — but he would be; that’s obvious.”
From this exchange, the-majority asserts that the respondent “plainly admitted” that he knew his son would “obviously” be on the run from an arrest warrant. Yet, the phrase “but he would be; that’s obvious” is susceptible to various interpretations. It may just mean that it was obvious, in hindsight, that his son would be wanted by the police. This equivocal phrase is hardly enough to meet Bar Counsel’s burden to clearly and convincingly prove that the respondent intended to hinder Detective Hamill’s investigation.
The second bit of testimony relied on by the majority, as support for the hearing judge’s finding on the respondent’s credibility, relates to the purchase of Samuel’s airline ticket. In response to a question about how Samuel’s voyage was financed, the respondent stated, “I went to Tower Air in New York City, and I purchased the ticket, a one-way ticket — well, a round-trip ticket is cheaper than a one-way — on Tower Air.” Respondent’s Grand Jury Testimony at 67. The majority declares that this statement alone discredits the respondent’s argument that he purchased a round-trip ticket in contemplation of Samuel’s return. But this misses the point. Even if the respondent’s purchase of a round-trip ticket was based solely on the price differential, this does not demonstrate by clear and convincing evidence that the respondent did not contemplate his son’s return once the immediate crisis had diffused. Indeed, the facts that developed in the days immediately following Samuel’s departure refute the majority’s theory. It is undisputed that the respondent sent his son, Robert, to Israel to bring Samuel back to this country. The obstacle to Samuel’s return was not the want of a return ticket.
Next, the majority argues that, because Samuel was alone when he met with his family in New York City, he was no longer in imminent danger of being under Aaron Needle’s unwanted influence. Yet, the respondent’s Grand Jury testi*275mony reveals a long history of distrust toward Mr. Needle, which was no doubt resurrected and exacerbated by the present circumstances. Moreover, the respondent was aware that his son had driven to New York with Mr. Needle; consequently, although Mr. Needle was not present at the family meeting, he probably was not very far away. Thus, I fail to discern any evidence casting doubt upon the respondent’s credibility when he claimed that he wanted to distance his son from Mr. Needle.
Finally, the majority contends that there was no “apparent imminent danger of [Samuel] committing suicide” in the presence of his family in New York. This is especially true, the majority argues, because Samuel had surrendered the shotgun to the respondent upon the family’s arrival. Under the circumstances, however, it is reasonable that the respondent was truly concerned that his son would take his own life. The respondent was well aware that his son had been involved in a grisly homicide, whether or not in self-defense, and that Samuel was not thinking clearly at this time. The fact that Samuel was no longer in possession of the shotgun only eliminated one means of killing himself. So long as Samuel was still expressing suicidal thoughts, it is credible that the respondent, as his father, was distressed over the possibility of his son’s suicide. Albeit in hindsight, I am also mindful of the fact that Mr. Needle, who likewise had expressed suicidal inclinations in New York, ultimately hanged himself on April 18, 1998, two days before jury selection was to begin in his trial.
There must be affirmative, clear and convincing evidence of the respondent’s specific intent to hinder a police officer. That is, even if the respondent’s testimony as to his intent is not deemed credible, this legal conclusion cannot supplant the affirmative showing, by clear and convincing evidence, that Bar Counsel must establish with regard to his specific intent. It is a well-settled principle in the law that lack of credibility, without more, is not ipso facto affirmative evidence sufficient to meet a proponent’s burden of proof on an intent element in a charge. See, e.g., VF Corp. v. Wrexham Aviation Corp., 350 *276Md. 693, 711, 715 A.2d 188, 196 (1998) (The finder of fact’s “prerogative not to believe certain testimony, however, does not constitute affirmative evidence of the contrary”); Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Clements, 319 Md. 289, 298, 572 A.2d 174, 179 (1990) (“A refusal to believe evidence of a respondent, however, does not, of itself, supply affirmative evidence of the ... [misconduct] charged”).
Furthermore, on the basis of the Grand Jury testimony, the hearing judge had little basis for determining whether the respondent was telling the truth. The record is not so much “replete” with facts supporting a finding of non-credibility, as it is replete with cold-record testimony susceptible of various interpretations. Therefore, I conclude that Bar Counsel did not present clear and convincing evidence of a specific intent to hinder or obstruct Detective Hamilfs investigation.
In sum, Bar Counsel did not provide proof, by clear and convincing evidence, that respondent committed the common law offense of obstruction or hindering a police officer. I do not agree that an attorney or father has criminally obstructed or hindered police activity in the case where two jurisdictions have the authority to prosecute an offense, and the attorney advises his client, or the father advises his son, to go to the jurisdiction with the less severe sanction. Moreover, when the only “hindering” is to frustrate the questioning of one who has been accused of a crime, and who is certain to invoke the privilege against self-incrimination, I do not believe that the offense of hindering has occurred. Nor do I believe that Bar Counsel proved, by clear and convincing evidence, that-the respondent had the requisite intent to hinder Detective Hamill in the course of her duties. Consequently, no misconduct by a criminal act, in contravention of MRPC 8.4(b), is present in this case.
III.
The majority also concludes that the respondent violated MRPC 8.4(d) by engaging in conduct that is prejudicial to the administration of justice. Generally, this Court has found *277conduct to be in violation of Rule 8.4(d) under two circumstances: First, when there has been conduct that is criminal in nature, or second, when the lawyer’s conduct concerned his own legal practice or his relationship with his clients.12 This is *279consonant with the guidance set forth in the Comments to the ABA Model Rules of Professional Conduct (Model Rules of Prof’l Conduct R. 8.4 cmt. 2 (2002) (emphasis added)):
“Many kinds of illegal conduct reflect adversely on fitness to practice law.... Although a lawyer is personally answerable to the entire criminal law, a lawyer should be professionally answerable only for offenses that indicate lack of those characteristics relevant to law practice. Offenses involving violence, dishonesty, breach of trust, or serious interference with the administration of justice are in that category.”
As noted in the majority opinion, the hearing judge’s conclusions on this point were based on his assessment that respondent’s conduct was criminal in nature, fitting within the first prong of cases mentioned above. In finding a violation of Rule 8.4(d), the hearing judge determined that “[t]he Respondent indisputably hindered the administration of justice by providing a means for his son to flee the country.” Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law at 14. Thus, his conclusion as to Rule 8.4(d) relied on his earlier pronouncements that all the elements of the offense of hindering a police officer were present in this case.
In addition, Bar Counsel’s Petition for Disciplinary Action bases both of the misconduct charges on the allegation that respondent’s “actions in assisting his son to leave the State of Maryland, and subsequently the country, was in direct impedance and obstruction of the investigation of the murder of Alfred Enrique Tello, Jr. in violation of Maryland law and the Rules of Professional Conduct governing the actions of attor*280neys.” Petition for Disciplinary Action at 11. Thus, the 8.4(d) charge in the Petition was dependent upon a finding that the conduct being alleged was criminal. No language appears in the Petition alleging that the respondent’s conduct was prejudicial to the administration of justice for any reason other than its alleged criminal nature. Consequently, in the instant case, as in the vast majority of 8.4(d) cases, the 8.4(d) charge is dependent upon the presence of another form of misconduct, rather than having an independent basis.
The majority, however, claims that the respondent’s acts violate Rule 8.4(d) on two separate grounds: first, under the theory that his acts were criminal and, second, under an alternative theory that his acts were “directly harmful to the legal profession.” I disagree. I doubt, under In re Ruffalo, 390 U.S. 544, 88 S.Ct. 1222, 20 L.Ed.2d 117 (1968), that it is proper for the majority to conjure up, sua sponte, alternative grounds to support a violation of Rule 8.4(d). Furthermore, as mentioned earlier, I do not believe the respondent’s actions constituted the offense of obstruction or hindering. Finally, because the actions taken by the respondent did not impact on his clients or on his law practice, I do not believe that his conduct was prejudicial to the administration of justice.
A.
At the threshold, the majority’s opinion as to the 8.4(d) charge is questionable under In re Ruffalo, supra. In Ruffalo, the petitioner was a trial lawyer who was charged with twelve counts of misconduct. As a result of incriminating testimonial evidence adduced during his hearing before a hearing board, the state’s grievance commission added a thirteenth charge against the petitioner. The hearing board found the petitioner guilty of seven charges, including the appended thirteenth charge. On review, the Ohio Supreme Court held that the evidence was sufficient to sustain only two charges, including the thirteenth charge, and ultimately concluded that disbarment was required. Proceedings thereafter ensued to disbar petitioner in the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit. The Sixth Circuit, relying *281solely on the record and findings of the Ohio courts, held that the thirteenth charge alone justified disbarment in its court. The United States Supreme Court, concluding that the petitioner was deprived of procedural due process, reversed, stating: “Disbarment ... is a punishment or penalty imposed on the lawyer. * * * He is accordingly entitled to procedural due process, which includes fair notice of the charge.” Ruffalo, 390 U.S. at 550, 88 S.Ct. at 1226, 20 L.Ed.2d at 122.
As Ruffalo holds, principles of due process require that fair notice of the charges be given to a defendant at the outset of disciplinary proceedings. Here, the majority states that, even if the conduct in question is not criminal, it is still prejudicial to the administration of justice in violation of Rule 8.4(d). According to the majority, “respondent’s actions are so appalling that either shoe will fit; respondent’s acts are both criminal in nature and directly harmful to the legal profession.” To the extent that the majority opinion relies upon a basis for finding an 8.4(d) violation which was neither alleged in the Petition for Disciplinary Action nor relied upon by the hearing judge, it presents a procedural due process infirmity in contravention to the holding in Ruffalo. In this case, the respondent was never given notice of such a basis for the 8.4(d) charge nor an opportunity to defend against an 8.4(d) violation based on his acts being “directly harmful to the legal profession.” As the Court in Ruffalo stated, disbarment proceedings are “adversary proceedings of a quasi-criminal nature. * * * The charge must be known before the proceedings commence.” 390 U.S. at 551, 88 S.Ct. at 1226, 20 L.Ed.2d at 122. It seems clear that, when a court devises a new basis for a charge at the eleventh hour of a quasi-criminal proceeding, as the majority has done here, the respondent has been deprived of procedural due process.
As noted by the majority, the respondent has been charged in a Statement of Charges in State of Maryland v. Sol Sheinbein, District Court of Maryland, Montgomery County, Case No. 6D00071133, with the criminal offense of hindering a police officer. An arrest warrant on that charging document has been issued in that case for Sol Sheinbein, District Court *282of Maryland, Warrant No. D98442735. Respondent, as a member of the Bar of this State, is an officer of this Court. It may be that the respondent’s conduct, in failing to present himself for trial and perhaps willful avoidance of prosecution on this Maryland criminal charge, would constitute a violation of Rule 8.4(d) as conduct prejudicial to the administration of justice. See Iowa Supreme Ct. Bd. of Prof'l Ethics & Conduct v. Mulford, 625 N.W.2d 672 (Iowa 2001) (sanctioning an attorney as a member of the Iowa bar for willful avoidance of prosecution by failing to return to the United States to resolve charges alleged in a federal indictment). Because this theory was never alleged as a basis for the professional misconduct charge before this Court, due process, as held in Ruffalo, precludes this Court from considering it now.
B.
In support for its argument that Rule 8.4(d) has been violated, the majority cites an Alaskan case in which an attorney was disbarred after having been convicted of certain criminal offenses. The majority then remarks that in our case, the respondent cannot be tried for obstruction or hindering because he remains in Israel. The majority’s reliance on the Alaskan case assumes that the respondent would be convicted. Since the evidence was insufficient to find that the respondent committed the offense of obstruction or hindering by clear and convincing evidence, the case relied on by the majority furnishes no support for a finding of an 8.4(d) violation.
Next, the majority claims that it “has not always been the case” that conduct violating Rule 8.4(d) must relate to the lawyer’s particular practice or clients, quoting the following statement in Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Richardson, 350 Md. 354, 368, 712 A.2d 525, 532 (1998):
“The respondent argues that to be conduct that is prejudicial to the administration of justice, the act must be one that hinders or otherwise interferes with a judicial proceeding of which he is a party or represents a party. This Court *283has never so narrowly defined Rule 8.4(d). We have instead recognized that conduct that impacts on the image or the perception of the courts or the legal profession, see Attorney Griev. Comm’n v. Alison, 317 Md. 523, 536, 565 A.2d 660, 666 (1989) and that engenders disrespect for the courts and for the legal profession may be prejudicial to the administration of justice.”
The majority capitalizes on this comment to broaden the scope of Rule 8.4(d) beyond any perceptible bounds.
In Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Alison, 317 Md. 523, 565 A.2d 660 (1989), relied on in Richardson and by the majority here, we dealt with a lawyer who hurled epithets during judicial proceedings and whose “irrational dangerous conduct persisted over a period of two years.” 317 Md. at 532, 565 A.2d at 664. There was no question that Mr. Alison’s resistance to a court ordered search, foul language in court, and verbal abuse of court clerks, among other things, “impact[edj on the image or perception of the courts or the legal profession.” Richardson, supra, 350 Md. at 368, 712 A.2d at 532. Mr. Alison’s conduct toward the court and court personnel obviously impacted on his legal practice and on his clients. Furthermore, it was oftentimes criminal.13 Thus, this Court had no difficulty in holding that the conduct he publicly displayed bred disrespect for the courts and for the legal profession.
Here, in the majority’s view, the respondent “usurped the role of twelve Maryland citizens” and supplanted it with his paternal instincts. Additionally, the majority claims that the respondent made it “impossible for the justice system to work,” and “did everything in his power to ensure that his son circumvent that system.” As a result, the majority concludes, “ti]t is difficult to see, as respondent suggests, how respondent’s blatant interference with an ongoing police investigation *284‘would not seriously impair public confidence in the entire legal profession’ and not, as a result, impair public confidence in the integrity of the courts.” The majority completely ignores the fact that, in September 1999, the Tel Aviv District Court convicted the respondent’s son of murder. As stated earlier, under the Act of State Doctrine, this Court must respect this conviction and may not question its validity. Ultimately, we should acknowledge the fact that justice, under the applicable law, has been served in the underlying case against the respondent’s son.
This case simply does not present facts, as the majority argues, “so appalling” as to constitute conduct prejudicial to the administration of justice in violation of MRPC 8.4(d). In the interest of giving members of the legal profession notice of what behavior in their personal lives will subject them to disciplinary action, I am unwilling to expand Rule 8.4(d) to include conduct as ambiguous as the respondent’s in this case. Therefore, Bar Counsel has not presented facts, by clear and convincing evidence, demonstrating a violation of MRPC 8.4(d).
In conclusion, I believe that Bar Counsel’s evidence was insufficient to support a finding of misconduct under either MRPC 8.4(b) or (d).
Judge RAKER agrees with the views expressed herein and joins this dissenting opinion.
. Maryland Rule of Professional Conduct (MRPC) 8.4(b) provides that:
*262“It is professional misconduct for a lawyer to:
(b) commit a criminal act that reflects adversely on the lawyer’s honesty, trustworthiness or fitness as a lawyer in other respects;”
. MRPC Rule 8.4(d) provides:
"It is professional misconduct for a lawyer to:
* * *
(d) engage in conduct that is prejudicial to the administration of justice.”
. The rules promulgated by this Court purport to give us original jurisdiction over contested adjudicatory attorney disciplinary cases, and we have regularly exercised such trial court jurisdiction, entering money judgments and equitable decrees when there were no prior judgments or decrees by a court.
The Constitution of Maryland, however, gives this Court original jurisdiction in only two situations, set forth in Article II, § 6, and Article III, § 5. Neither provision encompasses attorney disciplinary cases. Except for those two situations, the cases have uniformly held *263that the Court of Appeals may exercise appellate jurisdiction only. This Court has consistently held that enactments purporting to confer original jurisdiction on the Court of Appeals or the Court of Special Appeals are unconstitutional. Shell Oil Co. v. Supervisor, 276 Md. 36, 40-44, 343 A.2d 521, 523-525 (1975), and cases there collected.
The rules purporting to confer original jurisdiction on this Court in contested attorney disciplinary cases present another constitutional problem relating to the jurisdiction of Maryland courts. Under those rules, a petition for disciplinary action is referred to a judge of a circuit court to hold a hearing, make findings of fact, and make conclusions of law. The circuit court judge, however, is not empowered to decide the case. Instead, the trial judge forwards the findings and conclusions to another body (i.e., this Court), and that other body renders the decision. See Maryland Rules 16-752 through 16-759. In Duffy v. Conaway, 295 Md. 242, 455 A.2d 955 (1983), this Court held that a similar scheme, whereby a circuit court judge collected evidence and found facts for another body, but where the circuit court judge was not empowered to render a decision, violated the Maryland Constitution and that, therefore, the circuit court judge had no jurisdiction in the case.
We have never attempted to reconcile the rules conferring original jurisdiction on the Court in contested attorney disciplinary cases with the holdings in Shell Oil Co. v. Supervisor, supra, and Duffy v. Conaway, supra, although jurisdiction is an issue which we will address even if not raised by a party. One day, perhaps, the Court will address the matter.
. "The quality of proof, to be clear and convincing, has also been said to be somewhere between the rule in ordinary civil cases and the requirement of criminal procedure — that is, it must be more than a mere preponderance but not beyond a reasonable doubt. It has also been said tha1 the term ‘clear and convincing' evidence means that the witnesses to a fact must be found to be credible, and that the facts to which they have testified are distinctly remembered and the details thereof narrated exactly and in due order, so as to enable the trier of the facts to come to a clear conviction, without hesitancy, of the truth of the precise facts in issue. Whether evidence is clear and convincing requires weighing, comparing, testing, and judging its worth when considered in connection with all the facts and circumstances in evidence.” Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Harris, 366 Md. 376, 389, 784 A.2d 316, 523 (2001), quoting Attorney Grievance Comm'n v. Mooney, 359 Md. 56, 79, 753 A.2d 17, 29 (2000).
. For a general treatment on what types of acts have been deemed obstruction or hindering, see Note, Types of Activity Encompassed by the Offense of Obstructing a Public Officer, 108 U. Penn. L.Rev. 388 (1960).
. A state needs two types of jurisdiction in order to prosecute an individual: jurisdiction to prescribe and jurisdiction to enforce. See Restatement (Third) of Foreign Relations Law of the United States, pt. IV introductory note (1987). Jurisdiction to prescribe is “the authority of a state to make its substantive laws applicable to particular persons and circumstances.” Ibid. Jurisdiction to enforce is the authority of a state to use its resources "to induce or compel compliance with its law[s]”. Ibid. For a thorough discussion, see Barry E. Carter & Philip R. Trimble, International Law 712-801 (3d ed.1999). See also Rest. (Third) of Foreign Relations Law, supra, § 401.
. Under principles of Customary International Law, nationality is obtained in different ways. Jus Soli refers to laws that confer nationality because of birth in a state's territory. Jus Sanguinis refers to laws that accord nationality based on birth to parents who are nationals of that State. On February 25, 1999, the Israeli Supreme Court held that Samuel Sheinbein could not be extradited to the United States. This ruling was based on the passage of a 1978 amendment to Israel’s Extradition Law prohibiting extradition for offenses committed after an individual has obtained Israeli nationality. This decision led to Samuel Sheinbein's ultimate conviction for premeditated murder on September 2, 1999, by the Tel Aviv District Court, and sentencing on October 25, 1999, to twenty-four years in prison, the longest sentence ever imposed on a juvenile in Israeli history. Under the Act of State Doctrine, this Court is not at liberty to inquire into the validity of the Israeli courts' holdings. The rulings that Israel had jurisdiction to prosecute the homicide are binding upon us. See generally Banco Nacional de Cuba v. Sabbatino, 376 U.S. 398, 84 S.Ct. 923, 11 L.Ed.2d 804 (1964).
. See Susan Schmidt and Josh White, Sniper Suspects Handed to Va. for Trials, Wash Post. Nov. 8, 2002, at Al, reporting that the decision to prosecute sniper suspects John Allen Muhammad and John Lee Malvo in Virginia instead of Maryland was "based on which jurisdictions had the best law, the best facts and the best range of available penalties." (Internal quotations omitted).
. The respondent's Grand Jury testimony reveals that, when he sent his son Robert to Israel to bring Samuel back, Samuel pleaded with his father, "[c]an’t you send me to a country where they can’t catch me? Can’t you send me to Libya, Iraq?” See respondent’s Grand Jury Testimony at 72. There is no evidence that such a plan was ever contemplated by the respondent. Nonetheless, the majority opinion is written as if the respondent did send Samuel to a place where he could not be prosecuted.
. Compare this case to the homicide case against former hippie guru Ira Einhorn. In that case, the defendant fled the United States on the eve of his trial in Philadelphia, in 1981. Using different aliases, he successfully evaded detection for sixteen years in Europe before being arrested in France in 1997. He was returned to the United States in July 2001, but only after prosecutors agreed to a French request not to seek the death penalty and to have his 1993 first-degree murder conviction in absentia vacated by means of special legislation passed by the Pennsylvania Legislature. The legal saga ended with his conviction on October 17, 2002. See Jacqueline Soteropolous, Ira Flops With Jury, Phila. Inquirer, Oct. 18, 2002, at A1; Maida Cassandra Odom, Einhorn "Looking Forward." To Testifying, Boston Globe, Sept. 22, 2002 at A11.
. As to the “high profile” nature of the case, it should be noted that Bar Counsel, in oral argument before this Court, in response to a question concerning the delay in bringing the case, stated: "when the publicity came up, I remember reading it in the paper and I opened a Bar Counsel file on the strength of that....”
. A survey of cases alleging a violation of Rule 8.4(d) or its predecessor, DR 1-102(A)(5), brought before this Court in the past ten years, reveals that, during that period, no attorney has been found in violation of Rule 8.4(d) unless his conduct was either criminal or involved his legal practice or clients.
The following cases found a violation of 8.4(d) due to the respondent's conduct being criminal: Attorney Grievance Comm'n v. Childress, 364 Md. 48, 770 A.2d 685 (2001) (pursuing a child on the Internet); Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Waters, 2001 Md. LEXIS 864 (2001) (willful failure to file his income tax returns); Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Angst, 369 Md. 404, 800 A.2d 747 (2002) (failure to fulfil statutory obligations as an employer to withhold employees' state income laxes and to pay amounts owed to the Comptroller, failure to file the appropriate returns when due); Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Clark, 363 Md. 169, 767 A.2d 865 (2001) (repeated failure to limely file withholding tax returns, to remit the taxes withheld, and to hold the withheld taxes in trust); Attorney Grievance Comm'n v. Black, 362 Md. 574, 766 A.2d 119 (2001) (conviction for possession of cocaine); Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Childress, 360 Md. 373, 758 A.2d 117 (2000) (pursuing a child on the Internet); Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Dechowitz, 358 Md. 184, 747 A.2d 657 (2000) (conviction for possession with intent to distribute marijuana); Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Atkinson, 357 Md. 646, 745 A.2d 1086 (2000) (failure to file taxes); Attorney Grievance Comm'n v. Bereano, 357 Md. 321, 744 A.2d 35 (2000) (mail fraud conviction); Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Painter, 356 Md. 293, 739 A.2d 24 (1999) (convictions for battery and transporting a handgun in a domestic violence context); Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Gilbert, 356 Md. 249, 739 A.2d 1 (1999) (conviction for possession of crack cocaine); Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. White, 354 Md. 346, 731 A.2d 447 (1999) (perjury); Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Gavin, 350 Md. 176, 711 A.2d 193 (1998) (failure to file timely tax returns and to pay timely income taxes); Attorney Grievance Comm'n v. Post, 350 Md. 85, 710 A.2d 935 (1998) (failure to file taxes); Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Garland, 345 Md. 383, 692 A.2d 465 (1997) (conviction for driving under the influence of alcohol); Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Breschi, 340 Md. 590, 667 A.2d 659 (1995) (failure to file taxes); Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Casalino, 335 Md. 446, 644 A.2d 43 (1994) (conviction for tax evasion); Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Boyd, 333 Md. 298, 635 A.2d 382 (1994) (material misrepresentation respecting trust account to another attorney with intent to deceive); Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. James, 333 Md. 174, 634 A.2d 48 (1993) (forgery); Attorney Grievance. Comm'n v. White, 328 Md. 412, 614 A.2d 955 (1992) (misappropriation of client funds).
*278The following cases found a violation of 8.4(d) based on conduct that concerned the attorney’s own legal practice or the attorney’s relationship with his or her clients: Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Gallagher, 371 Md. 673, 810 A.2d 996 (2002) (misappropriation of client funds); Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Harris, 371 Md. 510, 810 A.2d 457 (2002) (failure to adequately represent a client); Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Barneys, 370 Md. 566, 805 A.2d 1040 (2002) (unauthorized practice of law); Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Santos, 370 Md. 77, 803 A.2d 505 (2002) (commingling client funds into operating account); Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Sullivan, 369 Md. 650, 801 A.2d 1077 (2002) (failure to administer estate promptly, dishonest and unlawful taking of client funds, and lack of communication with successor personal representatives); Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Powell, 369 Md. 462, 800 A.2d 782 (2002) (misuse of attorney trust account); Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. McCoy, 369 Md. 226, 798 A.2d 1132 (2002) (commingling of client funds); Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Garfield, 369 Md. 85, 797 A.2d 757 (2002) (representation of clients impaired by drug addiction); Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Dunietz, 368 Md. 419, 795 A.2d 706 (2002) (neglect of client matters); Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Wallace, 368 Md. 277, 793 A.2d 535 (2002) (neglect of client matters); Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Snyder, 368 Md. 242, 793 A.2d 515 (2002) (misuse of trust account); Attorney Grievance Comm'n v. Lane, 367 Md. 633, 790 A.2d 621 (2002) (failure to act diligently on client’s behalf); Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Harrington, 367 Md. 36, 785 A.2d 1260 (2001) (flagrant failure to respond to inquiries from Bar Counsel); Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Harris, 366 Md. 376, 784 A.2d 516 (2001) (incompetent representation of clients); Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Johnson, 363 Md. 598, 770 A.2d 130 (2001) (making false statements to tribunal, acting against interests of clients); Attorney Grievance Comm'n v. Bernstein, 363 Md. 208, 768 A.2d 607 (2001) (willful invasion of client funds); Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Shaw, 363 Md. 1, 766 A.2d 1028 (2001) (misconduct involving charges for attorney fees); Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Zdravkovich, 362 Md. 1, 762 A.2d 950 (2000) (failure to represent a client in an adequate manner); Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Koven, 361 Md. 337, 761 A.2d 881 (2000) (incompetent representation of clients, not refunding unearned fees, accepting payment for work not performed); Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Bridges, 360 Md. 489, 759 A.2d 233 (2000) (repeatedly refusal to provide information requested by Inquiry Panel regarding attorney’s involvement with employee); Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Mooney, 359 Md. 56, 753 A.2d 17 (2000) (inadequate representation of client); Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Harper, 356 Md. 53, 737 A.2d 557 (1999) (unauthorized practice of law); Attorney Grievance Comm'n v. Brugh, 353 Md. 475, 727 A.2d 913 (1999) (neglect in client matters, inadequate representation of clients); Attorney Grievance Comm'n v. Brown, 353 Md. 271, 725 A.2d 1069 (1999) (failure to respond to Attorney Grievance Commission’s inquiries about a client matter); Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Brennan, 350 Md. 489, 714 A.2d 157 (1998) (attorney had working relationship with a suspended attorney and mishandled client matters); Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Richardson, 350 Md. 354, 712 A.2d 525 (1998) (filing frivolous and malicious lawsuit against judges who had ruled against him in previous *279actions); Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. McCoy, 349 Md. 420, 708 A.2d 681 (1998) (inadequate representation of client); Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Milliken, 348 Md. 486, 704 A.2d 1225 (1998) (gross neglect of client cases, commingling of funds); Attorney Grievance Comm'n v. Hollis, 347 Md. 547, 702 A.2d 223 (1997) (misappropriation of client funds); Attorney Grievance Comm'n v. Kent, 337 Md. 361, 653 A.2d 909 (1995) (simultaneous representation of two co-defendants); Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Eisenstein, 333 Md. 464, 635 A.2d 1327 (1994) (attorney's handling of his claimant's money involved dishonesty); Attorney Grievance Comm’n v. Goldsborough, 330 Md. 342, 624 A.2d 503 (1993) (nonconsensual kissing and spanking of clients and employees).
. The conduct with which this Court was concerned with in Alison had its roots in marital discord. As a result of his conduct, Mr. Alison was convicted of driving while intoxicated, harassment, hindering a police officer, and misuse of subpoena.

=== CASE 9737254 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:20:05.199456+00 ===

DICKSON, Justice.
Jimmy L. Townsend appeals his convictions of robbery, a class B felony1, and confinement, a class B felony 2. Defendant was sentenced to consecutive terms of twenty (20) years imprisonment for each offense. This direct appeal asserts the following issues: 1) inconsistent findings; 2) insufficiency of the evidence; 3) failure to grant continuance; and, 4) inadequate sentencing findings.
ISSUE I
Defendant first argues that the trial court erroneously made inconsistent findings when it determined that the defendant was not guilty of carrying a handgun without a license, but guilty of using a handgun to commit robbery and confinement. Defendant was charged with three offenses. The crimes of robbery and confinement were charged as class B felonies because of the allegation that defendant was armed with a handgun as a deadly weapon. In the third count, defendant was charged with carrying a handgun without a license 3 *1200as a class D felony by alleging that the defendant had a prior conviction for the same type of offense.4 Following his trial to the court, without a jury, the defendant was convicted of the first two counts, but acquitted as to Count IIL.
This Court has looked and will continue to look at findings and verdicts to determine if they are inconsistent. But perfect logical consistency should not be demanded, and only extremely contradictory and irreconcilable verdicts warrant corrective action by this Court. Parrish v. State (1983), Ind., 453 N.E.2d 234, 239; Marsh v. State (1979), 271 Ind. 454, 393 N.E.2d 757.
In the case at bar, the findings are not necessarily inconsistent. It is true that the robbery and confinement counts, as charged, required proof that the defendant was armed with a handgun. However, conviction of the unlicensed handgun count as charged would have required not only proof that defendant was carrying a handgun, but also proof that defendant had previously been convicted of a similar offense. Thus, the acquittal does not necessarily and exclusively compel the conclusion that defendant was unarmed. We therefore hold that the judgments were not so inconsistent as to require a reversal.
ISSUE II
Defendant next challenges the sufficiency of the evidence supporting his convictions.
In addressing the issue of sufficiency of evidence, we will affirm the conviction if, considering only the probative evidence and reasonable inferences supporting the verdict, without weighing evidence or assessing witness credibility, a reasonable trier of fact could conclude that the defendant was guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. Case v. State (1984), Ind., 458 N.E.2d 223; Loyd v. State (1980), 272 Ind. 404, 407, 398 N.E.2d 1260, 1264, cert. denied, 449 U.S. 881, 101 S.Ct. 231, 66 L.Ed.2d 105.
The following facts support the convictions. Early in the morning of June 28, 1985, defendant entered an Indianapolis convenience store. Holding a handgun, he stood in front of the cashier and ordered her not to close the cash register drawer. Defendant then instructed the cashier to take money out of the drawer and to put it in a sack. He also demanded cigarettes and lighters. The cashier complied, but triggered an alarm as she removed the money. While the cashier was removing the money, defendant told her that he either wanted to kill her or that he was going to take her with him. After the sack was filled, defendant told the victim that he wanted her to go somewhere out of the way and that he wanted her to be quiet. In response to defendant's request, the cashier went into a back room. She testified that she was frightened because of defendant's earlier threats. Police apprehended defendant in the parking lot. He was armed with a .88 caliber revolver. As the arresting officer disarmed him, defendant dropped a paper bag containing lighters and cigarettes.
To support his contentions of insufficient evidence, defendant emphasizes alleged evi-dentiary discrepancies: no money was recovered from the defendant, a customer watching from outside the store did not observe a gun, and the cashier's movement to the back room was consentual rather than compelled. These are matters of weight and credibility for determination by the fact-finder. We find that the court could reasonably find the defendant guilty beyond a reasonable doubt.
ISSUE IH
Defendant next contends that the trial court erred in refusing to grant him a continuance requested during the sentencing hearing for the purpose of investigating whether or not the defendant was under medication at the time of the offense. This issue had not been previously raised at any time. The defendant had already been granted a prior one-week delay in the sen*1201tencing. The trial court's decision in granting or denying a continuance will be reversed only for an abuse of discretion. Woods v. State (1985), Ind., 484 N.E.2d 3. No information was provided to explain defendant's inability to complete his investigation of any desired evidence before the sentencing hearing. We do not find any abuse of discretion in refusing to grant the request for continuance.
ISSUE IV
Defendant finally contends that the trial court's sentencing statement was inadequate to support the enhanced sentences imposed. As to each of the two class B felonies for which defendant was convicted, the presumptive sentence is ten (10) years. The trial court enhanced each by an additional ten (10) years, and ordered the sentences to be served consecutively rather than concurrently. In imposing the sentence, the trial court's sentencing statement finds various aggravating cireum-stances including possession of a loaded gun, threatening the life of the victim, and prior criminal history. There is no mention of any mitigating cireumstances.
Defendant contends that the trial court erroneously used, as aggravating cireum-stances, the same elements which constituted the crimes in question. He also complains that the statement failed to find mitigating circumstances and sufficiently explain aggravating circumstances.
Ind.Code § 35-88-1-8 requires that if the trial court finds aggravating or mitigating circumstances, its record must include "a statement of the court's reasons for selecting the sentence that it imposes." The statement of reasons should contain three elements: a) identification of all significant mitigating and aggravating: circumstances found, b) specific facts and reasons which lead the court to find the existence of each such cireumstance, and c) articulation demonstrating that the mitigating and aggravating circumstances have been evaluated and balanced in determination of the sentence. Hammons v. State (1986), 498 N.E.2d 1250; Jones v. State (1984), Ind., 467 N.E.2d 681. Thorough ness and specificity in the sentencing statement facilitate meaningful appellate review. The trial court should not simply repeat statutory language. Totten v. State (1985), Ind., 486 N.E.2d 519; Page v. State (1981), Ind., 424 N.E.2d 1021. The statement supportive of enhanced or consecutive sentences should not be grudgingly given. FArina v. State (1982), Ind., 442 N.E.2d 1104, 1106.
The mere fact which comprises a material element of a crime may not also constitute an aggravating cireumstance to support an enhanced sentence, but the particularized individual circumstances may constitute a separate aggravating circumstance. Green v. State (1981), Ind., 424 N.E.2d 1014; Washington v. State (1981), Ind., 422 N.E.2d 1218; Pavey v. State (1985), Ind.App., 477 N.E.2d 957.
The trial court's sentencing statement consists of the following:
On Count One (1), a class B felony, from the presumptive sentence of ten (10) years the Court finds aggravating circumstances, those being, number one (1), having a loaded gun, number two (2), threatening the life of the victim and, number three (8), his prior criminal history as set out in the presentence report, and more specifically the convictions on April nineteenth (19th), 1984, of recklessness with injury and violation of the Firearms Act, and on that basis the Court increases the sentence by ten (10) years, making it twenty (20) years on Count One (1). On Count Two (2), confinement, the Court once again from the presumptive sentence of ten (10) years finds aggravating cireumstances, that being having a loaded gun, threatening the life of the victim, and three (8), his prior criminal history as the before set out and in the presentence report, and adds ten (10) years on that basis. So it will be twenty (20) years on Count Two (2). I'm going to have the counts run conseuctive [sic], and find the aggravating circumstances to be, number one, having a loaded gun, number two (2), threatening the life of *1202the victim, and, number three (8), his prior criminal history as set out in the presentence report. So it will be a total of forty (40) years.
At sentencing, defense counsel requested the court to find as a mitigating cireum-stance the lack of defendant's "serious previous trouble." As shown by the sentencing statement, however, the trial court gave consideration to defendant's prior criminal history, but determined that it constituted an aggravating, not mitigating, circumstance.
Failure to find mitigating circumstances when clearly supported by the record may reasonably give rise to a belief that they were overlooked, hence not properly considered. Jones v. State, 467 N.E.2d at 683. We do not find the exist ence of any mitigating circumstances shown by the record which were not considered by the trial judge. In the absence of mitigating factors, we cannot require the trial court's statement of reason to articulate the balancing process between mitigating and aggravating factors.
In the instant case, one of the three aggravating circumstances, defendant's prior criminal history, was sufficient ly particularized. However, two of the aggravating cireumstances, possession of the gun and threatening the victim, were elements of the crime for which the defendant was convicted, and thus, standing alone, cannot be considered as aggravating circumstances to support an enhanced sentence. If the trial court's imposition of the enhanced sentence resulted from consideration of the mere facts of weapon possession and threatening the victim, the sentence must be revised to exclude such considerations. However, if the enhanced sentence resulted from the trial court's consideration of the particularized circumstances of these factual elements, the trial court's sentence-ing statement must specify reasons why the use of the gun in this instance, or the manner in which the vietim was threatened, constitute aggravating circumstances which support the imposition of the enhanced sentence.
Cause remanded to the trial court with instructions to enter new sentencing order and statement.
DeBRULER and SHEPARD, JJ., concur.
GIVAN, C.J., dissents.
PIVARNIK, J., concurs and. dissents with opinion in which GIVAN, C.J., concurs.
. Ind.Code § 35-42-5-1.
. Ind.Code § 35-42-3-3.
. Ind.Code § 35-47-2-1.
. Ind.Code § 35-47-2-23(c).

=== CASE 9737255 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:20:05.204689+00 ===

PIVARNIK, Justice,
concurring and dissenting.
I concur in this opinion with the exception of the finding by the majority that the court did not sufficiently set out aggravating circumstances in enhancing Appellant's sentences and finding that the terms be consecutive. It is true the elements of robbery include the taking of property from another by putting the victim in fear. In this case, a pistol was used and that was the basis of Appellant's conviction for robbery. There was an added element here, however, that the court noted in his findings. Appellant told the victim he was going to kill her or take her with him as a hostage. He did neither of these things, of course, and finally ordered her into another room. She stated she was frightened because of his threats to take her life. The trial judge noted this and also noted that in Appellant's past record were convictions in 1984 of recklessness with injury and violation of the Firearms Act. Thus, the trial court did find particular and peculiar facts in this case that warranted enhancement und the giving of consecutive sentences, those being Appellant's demonstration not only to use a hand gun to induce people to give him their property, but his going beyond that point and possibly injuring the victims or, as in this case, threatening to kill them. The trial court, therefore, found a particularized individual circumstance that constituted a separate aggravating circumstance. I think he was justified in so doing and would find his reasons given were adequate, I therefore would affirm the judgment of the trial court.
GIVAN, C.J., concurs.

=== CASE 2209556 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:40.895581+00 ===

147 Ill. App. 3d 615 (1986)
498 N.E.2d 738
STEVEN W. BARRICK & ASSOCIATES, Plaintiffs-Appellees,
v.
JAMIE WITZ et al., Defendants-Appellants.
No. 2-85-0758.
Illinois Appellate Court  Second District.
Opinion filed September 26, 1986.
Barry A. Schultz, of Prairie State Legal Services, Inc., of Waukegan, for appellants.
James P. Hecht, of Woodstock, and William P. Stanton, of Crystal Lake, for appellees.
Judgment reversed.
*616 JUSTICE UNVERZAGT delivered the opinion of the court:
This is an appeal from a judgment entered by the circuit court of McHenry County, in a forcible entry and detainer action brought by plaintiffs against tenants Jamie and Deia Witz. Judgment was entered for plaintiffs, the owner and managing agent of a federally subsidized housing project, for possession of the premises and $732.80 in damages, including a double rent recovery pursuant to the lease.
The defendants rented an apartment from plaintiffs in June of 1983 under a written lease and a Federal assistance contract. Their lease was renewed in 1984. The defendants received a termination notice on April 3, 1985, to be effective upon the expiration of their lease on May 31, 1985. The notice was accompanied by an explanatory letter referring to altercations between Mr. Witz and three former neighbors, each of whom lived above the defendants at some time during the Witz' tenancy.
Testimony at trial established that Mr. Witz complained regularly about noise in the apartment above his, both to the occupants and to the building manager, and that he made threats to two former residents of that apartment. One threat was made in April and one in July 1984. Also in July 1984 Mr. Witz threatened a maintenance man who was cleaning the apartment and told the manager that he would "smear the maintenance man's teeth" if the noise were not stopped. No charges were filed with regard to any of these incidents.
A third occupant testified that Mr. Witz only occasionally complained to her about noise between August 1984 and March 1985, and that in March 1985 she complained to a maintenance man that she was afraid of Mr. Witz, and felt she could not have friends over because he might complain. It was the same month this complaint was made that plaintiffs sent defendants the notice of termination. The defendants consistently paid their portion of the rental on time each month, and plaintiffs accepted each payment through May 31, 1985. Plaintiffs refused defendants' tender of the June 1985 rent and filed their complaint on June 13, 1985.
The defendants raise three issues on appeal: (1) whether plaintiffs waived their grounds for terminating the lease by accepting rent from defendants after each of the incidents described and after having sent a notice to terminate the lease; (2) whether the termination notice satisfied the requirements of the applicable Federal regulations and due process of law; and (3) whether the lease's double rent clause can properly be applied to defendants.
The Witz' lease is subject to Federal regulations governing the section 8 housing assistance program. The regulations dealing with the *617 termination of a section 8 lease provide that such a lease may not be terminated "solely because of expiration of an initial or subsequent renewal term," and that the "owner may not terminate any tenancy except" upon certain grounds, including, as is argued here, "material noncompliance with the lease." (24 C.F.R. sec. 883.708(b)(1) (1985).) The regulations further state that the above provisions apply "to all decisions by an owner to terminate the tenancy * * * during or at the end of the family's lease term." 24 C.F.R. sec. 883.708(a) (1985).
 1 The lease requires residents to "refrain from acts or practices which disturb neighbors." Defendant-appellant argues that, while his actions may have constituted material noncompliance with that provision of the lease for which plaintiffs had a statutory right to terminate the lease, plaintiffs waived the breach and the right to terminate by subsequently accepting defendants' rental payments without protest. As a general rule, lease forfeiture is disfavored, and "courts will readily adopt any circumstances that indicate an intent to waive a forfeiture." (Housing Authority v. Little (1978), 64 Ill. App. 3d 149, 150.) Furthermore, a lessor's acceptance of rent accruing after a breach, with knowledge of the breach, will act as a waiver of his right to declare a forfeiture. Okey, Inc. v. American National Bank & Trust Co. (1981), 96 Ill. App. 3d 987, 992. See also Weiss v. Johnson (1963), 28 Ill. 2d 259, 261.
The trial court rejected defendants' waiver argument, concluding that it is not applicable to a termination of tenancy based on the lessor's refusal to renew a lease rather than termination during the course of the lease. We disagree.
The Federal regulations prohibit a lessor's termination of a section 8 lease simply because the lease term has expired. (24 C.F.R. sec. 883.708(b)(1) (1985).) The lessor must establish cause for termination, whether he wishes to terminate during the lease or at the conclusion of the lease term. (24 C.F.R. sec. 883.708(a) (1985).) In other words, the lessor cannot escape the requirement that there be grounds for termination of the lease by delaying termination until the end of the lease period.
The effect of the regulation is to give the section 8 tenant an option to automatically renew the lease so long as the lessor has not terminated it for cause. At issue, then, is whether waiving a breach of an existing lease, rather than declaring an immediate forfeiture, precludes a lessor from using that breach as a ground for terminating the lease at the end of the lease term when the lessee holds an option to renew.
 2 This court has held that a lessor may not revive grounds for forfeiture which he previously waived in order to prevent lessee's exercise *618 of an option to purchase. (Okey, Inc. v. American National Bank & Trust Co. (1981), 96 Ill. App. 3d 987; see also Perry v. Waddelow (E.D. Ill. 1956), 145 F. Supp. 349 (dealing with an option to renew a lease).) In Okey, the lessor continued to accept rent and to treat the lessee as his tenant after the lessee had filed for bankruptcy and was late with a number of rental payments. Later, when solvent and current in rent payments, the tenant attempted to exercise his rights under the option. The lessor refused to convey the property, however, citing the bankruptcy as grounds for forfeiture of the option. (Okey, Inc. v. American National Bank & Trust Co. (1981), 96 Ill. App. 3d 987, 988-89.) The court held that the lessor was estopped from relying on those breaches as grounds for rejecting lessee's exercise of the option. 96 Ill. App. 3d 987, 992.
Plaintiffs claim that Okey is not controlling, however, and that the decisions in Lake Shore Country Club v. Brand (1930), 339 Ill. 504, and Soltwisch v. Blum (1973), 9 Ill. App. 3d 760, should apply. In Lake Shore Country Club, the tenant held an option to purchase rental property which was expressly conditioned upon there being no default in the lease terms. (Lake Shore Country Club v. Brand (1930), 339 Ill. 504, 518.) The court held that because the tenant was in breach of the lease contract at the time it attempted to exercise the option the conditions precedent had not been met. 339 Ill. 504, 522.) The case is not on point, however, because the court concluded that the lessor had not had sufficient knowledge of the material facts and thus had not made an effective waiver. 339 Ill. 504, 524.) Additionally, the Okey court distinguished Lake Shore Country Club, indicating that if there had been a waiver in the latter case, the option would have remained effective. Okey, Inc. v. American National Bank & Trust Co. (1981), 96 Ill. App. 3d 987, 991-92.
In the Soltwisch case, this court found that a lessor could rely on a breach of an existing lease to refuse to give effect to a second lease which was to begin on the termination of the first. In Soltwisch, as in Lake Shore Country Club, compliance with the terms of the first lease was made an express condition to the effectiveness of the second. (Soltwisch v. Blum (1973), 9 Ill. App. 3d 760, 761.) By contrast, the section 8 regulations applicable here, while clearly making noncompliance with lease terms (or other valid grounds) a prerequisite to a landlord's termination of a lease even at the end of the term, do not make compliance with lease terms an express prerequisite to the tenant's renewal. (24 C.F.R. sec 883.708(b)(1) (1985).) Furthermore, the Soltwisch court determined that there had, in fact, been no waiver of the breach, because the lessor simply accepted rent that was past due, not rent *619 accruing after the breach. Soltwisch v. Blum (1973), 9 Ill. App. 3d 760, 761-62.
Plaintiffs erroneously conclude that Soltwisch and Lake Shore Country Club permit a lessor to revive a waived breach in order to forfeit a lease which has not yet taken effect or to prevent lessee's exercise of an option. In fact there was no waiver in either case, and the Lake Shore Country Club court expressly stated that an "optionee must perform all conditions * * * not waived by the optionor." Lake Shore Country Club v. Brand (1930), 339 Ill. 504, 522.
 3 Under Illinois law, then, waiver principles clearly apply to options to renew a lease, and conditions or breaches of conditions which are waived by a lessor cannot be revived to prevent exercise of the renewal option. The trial court's conclusion that waiver principles are not applicable to the termination of a section 8 tenant's lease at the end of the lease term would deprive a lessee who has been given an automatic lease renewal option by Federal regulations of the same protection afforded all other tenants holding renewal options. It would permit a lessor to acquiesce in, or even encourage, deviations from the lease terms by the lessee, and then to rely on those very deviations to refuse renewal of the lease. This result cannot be justified from an analysis of the Federal regulations which indicate no intent to offer less protection to a tenant who receives Federal assistance than to any other tenant.
The question remains whether plaintiffs' actions constituted a waiver of the breaches of the lease by Mr. Witz. The Okey court noted that a determination of the issue must center on the lessor's knowledge or lack of knowledge of the lessee's breach. (Okey, Inc. v. American National Bank & Trust Co. (1981), 96 Ill. App. 3d 987, 992-93.) Lessor's acceptance of rent accruing after the breach, with knowledge of the breach, is a well-established indication of the waiver of the right to forfeit the lease on that ground. (96 Ill. App. 3d 987, 992. See also Weiss v. Johnson (1963), 28 Ill. 2d 259, 261.) There can be no doubt that Hillcrest Apartments, through its manager, was aware of the threats made by Mr. Witz. One threat was made directly to the apartment manager, and the others were reported to her. The threats occurred within a four-month period after which plaintiffs accepted rent from defendants without comment or objection for eight months.
 4 As to Mr. Witz' regular complaints to other tenants about noise, the manager testified that she resolved the conflict between Mr. Witz and his first neighbor by offering each the option of moving into another apartment. At no time did she indicate to Mr. Witz that she considered his complaints to be a breach of the lease and grounds for *620 forfeiture. Even if Mr. Witz' actions were a breach of the lease terms, however, the rule is that "[w]here the tenant has been led by the landlord's conduct to believe that strict compliance with the terms of the lease will not be insisted on, forfeiture of the tenant's rights * * * will not be permitted because of his failure to comply strictly with its terms, unless the landlord has notified the tenant that he intends to hold him strictly to the provisions of the lease in the future." (24 Ill. L. & Prac. Landlord & Tenant sec. 239 (1980); see La Salle National Bank v. Helry Corp. (1985), 136 Ill. App. 3d 897, 904 (requiring sufficient notice to the lessee of an intent to insist on strict compliance in the future); see also 1616 Building Corp. v. Rubinson (1965), 64 Ill. App. 2d 104, 110-11.) The manager of Hillcrest Apartments silently tolerated Mr. Witz' complaints to tenants for at least an entire lease term, giving him no indication she considered his conduct to be a breach or that she would require strict compliance in the future with the lease term providing that tenants refrain from disturbing neighbors. The manager's silent acceptance of rent constituted a waiver of the breaches caused by both Mr. Witz' complaints and threats.
Finally, plaintiffs suggest that, if acceptance of rent is interpreted as a waiver of minor breaches, a lessor has no recourse against a tenant whose actions, when considered separately, might not constitute a breach of the lease but which would be a breach when viewed as a consistent course of conduct. We disagree. As discussed above, a lessor in that position may simply notify the tenant that his actions are not consistent with the lease terms and that further deviations will not be tolerated and will be followed by termination of the lease. (See La Salle National Bank v. Helry Corp. (1985), 136 Ill. App. 3d 897, 904.) Such notice will preserve the lessor's objection to his tenant's conduct, and acceptance of rent under those circumstances cannot reasonably be interpreted by the tenant as acquiescence. What the lessor may not do, however, is consistently accept rent from a problem tenant without objection, warning, or comment, and then attempt to forfeit the lease based on his prior behavior.
For the reasons stated, the judgment of the circuit court of McHenry County is reversed.
In light of our disposition, it is unnecessary for us to address the remaining issues raised by defendants.
Reversed.
HOPF and SCHNAKE, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9737259 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:20:14.679343+00 ===

SHEPARD, Justice,
concurring in part and dissenting in part.
While I agree that we should apply retroactively the rule announced in Terry v. State (1984), Ind., 465 N.E.2d 1085, I dissent from the decision to reverse the defendant's conviction because I am satisfied that the refusal of the instruction was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.
When this Court voided the legislature's policy decision to disallow voluntary intoxication as a defense in cases such as this, it was plain that we did not intend to grant general absolution for perpetrators who plead intoxication. Chief Justice Givan wrote for the Court:
A defendant in Indiana can offer a defense of voluntary intoxication to any crime. The potential of this defense should not be confused with the reality of the situation. It is difficult to envision a finding of not guilty by reason of intoxication when the acts committed require a significant degree of physical or intellectual skills. As a general proposition, a defendant should not be relieved of responsibility when he was able to devise a plan, operate equipment, instruct the behavior of others or carry out acts requiring physical skill.
Id., 465 N.E.2d at 1088.
While I agree with the majority that whether a defendant possessed adequate *1198mens rea is initially a jury question, deciding an appeal requires further analysis. We should consider whether the evidence at trial was such that the trial court's refusal of the instruction made any difference.
The evidence at trial about this defendant was that he was able to drive his van without visible impairment, able to hold intelligent conversations with his friends, and competent to conduct business at his bar. There was testimony that people who observed him did not notice anything unusual about his behavior, speech, or motor skills. Finally, he was able to aim and fire a shotgun with deadly accuracy.
To set aside the conviction of such a person seems to me more contrary to our decision in Terry than consonant with it.

=== CASE 2209581 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:41.164649+00 ===

812 A.2d 758 (2002)
TINICUM TOWNSHIP
v.
DELAWARE VALLEY CONCRETE, INC. and Mario Diliberto, Appellants.
Commonwealth Court of Pennsylvania.
Argued November 5, 2002.
Decided December 13, 2002.
As Amended December 17, 2002.
As Amended December 30, 2002.
*759 William E. Benner, Doylestown, for appellants.
Robert J. Sugarman, Philadelphia, for appellee.
Thomas M. Crowley, Harrisburg, for amicus curiae, PA Dept. of Environmental Protection.
BEFORE: SMITH-RIBNER, J., PELLEGRINI, J., and FLAHERTY, Senior Judge.
OPINION BY Judge PELLEGRINI.
Delaware Valley Concrete, Inc. and Mario Diliberto (collectively, DVC) appeal from an order of the Court of Common Pleas of Bucks County (trial court) granting Tinicum Township's (Township) request for a preliminary injunction to enjoin DVC from blasting in their quarrying operation.[1]
Mario Diliberto owns property in Tinicum Township that he leases to Delaware Valley Concrete for the purpose of operating a limestone quarry. In December 1996, DVC applied to the DEP for a permit to deepen the quarry. In 1997, Diliberto and the Township entered into an agreement regarding the development of a golf course on the quarry land which included a provision prohibiting blasting at the quarry (1997 contract).[2] As of the date of trial, no golf course had been constructed at the quarry site.
In 1999, the Township adopted what is known as Ordinance 127 (Blasting Ordinance)[3] pursuant to both the Pennsylvania *760 Municipalities Planning Code, Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, as amended, 53 P.S. §§ 10101-11202(MPC), and The Second Class Township Code, Act of May 1, 1933, P.L. 103, as amended, 53 P.S. §§ 65101-68701. The Blasting Ordinance makes it illegal for a property owner to engage in blasting without first obtaining a blasting permit. The Blasting Ordinance regulates the detonation of all explosives, except for fireworks, and is applied to anyone engaged in blasting except for a police bomb squad. It also establishes a 2,000-foot setback from all national historic landmarks and a 300-foot setback from any type of inhabited building.
In 2001, following almost five years of review, the DEP issued a mining permit under the Non-Coal Surface Mining Conservation and Reclamation Act (Non-Coal Act), Act of December 19, 1984, P.L. 1093, as amended, 52 P.S. §§ 3301-3326, to DVC, authorizing the deepening of the quarry through blasting.[4] In order to measure the relationship between the ground vibration frequency at structures around the quarry and the natural resident frequencies surrounding those structures, the mining permit required DVC to conduct a "Test Blast Protocol."[5]
The Township appealed the grant of the permit and also filed a request for supersedeas with the Environmental Hearing Board (EHB) alleging that the blasting would threaten the water supplies, endanger the public's health, cause excess pollution and expose the community to the risk of rock slides. On December 7, 2001, the EHB denied the Township's supersedeas request but did not rule on the merits of the appeal.
On March 20, 2002, upon learning DVC was performing pre-test blasting surveys in preparation for the "Test Blast Protocol," the Township sent a "Stop, Cease and Desist Order" to DVC informing them that the proposed blasting was a violation of the Blasting Ordinance. At the same time, the Township also filed a complaint in equity with the trial court seeking preliminary and permanent injunction, claiming the proposed blasting violated its Blasting Ordinance, constituted a private and public nuisance because the blasting create a danger to the health, safety and welfare of the community, and breached the 1997 contract between DVC and the Township. The Township claimed that the proposed blasting would violate the Blasting Ordinance because the blasting would occur within 2,000 feet of a national historic landmark, namely, the Delaware Canal, which was less than 1,000 feet from the quarry. On March 20, 2002, the trial court entered an ex parte special temporary injunction enjoining DVC from conducting any blasting at the quarry, pending a hearing on the requested preliminary injunction.
*761 At the preliminary injunction hearing,[6] the Township presented the testimony from David Levinson (Levinson), a resident in a house located approximately 2,000 feet from the quarry and over 3,000 feet from the test blast area. He testified that a boulder weighing approximately four to five tons which was situated on a cliff rising a few hundred feet directly behind and above his house was positioned precariously enough that it could fall at any time. Levinson stated his attention was drawn to this boulder by Frank Chiappetta (Chiappetta), DVC's blasting consultant, who advised Levinson that the chances of any vibration reaching the area of the boulder and dislodging it were very small; nonetheless, Chiappetta still recommended Levinson evacuate his home on the days that blasting was going to occur.
The Township also called Gary Pearson (Pearson), a Township supervisor and a property owner living less than one thousand feet from the quarry. Pearson estimated approximately six homes, including his, abutted the shale cliff near the quarry, and that he had seen rocks and trees break free from the cliff and fall upon the properties below. Pearson also testified regarding the implementation of the Blasting Ordinance and as to his understanding of the 1997 contract.
The Township's expert witness, Robert Alperstein (Alperstein), a geotechnical engineer, testified that he had toured the site in question, examined the shale cliffs located behind the residential properties near the quarry, and calculated the potential ground vibrations if blasting were to occur at the quarry. Alperstein testified that the cliffs located behind the properties near the quarry were very unstable and friable, and that blasting would increase the probability of rocks falling from the cliffs, including the boulder above the Levinson house. On cross-examination, Alperstein admitted he could not predict with any certainty the probability that rocks would fall from the cliffs.
In rebuttal, DVC's expert witness, Chiappetta, testified that he expected no significant seismic activity to affect the position of the boulder above the Levinson house, but admitted that if vibrations from blasting were to reach the boulder's location, it could dislodge it and cause it to fall. He admitted he did not do any calculations as to the affects of the vibrations on the shale cliffs behind the other residencies, but opined no seismic activity would register there either. Chiappetta also testified as to the danger of fly rock, the material ejected into the air due to the detonation of explosives, but that precautions would be taken to minimize the risk of nearby people being hit by projectiles.[7]
*762 Based on the testimony that the proposed test blast presumptively violated the Blasting Ordinance and generally exposed the community to a common law nuisance due to the increased risk of harm to people and property from falling rocks dislodged by blasting, the trial court enjoined DVC from blasting. The trial court found that loose rocks and boulders near the blasting site and residential properties might cause property and structural damage, as well as endanger the lives of nearby occupants. The trial court also found that while blasting was the most efficient and economical method to surface mine at the DVC quarry, alternative non-blasting methods could be used to mine materials from the quarry. DVC filed this appeal[8] contending that the trial court erred in granting the preliminary injunction because: (1) the provisions of the Blasting Ordinance establishing a setback are pre-empted by the Non-Coal Act; and (2) the trial court erred in enjoining DVC from blasting as a nuisance.[9]
*763 I.
DVC argues that the Township's Blasting Ordinance is pre-empted by Section 16 of the Non-Coal Act.[10] Section 16 states:
Except with respect to ordinances adopted pursuant to the Act of July 31, 1968 (P.L. 805, No. 247), known as the `Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code' all local ordinances and enactments purporting to regulate surface mining are hereby superseded. The Commonwealth, by this enactment, hereby pre-empts the regulation of surface mining as herein defined.
52 P.S. § 3316. Section 3 of the Non-Coal Act defines "surface mining" as:
[T]he extraction of minerals from the earth, from waste or stockpiles or from pits or from banks by removing the strata or material that overlies or is above or between them or otherwise exposing and retrieving them from the surface ...
52 P.S. § 3303. DVC contends that the Blasting Ordinance, including its setback requirements, is not a land use ordinance[11] but instead, involves the regulation of surface mining; therefore, it is preempted.
We have previously addressed whether ordinances imposing restrictions on mining purporting to be enacted pursuant to the Municipalities Planning Code (MPC) were preempted by the Non-Coal Act. In Warner Company v. Zoning Hearing Board of Tredyffrin Township, 148 Pa.Cmwlth. 609, 612 A.2d 578 (1992), petition for allowance of appeal denied, 533 Pa. 654, 624 A.2d 112 (1993), we addressed whether a township which amended its zoning ordinance by adding new clauses defining and regulating quarrying operations impermissibly regulated mining. The amendment imposed setback requirements prohibiting mining and excavation within 300 feet of any national historic place or residence; established quarrying operations as a use permitted by special exception; required specific buffer and berm requirements; regulated the storage of overburden; established procedures for reclamation upon cessation of quarrying operations; and required dikes, barriers or structures to control the drainage from the operation. In finding that the Non-Coal Act preempted the provisions dealing with buffers and berms, overburden storage, reclamation and drainage structures, we stated:
Surface mining, as defined in section 3 of the Non-Coal Act, 52 P.S. § 3303, includes all surface activity connected with the mining. Those surface activities *764 integral to surface mining necessarily include the removal of overburden, the construction of buffers and berms and the reclamation of the affected land. [Those sections] of the township's ordinance attempt to regulate surface activities... which the Non-Coal Act and Warner's permit also specifically address. Hence, in accordance with section 16 of the Act, the amendments that attempt to regulate Warner's surface mining operations are preempted by the Act.
612 A.2d at 582. However, we went on to hold that the setback requirements prohibiting quarrying uses, regardless of whether blasting was involved and only permitting quarrying by special exception, were not preempted because they were traditional land use regulations.
We again addressed this issue in Pennsylvania Coal Company, Incorporated v. Township of Conemaugh, 149 Pa.Cmwlth. 22, 612 A.2d 1090 (1992), petition for allowance of appeal denied, 533 Pa. 626, 620 A.2d 492 (1993). In that case, the Township of Conemaugh amended its zoning ordinance by adding new provisions that extensively regulated the operation of surface coal and non-coal mining activities. The amendments required surface mining applicants to apply for a permit from the Township of Conemaugh, addressed the extraction of coal, dealt with excavations and fills, and dealt with blasting. Because the local ordinance extensively regulated the operation of surface coal mining activities and went beyond the purviews of traditional land use controls, we held that it was preempted by the Non-Coal Act.
In this case, the regulations the Township's Blasting Ordinance establishes are like the type of regulation that we struck down in Conemaugh, as being preempted, because it regulated surface mining operations rather than the traditional land use regulations held to be valid in Warner. Unlike the zoning amendments involved both in Warner and Conemaugh, the Blasting Ordinance is a stand-alone ordinance that is not part of a zoning code or subdivision regulation, and all of its provisions go to when, where and how blasting can occur rather than what, where and how a particular land use will be permitted. Also, unlike the setback requirement at issue in Warner, which established a setback prohibiting mining within 300-feet of a national historic place or a residence, regardless of whether blasting occurred, the Township's Blasting Ordinance prohibits only blasting, not mining altogether, within its setback, which goes to the manner in which limestone is going to be extracted. Because blasting is an integral operation in surface mining and the extraction of minerals, it is, therefore, considered a surface activity connected with surface mining as defined in Section 3 of the Non-Coal Act, 53 P.S. § 3303. Because blasting is a surface mining activity regulated by the DEP and addressed by the Non-Coal Act and DVC's permit, the Township's Blasting Ordinance is preempted by Section 16 of the Non-Coal Act.
II.
The other basis that the trial court grounded the grant of the preliminary injunction in was that the blasting constituted a common law nuisance. DVC contends and DEP agrees that the trial court did not have reasonable grounds to enjoin the blasting as a nuisance because mining cannot be a nuisance per se since it is conducted pursuant to a DEP issued permit, issued after years of review. They argue that to hold otherwise will mean that the comprehensive review process for issuing permits, as well as the appeal process provided to the EHB, will be impaired, and applicants will no longer be able to *765 rely on permits that have been issued if trial courts can issue injunctions based on nuisance when an applicant has met regulatory requirements.
Recently, this issue was addressed by our Supreme Court in Machipongo Land and Coal Company, Incorporated, v. Department of Environmental Protection, 799 A.2d 751 (Pa.2002), which involved whether a DEP regulation that determined land unsuitable for mining constituted a regulatory take. Notwithstanding the permitting process that would have to be satisfied before any mining could occur and notwithstanding compliance with those requirements, DEP argued that a nuisance, nonetheless, would be caused if mining would be permitted which would prevent any need for compensation. We precluded DEP from introducing any evidence that the operation of the mine would constitute a nuisance, because if the proposed surface and underground mines met all statutory and regulatory provisions, then the use could not be considered a nuisance because it was in accord with the comprehensive regulatory scheme that the General Assembly crafted and the DEP implemented to protect the public. However, our Supreme Court reversed, holding that if mining causes or has a significant potential to cause a public nuisance, it can be prohibited regardless of whether the landowner complied with all applicable statutes and regulations. Machipongo, 799 A.2d at 755.
In this case, the trial court issued a preliminary injunction because, among other reasons, blasting would cause a nuisance. The Township's expert witness, Alperstein, testified that the cliffs above the nearby residential properties were very loose and friable, and that blasting would cause a high probability of rocks dislodging from the cliffs and endangering the lives and property of those below. DVC's expert witness, Chiappetta, stated that the chances of a vibration reaching the boulder above Levinson's house were minimal to non-existent, but he admitted that the boulder was so precariously positioned that a vibration could dislodge it, and he recommended Levinson and his family evacuate their home on days blasting was to occur. Moreover, Chiappetta stated that he never calculated the stress vibrations might place on the cliffs located behind other residences in between the Levinson house and the quarry. Because there are reasonable grounds in the record to support the trial court's grant of a preliminary injunction based on nuisance, we affirm. Ucheomumu v. County of Allegheny, 729 A.2d 132 (Pa.Cmwlth.), petition for allowance of appeal denied, 740 A.2d 1151, 559 Pa. 724 (1999).
Even though we find the Blasting Ordinance was preempted by the Non-Coal Act, the trial court had a reasonable basis under a common law nuisance doctrine to grant the preliminary injunction, and, accordingly, the order is affirmed.
ORDER
AND NOW, this 13th day of December, 2002, the order of the Court of Common Pleas of Bucks County, No. 02-01876-26-5, dated April 29, 2002, granting a preliminary injunction, is affirmed.
NOTES
[1]  The Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) submitted an amicus curiae brief in support of DVC's appeal and was permitted to argue.
[2]  The agreement between the Township and Diliberto provides in relevant part:
3. All quarrying must cease, and all stockpiles on site are to be removed, within ninety (90) days after issuance of necessary building permits or their equivalent, except for that necessary to construct a golf course. There shall be no blasting. If this agreement becomes void, it is without prejudice to the owner to pursue all other remedies.
[3]  Ordinance 127 provides in relevant part:
Ordinance 127, "Regulating Blasting Activities"
Pursuant to the provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code and the Second Class Township Code, in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the Township, Tinicum Township, Bucks County ordains as follows:
Article I, "Purpose"
It is against public policy to permit uncontrolled, unrestricted blasting. The purpose of this Ordinance is to prevent needless damage to life and property because of improper blasting and the nuisances caused by blasting.
Article III, "General Limitations"
A. It shall be unlawful to conduct blasting without complying with this Ordinance.
B. It shall be unlawful to conduct blasting within 2,000 feet of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places, a National Heritage Corridor, a structure contributing to the National Register Historic District, or a public park unless it pertains to a residential use and is reviewed and approved by Tinicum Township.
C. It shall be unlawful to conduct blasting that shall cause a peak particle velocity greater than one inch per second, measured at the immediate location of any non-owned dwelling unit, public building, public park, school, church, hospital, commercial building, industrial building, livestock shelter, barn, or other inhabited structures.
D. It shall be unlawful to conduct blasting within 300 feet of a public road or bridge and the structures listed in c above unless it pertains to a residential use and is reviewed and approved by Tinicum Township.
[4]  The Non-Coal Act was passed to address the negative affects of surface mining by improving conservation of the land, protecting the health and safety of citizens and wildlife, and limiting pollution. Its provisions are enforced by the DEP, and it preempts all local regulations that regulate surface mining.
[5]  A "Test Blast Protocol" is the process by which DEP and the quarry performing the blasting measure and assess the impact blasting has on the surrounding structures and properties. In implementing the "Test Blast Protocol," the quarry detonates blasts, gradually amplifying the strength of each blast, until it reaches the amount needed to successfully quarry, while also taking readings from seismographs located at varying distances from the blast location to determine the magnitude of the vibration from each individual blast.
[6]  During those proceedings, the court permitted Levinson to intervene into the case because he had been informed by Chiappetta, a blasting engineer hired by DVC, that during blasting, there was a danger of falling rocks. However, because DVC agreed to suspend any blasting activities for 45 days in order to allow Levinson to remove a large rock situated on the cliff above his property, Levinson withdrew as an intervenor.
[7]  Also testifying during the hearings were Corporal Richard E. Peterson with the Township's Police Department, who testified that the police department only had five officers and that policing the site would be difficult; Ken Lewis, the park manager for Delaware Canal State Park, who testified that the state park was always accessible by the public and that there had been recent renovations to the lock walls of the canal; James Sabath, Chief of the Township's Police Department, who testified that DVC has had problems with trespassers in the past and that he was concerned with the safety of trespassers who were present during blasting; Nicholas C. Forte, Chairman of the Board of Supervisors of the Township, who testified regarding the negotiations for the 1997 contract between the Township and Diliberto and as to his understanding of the phrase, "There shall be no blasting."
[8]  Our scope of review in an appeal of a preliminary injunction is to determine whether there were any reasonable grounds for the trial court's grant of a preliminary injunction, and we will reverse only if no such grounds exist. City of Philadelphia v. District Council 33, 528 Pa. 355, 598 A.2d 256 (1991). In order for a preliminary injunction to be granted, the court must apply the following standards: (1) the injunction must be necessary to prevent immediate and irreparable harm that could not be compensated by damages; (2) greater injury would result by refusing the injunction than by granting it; (3) the injunction restores the parties to the status quo that existed immediately before the alleged wrong; (4) the wrong is manifest and the injunction is reasonably suited to abate it; and (5) the applicant's right to relief is clear. In Re Milton Hershey School Trust, 807 A.2d 324 (Pa.Cmwlth.2002), citing City of Philadelphia v. District Council 33, 528 Pa. 355, 598 A.2d 256 (1991).
DVC argues that the trial court did not follow the standards for granting a preliminary injunction because the injunction did not preserve the status quo. They contend that they were granted a permit by DEP to deepen their quarry through the use of blasting, and the permit represented the status quo. DVC concludes that on April 29, 2002, when the trial court enjoined DVC from blasting, the status quo was altered because they possessed a DEP permit they could no longer use. The basic purpose of a preliminary injunction is to preserve the status quo as it exists or previously existed before the acts complained of, thereby preventing irreparable injury or gross injustice. Maritrans GP Incorporated v. Pepper, Hamilton & Scheetz, 529 Pa. 241, 602 A.2d 1277 (1992). The status quo to be preserved by a preliminary injunction is the last peaceable and lawful non-contested status preceding the underlying controversy between the parties or the alleged wrongful conduct of the party whose actions are sought to be enjoined. Sameric Corporation of Market Street v. Goss, 448 Pa. 497, 295 A.2d 277 (1972). Because the status quo is the last non-contested, peaceable status, in this case, we consider that time to be immediately prior to DEP's issuance of the mining permit to DVC. Furthermore, this finding prevents any potential irreparable harm that would result from blasting by DVC.
[9]  DVC also contends that the trial court erred in enjoining the blasting based on a breach of the 1997 contract between the Township and Diliberto. The Township contends that the language in the 1997 contract is unambiguous and prohibits all blasting in the quarry area, while DVC argues that the 1997 contract was only intended to prohibit blasting in connection with the development of a golf course, not a complete ban on blasting, and regardless of the contract's interpretation, no breach has yet occurred, making the grant of an injunction inappropriate at this time. We need not address these arguments because the trial court specifically stated that the order was based on the breach of the Blasting Ordinance and the risk of harm to nearby lives and property, and failed to mention any purported breach of the 1997 contract as a basis for the grant of the preliminary injunction.
[10]  During oral argument before this Court, the Township admitted that many of the other provisions of the Blasting Ordinance (dealing with peak particle velocity, etc.) were preempted by the Non-Coal Act. However, the Township still contends that the setback provisions of the Blasting Ordinance are not preempted.
[11]  Just because an ordinance purports to be enacted pursuant to the Municipalities Planning Code does not mean that it is enacted pursuant to the Municipalities Planning Code. First, the subject matter must fall within either Section 503 of the MPC, 53 P.S. § 10503, which deals with the proper subject of subdivision and land development ordinance, or Section 603 of the MPC, 53 P.S. § 10603, dealing with uses of land, size, height, bulk, location, areas of dimensions of land to be occupied by structures, as well as areas and other open areas and distances to be left unoccupied by uses and structures and density of population and intensity of use; i.e. zoning ordinances. See Land Acquisition Services, Incorporated v. Clarion County Board of Commissioners, 146 Pa.Cmwlth. 293, 605 A.2d 465 (1992). Not only must the subject matter be proper, the ordinance must be enacted in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 505 of the MPC, 53 P.S. § 10505, for subdivisions ordinances, or Section 609 of the MPC, 53 P.S. § 10609, for zoning ordinances.

=== CASE 9737260 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:20:16.030922+00 ===

PIVARNIK, Justice.
Defendant-Appellant Curtis Moore was convicted of Robbery, a class A felony, by a jury in the St. Joseph County Superior Court. He was sentenced to a term of forty-two (42) years and now appeals, raising the following errors:
1. admitting certain hearsay evidence;
2. admitting Appellant's confessions and admissions when the State had failed to establish the corpus delicti;
3. admitting statements which were not intelligently and voluntarily given; and
4. sufficiency of the evidence.
On May 12, 1983, Officer Terry Allen of the South Bend Police Department was dispatched to investigate an occurrence at Re-noy Vrient's residence. When Officer Al len entered the home he found Vrient seri ously injured and lying on the floor, discovered a window sereen removed from a bathroom window, and realized an intruder had gained entrance through that window. Officers Alien and Shock dusted for fingerprints after getting aid for Vrient. On that same day, Appellant admitted to his cousin, Noah Rucker, with whom he lived, that he had broken into Vrient's home, assaulted him, and stole money and a truck. Shortly thereafter, Appellant fled to Milwaukee, Wisconsin. Rucker later discovered a RCA X-L 100 television set in Appellant's room. Rucker transported the television to the home of Ann Harris, Rucker's girlfriend.
Thereafter, Officer Vincent Laurita located the victim's truck and impounded it. During a search of the vehicle, Officer Laurita found a piece of paper with the name "Noah Rucker" written on it. On May 21, 1983, the victim died. The following day, Officer Raymond Sucik of the Milwaukee, Wisconsin, Police Department, arrested Appellant on suspicion of the murder committed in South Bend, Indiana. Officer Roosevelt Harrell of the Milwaukee Police Department, read Appellant the Miranda warning. At this time, Appellant acknowledged his understanding of his rights but refused to sign a waiver form. While Appellant admitted he had been in South Bend around the time the robbery occurred, he denied involvement in any offenses and refused to elaborate further.
Officers Laurita and Walton of the South Bend Police Department arrived in Milwaukee on May 27, 1988, to transport Appellant back to South Bend. Once again, the officers read the Miranda warning to Appellant. However, this time Appellant signed the waiver form and Officers Walton and Laurita took Appellant's first statement. During this interview, Appellant *3was responsive, cooperative, and never requested the assistance of counsel. Appellant informed the officers that during the early morning hours of May 12, 1988, he and Noah Rucker, entered Vrient's home through a window. While Rucker and Vrient struggled, Appellant searched for and stole money and a television set. Appellant and Rucker then placed the television into Vrient's truck and fled.
After taking Appellant's statement, Lau-rita and Walton transported Appellant to South Bend. En route, Appellant informed Walton that he wanted to correct his earlier statement. Walton told Appellant an advisement of rights would be given and a second statement could be made in South Bend. The following day, May 28, 1983, Appellant was again advised of his rights, indicated his understanding, and signed a waiver form. He then proceeded to give a second statement in which he admitted to acting alone in the robbery. He stated he entered Vrient's residence by prying a sereen from a window. Vrient, armed with a weapon, confronted Appellant. Appellant beat him and bound his hands and feet. Appellant then stole money, a television set, a .22 caliber weapon and truck.
After Appellant was arrested, Officer Lulu fingerprinted him. Clyde Ottinger, a fingerprint specialist employed by the FBI, compared Appellant's fingerprints with prints lifted from areas in the victim's home and determined they were from the same individual. Finally, through the use of serial numbers, it was determined that the television recovered from Harris' residence was purchased by the victim. At the conclusion of this evidence, the jury convicted Appellant of Robbery resulting in bodily injury.
I
Appellant alleges the trial court erred by allowing Officer Allen to testify as to what he observed on the victim's wallet upon discovering the victim. Officer Terry Allen of the South Bend Police Department testified that on May 12, 1988, he was assigned to an investigation at 2306 Longley Avenue in South Bend, at approximately 1:80 am. When he arrived he observed an individual lying on his back on the floor in the den. He was asked if he made an identification of the individual. Allen indicated that he found a wallet with a man's name on it. He was asked to give the name. The defense objected that such a question called for hearsay and that the best evidence would be the wallet. The trial court overruled the objection and allowed Allen to state the wallet contained the name Renoy Vrient.
Appellant's first contention, that Officer Allen's testimony was inadmissible hearsay, is unfounded. Hearsay evidence is in-court testimony about an extra-judicial statement offered to prove the truth of the matter asserted therein. Such evidence is objectionable when the value of the testimony rests on the credibility of the declar-ant and the declarant is not in court or is otherwise unavailable for cross-examination. Grimes v. State (1983) Ind., 450 N.E.2d 512, 522. We agree, however, with the State that the information in the wallet was not put into evidence to prove the truth of what the information stated but was put in to explain Allen's actions. Dr. Koscielski identified the victim when he testified he knew the victim and his name was Renoy Vrient. Allen's testimony gave continuity to Dr. Koscielski's testimony and explained Allen's observations and the actions he took afterwards. As such, Allen's testimony did not constitute hearsay. Wagner v. State (1985), Ind., 474 N.E.2d 476, 491. The testimony was proper and the trial court did not err in permitting Officer Allen to testify as to the name on the wallet.
Appellant next contends that Officer Allen should not have been permitted to testify as to what name was displayed on the wallet because of the best evidence rule. The best evidence rule, referred to by this Court as the original documents rule, applies to a document that is used to prove a material fact in the case. Where the document is not central to litigation, the original documents rule does not apply. *4Darnell v. State (1982), Ind., 435 N.E.2d 250, 254. Here the name on the wallet was not central to the prosecution of Appellant. Moreover, Dr. Koscielski identified the vie-tim and this identity was undisputed. Accordingly, Appellant was not prejudiced and the trial court did not err by allowing Officer Allen to testify as to the name on the wallet.
II
Appellant claims there were several incidents of the trial court erroneously admitting testimony because the State failed to establish the requisite corpus delicti. The testimony consists of the following incidents. Appellant gave the police two statements confessing his involvement after his arrest which were admitted over his objection. Appellant also objected to Noah Rucker's testimony recounting admissions made by Appellant to him. Finally, Officer Walton, who transported Appellant from Milwaukee to South Bend, testified over Appellant's objection that en route Appellant stated he wanted to correct the first statement he gave the police. Walton advised Appellant he could do so when they arrived in South Bend. On appeal, Appellant argues the trial court erred by admitting these out of court statements without evidence of the corpus delicti, in other words, without sufficient evidence to prove that the crime charged had actually been committed.
The trial court, however, did not err in this respect as there was sufficient evidence, independent of Appellant's out of court statements, to establish the corpus delicti. To establish the corpus delicti, evidence independent of a defendant's statement must be presented which shows that a criminal act actually occurred. Greham v. State (1984), Ind., 464 N.E.2d 1, 7, reh. denied. In order for a confession to be admitted at trial, corroborating evidence of the corpus delicti must be introduced. Hudson v. State (1978), 268 Ind. 310, 313, 375 N.E.2d 195, 196. However, although it is preferable to first establish the corpus delicti before offering a confession or statement against interest by a defendant, it is not necessary. The order of proof is within the sound discretion of the trial court. Evans v. State (1984), Ind., 460 N.E.2d 500, 502. Further, circumstantial evidence may establish the corpus delicti and it need not be proven beyond a reasonable doubt. Graokam, supra. There was ample evidence presented in this case to prove the corpus delicti. Officer Allen arrived at Renoy Vrient's residence and discovered Vrient, lying bound and seriously injured on the floor in the den. A screen had been removed from the bathroom window, and the area appeared as if someone had entered through the window. Vrient's truck, television, and other items were missing. Later, Officer Laurita located Vrient's truck, and during a search of it found a piece of paper with "Noah Rucker" written on it. Meanwhile, Rucker, with whom Appellant resided, discovered a RCA XL 100 television set in Appellant's room after Appellant fled to Milwaukee. Through the use of serial numbers, it was shown that Vrient had purchased that television set. Further, Clyde Ottinger, a FBI fingerprint specialist, compared Appellant's fingerprints with those lifted from areas in the victim's home and determined the prints were made by the same individual. This was sufficient independent proof, apart from Appellant's statements, to establish that a robbery had been committed. The trial court, therefore, did not err by admitting testimony concerning Appellant's statements over Appellant's objections that the corpus delicti was not established.
IH
Appellant next alleges the court erroneously admitted the two statements he gave the police and his statement to Officer Walton concerning his wanting to correct his first statement. He claims these statements were admitted though the State failed to demonstrate they were intelligently and voluntarily given. Appellant asserts his statements were coerced, that they were involuntary because he had invoked his right to assistance of counsel, and that *5he was re-interrogated after he had elected to remain silent.
It is well settled that the burden is on the State to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that a defendant voluntarily and intelligently waived his rights and that a confession was voluntarily given. Upon a review of the denial of a motion to suppress a confession and the subsequent admission of the confession into evidence, an appellate court will neither weigh the evidence nor judge the credibility of the witnesses. The admissibility of a confession ultimately depends upon questions of fact which are to be resolved by the trial court. Bevill v. State (1985), Ind., 472 N.E.2d 1247, 1250, reh denied. Further, the admissibility of a statement or confession is controlled by determining from the totality of cireum-stances whether or not a confession was given voluntarily and not through inducement, violence, threats, or other improper influences so as to overcome the will of an accused. Massey v. State (1985), Ind., 473 N.E.2d 146, 147. On appeal, a trial court's finding of voluntariness of a confession will not be disturbed if there is substantial, though conflicting evidence to support the ruling. Jones v. State (1984), Ind., 464 N.E.2d 1283, 1286. The evidence adduced at trial supporting the trial court's ruling that the statements in issue were knowingly and voluntarily given are as follows.
On May 26, 1983, Officer Sucik of the Milwaukee Police Department arrested Appellant on suspicion of a murder committed in South Bend. In order to complete an arrest, Officer Harrell read Appellant the Miranda warning. Although Appellant advised Officer Harrell that he understood his rights, he declined to sign a waiver of rights form. Appellant then proceeded to state he was in South Bend during the time frame in issue, but he denied involvement in any offenses and refused to elaborate further. On May 27, 1988, Officer Laurita and Walton of the South Bend Police Department arrived in Milwaukee to transport Appellant to South Bend. The officers read and explained the Miranda warning to Appellant, at which time Appellant signed the waiver form. Appellant then was cooperative, responsive to questions, and never requested the assistance of counsel. There also was evidence that Appellant was never threatened or coerced into signing the waiver or answering questions. After Appellant confessed to robbing Vrient, Officers Laurita and Walton transported him to South Bend. En route, Appellant requested that corrections be made to his first statement. Officer Walton told him he could correct his statement in South Bend. The following day, Appellant was advised of his rights, indicated he understood them, and signed a waiver form. Again, Appellant was willing to talk with Officer Walton and informed him that, contrary to his previous statement, he had perpetrated the robbery alone and not with Noah Rucker. This evidence is sufficient to support the trial court's findings that Appellant's waivers and statements were freely and voluntarily given.
Further, Appellant's contention that his confessions were involuntary since he was denied the opportunity to consult with an attorney is unfounded. Apart from Ap-peliant's assertions, the record does not reveal that Appellant requested to speak with an attorney. To the contrary, there was testimony at trial that Appellant did not request assistance of counsel before making a statement. Further, a defendant's signed waiver indicates he was will ing to make a statement and did not wish to have an attorney appointed for him. Tyson v. State (1979), 270 Ind. 458, 461, 386 N.E.2d 1185, 1188. Appellant's signed waivers and testimony that he did not request the assistance of counsel were sufficient evidence supporting the trial court's determination that Appellant's statements were voluntary.
Appellant also claims it was improper for the South Bend Police to question him when he had expressed his desire to remain silent on the issue to the Milwaukee Police.
We recognize that this issue was discussed recently in Phillips v. State (1986), Ind., 492 N.E.2d 10, which requires clarification. Although it was dicto in *6Phillips, the implication was that one electing to remain silent triggers the same obligation on the part of police as a request for counsel. An analysis of these issues indicates such is not the case.
Miranda was handed down by the United States Supreme Court in 1966. Among its provisions was one that stated: "Once warnings have been given the subsequent procedure is clear. If the individual indicates in any manner, at any time prior to or during questioning, that he wishes to remain silent, the interrogation must cease." Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436, 473, 86 S.Ct. 1602, 1627, 16 L.Ed.2d 694 (1966). The first time the United States Supreme Court had occasion to speak on this particular provision of Miranda was in 1975 in the case of Michigan v. Mosley (1975), 423 U.S. 96, 96 S.Ct. 321, 46 L.Ed.2d 313.
Mosley was arrested in Detroit, Michigan, in connection with robberies that had recently occurred at the Blue Goose Bar and the White Tower Restaurant. Detective James Cowie attempted to interrogate Mosley on these robberies but he stated he did not want to answer any questions about the robberies. Cowie promptly ceased the interrogation. The court noted that at no time during the questioning did Mosley indicate a desire to consult with a lawyer. Later that same day, Detective Hill of the Detroit police brought Mosley from the cell block to a fifth floor office and questioned him about the fatal shooting of a man named Leroy Williams, who had been killed during a robbery attempt outside the 101 Ranch Bar in Detroit,. Mosley had not been arrested on this charge or interrogated about it by Detective Cowie. Hill carefully advised Mosley of his Miranda rights before the questioning. Mosley finally confessed to participating in this robbery and slaying to Detective Hill. At no time during this second interrogation did Mosley ask to consult with a lawyer or indicate he did not want to discuss the homicide. Mosley's motion to suppress the confession was denied by the trial court. On appeal, the Michigan Court of Appeals reversed Mosley's conviction, holding that Detective Hill's second interrogation of Mosley was a per se violation of the Miranda doctrine. Further appeal was denied by the Michigan Supreme Court. The United States Supreme Court granted a Writ of Certiorari " ... because of the important constitutional question presented." Michigan v. Mosley, 419 U.S. 1119, 95 S.Ct. 801, 42 L.Ed.2d 819 (1975).
Even though Mosley was questioned the second time by a different police officer about a different robbery the Supreme Court nonetheless discussed the application of the Miranda safeguards where one is interrogated after he has invoked his right to remain silent. In discussing the provision of Miranda stated above, the Supreme Court in Mosley stated:
"This passage states that the 'interrogation must cease' when the person in custody indicates that 'he wishes to remain silent! It does not state under what circumstances, if any, a resumption of questioning is permissible. The passage could be literally read to mean that person who has invoked his 'right to silence' can never again be subjected to custodial interrogation by any police officer at any time or place on any subject. Another possible construction of the passage would characterize 'any statement taken after the person invokes his privilege' as 'the product of compulsion' and would therefore mandate its exclusion from evidence, even if it were volunteered by the person in custody without any further interrogation whatever. Or the passage could be interpreted to require only the immediate cessation of questioning, and to permit a resumption of interrogation after a momentary respite.
It is evident that any of these possible literal interpretations would lead to absurd and unintended results. To permit the continuation of custodial interrogation after a momentary cessation would clearly frustrate the purposes of Miranda by allowing repeated rounds of questioning to undermine the will of the person being questioned. At the other extreme, a blanket prohibition against the taking *7of voluntary statements or a permanent immunity from further interrogation, regardless of the circumstances, would transform the Miranda safeguards into wholly irrational obstacles to legitimate police investigative activity, and deprive suspects of an opportunity to make informed and intelligent assessments of their interests. Clearly, therefore, neither this passage nor any other passage in the Miranda opinion can sensibly be read to create a per se proscription of indefinite duration upon any further questioning by any police officer on any subject, once the person in custody has indicated a desire to remain silent.
A reasonable and faithful interpretation of the Miranda opinion must rest on the intention of the Court in that case to adopt 'fully effective means ... to notify the person of his right of silence and to assure that the exercise of the right will be serupulously honored ...' 384 US, at 479, 16 L Ed 2d 694, 86 S Ct 1602 [at 1680], 10 Ohio MisC 9, 36 Ohio Ops 2d 237, 20 ALR3rd 974. The critical safeguard identified in the passage at issue is a person's 'right to cut off questioning.' Id., at 474, 16 L Ed 2d 694, 86 S Ct 1602 [at 1628], 10 Ohio Misc 9, 86 Ohio Ops 2d 2837, 10 ALR3d 974. Through the exercise of his option to terminate questioning he can control the time at which questioning occurs, the subjects discussed, and the duration of the interrogation. The requirement that law enforcement authorities must respect a person's exercise of that option counteracts the coercive pressures of the custodial setting. We therefore conclude that the admissibility of statements obtained after the person in custody has decided to remain silent depends under Miranda on whether his 'right to cut off questioning' was 'serupulously honored.'
Mosley, 423 U.S. at 101-104, 96 S.Ct. at 325-826, 46 L.Ed.2d at 320-321. The Court then went on to find that under the circumstances, Mosley's right to cut off question-img was fully respected since interrogation immediately ceased after he stated he wished to remain silent. Mosely, 423 U.S. at 104, 96 S.Ct. at 826, 46 L.Ed.2d at 321. Further, Mosley was carefully advised he was under no obligation to answer any questions and could remain silent if he wished. Id. Justice White, concurring in result, expressed the view that under the Miranda decision the proper standard for determining the admissibility of a custodial confession obtained after the accused's initial assertion of his right to silence should be whether the accused voluntarily waived his previously invoked right to silence. Mosely, 428 U.S. at 108, 96 S.Ct. at 328, 46 L.Ed.2d at 324.
On the other hand, the procedure police must follow when a suspect requests the presence of counsel before any custodial interrogation was set down by the United States Supreme Court in Edwards v. Arizona (1981), 451 U.S. 477, 101 S.Ct. 1880, 68 L.Ed.2d 378. In that case, Edwards refused to talk to Arizona police, stating he wished to confer with counsel first. The police officers ceased interrogation when he requested counsel. The police, however, returned the next day without making counsel available to him and requested that he speak to them again. Edwards informed the detention officer that he did not want to talk to anyone but the guard told him "that he had to" talk to them. He did so, and after again being advised of his Miranda rights, he gave an incriminating statement. Justice White, writing for the majority this time, set out the procedure police must follow when interrogating an accused who has demanded counsel before speaking further:
" ... although we have held that after initially being advised of his Miranda rights, the accused may himself validly waive his rights and respond to interrogation, See North Carolina v. Butler, supra, [441 U.S. 369] at 372-376, 60 L.Ed.2d 286, 99 S Ct. 1755 [at 1756-1759] the Court has strongly indicated that additional safeguards are necessary when the accused asks for counsel; and we now hold that when an accused has invoked his right to have counsel present during custodial interrogation, a valid *8waiver of that right cannot be established by showing only that he responded to further police initiated custodial interrogation even if he has been advised of his rights. We further hold that an accused, such as Edwards, having expressed his desire to deal with the police only through counsel, is not subject to further interrogation by the authorities until counsel has been made available to him, unless the accused himself initiates further communication, exchanges, or conversations with the police.
Miranda itself indicated that the assertion of the right to counsel was a significant event and that once exercised by the accused, 'the interrogation must cease until an attorney is present.' 384 US, at 474, 16 L.Ed.2d 694, 86 S Ct. 1602 [at 1628], 10 Ohio Misc 9, 36 Ohio Ops 2d 237, 10 ALR3d 974. Our later cases have not abandoned that view. In Michigan v. Mosley, 423 US 96, 46 L Ed 2d 313, 96 S Ct 321 (1975), the Court noted that Miranda had distinguished between the procedural safeguards triggered by a request to remain silent and a request for an attorney and had required that interrogation cease until an attorney was present only if the individual stated that he wanted counsel. 423 US at 104, n 10, 46 L Ed 2d 313, 96 S Ct 321; see also id., at 109-111, 46 L Ed 2d 313, 96 S Ct 821 (White, J., concurring). In Fore v. Michael C., supra, [442 U.S. 707] at 719, 61 L Ed 2d 197, 99 S Ct 2560 [at 2569], the Court referred to Miranda's rigid rule that an accused's request for an attorney is per se an invocation of his Fifth Amendment rights, requiring that all interrogation cease! And just last Term, in a case where a suspect in custody had invoked his Miranda right to counsel, the Court again referred to the 'undisputed right' under Miranda to remain silent and to be free of interrogation 'until he had consulted with a lawyer.' Rhode Island v. Innis, 446 US 291, 298, 64 L Ed 2d 297, 100 S Ct 1682 [1688] (1980). We reconfirm these views and, to lend them substance, emphasize that it is inconsistent with Miranda and its progeny' for the authorities, at their instance, to reinterrogate an accused in custody if he has clearly asserted his right to counsel." [Emphasis added.]
Edwards, 451 U.S. at 484, 101 S.Ct. at 1884-1885, 68 LEd.2d at 386. Justice White's majority opinion was joined by Justices Brennan, Stewart, Marshall, Black-mun, and Stevens. Chief Justice Burger concurring in judgment, expressed the view that the inquiry in these settings is whether resumption of interrogation is the result of a voluntary waiver, and that the inquiry should be resolved under the traditional voluntariness standard. Edwards, 451 U.S. at 488, 101 S.Ct at 1886-1887, 68 L.Ed.2d at 388-3889. Justice Powell also wrote a concurring opinion, joined in by Justice Rehnquist, expressing the view that the standard for waiver of a constitutional right is whether the accused fully understands the right in question and voluntarily intends to relinquish that right. He would not superimpose a new element of proof on the established doctrine of waiver of counsel by creating a new per se rule requiring a threshold inquiry as to precisely who opened any conversation between an accused and state officials. Edwards, 451 U.S. at 489-490, 101 S.Ct. at 1887-1888, 68 L.Ed.2d at 398-890.
In Oregon v. Bradshaw (1983), 462 U.S. 1039, 103 S.Ct. 2830, 77 L.Ed.2d 405, the United States Supreme Court, in a majority opinion written by Justice Rehnquist, reaffirmed its position that when an accused has requested counsel before speaking further, interrogation can be resumed only when the accused initiates a communication with police, and when it is apparent that he knowingly and intelligently waived his right to counsel. Bradshaw, 462 U.S. at 1044, 103 S.Ct. at 2834, 77 L.Ed.2d at 411-412. The court in Bradshaw found that the defendant had, in fact, initiated further discussion with the police by reopening dialogue about the investigation, and that, based on an investigation of the particular facts and circumstances surrounding the case, the defendant made a valid waiver of *9his right to counsel and his right to silence. Bradshaw, 462 U.S. at 1046, 103 S.Ct. at 2835, 77 L.Ed.2d at 412-418.
It seems clear from these opinions that the United States Supreme Court intended and did set a separate and more stringent standard to be followed when an individual requests assistance of counsel before he speaks further. It also is clear the Court did not intend to expand this special procedure to the situation where the individual has only invoked his right to remain silent and there is no request for counsel. This was made clear by Mosley and has been so interpreted by the majority of federal and state jurisdictions, including this State. Where an individual has invoked his right to remain silent, it has been held that there is not a per se rule prohibiting the authorities from ever initiating a discussion or further questioning the individual on the subject. Rather, it must be shown on a case by case basis that the authorities "serupulously honored" the defendant's right to cut off questioning at any time, and that he knew and understood these rights and voluntarily waived them. Martin v. Wainwright (11th Cir.1985), 770 F.2d 918; Anderson v. Smith (2nd Cir.1984), 751 F.2d 96; United States v. Bosby (11th Cir.1982), 675 F.2d 1174; United States ex rel. Riley v. Franzen (ith Cir.1981), 658 F.2d 1158 (the Tth Circuit here clearly makes the distinction between the right to remain silent and the right to counsel); United States v. Hackley (D.C.Cir.1980) 636 F.2d 493; United States v. Boyce (9th Cir.1979), 594 F.2d 1246; Wilson v. Henderson (2nd Cir.1978), 594 F.2d 1185 cert. denied, (1979), 442 U.S. 945, 99 S.Ct. 2892, 61 L.Ed.2d 316; United States v. Hernandez (5th Cir.1978), 574 F.2d 1362.
This Court considered the precise question in Lane v. State, (1977), 266 Ind. 485, 364 N.E.2d 756. Lane surrendered to police, was advised of his rights and stated he did not want an attorney and he did not wish to speak to a detective at that time. Detective Allen, who was assigned to the case, was advised that Lane surrendered and did not care to speak at that time. Despite this, Allen revisited Lane and asked him if he wanted an attorney, to which Lane replied: "No." Allen then asked Lane if he wanted to make a statement, to which Lane replied: "Yes, I want to tell you all about it." In a unanimous opinion authored by Justice Hunter, this Court stated:
"Although Lane at one point stated he did not wish to make a statement at that time, this was not such an assertion of his right to remain silent as would prohibit police officers from later asking if he wished to make a statement. Even after an unequivocal assertion by an accused of his right to silence, there is not a per se proscription of further interrogation. Michigan v. Mosley, supra. The officers did not hold Lane incommunicado for an extended period of time, extracting a confession only after prolonged interrogation. In fact, it seems that no interrogation occurred at all. The officers merely asked, on two separate occasions, if the defendant wished to make a statement. The record supports the trial court's conclusion that the defendant's right to remain silent was seru-pulously honored and that he made his confession after a valid waiver of that right."
Lane, 266 Ind. at 490, 364 N.E.2d at 759. Other state courts have taken the same position in interpreting Mosley, but it is not necessary to lengthen this opinion by setting them out here.
In this case, Appellant Moore was given his Miranda rights, acknowledged he well understood them, including his right to remain silent, and declined to talk to the Milwaukee police. Hours later, Moore was asked to consent to a search of his residence for a .22 caliber pistol believed to be the murder weapon. Moore consented. The next day, Moore was questioned by South Bend police. The South Bend police fully readvised him of his rights before he willingly talked to them, which resulted in his first confession. There is no showing that the police did not serupulously honor his right to remain silent nor that he failed to know and recognize his right before *10waiving it. Moore further demonstrated he was aware of this by initiating further discussion with the police which resulted in a second statement being given. Accordingly, there is no error here.
Furthermore, to the extent that Phillips has been interpreted to equate the waiver requirements where a defendant invokes his right to remain silent with his right to counsel, we hereby set aside Phillips. In Indiana, when a suspect invokes his right to remain silent, the police must "serupu-lously honor" that right. This is all the law requires and the reasons are apparent. The "serupulously honored" test strikes a balance between the accused's right to be free from coerced interrogation, and the State's interest in using custodial interrogation as an effective and efficient investigatory tool. The burden remains on the State to show the police serupulously honored the accused's right to remain silent.
IV
Finally, Appellant assigns as error the insufficiency of evidence presented at trial to support a conviction of robbery. Specifically, Appellant claims the State neither proved he took property from the vice-tim nor established he caused the victim bodily injury.
Ind.Code § 35-42-5-1 (Burns Supp.1983), which governs here, proscribed robbery as follows:
"See. 1. A person who knowingly or intentionally takes property from another person or from the presence of another person:
(1) by using or threatening the use of force on any person; or
(2) by putting any person in fear; commits robbery, a Class C felony. However, the offense is a Class B felony if it is committed while armed with a deadly weapon, and a class A felony if it results in either bodily injury or serious bodily injury to any person other than a defendant."
Where the sufficiency of evidence is challenged, the court on review will neither weigh the evidence nor judge the credibility of witnesses, rather it will consider the evidence most favorable to the State together with all reasonable inferences therefrom. If there is substantial evidence of probative value to support the conclusion of the trier of fact, the verdict will not be overturned. Robinson v. State (1985), Ind., 486 N.E.2d 986, 988.
Appellant argues that the State failed to show he took the television from the presence of the victim. However, in his second statement given to police, Appellant admitted that he beat the victim and left him lying on the den floor. After searching the victim's trousers in the bedroom, he walked past the victim still lying on the den floor to get the portable television set. According to Appellant's statement, the victim grabbed for Appellant and Appellant then bound him, took the television set from the den into the kitchen, found the keys to the victim's truck, transported the television set onto the truck and fled. By Appellant's own admission, he took the television from the victim's presence.
Appellant's claim that the State failed to present sufficient proof that he inflicted bodily injury upon the victim also is unconvincing. Ind.Code § 85-41-1-4 (Burns Supp.1983) defined bodily injury as, "any impairment of physical condition, including physical pain." The doctor treating the victim, who was discovered the evening the robbery occurred, testified the victim sustained multiple abrasions, severe bruises, and fractures of the left facial bones and the right humerus bones. Appellant also confessed to beating the victim during the perpetration of the robbery. In conjunction with the other evidence adduced at trial and heretofore mentioned, there was sufficient evidence to support the jury's findings that Appellant took the television from the presence of the victim, that Appellant inflicted bodily injury upon the victim, and that Appellant committed this robbery.
The trial court is in all things affirmed.
GIVAN, C.J., and DICKSON, J., concur.
SHEPARD, J., dissents with separate opinion in which DeBRULER, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9737261 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:20:16.036759+00 ===

*11SHEPARD, Justice,
dissenting.
In setting aside our decision in Phillips v. State (1986), Ind., 492 N.E.2d 10, the Court does several remarkable things. First, it overrules a decision reached without dissent only six months ago. Second, it does so without finding any particular reason why that decision should not be regarded as stare decisis. Third, it chooses a new standard plainly at variance with existing Fifth Amendment case law.
Judges should always be alert to the fact that existing case law may outlive its usefulness and we should be willing to test old rules against current reality. Nevertheless, a court which leaps from one side of a question to another creates confusion in the profession and among the citizenry about what the law really is at any given moment in time. This Court has traditionally held that stare decisis requires that a rule be followed unless it now appears from experience that it "works an obvious injustice upon litigants and is not supported by any authority." New York, Cincinnati, and St. Louis Railroad Co. v. Henderson (1958), 237 Ind. 456, 465, 146 N.E.2d 531, 537. Accord, Brooks v. Robinson (1972), 259 Ind. 16, 284 N.E.2d 794.
As for the merits of today's change in heart about what the Fifth Amendment of the United States Constitution requires, I choose not to belabor the point except to say that I believe that we properly interpreted the Fifth Amendment in Phillips. To belittle that decision by calling it dicte seems to me unbecoming.
The central thesis of the majority's position appears to be that a prisoner who asks for his lawyer may not be badgered but that one who tells the authorities that he wishes to invoke his right to remain silent may be. What good is the attorney, pray tell, if not to assure that the accused does not say something or consent to something that may not be in his best interests?
Although it is convenient to pass over the record in order to make today's decision seem more palatable, I submit that the evidence reveals a great deal about the fate of future appellants who come to this Court seeking vindication of their Fifth Amendment rights. The first time Moore was questioned, he asserted his innocence and invoked his right to remain silent. Knowing that he had done so, a second officer decided to attempt a further conversation in the hope that Moore could be persuaded to consent to a search of his residence. The next day, yet another attempt was made to elicit a confession from the defendant notwithstanding his expressed desire not to be questioned. If this set of efforts demonstrates that the authorities "serupulous honored" a defendant's decision not to speak, it is difficult to foresee that any defendant will ever receive relief from this Court by citing the Fifth Amendment.
To rely on Michigan v. Mosley, 423 U.S. 96, 96 S.Ct. 321, 46 L.Ed.2d 313 (1975), for today's decision is especially amazing. It is correct that the inquiry to be made about the voluntariness of a confession made by a prisoner who has invoked his right to remain silent is whether the police "serupu-lously honored" his request. The Mosley Court made it plain enough what "serupu-lously honored" meant. When Mosley invoked his right to remain silent, interrogation ceased immediately, the officer did not try to resume questioning or to persuade Mosley to reconsider, and Mosley was read his Miranda rights before interrogation commenced concerning another offense. Mosley, 423 U.S. at 104, 96 S.Ct. at 327, 46 L.Ed.2d at 322.
To rely on Mosley as authority for the idea that the Fifth Amendment permits police to attempt to persuade prisoners to change their mind about invoking their rights so as to permit further interrogation is beyond the pale.
DeBRULER, J., joins in this dissent.

=== CASE 9737262 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:20:18.082489+00 ===

KLEIN, J.:
¶ 1 Edmund L. Middleton appeals from the equitable distribution order entered on April 6, 2000 in the Court of Common Pleas of Delaware County. The trial judge, Judge Maureen F. Fitzpatrick, initially issued an order directing Husband to file a statement of matters complained of on appeal pursuant to Pa.R.A.P.1925(b). However, since the parties were exploring settlement, the judge granted an unlimited extension of time within which to file the 1925(b) statement. Then, to avoid having the case open at the end of the year, the judge filed an opinion without waiting for *1243Husband to file the 1925(b) statement. Counsel agree that Judge Fitzpatrick told them that she had been very involved in the case and was sufficiently familiar with Husband/Appellant’s arguments that she could address the issues without a 1925(b) statement. Not being aware of all the circumstances surrounding the 1925(b) statement, a panel of this court ruled all the issues waived for failure to file the statement. Because we now know that the trial court had granted an unlimited continuance to file the 1925(b) statement, we conclude that there was no waiver of Husband’s issues on appeal.
¶ 2 We find that Judge Fitzpatrick committed no error in her equitable distribution award. The matter was complicated because for ten years, Husband voluntarily paid more than the child and spousal support orders issued by the court. He paid first and second mortgages on the marital house as well as support. More than fifteen years after separation, Judge Fitzpatrick had to consider what should be a credit for rental value of the house and what should be considered support. Likewise, since Husband was paying more than his obligations, the judge considered it appropriate to give Wife some time to adjust to a lower standard of living. Her final order, after a modification, evenly divided the proceeds of the house rather than giving Wife a higher percentage to adjust for any credit for rental value. She also ordered short-term (six-month) alimony of less than what Husband had voluntarily paid for many years to assist Wife during the time she was trying to sell the house and readjust to more modest circumstances. We find no error in Judge Fitzpatrick’s order and instead believe she found a reasonable and practical solution to an unusual situation. We affirm. A full discussion follows.
¶ 3 Edmund L. Middleton and Lenora H. Brown Middleton were married in 1966. Although they separated in. March 1985, they were not divorced until December 1993 following Husband’s Petition for Bifurcation. There was no real action to move toward a hearing to resolve the outstanding economic issues until February 1998. While an initial equitable distribution order was entered on November 29, 1999, Judge Fitzpatrick granted reconsideration and vacated that order on December 28, 1999, within thirty days of the initial order. See Pa.R.A.P. 1701(b). A hearing was held on January 24, 2000, although no further testimony was taken. Thereafter, on April 6, 2000, Judge Fitzpatrick entered the order now before us.
¶ 4 When the parties separated in 1985, Husband moved to California. Wife and the parties’ son, now 25 years old, remained in the marital home in Broomall, Delaware County, Pennsylvania. Husband was employed as a referee for the National Basketball Association. While now on disability, he has a significant pension. During the approximately thirteen years from separation until 1998, Husband paid the first and second mortgages on the Broo-mall house, as well as water, electric and lawn care expenses, and in general, according to the Judge Fitzpatrick, “generously provided for his wife and son at times in excess of any child and spousal obligations.”
¶ 5 In her November 1999 order, Judge Fitzpatrick awarded Wife 60% of the marital estate and granted Husband certain credits for the mortgage payments he made, ordered Wife to deliver Husband title to the marital residence, and denied Wife’s request for alimony. Wife filed a notice of appeal as well as a request for reconsideration in the trial court. Judge Fitzpatrick granted reconsideration, vacat*1244ed the November 1999 order, and entered the April 2000 order.
¶ 6 The April 2000 order awarded each party 50% of the marital estate and denied Husband the previously awarded credits. Judge Fitzpatrick ordered that the house be sold and the mortgages paid off. She did not credit Husband with one-half of the rental value of the home but instead gave Wife 50% of the value of the home rather than the 60% contemplated in the initial order. In addition, Judge Fitzpatrick ordered Husband pay Wife temporary alimony in the amount of $2,000 per month for a period of six months, which amounted to $1,000 a month less than husband had been voluntarily paying.
¶ 7 Husband appealed this order. On May 19, 2000, Judge Fitzpatrick ordered Husband to file a statement of matters complained of on appeal pursuant to Pa. R.A.P.1925(b) within fourteen days. Judge Fitzpatrick wrote in a letter, and the parties agree, that Judge Fitzpatrick granted Husband’s counsel an indefinite extension to file his 1925(b) statement because the parties were exploring settlement. Near the end of 2000, Judge Fitzpatrick wanted to file an opinion to comply with Pa.R.J.A. 703, which poses the possibility of a judge being reported to the Judicial Conduct Board if one or more matters have remained undecided for over a year. Without advising Husband to file the 1925(b) statement, Judge Fitzpatrick filed her Pa.R.A.P.1925(a) opinion. She noted to counsel and counsel agree that she stated: “This Court’s extensive involvement in this proceeding made it aware of appellant’s complaints.”
¶ 8 As noted, because it was unaware of the circumstances surrounding the 1925(b) statement, a panel of this Court deemed all issues waived under Commonwealth v. Lord, 553 Pa. 415, 719 A.2d 306 (1999). We granted en banc review pursuant to Husband’s petition for reargument in which he maintained that the trial court had issued an unlimited extension to comply with its order to file a 1925(b) statement.
¶ 9 We note that the trial court has the option as to whether to request a 1925(b) statement of matters complained of on appeal. It is the 1925(a) opinion that enhances this Court’s appellate review process. See Commonwealth v. Lord, 553 Pa. 415, 719 A.2d 306, 308 (1998) (“The absence of a trial court opinion poses a substantial impediment to meaningful and effective appellate review.”). If the trial court understands the issues and has provided this Court with an explanation for its order in the 1925(a) opinion without asking for a 1925(b) statement, we are able to conduct meaningful appellate review. If the trial court initially asks for a 1925(b) statement by a certain date, but accepts the 1925(b) statement late and then considers all the issues raised and discusses them in the 1925(a) opinion, we are able to consider these issues on appeal. Commonwealth v. Ortiz, 745 A.2d 662 (Pa.Super.2000), appeal denied, 568 Pa. 658, 795 A.2d 973 (2000) (where although appellant’s 1925(b) statement was untimely, the trial court’s subsequent opinion discussed the issue raised and therefore there was no impediment to meaningful appellate review). Likewise, when the trial judge grants an unlimited extension to file a 1925(b) statement and then decides that he or she knows the case well enough to write a 1925(a) opinion without telling the party that a 1925(b) statement must be filed by a date certain, there is no reason that we should not consider these issues on appeal. Failure to conduct review under these circumstances would undermine the integrity of this Court and confidence in the appellate review process.
*1245¶ 10 Of course, if the trial judge believes he or she is unable to frame the issues, he or she need not guess but may decline to address any issues, and then we do not have a basis for appellate review. See, e.g., In re C.R.J., 801 A.2d 1261 (Pa.Super.2002) (where appellant failed to file a timely 1925(b) statement and the trial court refused to overlook the untimeliness, this court found appellant’s issues waived on appeal); Commonwealth v. Dowling, 778 A.2d 688 (Pa.Super.2001) (where appellant’s 1925(b) statement was not specific enough for the trial court to identify and address the issue appellant wished to raise on appeal, and the trial court therefore did not address it, the claim was waived on appeal); Commonwealth v. Overby, 744 A.2d 797 (Pa.Super.2000) (where the trial court ordered a 1925(b) statement and none was filed and trial court determined it was without a basis to render an opinion, this court found no issues preserved for appellate review). See also Commonwealth v. Alsop, 799 A.2d 129 (Pa.Super.2002) (en banc) (declining to find all issues waived under Lord where a concise statement was sent to trial court and inexplicably filed late, and where it was clear from the record that the trial court reviewed the Concise Statement before issuing its 1925(a) opinion, but holding that where the trial court’s discussion in its 1925(a) opinion is the result of anticipation, prediction, or guesswork, those issues are not saved for appellate review); Commonwealth v. Lemon, 804 A.2d 84 (Pa.Super.2002) (when the trial court has to guess what issues a defendant is appealing, that is not enough for meaningful review); Giles v. Douglass, 747 A.2d 1236 (Pa.Super.2000) (where appellant failed to file a 1925(b) statement, and the trial court attempted to guess what issues appellant would raise, meaningful review was hampered and the issues were deemed waived on appeal).
¶ 11 In Lord, supra at 309, the Pennsylvania Supreme Court held: “[I]n order to preserve their claims for appellate review, Appellants must comply whenever the trial court orders them to file a Statement of Matters Complained of on Appeal pursuant to Rule 1925. Any issues not raised in a 1925(b) statement will be deemed waived.” As noted, there is no requirement that a 1925(b) statement must be filed in every ease. It is when a trial judge orders a statement to be filed that the appellant must comply or risk waiver. The trial judge has the discretion to deem all issues waived and decline to address them if no 1925(b) statement is timely filed, see C.R.J., supra, as well as the discretion to accept a late filing, Ortiz, supra, or grant an extension, as in this case, in light of ongoing settlement negotiations.
¶ 12 It well may be that, as in this case, the trial court is aware of the issues that appellant wishes to raise and does not require anything further to draft an opinion under Rule 1925(a). Particularly here, where Husband’s counsel was granted an indefinite extension and not told the extension was being terminated, there is no waiver of appellate issues. It is noted that in this case counsel for the appellee graciously concedes that no prejudice was suffered by Husband’s failure to file a 1925(b) statement and urges this Court to address the merits of the case.
¶ 13 We therefore reach the merits of Husband’s claims of error:
(1) whether the trial court erred in reversing its original order in the absence of additional evidence or showing of legal error;
(2) whether the court abused its discretion in refusing to credit Husband for payments made in the absence of evi*1246dence that those payments were voluntary contributions or gifts;
(3) whether Husband should be credited for one-half the rental value of the marital residence, when Wife had exclusive possession, use, occupancy and control of the property for fifteen years and Husband paid all mortgage, property tax, insurance and utility expenses on the property for that period; and
(4) whether the court erred in granting alimony to Wife in addition to 50% of the marital estate in the absence of any evidence of need or a specific request for alimony by Wife?
¶ 14 This case turns on the parties’ 1993 stipulation, executed following Husband’s petition for bifurcation, in which Husband agreed to pay the first and second mortgages on the marital home, other household expenses and spousal and child support. The agreed amount was approximately $3,000 per month. Prior to the stipulation, the court had entered a child support order in the amount of $250.00 per week and a spousal support order in the amount of $50.00 per week; those orders were never amended or modified. While the sum of $3,000 per month may have been more than the amount of support ordered, Wife and the parties’ son adjusted to a lifestyle based on the agreement. Therefore, special circumstances were presented to Judge Fitzpatrick when the voluntary payments stopped and the economic issues were presented to her for resolution.
¶ 15 On reconsideration and in her 1925(a) opinion, Judge Fitzpatrick noted the difficulties in arriving at an equitable distribution when the parties have gone more than a decade without moving these issues to resolution. She made adjustments to her prior order, requiring the parties sell the marital house and pay off the mortgages, reversing the credit to husband for the voluntary payments he made which practically included both mortgages and other payments for the house and child support. More than fifteen years after the separation, it is difficult to calculate what should be considered support and what should be considered a credit for one-half of the rental value of house. To offset this, Judge Fitzpatrick did not give Wife an extra percentage of what will be the proceeds of the sale of the house, but divided the proceeds 50-50. Because of the abrupt decline in the support that had been given to the wife, Judge Fitzpatrick ordered short-term alimony for a six-month transition period while the house is' on the market for sale. The court noted that the award was necessary to assist Wife during the marketing of the marital residence and to allow her to move forward.
¶ 16 Not only is this not an abuse of discretion, but it seems to be a very intelligent, practical way to deal with a situation after the parties went so long without moving to resolve their economic issues.
L Reconsideration
¶ 17 Husband argues that the trial court erred in reconsidering its order without additional evidence or testimony. This claim is meritless. There is no requirement, and Husband points to none, that mandates additional evidence before the trial court undertakes reconsideration of its order. See Pa.R.A.P. 1701(b)(3); see also Pa.R.C.P.1930.2(e) (“If the trial court grants the motion for reconsideration, and files same, within the 30-day appeal period, it may, at any time within the applicable 120-day period thereafter, issue an order directing that additional testimony be-taken.”) (emphasis added). Husband points to no reason why there would have been a need to take additional testimony *1247or where there was prejudice from failing to take additional testimony.
2. Credit for Payments Made Pursuant to the Parties’ Stipulation
¶ 18 The trial court has broad discretion in fashioning equitable distribution awards and we will overturn an award only for an abuse of that discretion. Oaks v. Cooper, 536 Pa. 134, 638 A.2d 208 (1994); Hovis v. Hovis, 518 Pa. 137, 541 A.2d 1378 (1988); Gaydos v. Gaydos, 693 A.2d 1368 (Pa.Super.1997)(en banc). The Divorce Code1 states that the trial court
shall ... equitably divide, distribute or assign, in kind or otherwise, the marital property between the parties without regard to marital misconduct in such proportions and in such manner as the court deems just after considering all relevant factors....
23 Pa.C.S. § 3502(a). In assessing the propriety of an equitable distribution scheme, our standard of review is whether the trial court, by misapplication of the law or failure to follow proper legal procedure, abused its discretion. Johnson v. Johnson, 365 Pa.Super. 409, 529 A.2d 1123 (1987). “Specifically, we measure the circumstances of the case, and the conclusions drawn by the trial court therefrom, against the provisions of 23 P.S. § 402(d) [now 23 Pa.C.S. § 3502(a)] and the avowed objectives of the Divorce Code, that is, ‘to effectuate economic justice between the parties ... and insure a fair and just determination of their property rights.’ 23 P.S. § 102(a)(6) [now 23 Pa. C.S. § 3102(a)(6)].” Hutnik v. Hutnik, 369 Pa.Super. 263, 535 A.2d 151, 152 (1987). With these principles in mind, we review the trial court’s distribution order.
¶ 19 The parties’ November 1, 1993 stipulation provides in part:
Plaintiff [Husband] shall continue to pay to or on behalf of defendant [Wife] all expenses which he is now paying such as first and second mortgages, electric, water, lawn care, child support and alimony (or a sum equivalent thereto) and miscellaneous items, all of which shall approximate a total of $3000.00 per month, until such time as the ancillary issues are resolved.
Stipulation, 11/1/93, R.R. 138a-139a. Husband maintains these payments were “on account” and therefore should be credited against Wife’s distributive share. Wife argues that Husband agreed to make those generous payments to support Wife and child until the court resolved the economic issues and there is nothing in the stipulation to indicate that Husband would be credited upon resolution of the economic claims. We agree with Wife. Voluntary payment from Husband’s own resources will not be credited at equitable distribution. See Jayne v. Jayne, 443 Pa.Super. 664, 663 A.2d 169 (1995). In fact, and as the trial court apparently realized upon reconsideration, if Husband were credited with fifteen years of these payments, $78,224.00, and also credited with one-half of the rental value of the marital residence, $104,105.00, see infra, this would wipe out all of Wife’s share of the marital estate.2
*1248¶20 We point out that the stipulation also provided for bifurcation. Parties are free to enter into agreements that they may later regret. Absent fraud or duress, however, the agreement is enforceable. See Adams v. Adams, 414 Pa.Super. 684, 607 A.2d 1116 (1992).
3. Credit for Rental Value of Marital Residence
¶ 21 Husband claims the trial court abused its discretion in refusing to award him one-half the rental value of the marital residence from the time of separation, March 1985, to the hearing on equitable distribution in June 1999. As noted, in her first order Judge Fitzpatrick had awarded Husband one-half of the rental value of the marital residence .for fourteen years ($104,105.00).
¶ 22 An equitable distribution order may include an award to the non-possessing spouse of one-half of the rental value of the marital residence when possessed exclusively by the other spouse during the parties’ separation. Gordon v. Gordon, 436 Pa.Super. 126, 647 A.2d 530 (1994), reversed on other grounds, 545 Pa. 391, 681 A.2d 732 (1996); Powell v. Powell, 395 Pa.Super. 345, 577 A.2d 576 (1990); Gruver v. Gruver, 372 Pa.Super. 194, 539 A.2d 395 (1988); Hutnik v. Hutnik, 369 Pa.Super. 263, 535 A.2d 151 (1987). This award, however, is not mandatory. See 23 Pa. C.S.A. § 3502(a)(7); see also Schneeman v. Schneeman, 420 Pa.Super. 65, 615 A.2d 1369 (1992) (while each party is entitled to his or her equitable share of marital property, including fair rental value of the marital residence, the trial court need not compute that equitable share as a credit to the non-possessory spouse, as long as the total distributory scheme is equitable); Butler v. Butler, 423 Pa.Super. 530, 621 A.2d 659, 668 (1993); Sutliff v. Sutliff, 361 Pa.Super. 504, 522 A.2d 1144, 1154 (1987) (although award of rent is permissible, refusal was not an abuse of discretion).
¶ 23 We do not dispute that Husband in all likelihood exceeded the amount the Court would require him to pay when he paid the mortgages and expenses of the marital home. The point is, he very generously and voluntarily agreed to do so. To reimburse him now, at Wife’s expense, in light of the circumstances and equities of this case, would clearly not effectuate economic justice between the parties. The trial court’s efforts to reach an equitable division of marital assets and its ultimate order reflects a considered weighing of the economic standings and needs of the parties. The court considered the relevant factors of the Divorce Code, 23 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 3502(a)(l)-(ll), and that decision is supported in the record. We find no abuse of discretion. See Oaks, supra; Hovis, supra; Gaydos v. Gaydos, supra.
4. Alimony
¶ 24 In his final claim, Husband argues that Judge Fitzpatrick abused her discretion in granting Wife temporary alimony in the amount of $ 2,000.00 per month for six months. An award of alimony will not be reversed absent an abuse of discretion. Perlberger v. Perlberger, 426 Pa.Super. 245, 626 A.2d 1186 (1993); Ruth v. Ruth, 316 Pa.Super. 282, 462 A.2d 1351 (1983). In determining whether alimony is necessary, as well as the amount and duration of the payments, the trial court is required to consider various factors set forth in the Divorce Code, 23 Pa.C.S.A. § 3701(b), including, inter alia, relative earnings, sources of income, and the relative needs of the parties. Judge Fitzpatrick stated that the award was necessary to provide for Wife during the time the marital home was on the market. The award is reasonable under the circumstances of this case and supported by the record. See Adelstein v. Adelstein, 381 Pa.Super. 221, 553 A.2d 436 (1989). We *1249find no abuse of discretion. Barrett v. Barrett, 418 Pa.Super. 384, 614 A.2d 299 (1992).
¶ 25 Order affirmed.
¶ 26 DEL SOLE, P.J., MUSMANNO, LALLY-GREEN, and BENDER, JJ., join.
¶ 27 DEL SOLE, P.J., files a concurring statement in which KLEIN, J., joins.
¶ 28 JOYCE, J., files a concurring statement in which FORD ELLIOTT, STEVENS, and ORIE MELVIN, JJ., join.
. The Divorce Code of April 2, 1980, P.L. 63, No. 26, as amended 1988, February 12, P.L. 66, No. 13 was repealed by Act of December 19, 1990, P.L. 1240, No. 206, § 2, and substantially reenacted as Part IV of the Domestic Relations Code. See 23 Pa.C.S. §§ 3101 - 3707.
. The court valued the total marital assets at $395,748.00, the marital liabilities at $35,098.56. The court divided the net assets, $363,649.44, evenly ($181,824.72 to each party). The combined credits in the original order totaled $182,329.00 ($104,105.00 representing one-half of the rental value for fourteen years, and $78,224.00 representing expenses advanced to Wife prior to the hearing).

=== CASE 9737263 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:20:18.087651+00 ===

Concurring
DEL SOLE, P.J.:
¶ 1 I join the Majority. I write separately to invite the Appellate Court Rules Committee to consider modifying Pa. R.A.P.1925.
¶ 2 In Commonwealth v. Lord, 553 Pa. 415, 719 A.2d 306 (1998), the Supreme Court, recognizing that appellate review is substantially impeded by the absence of a trial court opinion, held that the appellant’s failure to include issues in an ordered 1925(b) statement resulted in waiver. As the court pointed out:
Rule 1925 is intended to aid trial judges in identifying and focusing upon those issues which the parties plan to raise on appeal.
Lord, 719 A.2d at 308.
¶ 3 I suggest the rule be modified to account for those situations where the trial court’s reasons appear of record, or where the trial court knows what issues will be raised on appeal and prepares an opinion addressing those issues. For instance, in cases where post-trial or post-sentencing motions have been filed, or a single issue is raised in a dispositive motion, the trial court can set forth the reasons for its ruling.
¶4 Given that in many cases, trial judges do not require 1925(b) statements, and waiver is probably the least favored method of resolving issues, the interests of justice may be better served by revisiting this rule.
¶ 5 KLEIN, J., joins.

=== CASE 9737264 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:20:18.091287+00 ===

Concurring
JOYCE, J.:
¶ 1 I agree with the Majority’s ultimate resolution of the equitable distribution issues and the absence of waiver under the unique circumstances of the case at bar. However, I am compelled to write separately to express my concerns over the Majority’s discussion of waiver and Pa. R.A.P.1925(b) statements.
¶ 2 Put simply, the instant case presents a situation where the trial court extended the period of time in which a Pa.R.A.P. 1925(b) statement could be filed, and as a result, it is proper in this instance for our Court to decline to find waiver. The Majority’s lengthy discussion and examples of situations where waiver may or may not exist pursuant to Pa.R.A.P.1925(b) is unnecessary and could cause confusion among the bench and bar.
¶ 3 The procedural history of the case at bar as it relates to Pa.R.A.P.1925 is unique, but it does not however, create a new rule. The law of this Commonwealth remains as it was succinctly set forth by our Supreme Court in Commonwealth v. Lord, 553 Pa. 415, 719 A.2d 306 (1998). Lord made it clear that failing to timely file a concise statement of matters complained of on appeal pursuant to 1925(b), when ordered to do so by the trial court, renders issues not raised therein waived on appeal. Since the Majority Opinion could be interpreted to stand in contrast to Lord, I concur in the result only.
¶ 4 FORD ELLIOTT, STEVENS and ORIE MELVIN, JJ., join.

=== CASE 2209601 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:41.374421+00 ===

267 Cal.App.2d 381 (1968)
ERLIN-LAWLER ENTERPRISES, INC., Plaintiff, Cross-defendant and Appellant,
v.
FIRE INSURANCE EXCHANGE, Defendant, Cross-complainant and Respondent.
Civ. No. 31758.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. Five.
Nov. 13, 1968.
Ben Waxman and Louis Mast for Plaintiff and Appellant.
Early, Maslach, Foran & Williams and Kenneth H. Wechsler for Defendant and Respondent.
AISO, J.
Erlin-Lawler Enterprises, Inc., a California corporation, dba Bestways Market #1, Dan Erlin, and James H. Lawler, as plaintiffs, brought this action against the defendant Fire Insurance Exchange and others for the purpose of collecting fire insurance under policies covering loss by fire to the equipment and fixtures and stock in trade of the plaintiff corporation and loss from business interruption caused by fire.
Defendant insurance company denied liability, inter alia, on the ground that the fire was deliberately caused by plaintiffs Dan Erlin and James H. Lawler, who had been convicted for arson for setting the fire. Defendant insurance company cross-complained against the three plaintiffs for reimbursement of the sum it had paid out to the Union Bank under a "Lender Loss Payable Endorsement" for damage to the equipment and fixtures on which the Union Bank held a security interest.
The trial court, sitting without a jury, denied recovery on the complaint and granted judgment on defendant's cross-complaint for $8,287.50 against plaintiffs and cross-defendants, Erlin-Lawler Enterprises, Inc., Dan Erlin and James H. Lawler.
From this judgment the plaintiff corporation, Erlin-Lawler Enterprises, Inc., alone appeals. Two stockholders, Jacqueline Erlin and Betty Mae Robison, attempted to appeal from said judgment, but their attempted appeals were dismissed for lack of standing to appeal. (265 A.C.A. No. 4, Minutes, p. 8.)
[1a] Plaintiff corporation contends that the conclusion of law upon which the judgment is predicated, namely, "That plaintiff, Erlin-Lawler Enterprises, Inc., was merely the alter ego of plaintiffs, Dan Erlin and James H. Lawler" is neither supported by the findings nor the evidence. We agree.
The congenital infirmity of this case is the attempted stipulated *383 submission on the agreed facts in the joint pretrial statement and the statement of facts as delineated in the defendant's trial brief filed with the court, the latter to "be considered by the Court as evidence." The stipulation did not cover sufficient facts or evidence to enable the court to render a judgment for either party based on the law and substantial evidence. The court should have set aside the stipulation of counsel and reopened the case for the taking of additional evidence or the obtaining of further stipulations as to necessary facts, ultimate or evidentiary. (McCarthy v. Employers' Fire Ins. Co. (1934) 97 Mont. 540 [37 P.2d 579, 582-583, 97 A.L.R. 292].)
There is no dispute as to defendant insurance company having issued a policy to plaintiff corporation covering losses under the risks alleged in its complaint, that a fire occurred on December 30, 1961, that a proof of loss claiming $85,854.63 was filed and the claim denied by defendant insurance company, that plaintiffs Dan Erlin and James H. Lawler had been convicted for arson on August 16, 1963, for wilfully and maliciously setting the fire with intent to defraud the insurer, and that defendant insurance company (cross-complainant) had paid to the Union Bank the sum of $8,287.50 under a "Lender Loss Payable Endorsement" for damages to equipment and fixtures caused by the fire.
The factual issues, dispositive of this litigation, were presented to the trial judge for resolution with only the following as the evidence:
"Erlin-Lawler Enterprises, Inc. was incorporated in August, 1960. The incorporators were Dan Erlin, his wife, James H. Lawler and his ex-wife. Each became equal stockholders upon contribution of cash to the corporation in equal amounts. Dan Erlin became president of the corporation and James H. Lawler, secretary-treasurer. The two women also became officers of the corporation. All but Mrs. Erlin took an active, full-time role in the operation of the food market in Inglewood and each received a salary as compensation. In the early part of 1961, James H. Lawler sold his entire stock interest to Dan Erlin, who wound up with 50% of the stock in his name, 25% in his presently ex-wife's name, and 25% in the name of Lawler's ex-wife. Mr. Lawler ceased all official connections with the corporation upon sale of his stock interest but remained to render advice as a friend."
"No change has occurred in the stock holdings or offices of *384 the corporation since early 1961, and the corporation continues in existence to the present time."
At the trial, defendant contended that Teitelbaum Furs, Inc. v. Dominion Ins. Co., Ltd. (1962) 58 Cal.2d 601 [25 Cal.Rptr. 559, 375 P.2d 439] was controlling. The plaintiff corporation contended that Nuffer v. Insurance Co. of North America (1965) 236 Cal.App.2d 349 [45 Cal.Rptr. 918] was the applicable case. Neither was correct; neither decision is dispositive of this case. In Teitelbaum, the insured corporations conceded that they were mere alter egos of the arsonist. There is no such concession here. In Nuffer there was no showing that the agent who set the fire would benefit from the recovery on the policy. The court there stated, "The courts of all jurisdictions in the United States, save one, that have considered situations such as in the case at bench, have held that recovery upon a policy of fire insurance is not defeated by the fact that the loss for which recovery is sought resulted from the intentional burning by the insured's agent of the property covered by the policy [citations omitted], unless the insured personally participated in the arson or ratified the same ..., or the agent would benefit substantially from recovery upon the policy. (California Ins. Co. v. Allen 235 F.2d 178, 179; Firemen's Mut. Ins. Co. v. Aponaug Mfg. Co., supra, 149 F.2d 359, 361; Kimball Ice Co. v. Hartford Fire Ins. Co., 18 F.2d 563, 565-566 [52 A.L.R. 799]; Meily Co. v. London & Lancashire Fire Ins. Co., 148 F. 683 [79 C.C.A. 454]; D. I. Felsenthal Co. v. Northern Assur. Co., 284 Ill. 343 [120 N.E. 268, 270, 1 A.L.R. 602]; Miller & Dobrin Furniture Co. v. Camden Fire Ins. Co. Assn., supra, 55 N.J.Super. 205 [150 A.2d 276, 280, 283]; Travelers Fire Ins. Co. v. Wright (Okla.) 322 P.2d 417, 422 [70 A.L.R.2d 1170]; Bellman v. Home Ins. Co., 178 Wis. 349 [189 N.W. 1028, 27 A.L.R. 944].)" (Nuffer v. Insurance Co. of North America (1965) supra, 236 Cal.App.2d 349, 354-355.) Here, Dan Erlin would benefit to at least the extent of 50 percent of the corporation's recovery, if the assets of the corporation consisted only of the proceeds of the policy. Neither case is, therefore, on all fours with the factual situation presented here.
We have examined the cases cited by the court in Nuffer listed above, as well as others cited in the following texts on fire insurance: 18 Couch on Insurance 2d (1968)  74:669-74:673, pp. 591-594; 5 Appleman, Insurance Law and Practice (1941)  3113, pp. 259-260; 45 C.J.S., Insurance,  822, p. *385 871; 29-A Am.Jur., Insurance,  1305, p. 428. The question posed here appears to be of first impression in California. [2] From the cases decided in the other jurisdictions, the following basic rule may be deduced: The arsonist's status as an officer, stockholder, employee or agent of an insured corporation does not necessarily preclude the corporation from recovering upon the policy of insurance. The basic function of the court is to see that no one takes advantage of his own wrong. (Civ. Code,  3517.) Section 533 of the Insurance Code providing in part, "An insurer is not liable for a loss caused by the wilful act of the insured ..." is but a codification of the foregoing jurisprudential maxim. (Nuffer v. Insurance Co. of North America (1965) supra, 236 Cal.App.2d 349, 354.) An analysis must be made in each case to see if the arsonist will benefit by the recovery on the policy, either directly or indirectly.
[3] "When ... the beneficial owner of practically all of the stock in a corporation, and who has the absolute management and control of its affairs and property, ... sets fire to the property of a corporation, or causes it to be done, there is no sound reason to support the contention ... that the corporation should be allowed to recover on a policy for the destruction of the corporate property by a fire so occasioned." (Felsenthal Co. v. Northern Assur. Co. (1918) 284 Ill. 343 [120 N.E. 268, 1 A.L.R. 602, 607].)
If an officer or stockholder has absolute control in the conduct of the business of a corporation, his acts if he acts on behalf of the corporation become the acts of the corporation barring it from recovery even though he is not the dominant shareholder. (Northern Assur. Co. v. Rachlin Clothes Shop (1924) 32 Del. 406 [125 A. 184, 187-188, 190].) Where the fire is set by a manager owning only one-fourth of the stock, but having complete control and management of the corporation, the latter may not recover. (Kimball Ice Co. v. Hartford Fire Ins. Co. (4th Cir. 1927) 18 F.2d 563, 564, 565-566 [52 A.L.R. 799].) Where the minority shareholder is the president and a secured creditor of the corporation, but his part in the corporate management is limited to participation and not control, it has been held that his act of incendiarism does not bar the corporation from recovering if the judgment provides that only other bona fide creditors and innocent stockholders are to share in the proceeds of the insurance. (Fidelity- Phenix Fire Ins. Co. v. Queen City Bus & Transfer Co. (4th Cir. 1925) 3 *386 F.2d 784, 785.) A Georgia court has even barred corporate recovery if the innocent stockholders will not actually realize any benefit because of the insolvent state of the corporation. (Sandersville Oil Mill Co. v. Globe & Rutgers Fire Ins. Co. (1924) 32 Ga.App. 722 [124 S.E. 728].) While we are not prepared to go to this extreme limit, if payment to creditors lightens the personal liability of the individual wrongdoers, then the benefit accruing to them would become apparent.
In Miller & Dobrin Furniture Co. v. Camden Fire Ins. Co. Assn. (1959) supra, 55 N.J.Super. 205 [150 A.2d 276, 284], the court held the corporation barred from recovery where the incendiary was a 50 percent shareholder, the secretary-treasurer, a director, and who exercised the dominant control of the management of the corporation. The court further held that although the business was being conducted under the guise of being a corporation, it was in fact a partnership, and applied the rule applicable to partnerships.
The rule as to partnerships or joint ventures is that innocent partners and joint venturers are also barred from recovery where the arson is perpetrated by a partner or a joint venturer. (Travelers Fire Ins. Co. v. Wright (1958) supra (Okla.) 322 P.2d 417, 70 A.L.R.2d 1170, 1177; Bellman v. Home Ins. Co. (1922) supra, 178 Wis. 349 [189 N.W. 1028, 27 A.L.R. 944]; Monaghan v. Agricultural Fire Ins. Co. (1884) 53 Mich. 238 [18 N.W. 797].)
[4] Mere family relationship of the arsonist which does not bestow a property right or other direct financial benefit in the proceeds of insurance does not bar a recovery. (Merchants Ins. Co. v. Lilgeomont, Inc. (5th Cir. 1936) 84 F.2d 685, 688-689 [wife sole owner and president of a corporation, to whose property husband fraudulently set fire]; cf. Arenson v. National Auto. & Cas. Ins. Co. (1955) 45 Cal.2d 81 [286 P.2d 816] [minor son, a member of the protected class, set fire; his father held not barred from recovery].) But if the property insured is community property, an innocent wife cannot recover if her husband wilfully burned the property. (California Ins. Co. v. Allen (5th Cir. 1956) 235 F.2d 178, 179.) Even a divorce prior to the fire without a division of the community property does not alter this rule as to property presumptively community. (Bridges v. Commercial Standard Ins. Co. (Tex.Civ.App. 1952) 252 S.W.2d 511, 512.) Even an innocent joint tenant has been denied recovery where the fire is set by the other joint tenant. (Klemens v. Badger Mut. Ins. Co. (1959) 8 Wis.2d 565 [99 N.W.2d 865, 866].) *387
[1b] The stipulated evidence is cryptic. The stipulation provides in part that upon the corporation being incorporated in August 1960, by plaintiff Dan Erlin, his wife, plaintiff James H. Lawler, and his ex-wife, "[e]ach became equal stockholders upon contribution of cash to the corporation in equal amounts." Was the money which Dan Erlin's then wife contributed community funds or separate funds? If it was from community funds, was there a transmutation into separate property? Was the stock issued in her sole name? (See Civ. Code,  164.) When did Mrs. Erlin become an ex-wife? Was it before or after the fire? The status at time of the fire would control the nature of her property interest in the proceeds from the fire insurance. Was Lawler's ex-wife already an ex-wife at the time she became a shareholder? What is the meaning of the stipulation, "In the early part of 1961, James H. Lawler sold his entire stock interest to Dan Erlin, who wound up with 50% of the stock in his name, 25% in his presently ex-wife's name, and 25% in the name of Lawler's ex-wife?" Does it mean that both of the ex-wives were merely nominal shareholders holding the shares for Erlin's benefit? Or does it mean as the trial court found "that on the date of the fire Dan Erlin owned 50 percent of the stock ...; Mrs. Erlin owned 25 percent, and the former Mrs. Lawler owned 25 percent?"
Under the court's finding that plaintiff Erlin owned only 50 percent of the stock at the time of the fire, he would not be the controlling shareholder. Nor can it be inferred that Erlin was in dominant control of the corporation simply by virtue of his being the president of the corporation. The two women were also officers, and "all but Mrs. Erlin took an active, fulltime role in the operations of Bestways Market, and each received a salary as compensation."
What was the financial status of the corporation at the time of the fire? No evidence on this factor was stipulated to.
The acts of plaintiff Lawler who "ceased all official connections with the corporation upon sale of his stock interest but [who] remained to render advice as a friend" without more would not be attributable to the corporation. (Merchants Ins. Co. v. Lilgeomont, Inc. (5th Cir. 1936) supra, 84 F.2d 685, 688-689.) His acts would have to be tied to the corporation by a showing of conspiracy or agency of some kind.
The finding as to the two ex-wives each owning 25 percent of the shares impliedly in their own right as separate *388 property is not free from the rule that if a finding is supported only by evidence so slight and tenuous that it does not create a real and substantial conflict in the evidence, it may be set aside. (Fewel & Dawes, Inc. v. Pratt (1941) 17 Cal.2d 85, 89 [109 P.2d 650].) If the finding be deemed adequately supported, then it is at war with the conclusion of law that "plaintiff, Erlin-Lawler Enterprises, Inc. was merely the alter ego of plaintiffs, Dan Erlin and James H. Lawler, and the latter [if it also includes Lawler] would benefit substantially if plaintiff corporation were permitted to recover upon said policy."
Since counsel represented at time of oral argument that evidence was available to resolve the various factual issues left untouched by the previous stipulation, the interests of justice will be best served by remanding the cause to the trial court for further proceedings consistent with the views set forth above with reference to the corporation's claim for recovery. The judgment should stand as to the individuals Dan Erlin and James H. Lawler, who did not appeal and whose conviction for arson apparently remains in force.
The judgment is reversed as to the plaintiff corporation, Erlin-Lawler Enterprises, Inc., on both the complaint and the cross-complaint. Each side shall bear its own respective costs on appeal.
Kaus, P. J., and Stephens, J., concurred.

=== CASE 2209603 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:41.402762+00 ===

267 Cal.App.2d 340 (1968)
MELVIN FRY, Plaintiff and Appellant,
v.
JOHN ELDON YOUNG, a Minor, etc., et al., Defendants and Appellants.
California Court of Appeals.
Nov. 12, 1968.
Changaris, Trezza & Ithurburn, Changaris, Trezza, Ithurburn & Keeley, Fred B. Ithurburn, Malcolm A. Misuraca and Terence J. Keeley for Plaintiff and Appellant.
Price, Burness & Price, R. E. Burness, Rich, Fuidge, Dawson, Marsh & Morris, Chester Morris and John L. Feeney for Defendants and Appellants.
REGAN, J.
In an unpublished opinion, this court affirmed the order of the trial court granting all defendants a new trial. Shortly thereafter, the code provisions (Code Civ. Proc., *343  657, 660) governing the timeliness and contents of new trial orders were reviewed by the State Supreme Court in a trilogy of cases--Siegal v. Superior Court, 68 Cal.2d 97 [65 Cal.Rptr. 311, 436 P.2d 311]; Mercer v. Perez, 68 Cal.2d 104 [65 Cal.Rptr. 315, 436 P.2d 315], and Treber v. Superior Court, 68 Cal.2d 128 [65 Cal.Rptr. 330, 436 P.2d 330]. By direction of the Supreme Court, the appeal is here again for reconsideration in light of those three cases.
Plaintiff sued for personal injuries suffered when an automobile owned by defendant Hurt and driven by defendant Young rear-ended a pickup truck which defendant Olds was alleged to have negligently parked on a rural road. At the time of the accident, plaintiff was standing in the highway conversing with Olds, who was seated on the driver's side of the pickup.
The chronology of the litigation is significant:
On October 13, 1965, judgment was entered for plaintiff on a jury verdict against all defendants. The clerk's written notice of entry of the judgment was served by October 15, 1965. Relying individually or jointly on all statutory grounds (Code Civ. Proc.,  657), all defendants made timely motions for a new trial; Young and Hurt also moved for judgment notwithstanding the verdict. At a hearing on November 1, 1965, according to the clerk's minutes, the trial judge denied the latter motion but granted a new trial "on all issues for the reason that the Court erroneously instructed the jury." There was no recital in those minutes of the instructions which the court deemed erroneous. On December 2, 1965, plaintiff filed notice of appeal from that new trial order.
On December 7, 1965--after plaintiff had taken his appeal, but within 60 days after service of notice of entry of judgment (Code Civ. Proc.,  660)--the trial court made a written order directing the clerk to enter nunc pro tunc as of November 1, 1965, an order granting a new trial "upon the ground of insufficiency of the evidence to justify the verdict, in addition to ... the ground of error in law." The nunc pro tunc aspect of this additional ground for relief was predicated upon clerical error having occurred at the November 1 hearing in that, at that prior hearing, "the court did, in open court, state its views that there was sufficient ground to justify granting the motion for new trial on the basis of insufficiency of the evidence as well as errors in law" but that the clerk had "omitted from the minute order ... the specification that said motion was, among other grounds, granted upon the *344 ground of insufficiency of the evidence to justify the verdict."
After directing the nunc pro tunc inclusion of insufficiency of the evidence as an omitted ground, the December 7 order next gave detailed reasons why the trial court deemed the evidence to be insufficient. The same order also specified the particular instructions which the court thought to have been erroneous.
Plaintiff did not file a new notice of appeal after the court's December 7 order. It was unnecessary that he do so to have both orders reviewed. (See Halpern v. Superior Court, 190 Cal. 384, 388 [212 P. 916].) After December 7, all defendants cross-appealed from the judgment, and defendants Young and Hurt cross-appealed from the order denying their motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict.
The efficacy of the trial court's orders of November 1 and December 7 is governed by sections 657 and 660 of the Code of Civil Procedure. Section 657 authorizes the trial court to grant a new trial upon grounds which include insufficiency of the evidence to justify the verdict (ground 6) and error in law (ground 7). By amendment in 1965 (Stats. 1965, ch. 1749) it is provided that when a new trial is granted "the court shall specify the ground or grounds upon which it is granted and the court's reason or reasons for granting the new trial upon each ground stated." It is also provided: "If an order granting such motion does not contain such specification of reasons, the court must, within 10 days after filing such order, prepare, sign and file such specification of reasons in writing with the clerk." Under section 660, with an exception not here material, the power of the court to pass on a motion for a new trial expires 60 days after service on the moving party of notice of entry of judgment.
In Siegal v. Superior Court, supra, 68 Cal.2d 97, a nunc pro tunc order purporting to grant a new trial after the 60-day period prescribed by section 660 had expired was held void and in excess of the trial court's jurisdiction even though that belated order recited an inadvertent failure to enter of record any portion of a new trial order which had been actually made within the 60 days. In Mercer v. Perez, supra, 68 Cal.2d 104, after emphasizing the difference between the statement of "grounds" and the specification of "reasons" required by section 657, the Supreme Court held that alleged insufficiency of the evidence could not be reviewed on appeal, and that affirmance of an order which could be construed as granting a new trial on that ground alone was *345 barred, where the trial court had filed no written reasons whatever to show why it deemed the evidence inadequate.
In addition to the other amendments to section 657 in 1965 it was provided: "On appeal from an order granting a new trial the order shall be affirmed if it should have been granted upon any ground stated in the motion, whether or not specified in the order or specification of reasons; provided, that the order shall not be affirmed upon the ground of the insufficiency of the evidence to justify the verdict ... unless such ground is stated in the order granting the motion. ..." The amendment also provides that, where the order was based on insufficiency of the evidence, on appeal "it shall be conclusively presumed that said order as to such ground was made only for the reasons specified ...." In Treber v. Superior Court, supra, 68 Cal.2d 128, section 657 was said to require affirmance on any meritorious ground listed in the motion for a new trial (other than alleged insufficiency of the evidence or excessive or inadequate damages), even though an order granting it solely for "errors in law" had not been followed by any written specification of those errors.
Under the 1965 amendment, both Mercer (68 Cal.2d at p. 121) and Treber (68 Cal.2d at pp. 134-135) bar nunc pro tunc specifications of reasons made more than 10 days after the motion is granted. In the instant case, to rectify a clerical oversight, insufficiency of the evidence was added as a ground by a nunc pro tunc order which was itself made within the 60-day period during which section 660 empowers the trial court to pass on a motion for a new trial. None of the Siegal-Mercer-Treber trilogy of cases involved that circumstance. Siegal is the only one of the three that involves a nunc pro tunc correction, and there the corrective order was made after the court's 60-day power had ended.
The Siegal (68 Cal.2d at pp. 102-103) and Mercer (68 Cal.2d at p. 121) opinions cite many precedents for the concept that, under the 1939 amendment of section 657,  [fn. 1] even where the trial court's purpose was to correct clerical error it lost jurisdiction to make a nunc pro tunc specification of *346 insufficiency of the evidence as a ground unless it did so in writing within 10 days after the motion for new trial was granted. None of those cited precedents, however, involved nunc pro tunc corrections made within the 60-day period.  [fn. 2] All of those precedents were decided before section 657 was amended in 1965. And Siegal, Mercer, and Treber themselves give no discussion to the fact that, in the 1965 amendment, the Legislature deleted the previous requirement that the order specifying insufficiency of the evidence as a ground "be filed ... within ten days after the motion is granted" and substituted the present statutory requirement that the order stating "the ground or grounds" (of whatever nature) "must be made and entered as provided in Section 660." (Italics ours.) Thus, under the 1965 amendment, the 10-day limitation is no longer stated as being applicable to the recital of grounds but instead is stated only as a limitation on the specification or reasons, which must be filed within 10 days after the filing of the order containing the grounds.
Decisions under the 1939 amendment had consistently taken the position that its express 10-day limitation abrogated the power the trial court would otherwise have to use a nunc pro tunc order to specify insufficiency of the evidence where there had been a clerical failure to list that ground. (See, e.g., Malkasian v. Irwin, 61 Cal.2d 738, 744-745 [40 Cal.Rptr. 78, 294 P.2d 822]; Roth v. Marston, 110 Cal.App.2d 249 [242 P.2d 375], and cases cited.) Inasmuch as the 1965 amendment deleted that 10-day limitation, it is possible to view the 1965 change as reinstating the trial court's pre-1939 authority to make nunc pro tunc specifications of the ground of insufficiency of the evidence (e.g., Lauchere v. Lambert, 210 Cal. 274 [291 P. 412]; Kraft v. Lampton, 13 Cal.App.2d 596 [57 P.2d 171]; Livesay v. Deibert, 3 Cal.App.2d 140 [39 P.2d 466]). However, other considerations compel a rejection of such course. Its adoption would frustrate the 1965 Legislature's intent to require that full judicial deliberation on motions for new trial be practically concurrent with judicial disposition of such motions. (See Mercer v. Perez, supra, 68 Cal.2d at p. 113.) It would compel an unsuccessful opponent of the granting of the motion to safeguard his time to appeal (Code Civ. *347 Proc.,  963; Cal. Rules of Court, rules 2(a) and 2(b)(2)) by filing a notice of appeal before he knew for certain the full basis of the trial court's action. (Cf. Mercer v. Perez, supra, 68 Cal.2d at pp. 113-115.) And it would further confuse the proceedings by converting the 10- day limitation on the specification of reasons (Mercer v. Perez and Treber v. Superior Court, supra) into one which was subject to repeated renewal during the 60-day period--if not beyond it--every time the trial court chose to make yet another nunc pro tunc correction of grounds.
[1] We therefore hold that, despite the fact that the 1965 Legislature removed from section 657 the 10-day limitation on the statement of grounds, the overall amendment should be deemed to prohibit nunc pro tunc additions either of reasons or grounds--even for clerical error--more than 10 days after the motion is "determined" in the manner prescribed by section 660. This conclusion is fortified by dictum in the Mercer case (stated without discussion of the 1965 deletion) to the effect that "a purported specification of grounds or reasons made after the 10-day statute of limitations had run is an act in excess of jurisdiction, and therefore void to that extent." (Mercer v. Perez, supra, 68 Cal.2d at p. 121; italics transposed.)
Thus, in the instant case, the December 7 order did not give either a timely statement of insufficiency of the evidence as a ground or a timely specification of the reasons why that ground applied. Nor did it contain a timely recital of the instructions which the trial judge thought erroneous. The court's power in those three regards--whether by original or nunc pro tunc order--had expired November 12, 1965. (Code Civ. Proc.,  12a, 657, 660.)
Since the November 1 order was in terms based on only one ground--error in law--and not on insufficiency of the evidence, and since all specifications of reason were tardy, appellate review of the sufficiency of the evidence is barred and the trial court's order cannot be sustained on that evidentiary ground. The only errors in law asserted by defendants in their motions and on this appeal pertain to instructions they claim (and the trial judge in part, but belatedly, specified) to be erroneous. Consequently, our further review will be confined to those instructions.
"Roadway" and "Pedestrian" Instructions
Substantial evidence showed that plaintiff, who had left his *348 own vehicle parked on the southbound side of Zumwalt Road while he was inspecting an alfalfa field on foot, walked out of the field and stood in the southbound lane talking with Olds. At that time, Olds was sitting in the driver's seat of his pickup, which was parked squarely in the northbound lane close to the center line. After five minutes Olds pulled over to his right and reparked facing northerly at an angle with the road. Olds' left rear tire was then on a paved 3-foot-wide shoulder. The evidence conflicted as to whether, in this position, the left rear end of the pickup partially projected into the 10 1/2-foot-wide northbound lane or was completely clear of it. Olds remained in the pickup.plaintiff followed him over on foot and stood on the driver's side of the pickup while they continued the conversation for another 10 minutes before the accident. During the entire interval, plaintiff was standing either out in the northbound lane or on the adjacent shoulder. Upon seeing Young approaching from the south, plaintiff only had time to shout a warning to Olds and to run a few steps toward the front of the pickup before being struck.
[2a] The court instructed the jury that "no pedestrian shall walk upon any roadway outside of a business or residence district otherwise than close to his left-hand edge of the roadway" (Veh. Code,  21956) and that "upon any highway in unincorporated areas no person shall stop, park, or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon the roadway when it is practicable to stop, park, or leave the vehicle off such portion of the highway" (Veh. Code,  22504, subd. (a)). (Italics ours.) These instructions made the proper definition of "roadway" crucial in gauging the rights and duties not only of Olds but of plaintiff as well.  [fn. 3]
[3] Vehicle Code section 530 provides that "a 'roadway' is that portion of a highway improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel." The trial court, on its own motion, deleted the "improved" and "designed" language and instructed the jury only that "a roadway is that part of a highway which is ordinarily used for vehicular traffic." More specifically, the court also instructed the jury that "that portion of Zumwalt Road referred to in the testimony of this case as the 'improved shoulder' is not a part of the roadway *349 within the definition of the term 'roadway' as used in these instructions." These deletions, removing the shoulder from the jury's consideration as part of the roadway, were specified in the trial court's December 7 order as having been errors in law.
The trial judge correctly determined that he had erred in thus defining "roadway." The court's deletion of the "improved" and "designed" language was error because there was some evidence that the Zumwalt Road shoulder was "improved" or "designed" for the purpose of facilitating vehicular travel. That evidence, though slight, was to the effect that the 10 1/2-foot lane and the 3-foot shoulder were both paved to grade even though the lane had a sealer coat on it and the shoulder did not. Similarly, there was evidence that the shoulder was "ordinarily used for vehicular travel" (Veh. Code,  530); this consisted of plaintiff's testimony that he had seen cars (but "not too many of them") "all over the road all the way up to the edge where the pavement stopped." The issue of whether the shoulder was part of the "roadway" was one of fact and should have been left to the jury. (See Wilson v. Foley, 149 Cal.App.2d 726, 733-734 [309 P.2d 97].)
[2b] Apart from the court's erroneous definition of "roadway." Olds contends there was no evidence plaintiff was a "pedestrian" and that the court therefore erred in giving the above-quoted instruction on the duty of a pedestrian on a roadway (Veh. Code,  21956). The uncontradicted evidence refutes Olds' claim. No emergency had compelled plaintiff to get out of his own vehicle. (Compare Dennis v. Gonzales, 91 Cal.App.2d 203, 205-206 [205 P.2d 55].) In contrast to the facts shown in Boynton v. McKales, 139 Cal.App.2d 777 [294 P.2d 733], where the driver parked his car merely so he could stand beside it to install curtains, plaintiff in the instant case manifested a clear intention to relinquish his driver's status and to set out on foot. After inspecting his alfalfa field, plaintiff did not enter upon the roadway for the purpose of crossing all the way over it to the other side. (Compare Catton v. Kerns, 123 Cal.App. 94 [10 P.2d 1036].) He walked onto it so he could stand in the southbound lane talking with Olds; and, by the time the accident occurred, plaintiff had simply moved over to continue standing either in the northbound lane or on its adjacent shoulder. (Cf. Newton v. Thomas, 137 Cal.App.2d 748, 755-758 [291 P.2d 503].)
Plaintiff was clearly a pedestrian, and the prohibition of *350 Vehicle Code section 21956 against his walking upon the roadway except close to his left-hand edge necessarily barred his standing there as well. To hold otherwise would be to permit standing pedestrians to create safety hazards in the same places where walking persons cannot lawfully do so. (Accord, Jermane v. Forfar, 108 Cal.App.2d 849, 852 [240 P.2d 351, 30 A.L.R.2d 860]; Nordman v. Mechem, 227 Mich. 86 [198 N.W. 586]; White v. Edwards, 222 Mich. 321 [192 N.W. 560]; see Inai v. Ede, 59 Cal.App.2d 549, 554 [139 P.2d 76].)
In support of a contrary conclusion, Olds relies upon Armstrong v. Sengo, 17 Cal.App.2d 300 [61 P.2d 1188], where a motorist ran down a squad of national guardsmen while they were standing at attention upon a paved roadway. That case is readily distinguishable. Unlike plaintiff, the solders in the Armstrong case were upon the roadway in compliance with their duty to obey the commands of their superior officer except when such orders were palpably illegal. (See Curnutt v. Holk, 230 Cal.App.2d 580 [41 Cal.Rptr. 174].) Beyond that, in holding that their officer's command for them to stand on the pavement was lawful, Armstrong reflected the court's conclusion that the statutory predecessor of section 21956 was not intended to apply to troop units. (17 Cal.App.2d at pp. 305- 308.) A similar result was reached in Zumwalt v. E. H. Tryon, Inc., 126 Cal.App. 583 [14 P.2d 912], where the earlier code section was held inapplicable to a sheepherder whose duties required him to work in the roadway.
"Last Clear Chance" Instruction
[4a] The trial court gave the standard instruction on last clear chance (BAJI No 205 Revised). All defendants urge this as error. It was not specified as such by the trial judge.
[5] In Gillingham v. Greyhound Corp., 263 Cal.App.2d 564 [69 Cal.Rptr. 728], this court has recently reviewed the rules governing application of the last clear chance doctrine. It may be invoked "only when: (1) The plaintiff by his own negligence has put himself in a helpless position. ... (2) The defendant knew that plaintiff was in a position of helpless peril; (3) The defendant thereafter had a last clear chance to avoid the accident--not a mere possible chance." (Id., at p. 569.) [6] In regard to the second element, "it must be remembered that ... 'actual knowledge of plaintiff's position of danger is required, but constructive knowledge of his inability to escape will suffice.' " (Id at p. 571.) A jury is not required to accept a defendant's denial that he actually knew plaintiff was in a position of danger; *351 from proper circumstantial evidence, the jury may find that defendant had such actual knowledge, and from this actual knowledge the jury may further infer that defendant should have known that plaintiff could not escape. (Id at p. 570; see Espinoza v. Rossini, 247 Cal.App.2d 40, 52-55 [55 Cal.Rptr. 205]; Gulley v. Warren, 174 Cal.App.2d 470, 476-478 [345 P.2d 17].)
[7] An instruction on last clear chance should be given where there is any substantial evidence which, viewed most favorably to its application, would reasonably support the doctrine. (Gillingham v. Greyhound Corp., supra, 263 Cal.App.2d at pp. 566-567; Espinoza v. Rossini, supra, 247 Cal.App.2d at p. 52.) However, unless such cvidence supports each one of the above elements, an instruction on the doctrine is improper. (Hickambottom v. Cooper Transp. Co., 163 Cal.App.2d 489, 491-492 [329 P.2d 609]; see Duenas v. Domingo, 219 Cal.App.2d 645 [33 Cal.Rptr. 320]; Di Sandro v. Griffith, 188 Cal.App.2d 428, 431-432 [10 Cal.Rptr. 595].)
[4b] On appeal, plaintiff makes no attempt to argue that the instruction was proper as to Olds. Nor could he, based on the undisputed evidence, make such a showing. Even assuming that Olds could be charged with constructive knowledge of plaintiff's inability to escape, there was no evidence from which the jury could have determined that, as to Olds, the third element of the doctrine was satisfied. The uncontradicted testimony of plaintiff and Olds showed that Olds' first warning of the impending rear end collision was when plaintiff yelled that a car was going to hit them. Olds, who never saw the approaching car, only had time to turn his wheel to the right and slump in his seat. Even if that testimony were disregarded, there was no contrary evidence to indicate that Olds had any chance whatever to avoid the accident. Therefore, as to Olds, the trial court erred in giving an instruction on last clear chance. "Since the instruction may have influenced the jury in arriving at a verdict for plaintiff and since the jury might well have found plaintiff guilty of contributory negligence contributing proximately to his own injury, the error is prejudicial." (Kowalski v. Shell Chemical Corp., 177 Cal.App.2d 528, 537 [2 Cal.Rptr. 319].)
The last clear chance instruction, however, was proper as to Young and Hurt. There was evidence from which the jury could infer that Young actually saw plaintiff in his position of peril and should have realized plaintiff could not escape, and that Young had time to avoid the collision. Zumwalt *352 Road was a straight, level road at the accident site. The weather was clear. Sunset was at 7:32 p.m. Olds testified that the accident occurred at approximately 7:30 p.m. when there was "good visibility." Various witnesses estimated the visibility to have been between 1/4 and 3/4 of a mile. Young's speed was placed at 60 to 80 miles per hour. As he approached, no other traffic intervened between him and Olds' pickup. Plaintiff and Olds testified there was room on the road to the left of the pickup for Young to have passed or swerved by them. This same evidence, though in part contradicted, also supported the trial court's denial of the motion made by Young and Hurt for judgment notwithstanding the verdict. (See Spillman v. City & County of San Francisco, 252 Cal.App.2d 782, 786 [60 Cal.Rptr. 809]; Robinson v. North American Life & Cas. Co., 215 Cal.App.2d 111, 118 [30 Cal.Rptr. 57].)
The order granting defendants a new trial is affirmed. Their cross- appeals from the judgment are dismissed as moot. The order denying defendants Young and Hurt judgment notwithstanding the verdict is affirmed.
Pierce, P. J., and Friedman, J., concurred.
NOTES
[fn. 1]  1. The 1939 legislation (Stats. 1939, ch. 713, p. 2234) amended the last paragraph of section 657 to provide: "When a new trial is granted, on all or part of the issues, upon the ground of the insufficiency of the evidence to sustain the verdict or decision the order shall so specify this in writing and shall be filed with the clerk within ten days after the motion is granted; otherwise, on appeal from such order it will be conclusively presumed that the order was not based upon that ground. ..."
[fn. 2]  2. Nor has our own research found any case discussing whether, under the 1939 amendment of section 657, insufficiency of the evidence could be specified as a ground by a nunc pro tunc order made (1) after the 10 days allowed by that section had expired but (2) before the end of the 60 days during which section 660 gave the court power to determine the motion.
[fn. 3]  3. The evidence conflicted as to whether Young was using the shoulder or was completely within the northbound lane. An instruction was neither given nor requested concerning Young's duty to drive "upon the right half of the roadway ...." (Veh. Code,  21650.) That omission is not urged as error on this appeal.

=== CASE 2209605 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:41.428651+00 ===

812 A.2d 829 (2002)
STATE
v.
Vincent A. CERASO.
No. 2001-101-C.A.
Supreme Court of Rhode Island.
December 27, 2002.
*830 *831 Present: WILLIAMS, C.J., LEDERBERG, FLANDERS, GOLDBERG, JJ, and WEISBERGER, C.J. (Ret.)
Aaron L. Weisman, Providence, for Plaintiff.
Catherine A. Gibran, Paula Rosin, Providence, for Defendant.
OPINION
PER CURIAM.
This case came before the Court for oral argument on December 9, 2002, pursuant to an order that had directed both parties to appear in order to show cause why the issues raised in this appeal should not summarily be decided. After considering the arguments of counsel and the memoranda filed by the parties, we are of the opinion that cause has not been shown and shall proceed to decide the appeal at this time.
Facts and Procedural History
After a nonjury trial in the Superior Court, defendant, Vincent A. Ceraso (defendant), was convicted of driving while intoxicated in violation of G.L. 1956 § 31-27-2. Judgment was entered and he was sentenced to serve the minimum mandatory sentence required by law.[1] On appeal, he asserts that the trial justice erred in denying his motion to suppress for lack of jurisdiction on the part of the Newport police to arrest him in neighboring Jamestown.
The following facts essentially are undisputed. In the early hours of February 14, 2000, Newport police officer, Sergeant Richard Field (Sgt. Field) obeyed a direction by his superior officer, Lieutenant Turano, to respond to a roll-over accident that had just occurred near the toll booths on the Jamestown side of the Newport Bridge. Sergeant Field promptly responded and arrived at the scene simultaneously with the State Police. Upon arrival, Sgt. Field immediately observed a scene of absolute chaos. There were police and rescue vehicle units present from both Jamestown and Newport, all of which had their emergency lights activated. The accident had completely blocked off the eastbound traffic from Jamestown and, because the toll booth operators had not stopped the flow of traffic onto the bridge from Jamestown, the eastbound lanes had backed up and were at a complete standstill between the toll booths and the accident scene. Even the Jamestown police cruisers were blocked in by the traffic and were prevented from gaining vehicular access to the accident scene.
Sergeant Field approached State Police Trooper Paul Conlon who informed him that the state police would manage the accident scene itself. Sergeant Field then met with Sergeant Donovan (Sgt. Donovan) of the Jamestown police and offered his assistance. They discussed the gravity of the situation and acknowledged that because the circumstances involved a roll-over, gasoline would leak onto the bridge thereby creating a very hazardous situation. *832 To avoid a potential catastrophe, it was crucial to evacuate all the vehicles trapped between the toll booths and the accident scene as quickly as possible. They decided that the most efficient way of easing the gridlock and securing the safety of all those present would be to establish a roadblock further up the bridge on the westbound side, and then to direct eastbound traffic to bypass the accident using the soon-to-be-traffic-free westbound side of the bridge. The only police cruiser availableto implement this evacuation plan belonged to Sgt. Field, so he told Sgt. Donovan that he would set up the necessary roadblock.
At approximately 2 a.m., Sgt. Field set up the planned roadblock by positioning his police cruiser at a right angle to the guard rail on the westbound side of the bridge at a location above the scene of the accident. His vehicle blocked most of the inside lane and partially blocked the outside lane. In addition to the vehicle's flashing overhead lights, Sgt. Field also used a flashlight to warn all westbound approaching vehicles to stop. Sergeant Field maintained constant radio contact with Lieutenant Kliever (Lt. Kliever), also a Newport police officer (who had come to the bridge), in order to apprise Sgt. Donovan and Lt. Kliever of the status and safety of the operation.[2] The entire evacuation procedure took approximately fifteen minutes during which time only two vehicles approached from the westbound side of the bridge.
The first vehicle to encounter the roadblock duly obeyed Sgt. Field's command to stop. However, instead of stopping, the second vehicle, which was driven by defendant, appeared to gain speed as it swerved from the inside lane into the outside lane. The vehicle sped by Sgt. Field at approximately fifty miles per hour. Sergeant Field testified that defendant passed between the cruiser and the curb through "a very tight space" and that defendant's vehicle "jolted sharply[,]" appearing as if it may have actually struck the curb. Considering the speed of the vehicle, the time of day, defendant's failure to obey a command to stop at an emergency roadblock, his erratic driving and his apparent failure to see the numerous emergency flashing lights ahead, Sgt. Field suspected that defendant was driving under the influence of alcohol. He immediately radioed ahead to warn Lt. Kliever of his suspicions and of the fact that defendant had failed to obey his command.
Lieutenant Kliever stopped defendant's vehicle near the toll booths and examined him for suspicion of driving under the influence. After he subjected defendant to various field sobriety tests, Lt. Kliever turned defendant over to the State Police officers who charged him with driving under the influence and brought him to the State Police barracks in Portsmouth. At the State Police barracks, defendant submitted to a breathalyzer test. The reading from the first test indicated that defendant had a blood alcohol level of 0.176. By the time the second test was administered, his blood alcohol level had risen to 0.180, almost twice the legal limit at the time.
Before trial began, defendant made motions to suppress and to dismiss on the basis that the Newport police had no jurisdiction to arrest him in Jamestown. Initially, the trial justice granted the motion, subject to reconsideration. She determined that if the officer had probable cause to arrest, then, because he witnessed a misdemeanor, G.L. 1956 § 12-7-3 gave him the jurisdictional authority to make that arrest because it doesn't "establish territorial limits for peace officers[.]"
*833 The defendant then renewed his motion to suppress. He asserted that the Newport police did not have jurisdiction to arrest him under the common law and that neither of the two statutory exceptions applied to the facts in this case because the situation did not involve a close pursuit, as required by § 12-7-19, and because the Jamestown police never contacted the Newport police department to request emergency police assistance, as required by G.L. 1956 § 45-42-1. The trial justice denied the motion finding that, for purposes of § 45-42-1, when Sgt. Donovan accepted Sgt. Field's offer of help, that acceptance was sufficient to constitute a request by a designee of the Jamestown Police Chief for emergency police assistance from the Newport police. After waiving his right to a jury trial, defendant was convicted in the Superior Court for the crime of driving while intoxicated.
The sole issue on appeal is whether the trial justice erred in denying defendant's motion to suppress for lack of jurisdiction on the part of the Newport police. We conclude that there was no error.
Jurisdiction of Newport Officers
In the absence of a statutory or judicially recognized exception, the authority of a local police department is limited to its own jurisdiction. See Page v. Staples, 13 R.I. 306 (1881). There are two exceptions to this general rule. First, when the police are in "hot pursuit" of a suspect, they may cross into another jurisdiction pursuant to § 12-7-19. Second, in emergency situations, it may be necessary and appropriate for the police from one jurisdiction to exercise authority in another jurisdiction. See § 45-42-1; State v. Locke, 418 A.2d 843, 847 (R.I.1980); Cioci v. Santos, 99 R.I. 308, 315, 207 A.2d 300, 304 (1965).
In the case presently before us, it is clear that the "hot pursuit" exception was not applicable. The record reveals that Sgt. Field was already in Jamestown when his suspicions concerning defendant were aroused. Thus, this was not a situation where a police officer lawfully pursued a suspect from his or her own jurisdiction into another jurisdiction in accordance with § 12-7-19.
The defendant asserts that § 45-42-1 also was inapplicable to the instant case. He contends that it is only after a police chief, or one of his or her designees, specifically requests emergency assistance from another police department that the members of that second police department obtain authority to act in the other jurisdiction. In this case, defendant asserts that no such request ever was made and he points out that it was the Newport police officers' own superior officer who ordered them to the scene of the accident. He maintains that although Sgt. Field offered his assistance to Sgt. Donovan, there is no evidence that his offer was officially orverbally accepted. He additionally contends that § 45-42-1 is penal in nature and a strict construction of that statute clearly would have shown that the Newport police officers did not have jurisdiction to arrest him.
Section 45-42-1 entitled "Emergency police power," provides:
"When the police chief of a city or town within the state or his or her designee requests emergency police assistance from another police department within the state, the officers responding to the request shall be subject to the authority of the requesting chief and have the same authority, powers, duties, privileges, and immunities as a duly appointed police officer of the city or town making the request, until the requesting chief of police discharges and releases *834 the assisting police officers to their own departments."
It is a well-known canon of statutory construction that "penal statutes must be strictly construed in favor of the party upon whom a penalty is to be imposed." State v. Smith, 766 A.2d 913, 924 (R.I.2001) (quoting State v. Bryant, 670 A.2d 776, 779 (R.I.1996)). However, § 45-42-1 is a not a penal statute. It is remedial, and therefore, strict construction would be inappropriate. Instead, we will apply our standard, well-established principles of statutory construction to determine whether the Newport police had jurisdiction to arrest defendant.
"It is well settled that when the language of a statute is clear and unambiguous, this Court must interpret the statute literally and must give the words of the statute their plain and ordinary meanings." RIH Medical Foundation, Inc. v. Nolan, 723 A.2d 1123, 1126 (R.I.1999) (quoting State v. DiCicco, 707 A.2d 251, 253 (R.I.1998)). "When confronted with an unambiguous statute, we must apply the statute as written." Id. (citing DiCicco, 707 A.2d at 253). "Moreover, when confronted with an unclear or ambiguous statute, there is room for statutory construction and we examine the statute in its entirety in order to `glean the intent and purpose of the Legislature.'" Id. (quoting In re Advisory to the Governor, 668 A.2d 1246, 1248 (R.I. 1996)). In doing so, "this Court `will not construe a statute to reach an absurd [or unintended]result.'" Hargreaves v. Jack, 750 A.2d 430, 435 (R.I.2000) (quoting Kaya v. Partington, 681 A.2d 256, 261 (R.I.1996)).
In denying defendant's motion to suppress, the trial justice reasoned that Jamestown police officer, Sgt. Donovan, was a designee of the Jamestown police chief because the police chief had scheduled Sgt. Donovan to carry out his duties as a police officer on the night in question. As part of those duties, Sgt. Donovan was required to handle any emergency situation that may have arisen. When the accident occurred, human lives and the safety of all persons on the Newport Bridge were at an extreme risk. The trial justice held that:
"once Sergeant Field had spoken with Sergeant Donovan, once the sergeant had indicated that he did in fact want Sergeant Field's assistance, that that conferred upon Sgt. Field at that point the powers, duties and privileges as articulated in 45-42-1.
"* * * it is clear to this Court that in passing 45-42-1 that the General Assembly clearly envisioned situations where one police department would need the assistance of another police department and would need the assistance for emergency situations such as this."
After reviewing the record, we cannot say that the trial justice erred in her determinations. The record reveals that Sgt. Donovan was faced with a very serious accident scene, with the possibility of gasoline spilling onto the bridge and causing an explosion. Many lives were in danger due to the number of occupied vehicles that were trapped in the eastbound lanes between the scene of the accident and the toll booths. Time was of the essence in averting a catastrophe. When Sgt. Field arrived at the scene to offer his assistance, Sgt. Donovan immediately seized upon the opportunity to develop an emergency evacuation plan with him. As Sgt. Field's police cruiser was the only police cruiser available to implement their emergency evacuation plan, it was absolutely crucial that both the cruiser and Sgt. Field be empowered to set up the blockade and to control traffic.
*835 The defendant suggests that Sgt. Donovan was required to give an "official or verbal `acceptance'" to Sgt. Field's offer of assistance before jurisdiction could be conferred upon the Newport police pursuant to § 45-42-1. We disagree. The statute facilitates police departments in handling emergency situations in the safest and most efficient manner possible. Given the exigent circumstances confronting Sgt. Donovan, it is absurd to have expected him to engage in some stylized ritual in order to officially accept Sgt. Field's offer of assistance. Such a requirement would have placed an onerous burden upon him when time was of the essence in saving lives and property. When Sgt. Donovan formulated an evacuation plan with Sgt. Field, clearly he was both accepting Sgt. Field's offer of assistance and requesting Sgt. Field to help him to implement that plan.
Considering that Sgt. Donovan, as designee of the Jamestown police chief, conferred "the same authority, powers, duties, privileges, and immunities as a duly appointed police officer of the * * * town[,]" § 45-42-1, upon the Newport police officers that were present at the scene, they necessarily had jurisdiction to control traffic and to arrest defendant. The policy of the state has been significantly changed from the rigidity of the holding in Page v. Staples, 13 R.I. 306 (1881), wherein a sheriff of the county of Providence lost jurisdiction by crossing through the county of Kent in order to reach his ultimate destination which was in Providence. Page has been distinguished in Cioci v. Santos, 99 R.I. 308, 207 A.2d 300 (1965), in which municipal officers from the town of Cumberland transported the defendant from a cell in Cumberland, where he tried to hang himself, to a hospital in Providence. This Court observed "[i]t is our opinion that the dictates of public policy require also that police officers who have a citizen in their lawful custody be not deterred from acting to protect the well-being of such person,particularly in circumstances arising out of an emergency such as existed in the instant case." Cioci, 99 R.I. at 315, 207 A.2d at 304.
Similar principles were enunciated in Locke, wherein a Charlestown police officer arrested Locke on probable cause to believe that he was intoxicated. The officer then transported the defendant to Westerly to administer a breathalyzer test because the town of Charlestown did not have breathalyzer equipment. The Court followed the reasoning in Cioci and held that the officer acted reasonably "to protect the public from a drunken driver and to protect Locke from himself." Locke, 418 A.2d at 847.
In the case at bar, the Legislature has made specific provisions for the cooperation of police officers who are from different municipalities in emergency situations where such cooperation requires the empowerment of the officers from another municipality to assist in maintaining the public safety. Certainly, no more dramatic example could be set forth of the need for cooperation by officers of an adjoining municipality to render assistance in maintaining order and protecting the safety of persons imperiled by an accident and fire on a bridge that joins the two communities. This is a classic example of the result which the Legislature intended to accomplish. Such intent should not be frustrated by demanding, unnecessary formalisms. Sergeant Donovan was clearly the designee of the Jamestown Police Chief and was in charge in the midst of an emergency situation. He accepted the cooperation of Sgt. Field and Lt. Kliever. The defendant's argument that the Newport officers lacked jurisdiction, pursuant to § 45-42-1 is without merit.
*836 Conclusion
For the reasons stated, the appeal of the defendant is denied and dismissed. The judgment of conviction and the sentence imposed in the Superior Court are hereby affirmed. The papers in the case may be remanded to the Superior Court.[3]
NOTES
[1]  The trial justice stayed the execution of the sentence pending this appeal.
[2]  It appears that Sgt. Field did not have radio contact with Sgt. Donovan.
[3]  It is also worthy of note that the Legislature in P.L. 2002, ch. 142, § 1, authorized agreements between adjacent municipalities to provide cooperative assistance by one municipality to the other in non-emergency situations. This statute is not relevant to the case at bar and does require substantial formal approval by both municipal councils. Nevertheless, it is illustrative that legislative policy supports cooperation between municipalities in providing police assistance even in situations where no emergency exists.

=== CASE 9737265 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:20:24.469209+00 ===

OPINION
LEDERBERG, Justice.
Can the Superior Court remand an arbitration award to the arbitrator for clarification? We answer in the affirmative. A Superior Court justice properly vacated an arbitrator’s punitive damages award and remanded the award to the arbitrator. We affirm the Superior Court’s confirmation of the clarified arbitration award.
Preliminary Facts
The dispute between the parties began in May 1993, when Pier House Inn, Inc. (Pier House or plaintiff) leased facilities in Narragansett, Rhode Island, to 421 Corporation, Inc. (421 Corp. or defendant) “to be used exclusively as a first-class restaurant.” The parties’ business relationship soon soured, and in February 1994, plaintiff filed an action for eviction and nonpayment of rent in District Court. Upon defendant’s motion,, the District Court submitted the case to arbitration pursuant to the terms of the lease. On December 20, 1994, the arbitrator issued an award, granting Pier House possession of the premises and also awarding $10,264 on its claim for rent, $10,634.93 on its claim for utility bills, and $41,030.18 on its claim for attorney’s fees. On 421 Corp.’s counterclaim for breach of contract, the arbitrator granted judgment for defendant in the amount of “$4,072.25 as compensatory damages” and “$150,000 as punitive damages.”
The award termed “punitive damages” constitutes the core of the dispute between the parties. On April 5, 1995, a Superior Court hearing justice confirmed, upon defendant’s motion, all parts of the award except the punitive damages, vacated the punitive damages award, and directed that “the matter [of punitive damages] be re*802heard by the arbitrator.”1 No further action was taken for two years until plaintiff filed a petition for issuance of a writ of certiorari that was denied by this Court on March 5, 1999. The defendant then sought the rehearing ordered by the hearing justice. On July 14, 2000, the arbitrator issued a clarified award, stating, “The award of punitive damages was in fact intended to compensate [defendant] for actual damages it sustained because of wrongful acts of Pier House Inn, Inc., related to the lease.” The defendant moved to confirm the award as clarified. After a hearing before a different justice of the Superior Court, the award was confirmed on October 26, 2000, and plaintiff filed this timely appeal. Additional facts will be presented in discussing the issues on appeal.
Vacating the Punitive Damages Award
We first examine whether the April 5, 1995 hearing justice properly vacated the arbitrator’s award of punitive damages. This Court has recognized that the judiciary’s role in the arbitration process is “extremely limited.” Purvis Systems, Inc. v. American Systems Corp., 788 A.2d 1112, 1114-15 (R.I.2002). By statute, General Laws 1956 § 10-3-12 directs that “the court must make an order vacating the award upon the application of any party to the arbitration:
“(1) Where the award was procured by corruption, fraud or undue means.
“(2) Where there was evident partiality or corruption on the part of the arbitrators, or either of them.
“(3) Where the arbitrators were guilty of misconduct in refusing to postpone the hearing, upon sufficient cause shown, or in hearing legally immaterial evidence, or refusing to hear evidence pertinent and material to the controversy, or of any other misbehavior by which the rights of any party have been substantially prejudiced.
“(4) Where the arbitrators exceeded their powers, or so imperfectly executed them that a mutual, final, and definite award upon the subject matter submitted was not made.”
In addition to the above statutory grounds, an arbitration award may be overturned when the award is irrational or if the arbitrator “manifestly disregarded the law,” Prudential Property & Casualty Insurance Co. v. Flynn, 687 A.2d 440, 442 (R.I.1996), such as when an arbitrator understands and correctly states the law, but ignores it in reaching a decision. Westminster Construction Corp. v. PPG Industries, Inc., 119 R.I. 205, 211, 376 A.2d 708, 711 (1977). Mere error of law or the failure to understand or apply the law, however, does not constitute manifest disregard. Id.
The record does not indicate upon which of the statutory grounds the April 5, 1995 hearing justice relied in vacating the award. The justice began his analysis of the punitive damages award by rejecting defendant’s argument that punitive damages were authorized by the American Arbitration Association (AAA) arbitration rules. He specifically pointed out that “people who are entering into agreements subject to arbitration in commercial contracts would be stunned to learn that they are thereby exposed to punitive damages in situations in which the law of the jurisdiction forbids punitive damages,” an observation with which we generally agree. *803The hearing justice next correctly summarized the grounds for vacating an award, as set forth in § 10-3-12 and by this Court. He then vacated the punitive damages award and ruled that, in the absence of an agreement by the parties, an arbitrator may not award punitive damages that are not authorized by Rhode Island law. He did not state whether he found the award of punitive damages to have been a manifest disregard of the law or simply a mistake in nomenclature, and he declined to take evidence on whether the arbitrator meant the award to be compensatory. Although the hearing justice did not specify the authority on which he relied to vacate the punitive damages award, he did find that § 10-3-18 authorized him to direct the arbitrator to rehear and clarify the vacated punitive damages award. The arbitrator did not hold a rehearing, but instead accepted memoranda from the parties and issued a “Clarification of Award of Arbitrator” on July 14, 2000.
After the clarified award was issued, defendant again filed a motion to confirm the award. At the October 26, 2000 hearing on the motion, Pier House conceded that the § 10-3-12 grounds for vacating the disputed award could not be met, but it argued on appeal that the hearing justice was nevertheless correct in vacating the punitive damages award. Having examined the record, we agree that the April 5, 1995 hearing justice was correct in vacating the punitive damages award, given the arbitrator’s manifest disregard of the law in awarding punitive damages, but we disagree that his authority to do so obtains from § 10-3-13.
We have pointed out that the judiciary’s “ ‘review [of] the merits of an arbitration award is extremely limited,’ ” Town of North Providence v. Local 2334 International Association of Fire Fighters, AFL-CIO, 763 A.2d 604, 605 (R.I.2000) (per curiam), and that an arbitration award can be vacated only if the award falls within one of the statutory criteria set out in § 10-3-12, or if the award is irrational, or if the arbitrator has manifestly disregarded the law. Bradford Dyeing Association, Inc. v. J. Stog Tech GmbH, 765 A.2d 1226, 1232 (R.I.2001); Aetna Casualty & Surety Co. v. Grabbert, 590 A.2d 88, 92 (R.I.1991). Neither an arbitrator’s mistake of law nor an error of law is a ground for vacating an arbitration award. Bradford Dyeing Association, 765 A.2d at 1232; Westminster Construction Corp., 119 R.I. at 210, 376 A.2d at 711.
With respect to whether the arbitrator’s award manifestly disregarded the law, we have recognized “that punitive damages are severely restricted under Rhode Island law.” Mark v. Congregation Mishkon Tefiloh, 745 A.2d 777, 779 (R.I.2000). Such damages are appropriate only when a defendant’s conduct requires deterrence and punishment over and above that provided in an award of compensatory damages, such as when a defendant “act[s] with malice or in bad faith.” Palmisano v. Toth, 624 A.2d 314, 318 (R.I.1993). For example, in Peckham v. Hirschfeld, 570 A.2d 663, 669 (R.I.1990), we held that punitive damages were appropriate in a slander of title action, when the defendant maliciously interfered with the plaintiffs ownership of real estate by knowingly filing an invalid purchase agreement in order to cloud the plaintiffs title and thereby prevent him from selling the property to a third party.
Although we cannot ascertain whether the arbitrator considered, then disregarded, the high bar that must be met before awarding punitive damages, his ready disavowal of that award upon remand is probative of his oversight in labeling the award punitive damages. The arbitrator’s clarification is reasonable in light of the fact that *804the common law established by this Court requires á party seeking punitive damages to demonstrate the validity of the claim by producing evidence of “such maliciousness, wantonness or willfulness, ‘on the part of the party at fault, as amounted to criminality, which for the good of society and warning to the individual, ought to be punished.’ ” Id. (quoting Sherman v. McDermott, 114 R.I. 107, 109, 329 A.2d 195, 196 (1974)). The defendant has not met this burden, given 421 Corp.’s failure to present any willful, wicked, reckless, or malicious acts by plaintiff that would serve as grounds for a punitive damages award.
Furthermore, although plaintiff characterized the arbitrator’s authority as the power to “do whatever he can to supply equity to the parties,” the relevant portion of Rule 45(a) of the American Arbitration Association’s Rules entitled “Scope of Award” provides: “The arbitrator may grant any remedy or relief that the arbitrator deems just and equitable and within the scope of the agreement of the parties, including, but not limited to, specific performance of a contract.” (Emphasis added.) In this case, the parties did not agree to the imposition of punitive damages. Moreover, the lease specifically provided that it be “construed under the laws of the State of Rhode Island and the Town of Narragansett * * Therefore, absent legal authority or the parties’ agreement, punitive damages could not be awarded in this case.
Hearing Justice’s Authority to Remand the Award for Clarification
Having concluded that the hearing justice properly vacated the punitive damages award, we address the second issue presented on appeal, namely, whether the justice had the authority to remand the award for clarification. The hearing justice relied -on § 10-3-13 to remand the punitive damages portion of the award and directed that “the matter be reheard by the arbitrator to determine whether that award was in whole or in part intended to be compensatory * * Notwithstanding the hearing justice’s direction that the arbitrator rehear that part of the award, the arbitrator neither conducted a rehearing, or reconvened the parties, or accepted new evidence. Instead, the arbitrator accepted the parties’ memoranda, then issued a clarified award.
This Court reviews de novo questions of statutory interpretation. Carnevale v. Dupee, 783 A.2d 404, 408 (R.I.2001). When a statute is clear and unambiguous, we adopt its plain and ordinary meaning. In re Bernard H., 557 A.2d 864, 866 (R.I.1989). We presume that the Legislature intended every word, sentence, or provision to serve some purpose and have some force and effect, id., but we will not interpret a statute in a manner that would defeat the underlying purpose of the enactment. Dias v. Cinquegrana, 727 A.2d 198, 199-200 (R.I.1999) (per curiam). When a statute is ambiguous, we ground our interpretation in policy considerations. Id. at 200.
Section 10-3-13 provides: “Where an award is vacated, and the time within which the agreement required the award to be made has not expired, the court may, in its discretion, direct a rehearing by the arbitrators.” (Emphasis added.) Here, the parties’ lease provided that the AAA rules for expedited procedures would govern any disputes.2 Rule *80557 of the American Arbitration Association’s Rules requires that, in an expedited arbitration, “the award shall be rendered not later than fourteen days from the date of the closing of the hearing.” Thus, plaintiff reasoned, the Superior Court could have remanded the award for rehearing only during the fourteen days following the arbitration hearing, given that a fourteen-day period was the “time within which the [arbitration] agreement required the award to be made.” Section 10-3-13. In this case, the record did not indicate the date on which the hearing ended. Assuming the hearing ended no later than the date of the award, i.e., on December 20, 1994, plaintiff argued that the fourteen-day window for remand expired not later than January 3, 1995, well before the April 5, 1995 confirmation hearing in the Superior Court.
We decline to adopt this interpretation of the statute. Section 10-3-13 clearly intends to provide for remand of arbitration awards to arbitrators at the discretion of the hearing justice. Limiting a remand to the time constraints advocated by plaintiff would render the statute a nullity if, for example, an arbitrator forecloses a Superior Court remand for rehearing by rendering a decision on the last day permitted by statute, rule, or agreement.
Nevertheless, although we reject the hearing justice’s rebanee on § 10-3-13 in remanding the case to the arbitrator, we affirm the remand for clarification on other grounds. Levine v. Bess Eaton Donut Flour Co., 705 A.2d 980, 984 (R.I.1998) (per curiam). In the case at bar, the hearing justice observed what he perceived to be an obvious error on the face of the award; awarding punitive damages to defendant was irreconcilable with the arbitrator’s finding that defendant breached the lease and with the award of attorney’s fees to plaintiff. It is our opinion that this blatant discrepancy clearly exemplifies the type of award that § 10-3-14 authorizes a judge to modify or correct, in the interest of effectuating the intent of the award and promoting justice between the parties. Using the unambiguous words, “the court must make an order modifying or correcting the award,” § 10-3-14(a) mandates a modification or correction upon the application of any party to the arbitration:
“(1) Where there was an evident material miscalculation of figures, or an evident material mistake in the description of any person, thing, or property referred to in the award.
“(2) Where the arbitrators have awarded upon a matter not submitted to them, unless it is a matter not affecting the merits of the decision upon the matters submitted.
“(3) Where the award is imperfect in matter of form not affecting the merits of the controversy.”
Here, given the conspicuous incongruity of the award, we conclude that the arbitrator made an “evident material mistake.” It is likely that if the arbitrator had awarded $154,072.50 compensatory damages and $150,000 punitive damages, the hearing justice would not have directed a rehearing on the vacated award of punitive damages, because that amount of compensatory damages in this case would have negated any speculation that the $150,000 punitive damages award actually was intended as compensatory damages.
The justice in this case did not modify or correct the award pursuant to § 10-3-14(b), but instead remanded the award to *806the arbitrator to clarify whether the $150,000 award was meant to be compensatory. In so deciding, the hearing justice declined to accept evidence “as to what the arbitrator considered or what he decided.” Although § 10-3-14 requires the reviewing court to modify the award as necessary and does not expressly limit the hearing justice’s scope of review, under the circumstances of this case, the remand to the arbitrator was appropriate, given the insufficient evidence before the April 5, 1995 hearing justice regarding the rationale for the punitive damages award. There was neither a transcript of the arbitration proceeding, nor was an explanation of the arbitrator’s reasoning available for the justice’s examination. See Purvis Systems, Inc., 788 A.2d at 1118, and Westminster Construction Corp., 119 R.I. at 209-10, 376 A.2d at 710 (holding that explanations of arbitration awards are not required). The April 5, 1995 hearing justice had before him only the representations of counsel that 421 Corp. had presented evidence demonstrating a loss of $150,000 for capital improvements. The justice had no evidence on which to assess defendant’s assertion that plaintiff was liable for these expenditures on the basis of its alleged promise to defendant, as an inducement for entering into the lease, that it would maintain the premises and repair the equipment. Rather than rely on defendant’s representations to modify the punitive damages award, the court properly sought a clarification from the arbitrator.
This Court previously affirmed a remand for clarification in Lemoine v. Department of Mental Health, Retardation and Hospitals, 113 R.I. 285, 320 A.2d 611 (1974), for the purpose of taking further evidence pursuant to the Administrative Procedures Act.3 In that case, we held that the remand was part of the reviewing court’s “inherent power * * * to correct deficiencies in the record and thus afford the litigants a meaningful review.” Id., at 290, 320 A.2d at 614. The April 5, 1995 hearing justice’s decision here comports with the statutory mandate that the reviewing justice effectuate the intent of the award and “promote justice between the parties.” Section 10-3-14(b). But because of the minimal record, a remand was necessary to ascertain the arbitrator’s intent. In the clarified award, the arbitrator made clear that he intended to compensate 421 Corp. for its costs. Simply vacating the arbitrator’s award of punitive damages would have thwarted that intent. Moreover, justice would not be served by permitting plaintiff to avoid paying compensation to defendant because of the arbitrator’s error in designating the award.
Notwithstanding our holding in this case, we continue to recognize that parties use arbitration as an expeditious and informal means of resolving their disputes by limiting judicial involvement in arbitration. Purvis Systems, Inc., 788 A.2d at 1118. Here, however, the parties’ dilatory manner belied their expressed intent to pursue an expeditious arbitration of their grievances. Following the order of remand for rehearing, years passed before defendant sought a clarification of the arbitrator’s punitive damages award. The plaintiff also failed to seek either the required rehearing or a timely review of the remand order and thus was responsible for significant delays.
It is our opinion that to ensure that a rehearing before an arbitrator pro-*807ceeds within a reasonable period, a hearing justice ordering such a remand hearing should set a reasonable time within which the parties must seek the rehearing. In this case, such a limitation would have reduced the eight-year resolution of this case to a time frame that better might have served the parties’ original intent to resolve their disputes on an expedited basis.
Conclusion
We concur with the October 26, 2000 hearing justice who had “absolutely no problem in confirming this award.” In summary, therefore, we affirm the vacating of an arbitrator’s award of punitive damages, the order directing the arbitrator to clarify the “punitive damages” award, and the confirmation of the clarified award. In so doing, we deny and dismiss the plaintiffs appeal and affirm the judgment of the Superior Court, to which we remand the papers of this case.
Chief Justice WILLIAMS did not participate.
. This Court denied and dismissed as interlocutory plaintiff’s appeal of the April 5, 1995 decision and pointed out that the proper method for seeking review of an interlocutory order is by a petition for writ of certiorari. Pier House Inn, Inc. v. 421 Corp., Inc., 689 A.2d 1069, 1070 (R.I.1997) (mem.).
. The lease’s arbitration clause in its entirety provided that:
"ARBITRATION: Any and all disputes of any nature whatsoever arising hereunder and/or in connection with the interpretation *805and/or meaning and/or intent of the parties to this Lease shall be decided by 'expedited arbitration’ conducted in accordance with the rules and procedures of the American Arbitration Association.”
. The Administrative Procedures Act, G.L. 1956 § 42-35-15(g), provided in relevant part that: "The court may affirm the decision of the agency or remand the case for further proceedings, or it may reverse or modify the decision if substantial rights of the appellant have been prejudiced * *

=== CASE 9737266 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:20:24.474209+00 ===

FLANDERS, Justice,
concurring.
I concur in the result in this case, but for different reasons than those expressed by the majority. Under G.L.1956 § 10-3-14(a), the Superior Court, upon the application of any party to the arbitration, is empowered to modify or correct an arbitration award in any of the following cases:
“(1) Where there was an evident material miscalculation of figures, or an evident material mistake in the description of any person, thing, or property referred to in the award.
“(2) Where the arbitrators have awarded upon a matter not submitted to them, unless it is a matter not affecting the merits of the decision upon the matters submitted.
“(3) Where the award is imperfect in matter of form not affecting the merits of the controversy.”
If the court finds that any one or more of the above-listed circumstances exists, then it “must modify and correct the award, so as to effect the intent thereof and promote justice between the parties.” Section 10-3-14(b).
Here, one of the parties to the arbitration alleged that the arbitrator mistakenly designated a portion of the damages award as punitive rather than as compensatory. If it were so, then the award would be “imperfect in matter of form not affecting the merits of the controversy,” requiring the court, under § 10-3-14 to “modify and correct the award.” Also, if the only dispute submitted to the arbitrators was merely one having to do with an alleged breach of the lease agreement, then it was possible that the arbitrator, in awarding punitive damages, “awarded upon a matter not submitted to [the arbitrator].” This also would require modification and correction of the award “to effect the intent thereof and to promote justice between the parties.” Section 10-3-14(b).
The question raised but unanswered by the text of § 10-3-14 is how should the Superior Court ascertain whether “the award is imperfect in matter of form not affecting the merits of the controversy,” or whether “the arbitrators have awarded upon a matter not submitted to them”? In other words, how is the Superior Court to determine whether, as alleged, the arbitrator’s designation in the award of a portion of the damages as “punitive” was a mistake? In cases such as this one, the court may have to go beyond the face of the award to answer these questions. In my judgment, one of the most efficient and direct ways to get to the bottom of such allegations is to remand the proceeding to the arbitrator with a request to clarify the *808award or that portion of it that has been questioned or challenged as mistaken. I agree with the majority that providing a time limit for the arbitrator to respond is doubtless the most prudent course to follow.
To be sure, “a general rule in common law arbitration [is] that when arbitrators have executed their award and declared their decision they are functus officio and have no power or authority to proceed further.” Mercury Oil Refining Co. v. Oil Workers International Union, 187 F.2d 980, 983 (10th Cir.1951). (Emphasis added.) But this “common law doctrine of functus officio ’ has been modified by statute in some states to permit the arbitrator to modify or correct the award, to the limited extent stated in the statute, upon submission by a court or upon direct application to the arbitrator by one of the parties.” Elkouri & Elkouri, How Arbitration Works 313, 388 (5th ed.1997). (Emphasis added.) Given the mandate of §§ 10-3-13 and 10-3-14 for courts to correct and to modify arbitration awards in certain circumstances, and to vacate them and remand the case to the arbitrator(s) for a rehearing in others, I believe that the common-law doctrine of functus officio has been modified in this jurisdiction to the extent necessary for courts to fulfill their duties under these statutes.
Thus, I would hold that § 10-3-14, together with § 10-3-13 (authorizing the court, “in its discretion, [to] direct a rehearing by the arbitrators” after vacating an award, if the time to make the award under the agreement has not yet expired), have modified the common-law doctrine of functus officio by allowing rehearings, modifications, and corrections of awards in the situations specified “so as to effect the intent thereof and promote justice between the parties.” Section 10-3-14(b). Cf. Locals 2222, 2320-2327, International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers AFL-CIO v. New England Telephone and Telegraph Co., 628 F.2d 644 (1st Cir.1980) (citing numerous cases recognizing the power of courts to resubmit awards to the original arbitrators for interpretation or amplification).
Accordingly, for the purpose of resolving this case, I would assume, without deciding, that arbitrators have the power to issue punitive-damage awards in situations in which, for example, the .scope of the arbitration agreement is broad enough to include within its ambit disputes that involve intentional tort claims (such as fraud, conversion, or intentional interference with contract). See, e.g., Mastrobuono v. Shearson Lehman Hutton, Inc., 514 U.S. 52, 61-62 n. 7, 115 S.Ct. 1212, 1218 n. 7, 131 L.Ed.2d 76, 87 n. 7 (1995) (if contracting parties agree to include punitive damage claims within the issues to be arbitrated, then the Federal Arbitration Act ensures that their agreement will be enforced even if state law otherwise would exclude such claims from arbitration); see also Raytheon Co. v. Automated Business Systems, Inc., 882 F.2d 6, 10 (1st Cir.1989) (interpreting “all disputes” and “any remedy or relief’ phrases in an arbitration agreement to allow arbitrators to award punitive damages).4 In such cireum-*809stances, an arbitration agreement that is not limited to breach-of-eontract disputes may allow the arbitrator to award such damages because they would be available as a matter of law if such claims were litigated in a judicial tribunal. On the other hand, if the parties simply agreed to arbitrate a contractual dispute, then the arbitrators might well exceed their powers by awarding punitive damages because such relief is not generally available as a remedy for a breach of contract.
But here, however, we have no need to decide these issues because, even if punitive damages could be awarded under this arbitration agreement, the question presented is whether the court had the power to obtain a clarification from the arbitrator about whether, as alleged, the apparent award of punitive damages was a mistake because of a mislabeling or misidentification of this damages component by the arbitrator.
Although, in this case, the Superior Court did not actually proceed under § 10-3-14, it could have done so and reached the same result. Thus, even if the court erred both in vacating the award under § 10-3-12 (because the grounds specified therein for doing so did not exist in this case) and in remanding the case for a rehearing under § 10-3-13 (because “the time within which the agreement required the award to be made” had expired in this case, and, therefore, the court lacked the ability to direct a rehearing by the arbitrators under § 10-3-13), such errors were harmless because the court nevertheless had the power to seek a clarification of the award under § 10-3-14 without any need for a rehearing and, thus, without regard to the expiration of any applicable period for obtaining a rehearing. Moreover, this Court can affirm a Superior Court judgment for different reasons than those relied upon by the trial justice. Levine v. Bess Eaton Donut Flour Co., 705 A.2d 980, 984 (R.I.1998) (holding that the Supreme Court can affirm a trial justice’s decision on grounds other than those stated by the trial justice); see also Liberty Mutual Insurance Co. v. Tavarez, 797 A.2d 480, 486 n. 5 (R.I.2002); Borsay v. State of Rhode Island, 714 A.2d 1201, 1202 (R.I.1998).
For these reasons, I would affirm the judgment confirming the award as modified on the grounds that, under § 10-3-14, the court had the power to ascertain whether, as alleged, the award of punitive damages was a mistake, and it could do so by asking the arbitrator to clarify the award in this respect. In effect, that is what happened here. Even though the court vacated the award and remanded it for a rehearing, no such rehearing occurred and the arbitrator merely clarified for the court and the parties that he intended the punitive portion of the damages award to be compensatory. In these circumstances, the Superior Court “must modify and correct the award so as to effect the intent thereof and promote justice between the parties.” Section 10-3-14(b). Because the Superior Court accomplished this same objective (albeit by a different route), I would affirm the judgment that confirmed the award as modified to reflect the arbitrator’s true intention.
. Punitive damages "serve as an effective deterrent to malicious or fraudulent conduct.” Raytheon Co. v. Automated Business Systems, Inc., 882 F.2d 6, 12 (1st Cir.1989). In a situation in which such conduct could give rise to punitive damages if proven to a court, there does not appear to be any compelling reason to prohibit a party that proves ffaudu-' lent conduct to an arbitrator from recovering punitive damages, unless the scope of an arbitration agreement is limited to breach-of-contract disputes. Id. An arbitration agreement, therefore, can be construed to authorize the arbitrator to award punitive damages in the same circumstances in which a court could do so, unless an agreement to arbitrate explic*809itly excludes such damages from its arbitration provisions. Id.

=== CASE 2209612 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:41.490195+00 ===

267 Cal.App.2d 652 (1968)
THE PEOPLE, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
JOHN ANTHONY DAVID RHONE, Defendant and Appellant.
Crim. No. 3271.
California Court of Appeals. Fourth Dist., Div. One.
Nov. 25, 1968.
John W. Porter, under appointment by the Court of Appeal, for Defendant and Appellant.
Thomas C. Lynch, Attorney General, William E. James, Assistant Attorney General, and Mark L. Christiansen, Deputy Attorney General, for Plaintiff and Respondent.
WHELAN, J.
Defendant appeals from an order admitting him to probation following his conviction by a jury of assault (an offense included within the charge of assault with a deadly weapon of which he was found not guilty), and of two counts of battery on each of two peace officers.
On October 7, 1967, two on-duty uniformed San Diego police officers, Knoll and Smith, in a marked police vehicle driven by Knoll, saw a late model automobile come onto National Avenue from Wabash Freeway shortly before 9 p.m. The police vehicle, westbound on National Avenue, was passed by the other car, eastbound, traveling at a high rate of speed.
Knoll made a U-turn to follow the other car, which turned from National Avenue onto 35th Street, onto which the police car followed with its red light directed at the car ahead. Driving on 35th Street at as fast as 60 miles per hour, the police car did not gain on the other vehicle; 35th Street merged into Rigel Street about three blocks from National Avenue. After traveling one block on Rigel Street, the pursued car turned east onto Birch Street which it went along for one block to Siva onto which it turned and on which it traveled north for one block, and from which it turned west onto Acacia Street where it stopped in front of 3520 Acacia, the home of Mr. and Mrs. Autry. Rigel, Birch, Siva and Acacia Streets are unpaved, and the area is a residential one. During the chase, Smith, in order to avoid being thrown about, had to hold onto the door fixtures on his side. The rear-end of the pursued car fishtailed as it traveled over the streets after leaving National Avenue.
As Knoll came up behind the other car, defendant got out of the left front door of that car, went around the front of it and turned toward the entrance to 3520 Acacia Street. From the police car, which had then stopped, Smith called to *655 defendant to stop, that Smith wanted to talk to him. Defendant turned and looked at Smith and continued toward the house; the two police officers alighted and followed defendant who entered the house, into which the two policemen followed him, opening the screen door to pass through an otherwise opened door. Defendant had gone from the living room into a bedroom, into which the officers followed, and where Smith asked defendant to come outside, that Smith wanted to talk to him. Without saying anything, defendant went out the front door, followed by Smith and Knoll; outdoors, Knoll took hold of defendant's right arm and Smith of his left and conducted defendant to the police car where Smith told defendant he was under arrest for reckless driving; told defendant to put his arms behind his back so he might have handcuffs put on. Defendant said, "You are not going to put me no place" and shoved Smith so that the latter was thrown off balance. Smith attempted unsuccessfully to subdue defendant, in which effort Knoll also joined. In the ensuing melee, defendant pulled Smith's pistol in its holster away from Smith's belt, but during the struggle the pistol and holster were forced from defendant's hand. After the officers had subdued defendant, he broke away and ran. Smith then drew his pistol but did not fire it. Several hours later defendant surrendered himself into custody.
At the time, defendant, a 21-year-old Negro high school graduate, temporarily separated from his wife, was living with his mother on Rigel Street around the corner from the Autry house. He was six feet tall and weighed about 190 pounds. He was working as a welder's apprentice and a plumber's apprentice five and as many as seven days a week. The car followed by the police, a 1967 Plymouth Sports Fury, had been purchased by defendant in February.
Defendant's Contentions
Defendant states the issues as follows:
"1. Whether the chief of police of the City of San Diego should have been permitted to testify under subpoena as an expert witness for the defense with respect to police practice in circumstances like those shown here."
"2. Whether the trial judge properly sustained objections to the hypothetical question sought to be propounded by the defense to the chief of police as an expert."
"3. Whether special interrogatories and special verdicts requested by the defendant should have been submitted to the jury. *656"
"4. Whether the trial court erred in refusing a 'formula' instruction to the jury on the issue of self-defense, offered by the defendant.  [fn. 1]"
"5. Whether the trial court should have instructed the jury, as requested by the defendant on the effect of the violation of Penal Code 844 by the police officers as disclosed in the evidence at the trial."
"6. Whether the defendant should have been permitted to refer, in voir dire of the jury panel and in closing argument, to portions of the report of the National Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders relative to community- police relationships in the ghettoes."
Discussion of the Evidence
The evidence presented by defendant would have placed the emphasis on issues quite different from those stated above. Defendant's testimony was that he had last driven his car at least a half hour before the police entered the Autry house; that just before his arrest he himself had gone to the Autry house from his mother's home to make a phone call and saw his wife, another woman and his two children in the car as he went toward the Autry house and stopped to speak to them.
He concedes, however, that the evidence was sufficient to support the verdicts.
Defendant's First Contention
[1a] It is claimed that a police officer is competent to give an expert opinion as to whether, under stated circumstances, another police officer uses force upon a person without lawful necessity.
A hypothetical question was prepared covering defendant's contentions as to the circumstances.
Defendant obtained and had served upon the San Diego chief of police a subpoena for his appearance at 2 p.m. of the day the trial commenced. The police chief presented, through the district attorney, his statement that he did not know anything about the facts of the case, and a motion to quash the subpoena.
Defendant urged to the court that he wished to examine the police chief as an expert as to whether the circumstances of defendant's encounter with the police on October 7 were such as to make the police guilty of a violation of section 149, Penal Code, which provides: "Every public officer who, under *657 color of authority, without lawful necessity, assaults or beats any person, is punishable by a fine not exceeding five thousand dollars, or by imprisonment in the state prison not exceeding five years or in a county jail not exceeding one year, or by both such fine and imprisonment."
The court granted the motion to quash.
[2] There is no statutory authority to quash a subpoena, other than a subpoena duces tecum. It was held in an early case that in the absence of a statutory provision for such an order, an order quashing a subpoena was a nullity. (Pfister v. Superior Court, 64 Cal. 400 [1 P. 492].) It has since been established that the court may quash a subpena that is regular on its face where the facts justify such action. The Supreme Court has said: "The defendant is entitled to compel the attendance of witnesses (Cal. Const., art I,  13; Pen. Code,  686, subd. 3), but in the instant case he failed to show that the persons he subpoenaed could offer relevant testimony in his behalf. It is not claimed that they had personal knowledge of the matters relating to the charges. The defendant himself indicated that they could establish only that the sections of the Vehicle Code were discriminately enforced as to him (testimony manifestly incompetent, irrelevant and immaterial for the reasons heretofore stated), and, although invited by the court to set forth the specific nature of the testimony sought to be elicited from the witnesses in question, defendant failed to do so, nor is there any such showing in the petitions with which we are here concerned. Under the circumstances present in the instant proceeding, we are satisfied that the court did not err in quashing the subpoenas." (In re Finn, 54 Cal.2d 807, 813 [8 Cal.Rptr. 741, 356 P.2d 685].)
A like result has been achieved by the quashing of a request for the issuance of subpoenas to witnesses for the purpose of impeaching witnesses for the prosecution where: "There was no showing that any one of the witnesses subpoenaed would have impeached any of the People's witnesses." (People v. Hollander, 194 Cal.App.2d 386, 391 [14 Cal.Rptr. 917].)
[1b] The defendant subpoenaed the police chief for the sole purpose of asking questions as to police methods in dealing with minority groups in the city, and to propound a hypothetical question with whose defects we deal hereafter.
No attempt was made to show what testimony would be elicited from the prospective witness; there was no offer of proof.
Apart from the hypothetical question with which we deal *658 later, the subject matter of the proposed interrogation was irrelevant to the issue, and had no tendency to prove what in fact occurred at the time or place in question; under the authorities cited, there was no error in the court's ruling.  [fn. 2]
Defendant's Second Contention
Defendant submitted to the court a hypothetical question in writing which was marked as a court exhibit. The question was one that defendant would have propounded to the chief of police of San Diego. The court sustained an objection to it.
Among the assumed matters the question is based upon was that after entering the Autry house and seeing defendant in a bedroom within, the officers asked an occupant (Mrs. Autry) "if defendant is the man who had just come in."
Such an assumed fact is wholly unsupported by any evidence, direct or inferential.
Without discussing whether the opinion sought to be elicited was a proper subject of expert opinion, and without discussing whether the question omitted undisputed facts that should have been embodied, we believe the court's ruling was correct because of the inclusion of assumed facts of which there was no evidence.
[3] Error cannot be predicated upon the sustaining of an objection to a hypothetical question that assumes facts of which the record is devoid of evidence. (Linde v. Emmick, 16 Cal.App.2d 676, 686 [61 P.2d 338]; Estate of Phillips, 202 Cal. 490, 495 [261 P. 709].) The court, without an objection having been made, might properly exclude such a question.
[1c] There was no error in the court's rulings on the propriety of the hypothetical question regardless of the stated grounds of objection. (Davey v. Southern Pac. Co., 116 Cal. 325, 330 [48 P. 117].)
Defendant's Third Contention
[4] Defendant requested that the following special interrogatories be submitted to the jury:
"Did the police officers, or either of them, assault defendant before defendant offered any physical resistance?" *659
"If so, was the assault committed with or without lawful necessity?"
"Did defendant resist the assault with any greater force than he reasonably believed necessary to protect himself against injury in the circumstances?"
"Was defendant reasonable in the circumstances in believing that the force he used was necessary to protect himself from injury?"
He also requested the submission of the following forms of special verdicts:
"We, the jury in the above-entitled cause find that Officer Donald Knoll did assault defendant John Rhone without lawful necessity."
"We, the jury in the above-entitled cause find that Officer Donald Knoll did not assault defendant, John Rhone without lawful necessity."
Concerning the forms of special verdicts requested, it is immediately apparent that they do not provide for a determination of all the ultimate facts upon which the court could draw conclusions of law, that defendant was or was not guilty of the offenses charged against him.
One factual issue, the answer to which bore necessarily upon the question whether the officers acted reasonably in taking hold of defendant's arms when he walked out of the house, is whether it was defendant who drove the car pursued by the officers and ignored their request that he stop before he entered the Autry house. Defendant's account was to the contrary.
Section 1150, Penal Code, is as follows: "The jury must render a general verdict, except that in a superior court, when they are in doubt as to the legal effect of the facts proved, they may, except upon a trial for libel, find a special verdict."
Section 1152, Penal Code, is as follows: "A special verdict is that by which the jury find the facts only, leaving the judgment to the Court. It must present the conclusions of fact as established by the evidence, and not the evidence to prove them, and these conclusions of fact must be so presented as that nothing remains to the Court but to draw conclusions of law upon them."
Nothing in the record indicates that the jury expressed or experienced any difficulty in applying the court's instructions to the facts impliedly found by the jury.
There may be circumstances in which it might be error for *660 the court to refuse to invite the jury at its option to return a special verdict or for the court to fail to submit such special verdict on its own motion.
On the other hand, it has been held as a matter of law in some circumstances that the refusal to submit a special form of verdict was proper (People v. Rehman, 253 Cal.App.2d 119, 157 [61 Cal.Rptr. 65]; and see People v. Anderson, 199 Cal.App.2d 510, 522 [18 Cal.Rptr. 793]).
The defendant complains only of the refusal of the court to submit the particular forms of special verdicts and interrogatories prepared by him. Those forms did not cover all the facts at issue under the evidence. The refusal to submit them was not error.
Defendant's Fourth Contention
That is the contention that was abandoned at the time of oral argument. Defendant submitted a form of instruction which the court refused to give.
The requested instruction, so far as it contained a statement of the law, was fully covered by the instructions given; that the judge may have expressed himself as refusing it as a formula instruction is of no consequence.
Defendant's Fifth Contention
[5] Defendant requested the following instruction. The failure to give it he assigns as error.
"To make an arrest in a house, a peace officer may break open the door or window of the house in which the person arrested is, or in which they have reasonable grounds for believing him to be, after having demanded admittance and explained the purpose for which admittance is desired. The opening by police of a closed screen or other door constitutes a breaking within the meaning of this instruction."
"Since it appears from the evidence in this case that the police officers entered the Autry home without demanding admittance or explaining their purpose, I charge you that their entry was illegal and an arrest, if any, made by them in the house after such entry was not a valid arrest."
The question whether the police acted legally in entering the Autry house without first knocking, identifying themselves, announcing their purpose and requesting admittance, is irrelevant to the issues in the case at bench. In view of the language of Penal Code, section 834a, the illegality of an arrest made in the house would not justify resistance on the *661 part of defendant.  [fn. 3] (People v. Baca, 247 Cal.App.2d 487, 496 [55 Cal.Rptr. 681]; People v. Curtis, (Cal.App.) 70 Cal.Rptr. 271.) There is no question here of the use of physical evidence seized as the result of a search incidental to an unlawful arrest, as in People v. Rosales, 68 Cal.2d 299 [66 Cal.Rptr. 1, 437 P.2d 489].
It is further true that defendant was seeking to evade the officers who were engaged in an immediate and in-view pursuit of defendant, which made unnecessary what would have been superfluous as far as defendant was concerned.
Defendant's Sixth Contention
[6] To appreciate defendant's argument, a quotation from his brief will be helpful. He writes: "In the voir dire examination of the jury panel and in closing argument, appellant sought to make reference to the Report of the National Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders for the purpose of demonstrating that by reason of the existence within the United States of 'two societies, one black, one white--separate and unequal' there are different ways of life, one for the ghetto and one for the rest. When the only two Negro veniremen were excused by the prosecutor upon peremptory challenge, any jury awareness of the nature of ghetto life and police practices there was eliminated, and other evidence to fill the gap was needed if the jury was to function as a body representative of the total community. For these reasons the exclusion of references to the Kerner Commission Report was highly prejudicial to appellant's cause."
The assumption that defendant lived in a ghetto area is unsupported by the record, unless unpaved streets are found only in ghettos, or Negro citizens live exclusively in ghettos. The record shows, rather, that defendant was in full-time employment, was a high school graduate, owned and drove a car of the then current annual model, and had himself obtained the assistance of the police on an earlier occasion when his car was stolen. The house in which defendant took refuge had at least two bedrooms, contained a telephone which apparently could be used in more than one room, had a rear *662 patio and a front yard partly enclosed with a stone or brick wall.
The matters at issue were not whether at some times and places police had been guilty of brutality, but what were the conduct and actions of defendant and the two officers with whom he dealt. The report of the Kerner Commission was not in evidence and would not have been admissible in evidence, and was, therefore, not a proper subject for argument by counsel. The knowledge or lack of knowledge of the report by prospective jurors would in no way have indicated bias or prejudice or borne upon their quailfications, any more than would have their familiarity or lack of familiarity with the writings of James Baldwin.
We do not say that knowledge of the contents of the report would not be useful to a trial judge in pronouncing judgment on a convicted defendant whose living conditions were of the kind defense counsel assumes his client had.
The order appealed from is affirmed.
Brown (Gerald), P. J., and Coughlin, J., concurred.
NOTES
[fn. 1]  1. Defense counsel at the time of oral argument stated he did not continue to make that contention.
[fn. 2]  2. In Dillenbeck v. City of Los Angeles, 69 Cal.2d 472 [72 Cal.Rptr. 321, 446 P.2d 129], the Supreme Court held it error to exclude written bulletins which might have been rules establishing standards for police conduct in the operation of emergency vehicles, a departure from which might have been a failure to use due care. A record of the contents of the documents was established by their offer in evidence. No such attempt was made here to show standards of police conduct by an offer of proof.
[fn. 3]  3. Penal Code, section 834a, provides: "If a person has knowledge, or by the exercise of reasonable care, should have knowledge, that he is being arrested by a peace officer, it is the duty of such person to refrain from using force or any weapon to resist such arrest."

=== CASE 9737267 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:20:27.31892+00 ===

*191
OPINION
SAYLOR, Justice.
This appeal concerns the application, in the administrative law setting, of what has been termed the capricious disregard standard of appellate review.
In November of 1993, Linda Marlowe (“Claimant”) filed a claim petition seeking benefits against Leon E. Wintermyer, Inc. (“Employer”), and its insurer, American General Group, pursuant to the Workers’ Compensation Act.1 Claimant alleged that, in March of 1993, she sustained an injury— bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome (“CTS”) — in the course and scope of her employment primarily as a bookkeeper. On the same day, Claimant also asserted a claim against her previous employer, Lome G. Seifert, Inc. (“Seifert”), alleging that her clerical duties at that company contributed to her injury. Employer filed a joinder petition against Seifert for the same reason and, subsequently, filed a second joinder petition, contending that any injury occurred while Claimant worked for another company, H & R Block, as a tax preparer.2
The WCJ treated the petitions on a consolidated basis for purposes of hearing and decision. The parties stipulated that Claimant’s work with Employer spanned the fall of 1991 through mid-1993; her job with Seifert from 1987 through 1990; and her seasonal employment with H & R Block several months in 1991 (full time), as well as in 1992 through 1993 (part time). Claimant testified that her duties for all employers included substantial periods of repetitive hand motion, particularly typing and computer keyboarding; she experienced tingling and numbness in her fingers and right arm in December of 1989, while employed by Seifert; she was treated by a chiropractor in 1990 and ultimately referred to a physician, who diagnosed CTS; while working for Employer, she spent seventy percent of her time typing at a computer *192keyboard; working full time for Employer, her symptoms increased; she came under the care of James A. Yates, M.D., in February of 1992; and it was at such time that she learned that her CTS was work related.
Claimant also presented Dr. Yates’ testimony via deposition transcript. His description concerning onset and treatment of the CTS was consistent with Claimant’s; further, he explained that he performed several surgical procedures in 1992 and 1993 to alleviate the symptoms. According to Dr. Yates, Claimant’s injury caused permanent nerve damage, and her condition was related to her employment and caused by repetitive motion, including typing, keyboarding, and writing. On cross-examination, Dr. Yates indicated that his opinion concerning work-relatedness was predicated upon the work and medical history provided by Claimant, and that such history was generalized in nature.3 Dr. Yates also identified a series of other causes for CTS, although he emphasized that repetitive motion activities were the most common source.
Employer presented testimony from its director of human services and the accounting employee who replaced Claimant, both of whom substantially contradicted Claimant’s assertions concerning the amount of time that she spent performing data entry on a daily basis. The supervisor testified that the majority of Claimant’s work involved working with invoices and other documents, and that she did not spend a great deal of time at a computer terminal. The clerical worker stated that, in performing Claimant’s duties, she spent no more than two hours per day on data entry; the remainder of the workday involved non-repetitive tasks; and many days she did *193not spend any time at a keyboard. Employer did not present an expert medical witness, nor did Seifert present evidence.
In her findings, the WCJ emphasized inconsistencies, conflicts, and vagaries in Claimant’s evidence. For example, she contrasted the extensive evidence to the effect that Claimant’s difficulties with CTS were longstanding and clearly evident in June of 1990, with a disability claim form submitted to Employer by Claimant indicating that her CTS first appeared in August of 1992; credited the testimony of Employer’s witnesses over Claimant’s concerning the extent of repetitive motion activity she performed; and emphasized that Dr. Yates was unable to specify any particular event leading to or time of an onset or aggravation of Claimant’s injury. The WCJ specifically stated that the testimony of Claimant and Dr. Yates was not credible. Therefore, the WCJ concluded that Claimant failed to sustain her burden of proving that her injury was work related and entered an order dismissing the claim petitions against Employer and Seifert, as well as Employer’s joinder petition.
The Workers’ Compensation Appeal Board (“WCAB”), however, reversed. Preliminarily, it acknowledged that its review was in an appellate capacity, and it was therefore not its function to weigh the evidence and resolve conflicts, but rather, such role was assigned to the WCJ. Further, the WCAB noted that it was within the WCJ’s discretion to accept or reject, in whole or in part, the testimony of any witness, including an expert. Nevertheless, the WCAB indicated that, in instances in which only the party bearing the burden of proof presents evidence and relief is denied, it is appropriate for an appellate tribunal to review an administrative adjudication to ensure that it is free from any capricious disregard of competent evidence. Although acknowledging that Employer presented fact witnesses in rebuttal to Claimant’s testimony, the WCAB emphasized that Employer had not presented expert evidence to challenge Dr. Yates’ testimony. The WCAB invoked a traditional definition of capricious disregard as “a willful, deliberate disbelief of an apparently trustworthy witness, whose testimony one has no basis to challenge.” The *194WCAB then quoted extensively from Dr. Yates’ testimony concerning Claimant’s injury and his conclusion as to its work relatedness; characterized such testimony as unequivocal; and concluded that the WCJ erred in rejecting it, at least to the extent that it supported an aggravation of a pre-existing condition and/or a repetitive trauma injury. The WCAB therefore remanded the matter to the WCJ, requiring a determination of the date of injury and identification of the liable employer. On remand, the WCJ granted the claim petition for the work period from June 21, 1993, through June 1, 1994, and identified Employer as the liable party. The WCAB subsequently extended this period by fifteen months.
Before a panel of the Commonwealth Court, Employer argued, inter alia, that in its initial opinion, the WCAB improperly applied the capricious disregard standard of appellate review, thereby usurping the WCJ’s determinations of credibility and evidentiary weight. Like the WCAB, the Commonwealth Court majority emphasized that Employer had not presented medical evidence and, accordingly, also invoked what it termed a capricious disregard standard of review. On such basis, the Commonwealth Court rejected Employer’s argument, reasoning:
In order to make such determination [concerning capricious disregard], the [WCAB] reviewed the medical testimony of record in order to determine if it was equivocal or unequivocal. Such a review required the Board’s assessment of the competency of the evidence, not its credibility. Thus, Employer is mistaken in its assertion that the [WCAB’s] assessment of the competency of the medical evidence of record was an evaluation of its credibility and evidentiary weight,
(emphasis in original). After resolving additional questions raised by Employer, the Commonwealth Court affirmed the WCAB’s order in a memorandum opinion, remanding the matter for reasons unrelated to the present appeal.
Judge Friedman concurred in the result but wrote separately to express her belief that the WCAB should not have applied a capricious disregard review standard, but rather, should have employed a substantial evidence test. She rea*195soned that the court’s precedent clearly established that review for capricious disregard applied in the limited circumstance in which the burdened party does not prevail and was the sole presenter of evidence. Judge Friedman noted a conflict in authority concerning the application of the review standard in cases in which only the burdened party presents medical evidence but both parties present lay testimony or other non-medical evidence. Compare Iacono v. WCAB (Chester Housing Auth.), 155 Pa.Cmwlth. 234, 624 A.2d 814 (1993), aff'd per curiam, 536 Pa. 535, 640 A.2d 408 (1994), with Tomczak v. WCAB (Pro-Aire Transport, Inc.), 150 Pa. Cmwlth. 431, 615 A.2d 993 (1992). Citing to Iacono, Judge Friedman concluded that the controlling position is that, when both parties present evidence before the factfinder, however limited (there being no requirement that such proof include medical evidence), an appellate court must apply the substantial evidence standard to the exclusion of review for capricious disregard. See Iacono, 155 Pa.Cmwlth. at 240, 624 A.2d at 816-17.4 According to Judge Friedman, Employer’s presentation of factual testimony concerning the nature of Claimant’s job duties removed the matter from the purview of capricious disregard review. Judge Friedman also chastised the majority for taking a position that unnecessarily confused what she viewed as a “clear-cut legal determination,” and adopting an analysis that was both unnecessary and impractical. In this regard, Judge Friedman explained:
The effect of the majority’s opinion is that the standard of review must be decided separately for each issue raised within a single case. Former President Judge Craig pointed out the burdensome nature of this approach in Herbert v. [UCBR], 131 Pa. Cmwlth. 601, 571 A.2d 526 (Pa. Cmwlth.[1990)], stating that if this court had to apply differ*196ent standards depending upon whether only one or more parties produced evidence on a specific issue within a case, unworkable complications would result.... Because testimony on one issue can, and often does, impact to some extent on a different issue, or issues, in the same case, the parties could end up battling over pieces of evidence and their relevance to individual issues. This could require us to perform an extensive analysis of the evidence and to decide the question of the appropriate standard several times in a single case before we could address the issues raised in the-case. There is no need for this court to invite such difficulties, and I would hope that we could avoid such inquiries in the future.
Finally, Judge Friedman referenced the reasoned decision requirement of Section 422(a) of the Act, 77 P.S. § 834,5 the application of which, in her view, would eliminate the need for a separate inquiry concerning capricious disregard.
This Court granted limited review to revisit aspects of the standard governing appellate review of administrative agency adjudications in light of continuing differences among jurists concerning its appropriate composition.
*197Preliminarily, we note that courts do not rigidly employ precise verbiage in applying governing standards of review, but rather, frequently use differing terms, since the effort is to capture a conceptual manner of review. See generally Jeffrey P. Bauman, Standards of Review and Scopes of Review in Pennsylvania — A Primer and Proposal, 39 Duq. L. Rev. 513 (Spring 2001). Nevertheless, in the area of administrative agency review, judges have sometimes described fundamentally different and irreconcilable concepts, as illustrated by the division of the Commonwealth Court panel in the present case. Indeed, in a few instances in this arena, unfortunately, form has overcome substance, causing confusion. We emphasize, at the outset, that the intermediate appellate courts cannot be greatly faulted in this regard, since several of this Court’s own decisions reflect such fundamental inconsistencies. While recently, Madame Justice Newman, writing for a unanimous Court, articulated the essential concepts, see Fraternal Order of Police v. PLRB, 557 Pa. 586, 593-94, 735 A.2d 96, 99-100 (1999), it is apparent that vestiges of prior difficulties remain. A critical review of the historical development in Pennsylvania of what is now termed the capricious disregard standard of review serves to illustrate the difficulty, but more affirmatively, in conjunction with Fraternal Order of Police, to provide a framework for alignment.
For many years, the general standards governing appellate review in the administrative setting included a component of review for capricious disregard of evidence,6 in addition to the equally well established review for errors of law and manifest abuse of discretion. See Gaudenzia, Inc. v. Zoning Bd. of Adjustment of Phila., 4 Pa.Cmwlth. 355, 363-64, 287 A.2d 698, *198702-03 (1972) (citing Blumemchein v. Pittsburgh Housing Auth., 379 Pa. 566, 572-73, 109 A.2d 331, 334 (1954)). Review for capricious disregard clearly applied in cases in which evidence was presented by respective parties to support both a claim and defenses, see, e.g., Greap, 178 Pa.Super. at 157-58, 113 A.2d at 341, although in such circumstances, relief would infrequently be warranted, since the agency was to be accorded great deference in terms of its resolution of conflicts in the evidence and credibility determinations.7 As regards decisions unfavorable to the burdened party, review for capricious disregard assumed a more visible role, since, in such matters, the adjudication need not necessarily rest upon affirmative factual findings, but rather, could also be predicated upon the agency’s disbelief of the claimant’s evidence (i.e., a negative finding or conclusion).8 In such instances, Pennsylvania ap*199pellate courts often emphasized that their task was not to determine whether there was competent evidence that would support the requested relief (since it was denied), but rather, if there was capricious disregard in the refusal. See, e.g., Yanofchick v. State Workmen’s Ins. Fund, 174 Pa.Super. 182, 187,100 A.2d 387, 389 (1953).
With the promulgation of the Administrative Agency Law in 1978,9 the General Assembly identified express criteria for review which it directed would generally govern appeals from agency adjudications. See 2 Pa.C.S. §§ 701, 704. Section 704 of the Administrative Agency Law, governing the disposition of appeals, provides, inter alia, as follows:
After hearing, the court shall affirm the adjudication unless it shall find that the adjudication is in violation of the constitutional rights of the appellant, or is not in accordance with law, or that the provisions of Subchapter A of Chapter 5 (relating to practice and procedure of Commonwealth agencies) have been violated in the proceedings before the agency, or that any finding of fact made by the agency and necessary to support its adjudication is not supported by substantial evidence.
2 Pa.C.S. § 704.
Subsequently, in light of such statutory formulation, this Court criticized the Commonwealth Court’s adherence to a traditional statement of the appellate standard of review in an administrative context that included, as a component, review for capricious disregard. See McGovern’s Estate v. State Employees’ Retirement Bd., 512 Pa. 377, 381-82, 517 A.2d 523, 525 (1986). Further, in fairly cryptic terms, McGovern directed that it was no longer ever appropriate for appellate courts to apply a capricious disregard component in agency review.10 *200Nevertheless, within a year, this Court again described a standard of review subsuming examination for capricious disregard as applicable to review of agency adjudications unfavorable to the burdened party. See Odgers v. UCBR, 514 Pa. 378, 390, 525 A.2d 359, 365 (1987) (“The standard of review any appellate court must apply where the party with the burden of proof lost before the [agency], is whether the [agency] erred as a matter of law or capriciously disregarded competent evidence.”).
In Russell v. WCAB (Volkswagen of America), 121 Pa. Cmwlth. 436, 550 A.2d 1364 (1988), the Commonwealth Court undertook to reconcile McGovern with Odgers and other of this Court’s later statements. The court attempted to remain faithful to McGovern, indicating that its reading of Section 704 must unquestionably be applied to agency proceedings in which both parties present evidence. See Russell, 121 Pa. Cmwlth. at 438, 550 A.2d at 1365. Although Russell is not explicit in this regard, it also appears that the Commonwealth Court believed that the interpretation also had to be applied generally to cases in which an adjudication was against the burdened party, since that was McGovern’s fact paradigm. Nevertheless, the Commonwealth Court was concerned that strict application of McGovern to the discrete situation where a burdened party is the only party to present evidence and does not prevail before the agency would leave a substantial void in the review process. In such matters, Russell noted *201that application of the substantial evidence component of Section 704 was inapt:
If no evidence was presented to support the prevailing party, there is no evidence upon which to apply the “substantial evidence” test; i.e., it is impossible to find substantial evidence to support a position for which no evidence was introduced. In such cases, therefore, the appropriate scope of review, as set forth in ... Odgers, is whether the agency erred as a matter of law or capriciously disregarded competent evidence.
Russell, 121 Pa.Cmwlth. at 438-39, 550 A.2d at 1365. The Commonwealth Court subsequently characterized this review standard, which it has deemed applicable strictly in this discrete setting, as its capricious disregard standard of review. See, e.g., Linko v. WCAB (Roadway Express, Inc.), 153 Pa. Cmwlth. 552, 557, 621 A.2d 1188, 1190 (1993).
The Commonwealth Court’s effort in Russell was salutary in that it preserved essential judicial review for capricious disregard in at least one category of cases, and the formulation has been applied regularly. See id. The difficulty with the approach, however, is that agencies are not foreclosed from making affirmative factual findings in matters decided against the claimant. There are many instances in which agencies predicate negative conclusions (for example, that a party failed to meet his burden of proof) upon affirmative facts adduced from the claimant’s testimony and evidence, to include cross-examination. In such cases, Section 704 review for substantial evidence applies to all affirmative findings that are necessary to support the adjudication. See 2 Pa.C.S. § 704 (“the court shall affirm the adjudication unless it shall find that ... any finding of fact made by the agency and necessary to support its adjudication is not supported by substantial evidence”). Conversely, it is troubling to suggest that the General Assembly intended for judicial review to be simply unavailable in an instance in which substantial evidence supported the agency’s factual findings, but where it was clear beyond doubt that its conclusions were based upon capricious disregard of other evidence. Such a situation would occur, for example, if the *202agency expressly refused to resolve conflicts in the evidence and make essential credibility determinations.11 Additionally, given the inadequate foundation upon which the exception allowing for review for capricious disregard was crafted, fractured opinions have developed concerning the appropriate manner of its application, as again illustrated by this case.
As noted, Fraternal Order of Police clarified the appellate standard of review applicable in the administrative agency setting. See Fraternal Order of Police, 557 Pa. at 593, 735 A.2d at 99-100. Although its focus was directed to the component of Section 704 review requiring that agency conclusions must be “in accordance with law,” Justice Newman’s core explanation is highly relevant:
While [the in-accordance-with-law] standard has been described in a number of ways, its essential import is to establish limited appellate review of agency conclusions to ensure that they are adequately supported by competent factual findings, are free from, arbitrary and capricious decision making, and, to the extent relevant, represent a proper exercise of the agency’s discretion.
Id. at 593, 735 A.2d at 99 (citing Slawek v. Commonwealth, State Bd. of Med. Educ. and Licensure, 526 Pa. 316, 322, 586 A.2d 362, 365 (1991)). In further emphasizing the deferential character of the process, the Court explained that appellate courts are not free to invoke a generalized conception of reasonableness in order to substitute their judgment for that of an agency. See id. Nevertheless, recognition was also given to the boundaries of such discretion, as the Court explained that it remains within the purview of reviewing courts to consider whether a reasonable mind might make the same decision on the evidence before the agency. See id. at 593, 735 A.2d at 100 (citing Williams v. Commonwealth, State *203Civil Serv. Comm’n, 457 Pa. 470, 473, 327 A.2d 70, 72 (1974)). This, of course, overlaps with and, indeed, subsumes the traditional description of the “capricious disregard” facet of review.12 Indeed, in cases in which there has been a capricious disregard of competent, material evidence, the error is not only legal but structural and, pursuant to legislative design and long-standing principles, requires correction.
Since an adjudication cannot be in accordance with law if it is not decided on the basis of law and facts properly adduced, we hold that review for capricious disregard of material, competent evidence is an appropriate component of appellate consideration in every case in which such question is properly brought before the court.13 As at common law, this review will generally assume a more visible role on consideration of negative findings and conclusions.14 Even in such *204context, however, this limited aspect of the review serves only as one particular check to assure that the agency adjudication has been conducted within lawful boundaries — it is not to be applied in such a manner as would intrude upon the agency’s fact-finding role and discretionary decision-making authority.
Since review for capricious disregard was an appropriate function of the Commonwealth Court and the WCAB in the present case, it remains only to consider whether those tribunals were correct in their conclusion that the WCJ had exceeded the boundaries of her decision-making authority.
After an extensive recitation of Dr. Yates’ testimony, the WCAB summarily concluded that, because such testimony was unequivocal, the WCJ must have capriciously disregarded it in denying benefits. In reaching this decision, the WCAB failed to acknowledge that the WCJ based her disbelief upon the countervailing evidence presented by Employer pertaining to the nature of Claimant’s work and the degree to which she engaged in repetitive motion activities on a daily basis. Dr. Yates acknowledged that his assessment of work relatedness was dependent upon the character and intensity of Claimant’s activities at work, as related to him by Claimant. Therefore, the fact that Employer did not present medical testimony in rebuttal is not necessarily dispositive. Moreover, while the Commonwealth Court majority was correct in concluding that the WCAB addressed competency and not credibility, it erred in treating this distinction as controlling. To support its determination of capricious disregard in the circumstance of a negative finding, the Commonwealth Court should have considered the impact of Employer’s non-medical evidence.
We do acknowledge that, due to vagaries in the proofs, this is a close case, since uncontradicted, competent evidence was offered to establish the fact of the injury as well as Claimant’s performance of potentially aggravating activities during her tenure with Employer. Nevertheless, the conflicts in the evidence were substantial and could reasonably have been *205viewed by the WCJ, consistent with her explanation, as detrimental to Claimant’s overall credibility. It is most significant in this case, then, that the sole evidence of times of injury onset and aggravation derived from Claimant’s accounts and testimony, and that Claimant’s credibility was therefore an essential linchpin to the central question of work relatedness.
Since a determination of capricious disregard was unwarranted in this case, the orders of the WCAB and Commonwealth Court are reversed, and the matter remanded for reinstatement of the initial order of the WCJ.
Former Chief Justice FLAHERTY did not participate in the decision of this case.
Chief Justice ZAPPALA, and MADAME Justice NEWMAN file concurring opinions.
Justice CAPPY files a concurring opinion in which Justice NIGRO joins.
. Act of June 2, 1915, P.L. 736 (as amended, 77 P.S. §§ 1 — 1041.4) (the "Act”).
. This second joinder petition was eventually dismissed because Claimant failed to provide H & R Block with timely notice pursuant to Section 311 of the Act, 77 P.S. § 631.
. For example, the following interchange occurred:
Q. ... Specifically, Doctor, do you have any clear-cut and specific occupational history as to what [Claimant] did for any given employer at any particular point in time?
A. Only what she has told me and what her job description was, bookkeeping, et cetera.
Q. ... [Y]ou don’t know how much of the day she spent doing X activity versus Y activity, whether there were breaks or anything of that nature?
A. No, I do not.
. Judge Friedman also referred to other cases in which inconsistent standards were applied, including Crenshaw v. WCAB (Hussey Copper), 165 Pa.Cmwlth. 696, 645 A.2d 957 (1994), in which the court applied the standard as articulated in Iacono, and Tynan v. WCAB (Associated Cleaning Consultant and Services, Inc.), 162 Pa.Cmwlth. 393, 639 A.2d 856 (1994), and Van Duser v. UCBR, 164 Pa.Cmwlth. 96, 642 A.2d 544 (1994), in which the court did not consistently apply Iacono’s formulation.
. Section 422(a) states:
Neither the board nor any of its members nor any workers’ compensation judge shall be bound by the common law or statutory rules of evidence in conducting any hearing or investigation, but all findings of fact shall be based upon sufficient competent evidence to justify same. All parties to an adjudicatory proceeding are entitled to a reasoned decision containing findings of fact and conclusions of law based upon the evidence as a whole which clearly and concisely states and explains the rationale for the decisions so that all can determine why and how a particular result was reached. The workers' compensation judge shall specify the evidence upon which [he] relies and state the reasons for accepting it in conformity with this section. When faced with conflicting evidence, the workers’ compensation judge must adequately explain the reasons for rejecting or discrediting competent evidence. Uncontroverted evidence may not be rejected for no reason or for an irrational reason; the workers’ compensation judge must identify that evidence and explain adequately the reasons for its rejection. The adjudication shall provide the basis for meaningful appellate review.
77 P.S. § 834.
. See, e.g., Cairgle v. American Radiator & Standard Sanitary Corp., 366 Pa. 249, 252, 77 A.2d 439, 440 (1951) (explaining that "unless there is a capricious disregard of relevant, credible testimony, the findings of fact by the referee, adopted or affirmed by the Board, if based upon adequate and competent evidence, will be sustained on appeal” (citations omitted)); Greap v. Oberdorff, 178 Pa.Super. 153, 157-58, 113 A.2d 339, 341 (1955) (“The credibility of witnesses and the weight to be attached to their testimony is for the compensation authorities and not for the court[;] [o]f course there may not be a capricious disregard of competent evidence.”).
. As the Commonwealth Court has observed:
[T]he referee has a critical fact finding role; he alone hears the testimony and observes the witnesses firsthand. In proceedings pertaining to benefits, therefore, it is for the referee to determine the credibility and weight of the evidence. In exercising that broad discretion, he may accept or reject the testimony of any witness in whole or in part. This includes the testimony of expert medical witnesses.
Container Corp. of America v. WCAB, 59 Pa.Cmwlth. 367, 372, 429 A.2d 1264, 1265 (1981); see also Phillips v. WCAB (Century Steel), 554 Pa. 504, 507, 721 A.2d 1091, 1092 (1999) (as fact finder, the WCJ is free to reject the testimony of any witness, including a medical witness, in whole or in part, even where that testimony remains uncontradicted). See generally Borough of Tyrone v. UCBR, 52 Pa.Cmwlth. 18, 21, 415 A.2d 146, 148 (1980) (explaining that "[t]o accord greater credibility to one witness’ testimony than to that presented by others is simply a manifestation of the Board's fact-finding role and does not constitute a capricious disregard of evidence”); Aluminum Co. of America v. WCAB, 33 Pa.Cmwlth. 33, 38, 380 A.2d 941, 943 (1977).
. In this regard, we note that the unburdened party has no obligation to present any proof, and may prevail if the burdened party's evidence, while credible, is insufficient. See Inglis House v. WCAB (Reedy), 535 Pa. 135, 141, 634 A.2d 592, 594 (1993). See generally Barrett v. Otis Elevator Co., 431 Pa. 446, 450, 246 A.2d 668, 670-71 (1968); Walsh v. Penn Anthracite Mining Co., 147 Pa.Super. 328, 333, 24 A.2d 51, 53 (1942) (stating that “[wjhere the decision of the board is against the party having the burden of proof — in this case, the claimant — bearing in mind that a trier of fact is not required to accept even uncontradicted testimony as true, the question before the court is whether the board's findings of fact are consistent with each other and with its conclusions *199of law and its order, and can be sustained without a capricious disregard of the competent evidence” (citation omitted)).
. Act of April 28, 1978, P.L. 202, No. 53 (as amended 2 Pa.C.S. §§ 501-508, 701-704).
. In McGovern, the Court framed the issue on appeal as follows:
Commonwealth Court reversed the Board, holding that it capriciously disregarded the evidence .... We granted allocatur to examine *200whether Commonwealth Court applied the appropriate standard of review ....
McGovern, 512 Pa. at 381, 517 A.2d at 525. McGovern then quoted the Commonwealth Court's traditional statement of the appellate standard of review in cases in which the agency’s adjudication reflects a determination that the party bearing the burden of proof has failed to carry it, including the capricious disregard component, followed by a quotation of Section 704. See id. at 382, 517 A.2d at 525. Without further analysis, the Court concluded:
Because the standard of review articulated by the Commonwealth Court finds no support in the [Administrative Agency Law], we hold that Commonwealth Court’s review of the present case was conducted pursuant to an improper and illegal standard.
Id.
. Cf. Hamilton v. Procon, Inc., 434 Pa. 90, 99, 252 A.2d 601, 605 (1969) (stating, as a general proposition, that factual findings can be disturbed “if there has been a capricious disregard of competent evidence or if there is no evidence at all to support the finding”); In re Patterson's Estate, 333 Pa. 92, 93, 3 A.2d 320, 321 (1939) (characterizing a trial court's findings as "worthless” where there is a capricious disbelief of evidence).
. See, e.g., Arena v. Packaging Sys. Corp., 510 Pa. 34, 38, 507 A.2d 18, 20 (1986) (describing capricious disregard as a deliberate disregard of competent evidence which one of ordinary intelligence could not possibly have avoided in reaching a result); Kania v. Ebensburg State Sch. and Hasp., DPW, 49 Pa.Cmwlth. 136, 138, 410 A.2d 939, 940 (1980) ("A capricious disregard amounts to a willful or deliberate ignorance of evidence which a reasonable person would consider important.”). Although McGovern failed to acknowledge that review for capricious disregard is merely one sub-component of review for whether an adjudication is in accordance with law, the soundness of the disposition of the case is not in doubt. There, the Commonwealth Court erroneously discerned a capricious disregard of the evidence in an adjudication in which, not only was the central finding a negative one in the sense that the claimant had failed to sustain his burden of proof, but also, there appears to have been substantial evidence of record offered by the opposing party to support the contrary agency determination. See McGovern, 512 Pa. at 383-84, 517 A.2d at 525-26 (detailing such evidence). It is a quite different thing, nonetheless, to say that the capricious disregard standard is not met than that it should not be applied, and McGovern should not have suggested the latter.
. In light of the above, ihe exception crafted in Russell and reconciliation of its various permutations is no longer necessary. Indeed, as Judge Friedman noted, the General Assembly's emphasis upon a reasoned decision in the amendments to Section 422(a) of the Act evidences its intention that an appellate court must conduct its review in a manner that ensures that the agency has not exceeded its fact-finding role or the outer limits of its discretion.
. It bears repeating that, where there is substantial evidence to support an agency's factual findings, and those findings in turn support the *204conclusions, it should remain a rare instance in which an appellate court would disturb an adjudication based upon capricious disregard.

=== CASE 9737268 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:20:27.326309+00 ===

ZAPPALA, Chief Justice,
concurring.
I concur in the result reached by the majority. Simply put, the Workers’ Compensation Judge (WCJ) credited the testimony offered by Employer regarding the nature of Claimant’s duties and found the testimony of Claimant and her medical expert incredible. Having found that Employer’s evidence rebutted the factual predicate upon which Claimant’s medical expert based his opinion, the WCJ concluded that Claimant failed to sustain her burden of proving that she suffered carpal tunnel syndrome during the course and scope of her employment. Thus, the Workers’ Compensation Appeal Board and the Commonwealth Court erred in awarding workers’ compensation benefits based on the ground that the WCJ capriciously disregarded Claimant’s medical evidence. The fact that Employer presented factual evidence as opposed to medical evidence does not alter the analysis.
As to the application of the capricious disregard standard in the appropriate case, I would adhere to the case law holding that such standard applies only where the party with the *206burden of proof is the sole party to present evidence, yet does not prevail before the fact finder. See Russel v. Workmen’s Compensation Appeal Board, 121 Pa.Cmwlth. 436, 550 A.2d 1364 (1988) (holding that if no evidence was presented to support the prevailing party, there is no evidence upon which to apply the “substantial evidence” test and therefore the “capricious disregard” standard applies). The majority finds difficulty with this approach and states that “it is troubling to suggest that the General Assembly intended for judicial review to be simply unavailable in an instance in which substantial evidence supported the agency’s factual findings, but where it was clear beyond doubt that its conclusions were based upon capricious disregard of other evidence.” Majority opinion at 13. I do not share this concern because if substantial evidence exists to support the factual findings of the WCJ, the appellate tribunal should not delve into whether the WCJ capriciously disregarded “other evidence.”
I also do not view this Court’s decision in Fraternal Order of Police v. PLRB, 557 Pa. 586, 735 A.2d 96 (1999), as altering the capricious disregard standard. The majority concedes that Fraternal Order of Police did not involve such standard, but rather addressed the “in accordance with law” standard of review of administrative decisions. Majority opinion at 14. Finally, I would refrain from expanding the application of the capricious disregard standard, even on a limited basis, in a case where the factual predicate does not warrant it.1
. The majority specifically holds that "review for capricious disregard of material, competent evidence is an appropriate component of appellate consideration in every case in which such question is properly brought before the court.” Majority opinion at 15. I believe that such questions are only “properly before the court” when the party with the burden of proof is the sole party to present evidence, yet loses before the fact finder.

=== CASE 9737269 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:20:27.330685+00 ===

CAPPY, Justice,
concurring.
I join the majority opinion. I write separately for two reasons: first, to clarify my understanding of the proper place for the capricious disregard standard in the overarching statutory framework that governs appellate review of an agency’s *207adjudication, and second, to emphasize the narrow circumstances in which review for a capricious disregard of the evidence will lead to the reversal of an agency’s decision.
To set forth my understanding of where review for a capricious disregard of the evidence fits within the spectrum of appellate review, a brief discussion of the statutory framework governing appellate review of an agency adjudication is required. The legislature has narrowed the sphere of an appellate court’s review of an agency’s decision to four distinct and separate bases for reversal:
After hearing, the court shall affirm the adjudication unless it shall find that the adjudication is in violation of the constitutional rights of the appellant, or is not in accordance with law, or that the provisions of Subchapter A of Chapter 5 [relating to practice and procedure of Commonwealth agencies] have been violated in the proceedings before the agency, or that any finding of fact made by the agency and necessary to support its adjudication is not supported by substantial evidence.
2 Pa.C.S. § 704 (explanation supplied). Thus, the statute, viewed as setting forth an overarching framework in which to conduct appellate review, limits appellate review of an agency’s adjudication to: (1) constitutional determinations; (2) legal conclusions; (3) procedural regularity; and (4) findings of fact.1
In this appeal there is neither an assertion that the agency violated the constitutional rights of the Appellant nor a claim of irregular procedure in the agency proceedings. Therefore, only two of these four areas of review have been raised. Assertions have been raised regarding the legal conclusions reached by the workers’ compensation judge and it has been suggested that issues regarding findings of fact are implicated as well.
*208As to legal conclusions, section 704 states that an appellate court may review the agency decision to determine whether the adjudication is “in accordance with law.” Recently, our court has clarified the contours of an “in accordance with law” review. Fraternal Order of Police v. PLRB, 557 Pa. 586, 735 A.2d 96 (1999). The “essential import is to establish limited appellate review of agency conclusions to ensure that they are adequately supported by competent factual findings, are free from arbitrary or capricious decision making, and to the extent relevant, represent a proper exercise of the agency’s discretion.” Id. at 99 (emphasis supplied).
Thus, review for whether an agency’s legal conclusions are “in accordance with law” consists of at least three distinct facets. Stated another way, FOP sets forth certain inquiries to be applied in the appropriate situation: (1) whether the legal conclusions are supported by competent factual findings; (2) whether the legal conclusions were made in an arbitrary and capricious fashion; and/or (3) whether the legal conclusions were an abuse of discretion.
As to findings of fact, section 704 offers that an appellate court must affirm the agency’s adjudication, unless the appellate court determines that “any findings of fact made by the agency and necessary to support its adjudication is not supported by substantial evidence.” 2 Pa.C.S. § 704 (emphasis added). The statute itself provides the standard of review appropriate for findings of fact: the inquiry regarding an agency’s affirmative factual findings is whether they are supported by substantial evidence.
With this background, I write to clarify my understanding of the placement of review for a capricious disregard of the evidence within this framework because I believe there to be some confusion or disagreement into which statutory area a capricious disregard review falls. I am persuaded that while a capricious disregard review has as a component consideration of the evidence offered at a hearing, it is not an inquiry regarding an agency’s affirmative findings of fact. Rather, it is a review of the agency’s legal conclusions to determine whether in making those legal conclusions, the agency capri*209ciously disregarded evidence of record that would have clearly and beyond doubt commanded a different result. Being a review of legal conclusions, consideration of whether a tribunal capriciously disregarded evidence is a component of the in accordance with law review.
This conclusion is consistent with, and supported by, our decision in FOP. As stated in FOP, an appellate court will review to determine if the agency’s conclusions are, inter alia, free from arbitrary and capricious decision making. FOP, 735 A.2d at 99. As the majority in this appeal explains, the concept of legal conclusions being free from arbitrary and capricious decision making, and the related concept of the legal conclusions being reasonable, “overlaps with and, indeed, subsumes the traditional description of the ‘capricious disregard’ facet of review.” Majority Op. at 487 (emphasis supplied); id. n. 13 (capricious disregard sub-component of in accordance with law). Simply stated, if an agency capriciously disregards evidence in reaching its legal conclusions, its adjudication is capricious, and thus, not in accordance with law. It therefore cannot be affirmed. 2 Pa.C.S. § 704.2
In sum, it is my understanding that review for a capricious disregard of the evidence, at its core, does not entail consideration of the agency’s affirmative finding of facts, but instead goes to a review of the agency’s legal conclusions.3 It “is not *210only legal but structural and, pursuant to legislative design and long-standing principles, requires correction.” Majority Op. at 487.
Second, while I believe that review for whether the agency’s legal conclusions were made by a capricious disregard of the evidence is an appropriate appellate function, I, like the majority, recognize that such review has the potential for abuse. Thus, I emphasize that reversal by an appellate court of an agency’s determination by application of the capricious disregard standard will be the exceptional case. As stated by the majority, “where there is substantial evidence to support an agency’s factual findings [in accord with section 704], and those findings in turn support the [legal] conclusions [in accord with FOP], it should remain a rare instance in which an appellate court would disturb an adjudication based upon capricious disregard.” Majority Op. at 487 n. 14 (comments added). More precisely, reversal based on this type of review should occur only where it is “clear beyond doubt” that an agency’s legal conclusions were based upon capricious disregard of evidence — a very high bar. Id. at 486. As suggested by the majority, this might occur if “the agency expressly refused to resolve conflicts in the evidence and make essential credibility determinations.” Id. It might also be the case where the agency completely ignores overwhelming evidence *211without comment. Thus, reversal based upon review for a capricious disregard of the evidence would be an exceedingly rare event.4
Finally, I envision reversal for a capricious disregard of evidence to be the exception for an additional reason. The agency’s finder of fact is bound by section 422(a) of the Workers’ Compensation Act (the “Act”). 77 P.S. § 1 et seq. This provision requires, inter alia, a reasoned decision containing findings of fact and conclusions of law based upon the evidence as a whole. Specifically:
All parties to an adjudicatory proceeding are entitled to a reasoned decision containing findings of fact and conclusions of law based upon the evidence as a whole which clearly and concisely states and explains the rationale for the decisions so that all can determine why and how a particular result was reached. The workers’ compensation judge shall specify the evidence upon which he relies and state the reasons for accepting it in conformity with this section. When faced with conflicting evidence, the workers’ compensation judge must adequately explain the reasons for rejecting or discrediting competent evidence. Uncontroverted evidence may not be rejected for no reason or for an irrational reason; the workers’ compensation judge must identify that evidence and explain adequately the reasons for its rejection.
77 P.S. § 834 (emphasis supplied). Thus, if a workers’ compensation judge considers all the evidence offered by the parties, sets forth reasons for making factual determinations, including rational reasons for the rejection of uncontroverted evidence, then it is likely there will be no grounds for an *212appellate court to overturn his or her legal conclusions on the basis of a capricious disregard of the evidence.
In sum, there is a place for appellate review of whether an agency capriciously disregarded the evidence in reaching its legal conclusions and this review is part of the “in accordance with law” sphere of review. Furthermore, I believe that reversal of an agency’s adjudication on this basis must be the rare exception, and will be so, in part, because of the dictates of section 422(a) of the Act.
Justice NIGRO joins this concurring opinion.
. See generally, Martha S. Davis, Standards of Review: Judicial Review of Discretionary Decisionmaking, 2 J. App. Prac. & Process 47, 47-49 (2000)(dividing appellate review into three parts: review of facts, review of law, and review of discretion, each with varying level of deference to the action or decision under review).
. It is for this reason that I cannot agree with Madame Justice Newman’s contention that review for a capricious disregard of evidence is not the application of a standard of review, but a legal conclusion. I believe that it can be conceptualized as both. Specifically, while not all standards of review describe a standard and a legal conclusion (see the de novo standard of review applicable to pure questions of law), other standards do have a dual meaning. The standard of review described as an “abuse of discretion’’ sharpens the point. An appellate court may review a trial court’s admission of evidence to determine if the trial court committed an abuse of discretion. The standard of review is the "abuse of discretion” standard. If the appellate court determines the trial court erred, the legal conclusion is that the trial court "abused its discretion.”
. The concept of appellate review for whether an agency’s conclusions are supported by “substantial evidence” has become part of the appellate court lexicon. See Wilson Area School District v. Easton Hospital, 561 Pa. 1, 747 A.2d 877, 879 (2000) (decision is supported by substantial evidence); Mallios v. Pa. State Police, Bureau of Liquor Control *210Enforcement, 534 Pa. 616, 633 A.2d 1163, 1165 (1993)(whether order of Board is supported by substantial evidence). Use of the "substantial evidence” verbiage to describe both review of an agency’s affirmative findings of fact and review of an agency’s legal conclusions unnecessarily confuses matters. I believe it far more desirable to keep the inquiry regarding findings of fact distinct from the inquiry regarding conclusions of law and to use distinct terms with respect to each area. To keep the inquiries separate, and to create a common lexicon, I would suggest using the terminology "substantial evidence” only with respect to the deferential review of an agency’s findings of fact. This position is of course, grounded in section 704. 2 Pa.C.S. § 704 (whether findings of fact are supported by substantial evidence). For review of an agency's legal conclusions, i.e., whether the conclusions are in accordance with law, I would advocate use of the terms articulated in FOP. That is review, where appropriate, to determine if the agency’s legal conclusions are adequately supported by competent factual findings, are arbitrary and capricious, or constitute an abuse of discretion. FOP, 735 A.2d at 99.
. It is for this reason that I believe that Chief Jusüce Zappala's position unnecessarily circumscribes appellate review. I, like the majority, envision a situation in which a tribunal disregards overwhelming evidence of record without comment which, if considered, would command a different result. Without the tool of review for a capricious disregard of the evidence, an appellate court would be limited to a review of whether the affirmative findings of fact made by ihe judge were supported by the substantial evidence. Consideration of the overwhelming contra-evidence, not found by the agency as facts, would be precluded.

=== CASE 9737270 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:20:27.335667+00 ===

MADAME, Justice Newman,
concurring.
While I agree with the Majority that a determination of capricious disregard was unwarranted in this case, I write separately to further make it clear that I believe there is no capricious disregard standard of review of agency decisions. The appropriate standard of review in appeals from agency decisions, which has been previously articulated by this Court, is set forth in Section 5 of the Administrative Agency Law, 2 Pa.C.S. § 704. See, e.g., Fraternal Order of Police v. Pennsylvania Labor Relations Board, 557 Pa. 586, 735 A.2d 96 (1999) (hereinafter FOP)-, Estate of McGovern v. State Employees’ Retirement Board, 512 Pa. 377, 517 A.2d 523 (1986). Section 5 of the Administrative Agency Law, 2 Pa.C.S. § 704 (Disposition of Appeal), as indicated by the Majority, states:
The court shall hear the appeal without a jury on the record certified by the Commonwealth agency. After hearing, the court shall affirm the adjudication unless it shall find that the adjudication is in violation of the constitutional rights of the appellant, or is not in accordance with law, or that the provisions of Subchapter A of Chapter 5 (relating to practice and procedure of Commonwealth agencies) have been violated in the proceedings , before the agency, or that any finding of fact made by the agency and necessary to support its adjudication is not supported by substantial evidence. If the adjudication is not affirmed, the court may *213enter any order authorized by 42 Pa.C.S. § 706 (relating to disposition of appeals).
2 Pa.C.S. § 704 (emphasis added). As expressed in FOP, “[The] essential import [of this standard] is to establish limited appellate review of agency conclusions to ensure that they are adequately supported by competent factual findings, are free from arbitrary or capricious decision making, and, to the extent relevant, represent a proper exercise of the agency’s discretion.” FOP, 735 A.2d at 99 (emphasis added). As recognized by the majority, inherent as an element of that review process, is an examination of the evidence produced relative to the findings of the WCJ to see whether the WCJ capriciously disregarded competent evidence. It is only in performing a substantial evidence analysis that the appellate court, inter alia, looks to see that conclusions are adequately supported, constitutional rights were protected, legal precepts were properly invoked and applied, and factual findings are free from arbitrary or capricious decision making. FOP. But the touchstone of any agency adjudication remains that substantial evidence must support the findings made by the WCJ.
The Commonwealth Court has developed a line of cases holding that, where the burdened party is the only one to produce evidence and loses before the WCJ, the substantial evidence standard of review is inapplicable because there is no substantial evidence on which to base the findings of the lower tribunal. See, e.g., Cerasaro v. Workers’ Compensation Appeal Board (Pocono Mountain Medical, Ltd.), 717 A.2d 1111 (Pa.Cmwlth.1998); CRL of Maryland v. Workmen’s Compensation Appeal Board (Hopkins), 156 Pa.Cmwlth.441, 627 A.2d 1238 (1993); Butler v. Workmen’s Compensation Appeal Board (Commercial Laundry, Inc.), 67 Pa.Cmwlth.393, 447 A.2d 683 (1982). That court articulated its reasoning as follows:
[W]here the burdened party is the only party to present evidence and does not prevail before the agency, the “substantial evidence” test falters. If no evidence was presented to support the prevailing party, there is no evidence upon *214which to apply the “substantial evidence” test; i.e., it is impossible to find substantial evidence to support a position for which no evidence was introduced. In such cases, therefore, the appropriate [standard] of review ... is whether the agency erred as a matter of law or capriciously disregarded competent evidence.
Russell v. Workmen’s Compensation Appeal Board (Volkswagen of America), 121 Pa.Cmwlth. 436, 550 A.2d 1364, 1365 (1988).
The Commonwealth Court’s capricious disregard standard represented a departure from previous Commonwealth Court cases that applied the decision of this Court in Estate of McGovern v. State Employees’ Retirement Board, 512 Pa. 377, 517 A.2d 523 (1986). In Kirkwood v. Unemployment Compensation Board of Review, 106 Pa.Cmwlth. 92, 525 A.2d 841 (1987), the Commonwealth Court examined the standard of review articulated in McGovern, within the context of whether one or both parties presented evidence, and reasoned:
Two possible scenarios present themselves when the burdened party fails to prevail: (a) where the evidence of the burdened party, even if believed, and substantially supporting the facts asserted, nonetheless is not sufficient, as a matter of law, to meet the imposed burden, and, (b) where the burdened party does present substantial and sufficient evidence as a matter of law, but the factfinder nonetheless finds against that party.... [T]o prevail, the burdened party must meet both [her] burden of production (i.e., present sufficient evidence) and [her] burden of persuasion (i.e., present credible evidence).... [W]here the burdened party did not prevail before the agency, we must assess whether [her] failure to prevail below is due to: (1) the legal insufficiency of the evidence or, (2) the lack of credibility of the evidence....
Kirkwood, 525 A.2d at 844 (footnotes omitted).
This analysis says nothing about a capricious disregard of competent evidence. The review properly focuses on the burdened party and the success or failure of that party to *215meet her requisite burden of proof. The Commonwealth Court went on to say:
When, however, the burdened party did present sufficient evidence as a matter of law and yet failed to prevail below, we then must determine whether the reason for the adverse determination stems from the factfinder’s opinion that the evidence presented was not credible, or, whether instead the factfinder committed an error of law in applying the proper principle of law to the facts presented.... If specific credibility determinations appear that support the result of the adjudication, then we may affirm the decision below on the basis that the burdened party failed in [her] burden to persuade the factfinder.
Id. (Emphasis omitted.) This appears to articulate a clear understanding of the appropriate standard of review, regardless of whether one party or both parties produce evidence. Thus, where a party, with the burden of proof, is the only party to present evidence and does not prevail, that party has either failed to meet her burden of production or her burden of persuasion. Because a defendant has no burden of production or persuasion, at least until the plaintiff has sufficiently met both of her burdens, the burden of persuasion may not shift to the defendant to produce sufficient credible evidence or lose, before plaintiff has satisfied both those burdens.
The majority cites to Odgers v. Unemployment Compensation Board of Review, 514 Pa. 378, 525 A.2d 359 (1987), as a case in which this court emphasized “capricious disregard as applicable to review of agency adjudications unfavorable to the burdened party.” (Majority opinion, page 485.) However, a review of Odgers indicates that this Court was concentrating on an error of law analysis, rather than one of “capricious disregard.” A few months later, this Court issued its opinion in Farquhar v. Workmen’s Compensation Appeal Board (Corning Glass Works), 515 Pa. 315, 528 A.2d 580 (1987), one in which the employer presented no witnesses, testimony or other evidence. While indicating that the standard of review had been expressed in varying language, we stated that, “At the very least the findings and conclusions of the fact finder *216must have a rational basis in the evidence of record and demonstrate an appreciation and correct application of underlying principles of substantive law to that evidence.” Id. at 584-85. Barely three years later, this Court, in Pieper v. Ametek-Thermox Instruments Div., 526 Pa. 25, 584 A.2d 301 (1990), relied upon Odgers for the proposition that a Section 5, substantial evidence, standard of review was the appropriate standard. Moreover, Pieper involved a workers’ compensation claim in which the employer presented no medical expert testimony.
A review of the origins of a capricious disregard analysis sheds light, I believe, on the context and manner of its application. In the late 1800s, at least as far as published opinions of that era reveal, cases that were improperly submitted to a jury or in which the jury rendered a judgment that resulted in a judgment non obstante veredicto (JNOV), were often reversed by a finding that the jury capriciously disregarded the evidence or lack of evidence in their determinations. This gave rise to the adage that widows and orphans make bad law. See, i.e., Pennsylvania Railroad Co. v. Beale, 73 Pa. 504 (1873) (reversing jury award in favor of widow and children of deceased where jury capriciously disregarded the fact that decedent’s failure to stop immediately before crossing a railroad track was negligence per se); Pennsylvania Railroad Co. v. Mooney, 126 Pa. 244, 17 A. 590 (1889) (reversing a judgment of $8,000 for the widow of a man struck and killed by a train where the lower court should have granted a JNOV); McNeal v. Pittsburgh & W.R. Co., 131 Pa. 184, 18 A. 1026 (1890) (reversing jury award of damages for widow and children of man killed in railway crossing accident). In cases such as these, this Court repeatedly said that:
[W]here the testimony in support of an action is a mere scintilla and that opposed to it so overwhelming that no real controversy is raised, and where the jury could not find for the plaintiff without a capricious disregard of apparently truthful testimony, probable in itself and not at variance with any admitted or proved facts, a verdict may be directed for the defendant.
*217Cromley v. Pennsylvania R. Co., 211 Pa. 429, 60 A. 1007 (1905) (citing Lonzer v. Lehigh Valley Railroad Co., 196 Pa. 610, 46 A. 937 (1900)) (emphasis added). See also Holland v. Kindregan, 155 Pa. 156, 25 A. 1077 (1893). The operative word in this analysis is “capricious.” The clear meaning of capricious disregard that is gleaned from these early cases is that the fact finder intentionally and willfully overlooked overwhelming controlling law or evidence to the contrary to arrive at its intended result. This is not an application of a standard of review, but a legal conclusion. Moreover, there is no evidence in the matter sub judice that the WCJ intentionally overlooked controlling law, or evidence to the contrary, to achieve a desired outcome.
This Court has also said that, “[t]he rule stated in [Lonzer], that a verdict may be directed where a different conclusion could not be reached by the jury without a capricious disregard of [facts] ... does not apply where there is a conflict of testimony .... ” Heh v. Consolidated Gas Co., 201 Pa. 443, 50 A. 994, 995 (1902) (emphasis added). In the instant matter, the WCJ determined that the testimony of Claimant was less than credible. Claimant went to work for Wintermyer in 1991 after she was aware that she had CTS. In fact, she informed Wintermyer that she had CTS when she was hired. The determination of the WCJ to deny benefits was a direct result of the testimony of Employer’s witnesses as to the repetitive task requirements of Claimant’s job and went directly to the work-relatedness of the injury. The WCJ is not bound to believe every story that a witness or witnesses willingly swears to, simply because no other witness contradicts it. Having discredited Claimant’s testimony concerning the causation of her underlying CTS and its direct relationship to her job, as well as other important aspects of her testimony, the WCJ discredited the testimony of Dr. Yates because Dr. Yates’ opinion that Claimant’s CTS was a work-related injury was based entirely upon the discredited testimony of Claimant. The WCJ did not discredit the testimony of Dr. Yates because it was equivocal. The sole issue here was credibility, not unequivocality
*218I would reiterate that this Court has rejected the “capricious disregard” standard as applied by the Commonwealth Court beginning with McGovern and continuing to the present, even where only one party produced evidence. Moreover, it must be remembered that the defendant is not required to produce any evidence, including medical evidence, because it bears no burden of proof. Our workers’ compensation jurisprudence has not held that, irrespective of the credibility determinations of the lay witnesses and of the claimant, if a physician testifies that the claimant was injured at work, then, despite a lack of factual foundation for that testimony, the testimony of the physician must be accepted and the claim granted. In the instant matter, the decision of the Commonwealth Court and the Board would set an untenable precedent of requiring the production of medical testimony by the defense or face the imposition of liability. Regardless of how many parties present evidence, the WCJ must issue findings of fact. It is these findings of fact that must be supported by substantial evidence, whether or not the evidence is controverted. If the findings of fact that are necessary to support an adjudication are supported by substantial evidence in the record, then the adjudication will be supported by substantial evidence, even if that evidence demonstrates that the party with the burden of proof has failed to carry its burden.
Substantial evidence can support a negative finding by a tribunal charged with deciding the outcome of a particular cause of action. Insufficient evidence presented by the burdened party is ascertainable and provides substantial evidence to support a finding that the plaintiff failed to carry his or her burden of production and the plaintiffs case has failed. Sufficient evidence presented by the burdened party that is not credited by the fact finder is also ascertainable and provides substantial evidence that the burdened party has failed to sustain his or her burden of persuasion. When the Commonwealth Court opined that, where “no evidence was presented to support the prevailing party, there is no evidence upon which to apply the ‘substantial evidence’ test,” Russell, 550 A.2d at 1865, the focus of the court’s review was misdirected. *219That is because a capricious disregard analysis shifts the focus to the actions of the fact finder, rather than remain attentive to the sufficiency or credibility of the evidence presented. As the majority discerns, a capricious disregard analysis is an “appropriate component” of appellate consideration when undertaking a review pursuant to the substantial evidence standard of review. But it is only a mechanism to facilitate review. Because the capricious disregard analysis is applied to the findings of fact, credibility determinations and evidentiary weight of the proceedings at issue, it is not a standard of review but a tool to be utilized in determining that substantial evidence supports the ultimate determination. The substantial evidence standard is set forth in Section 5 of the Administrative Agency Law, 2 Pa.C.S. § 704 and that is the standard we must apply.

=== CASE 2209619 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:41.567155+00 ===

231 Ind. 105 (1952)
107 N.E.2d 168
RUDD
v.
STATE OF INDIANA.
No. 28,768.
Supreme Court of Indiana.
Filed August 4, 1952.
*107 Clarence E. Benadum and Frederick F. McClellan, Jr., both of Muncie, for appellant.
J. Emmett McManamon, Attorney General; John Ready O'Connor and William T. McClain, Deputy Attorneys General, for appellee.
EMMERT, J.
The grand jury of Madison County, for the April 1949 term, returned an indictment in three counts charging appellant with murder in the second degree, voluntary manslaughter and involuntary manslaughter. Appellant seasonably filed a plea in abatement to the indictment, wherein he charged violations of several statutes prescribing the duties of the jury commissioners and the clerk. After a hearing the trial court overruled the plea in abatement, and appellant entered a plea of not guilty to each count of the indictment. Appellant was then tried by a jury, which returned a verdict that he was guilty of murder in the second degree, and from the judgment on this verdict this appeal is prosecuted.
The only issue properly presented here is the legality of the grand jury that indicted appellant. "It is well settled that this court will indulge all reasonable presumptions in favor of the regularity and validity of proceedings in the lower courts, and will not reverse a judgment unless the record affirmatively shows that material errors intervened in such proceedings." Ford v. State (1887), 112 Ind. 373, 376, 14 N.E. 241. Ewbank, Ind. Cr. Law (2d Ed.) § 198, pp. 121, 122.
We have carefully examined the record of all the evidence heard on the plea in abatement, and from the uncontroverted evidence it appears that clear statutory provisions were disregarded concerning the selection and placing of names in the jury box, the security provisions *108 for keeping the jury box locked, the drawing of names for jury service, and the calling of such persons for grand jury service.
Charles C. Harrold, Clerk of the court, and Ray Houston, a jury commissioner, were members of the same political party, and Vernet Turner, the other jury commissioner, was not an "adherent of the same political party as the clerk." Turner was appointed commissioner in February, 1948, but he was never instructed by the court as to his duties as required by § 4-3301, Burns' 1946 Replacement. There is some dispute in the evidence as to why or whose fault it was that Turner did not have the key to the jury box as required by § 4-3304 and § 4-3305, Burns' 1946 Replacement,[1] but it clearly appears from the evidence that he did not begin keeping the key in his possession until after the return of the indictment against appellant on April 22, 1949. Before this time the clerk had the key. The jury box was not emptied during the last term of court for 1948 before more names were placed therein for jury service for the next calendar year, as required by § 4-3304, Burns' 1946 Replacement. State v. Bass (1936), 210 Ind. 181, 184, 1 N.E.2d 927. Both jury commissioners obtained the names from the tax schedules in the county assessor's office, but neither did so in the presence of the other at any time, and it must be inferred that these names were placed in the jury box by each without the other being present. This was a violation of § 4-3304, Burns' 1946 Replacement. The jury commissioner Turner was not present nor was he notified to be present on March 28, 1949, when the grand jury for the April term was drawn from the jury *109 box.[2] The order book record disclosed that the name of Walter Stohler was drawn second from the box for the April term grand jury, but he was never called nor did he ever serve as a grand juror at the April term nor at any other time in 1949.[3] At various times if the clerk or a jury commissioner knew a name as drawn from the box was of a deceased person, or had a guardian appointed for him or was insane, by mutual agreement such name was stricken off the list as drawn without any court order being had. There was no exclusion of members of the Negro race for jury service, nor was there any bad faith, fraud or corruption in any of the acts or omissions of the clerk or either jury commissioner.
The state's position is that none of the acts or omissions were done in bad faith or harmful to the substantial *110 rights of appellant, that the acts or omissions were merely irregularities, and that, therefore, the trial court properly refused to abate the indictment. The state insists that § 4-3321, Burns' 1946 Replacement, justifies the action of the trial court. This section in part provides:
"... This act shall be construed liberally, to the effect that no indictment shall be quashed, and no trial, judgment, order or proceeding shall be reversed or held invalid on the ground that the terms of this act have not been followed, unless it shall appear that such noncompliance was either in bad faith or was objected to promptly upon discovery and was probably harmful to the substantial rights of the objecting party." (Section 2, Ch. 156, Acts 1937.)
However, it should be noted that this section only applies to Chapter 156 of the 1937 Acts, and the only section of this act involved in this appeal concerns the time, manner, method, place, recording, and summonsing of the grand and petit juries in such numbers as may have been fixed by order of court. Since no bad faith was involved, and since appellant did promptly object by proper procedure to the statutory violations, we must determine whether the violations of § 4-3320, Burns' 1946 Replacement, were probably harmful to the substantial rights of appellant. Unfortunately, we are not able to obtain much help from the precedents of this state, since each case was decided with reference to its particular facts, and the language of the opinions must be understood in the light of the particular facts involved.
It is difficult to imagine that the General Assembly, after prescribing the procedure to be followed by § 4-3320, *111 Burns' 1946 Replacement, to insure judicial fairness in drawing and calling grand and petit juries, then by § 4-3321, Burns' 1946 Replacement, intended to say that none of these requirements mean anything for an accused unless he could prove at a hearing on his plea in abatement that he was innocent and ought not have been indicted in the first place. It seems to us that the proper construction is to hold that an accused, regardless of his guilt or innocence, has the right to insist that there be substantial compliance with § 4-3320, Burns' 1946 Replacement, and if these provisions are not substantially complied with, his substantial rights are harmed.
In Anderson v. State (1941), 218 Ind. 299, 32 N.E.2d 705, this court, after a review of the authorities, and after noting the provisions of Chapter 156 of the 1937 Acts, held that appellant's substantial rights had not been violated by failure to properly enter and certify the names on the order book, and to give two days' notice of one drawing.[4] The opinion quoted with approval the language of Judge Mitchell in Cooper v. State (1889), 120 Ind. 377, 379, 22 N.E. 320, which is as follows:
"The intervention of mere irregularities in drawing and organizing the grand jury, which *112 involve no charge of fraud or corruption, and which in no way prejudice the substantial rights of the defendant, assuming, in the absence of anything appearing to the contrary, that the body as constituted was composed of persons duly examined and qualified, and not subject to any of the statutory causes of challenge, is not available as a plea to abate the indictment. Whart. Cr. Pl. and Pr. (9th ed.), section 350; State v. Mellor, 13 R.I. 666."
But in the Cooper case, supra, it is quite clear that the plea in abatement was not timely filed, and it failed to allege absence of substantial compliance with the law on grand juries.[5]
Since there was not subtantial compliance with the statutes on grand juries we are of the opinion that the substantial rights of appellant were harmed, both under § 4-3321, Burns' 1946 Replacement, and under the test laid down in Cooper v. State *113 (1889), 120 Ind. 377, 379, 22 N.E. 320, supra, and subsequent cases following its reasoning. A lack of substantial compliance is more than an irregularity. These matters were promptly presented before a plea of not guilty, and the alleged offense could have been promptly presented to another grand jury lawfully constituted before the expense of a jury trial. As was stated in State v. Bass (1936), 210 Ind. 181, 184, 1 N.E.2d 927, "Our statutory method of drawing juries was devised for the purpose of putting the selection beyond suspicion of advantage or favoritism." The only way this court has to enforce substantial compliance with the statutes on juries is to reverse when the issue is properly presented in the trial court and here.
Appellant's brief fails to comply with Rule 2-17 (e) in presenting his causes for a new trial that the verdict was not sustained by sufficient evidence, and was contrary to law. Approximately one-half page in the "argument" section is devoted to each cause. Neither cause is supported by applicable points of fact or law. Such causes for new trial are waived. Rule 2-17 (f); Hartsfield v. State (1950), 228 Ind. 616, 94 N.E.2d 453.
Judgment reversed, with instructions to abate the indictment.
NOTE.  Reported in 107 N.E.2d 168.
NOTES
[1]  "... The key shall be retained by one of the commissioners not an adherent of the same political party as is the clerk." Section 4-3304, Burns' 1946 Replacement.
[2]  "... the clerks, having first well shaken the box, shall open the same in his office, and in the presence of the jury commissioners he shall publicly draw therefrom such number of names of competent persons as the judge of such court shall have ordered to be summoned as prospective jurors for such court...." Section 4-3320, Burns' 1946 Replacement.
[3]  "... At such original drawing for the term, the names of competent persons first drawn for each court having criminal jurisdiction, in the number specified by the court in such order as prospective grand jurors, shall be summoned as grand jurors for such court for the ensuing term.... Provided, That the order of the names as listed in the panel and as called for service shall be the same order as that in which the names are drawn from the box, as herein provided. The clerk shall at the time of drawing such prospective jurors, enter a list of names so drawn, upon the order-book of the court, in the same order in which the names are drawn from the box, and he shall attach his certificate of the fact. The clerk shall issue venires for such jurors as such courts, or the judges thereof in vacation, may direct. The sheriff or bailiff shall then call the jurors to the jury box in the same order as that in which their names are drawn from the box and certified thereto." Section 4-3320, Burns' 1946 Replacement (§ 1, Ch. 156, Acts 1937).
[4]  "The departures from statutory procedure were that the clerk failed at the time of the first drawing then to enter the names drawn on the order book, that the second drawing did not have two full days' notice, and that in the third, the clerk's entry was delayed. All matters were of record, however, on September 5, 1939, [the indictment was returned December 1, 1939] except the clerk's certificate to the last entry. The plea in abatement was filed December 8th, and thereafter upon the order of the court the clerk's certificate to the record of the third drawing was entered as of the date of the drawing." Anderson v. State (1941), 218 Ind. 299, 303, 32 N.E.2d 705.
[5]  In Weer v. State (1941), 219 Ind. 217, 36 N.E.2d 787, this court held that appellant's substantial rights had not been harmed because the court ordered twelve grand jurors drawn, and the order book did not show the names of those who did serve, nor was he harmed by the fact that the drawing was done in a small wood and glass enclosure in the clerk's office used by him for private conferences.
In Dale v. State (1928), 200 Ind. 408, 164 N.E. 260, a plea in abatement which alleged no record whatever of the names of the grand jury in the order book, was sufficient to abate the indictment. This clearly was no substantial compliance.
In State v. Bass (1936), 210 Ind. 181, 1 N.E.2d 927, the plea in abatement alleged that "there was opportunity for names to be inserted in the box by others than the jury commissioners; that the names of two who were active in seeking an investigation of the matters involved in the indictment were in the box," and that the name of one of the jury commissioners was drawn from the box for both petit and grand jury service. This court held such violations made the grand jury an unlawful jury, and its indictment subject to abatement.

=== CASE 2209625 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:41.635291+00 ===

812 A.2d 953 (2002)
Jimmy PEARSALL, Appellant,
v.
UNITED STATES, Appellee.
Nos. 98-CF-317, 98-CO-1225.
District of Columbia Court of Appeals.
Argued June 19, 2001.
Decided December 19, 2002.
*956 M. Elizabeth Kent, Washington, DC, appointed by the court, for appellant.
Valinda Jones, Assistant United States Attorney, with whom Wilma A. Lewis, United States Attorney at the time the brief was filed, and John R. Fisher and *957 Peter R. Zeidenberg, Assistant United States Attorneys, were on the brief, for appellee.
Before WAGNER, Chief Judge, and TERRY and REID, Associate Judges.
WAGNER, Chief Judge:
Following a jury trial, appellant, Jimmy Pearsall, was convicted of conspiracy to commit armed robbery (D.C.Code §§ 22-2901,[1] -3202[2] (1996)), second-degree burglary while armed (D.C.Code §§ 22-1801(b),[3] -3202) (1996), kidnaping while armed (D.C.Code §§ 22-1801, -3202) (1996); attempted armed robbery, as a lesser included offense of armed robbery (D.C.Code §§ 22-2901, -3202) (1996), first-degree felony murder while armed (D.C.Code §§ 22-2401,[4] -3202) (1996), carrying a pistol without a license ("CPWL") (D.C.Code § 22-3204(a)[5] (1996)), and possession of a firearm during the commission of a crime of violence or dangerous offense ("PFCV") (D.C.Code § 22-3204(b) (1996)).[6] He argues that his conviction of conspiracy must be vacated because it is barred by a criminal law doctrine known as Wharton's Rule, an exception to the general principle that a conspiracy and the substantive offense which is its object are discrete crimes for which separate punishments may be imposed. He also contends that the conspiracy count of the indictment was defective, that the evidence was insufficient to support his conviction of armed kidnaping and that the trial court erred in denying, without a hearing, his motion to vacate his convictions pursuant to D.C.Code § 23-110. We hold that Wharton's Rule does not apply, and hence does not require the dismissal of the conspiracy charge in this case. Further, finding no other reversible error, we affirm.
I.
Israel Jones was fatally shot in the head in his apartment on Chesapeake Street, S.W. Keith Barnes, who entered a plea of guilty to second-degree murder while armed and conspiracy to commit armed robbery in connection with Jones' murder, testified at Pearsall's trial. According to Barnes' testimony, on the evening of the murder, April 11, 1996, he, appellant, Carpenter and Mitchell were together when Carpenter suggested that they rob Jones, whom Carpenter had seen selling drugs earlier that day. Barnes testified that they all agreed with Carpenter's plan and that the four of them drove to Chesapeake Street to look for Jones. Barnes testified that he was armed with a .38 revolver; appellant had a .357 revolver; and Carpenter had a semi-automatic pistol. When they arrived at Jones' apartment, no one was there, and Carpenter told appellant and Mitchell to go to South Capitol Street to look for Jones. Barnes testified that meanwhile, he kicked in the door to Jones' apartment, and he and Carpenter searched *958 it for drugs and money. Barnes testified that when appellant and Mitchell returned to the apartment with Jones, appellant had a gun in his hand, and Jones looked scared. He testified that Jones was taken into the bedroom, and Carpenter demanded his money. At some point, Carpenter took appellant's .357 revolver and put it in Jones' mouth. Barnes testified that he heard a shot from the bedroom a few minutes after he and Mitchell left the bedroom to search the living room. Barnes testified that he ran into the bedroom where Jones was lying on his back near the closet. He testified that he and the other three men left the apartment through the bedroom window.
Jones' sister, Quiovalee Jones, testified about events which occurred shortly before the shooting. She testified that appellant and Mitchell were looking for Jones and found him. She said that as she and appellant walked behind Mitchell and her brother, she overheard Mitchell tell her brother, "If you don't come with us, it's going to be the Fourth of July out here. . . ." She testified that her brother said that he did not want to go to see Carpenter. Only after Jones' friend, James Young, agreed to accompany Jones and the other men did Jones get into a car with appellant and Mitchell. James Young testified and corroborated Ms. Jones' testimony about Jones agreeing to get in the car if Young came along. Young also testified that after driving a short distance, Mitchell pulled over and ordered him out of the car, while appellant, who was holding a gun, placed his arm around Jones' neck.
Following his arrest, appellant gave a videotaped statement to the police which the jury viewed at trial. In his statement, appellant admitted that he agreed with Carpenter, Mitchell and Barnes to rob Jones and that Carpenter gave him a .357 revolver to use. Appellant also stated he and Mitchell found Jones on South Capitol Street and that Jones did not want to get into the car with them; however, after he reassured Jones' sister that her brother would be all right, Jones went along. Appellant said that Young was ordered out of the car and that Mitchell told Young "we got to handle our business." Appellant also recounted in his statement that when they were inside Jones' apartment, Carpenter was demanding money from Jones in the bedroom, and he was facing the living room, when he heard a loud noise, turned around and saw Jones fall. He also said that he heard Carpenter say that he shot Jones.
At trial, appellant provided a different account of the events that evening. He admitted that he rode with Carpenter, Barnes and Mitchell to Jones' apartment and that he went to get Jones, who was not at home. However, appellant testified that he thought the other men were just going to pick up money that Jones owed them and that he stayed in the car when Carpenter and Barnes went inside. Appellant described the ride back to Jones' apartment as friendly, and he said that no one had a gun. He also testified that when they returned to Jones' apartment, only Jones and Mitchell went inside and that he stayed in the car for about ten minutes and then left. Appellant explained that he gave the statement to the police because they would not believe him, and they told him to go along with what the others had said about the murder. However, appellant acknowledged on cross-examination that the police did not threaten him and that he had consulted with his mother and uncle before giving the statement.
II.
Appellant argues that his conviction for conspiracy to commit armed robbery violates *959 Wharton's Rule, since the object of the conspiracy and overt acts in furtherance thereof largely duplicate the substantive counts for which he was convicted. He also contends that the conspiracy count of the indictment is poorly drafted and defective because it is superfluous, and the alleged conspiracy was of extremely short duration. The government argues preliminarily that these claims are barred procedurally because appellant failed to challenge the indictment before trial as required by Super. Ct.Crim. R. 12(b). Further, the government contends that no law prohibits separate convictions and consecutive sentences for conspiracy to commit armed robbery and attempted armed robbery.
A. Timeliness of the Claim
With limited exceptions, defenses and objections based on defects in the indictment must be raised prior to trial in a pre-trial motion. Super. Ct.Crim. R. 12(b)(2).[7] Failure to raise such an objection prior to trial constitutes a waiver of the objection, "but the Court for cause shown may grant relief from the waiver." Super. Ct.Crim. R. 12(d). A defendant who fails to object to an error in an indictment in a pre-trial motion waives the right to challenge the indictment on appeal unless it is so deficient as to be "`totally lacking in the statement of offense.'" Nichols v. United States, 343 A.2d 336, 341 (D.C.1975) (quoting Bush v. United States, 215 A.2d 853, 855 (D.C.1966)). When no objection is made during trial, our review is limited to determining (1) whether the indictment sets forth the elements of the offense, and (2) if so, whether the claimed flaw prejudiced the defense. Nichols, 343 A.2d at 341.
In this case, appellant acknowledges that he did not raise a challenge to the indictment prior to trial. Nevertheless, he argues on appeal that the conspiracy count was poorly drafted and "should have been stricken as bizarre, superfluous, and violative of at least the spirit of the Wharton'[s] Rule."[8] Setting aside for a moment appellant's claim based upon Wharton's Rule, we consider whether he has waived his other challenges to the indictment. These challenges include that the conspiracy statute, D.C.Code § 22-105a[9] (1996), charging him only with conspiring with Carpenter and Mitchell "to commit criminal offenses" and citing the armed robbery statutes, D.C.Code §§ 22-2901, -3202, with the object of the conspiracy being the armed robbery of Israel Jones.[10] These *960 challenges are defects in the indictment within the meaning of Super. Ct. R. 12(b)(2) which are waived under Super. Ct. R. 12(d) if not raised prior to trial. See United States v. Weathers, 337 U.S.App. D.C. 362, 366-67, 186 F.3d 948, 952-53 (1999), cert. denied, 529 U.S. 1005, 120 S.Ct. 1272, 146 L.Ed.2d 221 (2000). Appellant seems to concede this, but argues that he has shown cause for relief from any waiver pursuant to Rule 12(d). As cause for the default, appellant argues that the trial court expressed concern about the way that the indictment was drafted, and his trial counsel, whose effectiveness he challenges, "was not at the top of his form." Essentially, appellant's claim is that his trial counsel's failure to challenge the indictment constituted ineffective assistance of counsel and cause for failure to raise the claim earlier. Assuming, without deciding, that appellant has met the requirements to show cause and avoid the waiver, we conclude that appellant has shown no prejudice which would warrant reversal.
The sufficiency of an indictment is determined by "(1) [w]hether it contains the elements of the offense intended to be charged, and sufficiently apprises the defendant of what he must be prepared to meet, and (2) whether the record adequately shows that the defendant may plead a former acquittal or conviction in the event any other proceedings are initiated against him later for a similar offense." Nichols, supra, 343 A.2d at 340 (citing Russell v. United States, 369 U.S. 749, 763-64, 82 S.Ct. 1038, 8 L.Ed.2d 240 (1962)). If this standard is met, that the indictment could have been made more definite and certain is not material. Roberts v. United States, 752 A.2d 583, 587 (D.C.2000), cert. denied, 532 U.S. 1044, 121 S.Ct. 2012, 149 L.Ed.2d 1013 (2001) (citing Hagner v. United States, 285 U.S. 427, 431, 52 S.Ct. 417, 76 L.Ed. 861 (1932)). Here, the indictment adequately informed appellant of the conspiracy charge he faced and protected him from future prosecution for that offense.
The elements of the crime of conspiracy to commit robbery are that: (1) two or more persons formed an agreement to commit a robbery; (2) the defendant knowingly participated in the conspiracy with the intent to commit the offense; and (3) at least one person involved in the conspiracy committed one of the charged overt acts. Robinson v. United States, 608 A.2d 115, 116 (D.C.1992) (citing Criminal Jury Instructions for the District of Columbia, No. 4.93 (4th ed.1993)); see also United States v. Treadwell, 245 U.S.App. D.C. 257, 263, 760 F.2d 327, 333 (1985), cert. denied, 474 U.S. 1064, 106 S.Ct. 814, 88 L.Ed.2d 788 (1986). The indictment provided fair notice of the conspiracy charge. It specified each of these elements. As to the first and second elements *961 it stated that appellant, Carpenter and Mitchell knowingly and willfully conspired and agreed to commit together criminal offenses in violation of D.C.Code §§ 22-2901, -3202, the armed robbery statutes. The indictment specified that the object of the conspiracy was to rob Israel Jones while armed. Since that was the only armed robbery specified, the reference to criminal offenses in the plural was not misleading. The indictment also lists various overt acts which the named conspirators, including appellant, were alleged to have committed. These overt acts included arming themselves in preparation for committing the armed robbery, searching out the intended victim, Israel Jones, breaking into the victim's apartment, and forcing Jones to ride to his apartment with them for the purpose of committing the armed robbery. Although the indictment made no reference to D.C.Code § 22-105a, "Conspiracy to Commit Crime," it alleged a conspiracy by its terms. Our rules provide that an "[e]rror in the citation or its omission shall not be ground[s] for dismissal of the indictment or information or for reversal of a conviction if the error or omission did not mislead the defendant to the defendant's prejudice." Super. Ct.Crim. R. 7(c). Appellant has neither alleged nor established any prejudice resulting from the omission of the citation to § 22-105a.
A common sense construction must be given to an indictment. Craig v. United States, 490 A.2d 1173, 1176 (D.C. 1985). Read as a whole, the indictment in this case apprised appellant of the conspiracy charge he faced and stated it sufficiently to avoid any future prosecution for the same offense. See Nichols, supra, 343 A.2d at 340 (citing Russell, supra, 369 U.S. at 763-64, 82 S.Ct. 1038). Even if defective, an indictment which adequately protects these interests of fair notice of the charges and avoidance of future prosecutions will not be dismissed. Craig, 490 A.2d at 1176 (citations omitted).
B. Wharton's Rule
Appellant argues that his conspiracy conviction must be vacated because it violates Wharton's Rule in that the conspiratorial object and overt acts duplicate the substantive counts for which Pearsall was convicted on an aiding and abetting theory. He recognizes that generally "the conspiracy to commit an offense and the subsequent commission of that crime normally do not merge into a single punishable act." Iannelli v. United States, 420 U.S. 770, 777, 95 S.Ct. 1284, 43 L.Ed.2d 616 (1975). The essential element of conspiracy is the agreement to commit an unlawful act, which distinguishes it from other substantive offenses and aiding and abetting that do not require proof of an agreement. Id. at 777 n. 10, 95 S.Ct. 1284 (citing Pereira v. United States, 347 U.S. 1, 11-12, 74 S.Ct. 358, 98 L.Ed. 435 (1954)) (other citations omitted); Robinson, supra, 608 A.2d at 116. "`Only if the substantive offense and the conspiracy are identical does a conviction for both constitute double jeopardy.'" United States v. Boyle, 157 U.S.App. D.C. 166, 177, 482 F.2d 755, 766, cert. denied, 414 U.S. 1076, 94 S.Ct. 593, 38 L.Ed.2d 483 (1973) (quoting Pereira, 347 U.S. at 11, 74 S.Ct. 358). In Robinson, this court, rejecting a claim of merger, upheld convictions for both conspiracy to commit robbery and attempted robbery, the lesser-included offense of robbery that was the object of the conspiracy. Robinson, 608 A.2d at 116. However, we did not consider in Robinson, nor does it appear that this court has ever considered such a challenge based upon Wharton's Rule. Id.
Wharton's Rule is an "exception to the general principle that a conspiracy *962 and the substantive offense that is its immediate end" are discrete crimes for which separate sanctions may be imposed. Iannelli, supra, 420 U.S. at 781-82, 95 S.Ct. 1284. Under Wharton's Rule, an agreement by two people to commit a particular crime cannot be prosecuted as a conspiracy when the crime is of such a nature as to require necessarily the participation of two people for its commission. Id. at 782, 95 S.Ct. 1284. For example, Wharton's Rule applies to offenses such as adultery, incest, bigamy, and duelling that require concerted criminal activity, a plurality of criminal agents and is essentially an aid to the determination of legislative intent. Id. "Only where it is impossible under any circumstances to commit the substantive offense without cooperative action, does Wharton's Rule bar convictions for both the substantive offense and conspiracy to commit that same offense." United States v. Payan, 992 F.2d 1387, 1390 (5th Cir.1993) (citing Gebardi v. United States, 287 U.S. 112, 121-22, 53 S.Ct. 35, 77 L.Ed. 206 (1932)) (emphasis in the original).[11]
In determining whether more than one person is necessary to commit the offense, it is recognized that "[a] participant is `necessary' to the commission of a crime, for purposes of merging substantive and conspiracy counts, if the substantive statute requires the [participant's] existence as an abstract legal element of the crime." Boyle, supra, 157 U.S.App. D.C. at 178, 482 F.2d at 767. In the present case, it was entirely possible for appellant to commit the offense of armed robbery of Israel Jones without the participation of anyone else. Although armed robbery may be easier with the assistance of others, such assistance is not necessary to commit the offense. Armed robbery does not require proof that there was more than the one actor. Since the focus of a Wharton's Rule inquiry is on the statutory elements, rather than the facts proved at trial, that the evidence showed several persons participated in the armed robbery does not make the rule applicable. Payan, supra, 992 F.2d at 1390 (citing Iannelli, supra, 420 U.S. at 780, 95 S.Ct. 1284).
The crimes that traditionally fall under Wharton's Rule share three characteristics:
[1] [t]he parties to the agreement are the only persons who participate in commission of the substantive offense . . . .
[2] the immediate consequences of the crime rest on the parties themselves rather than on society at large . . . . and
[3] the agreement that attends the substantive offense does not appear likely to pose the distinct kinds of threats to society that the law of conspiracy seeks to avert.
Iannelli, supra, 420 U.S. at 783-84, 95 S.Ct. 1284 (internal citations omitted). Considering these factors against the facts of this case, the offenses do not meet the test. Even assuming the first characteristic were satisfied (considering that appellant, Barnes, Carpenter, and Mitchell were parties to the conspiratorial agreement and the sole participants in the armed robbery of Jones), the second and third characteristics are not met. Specifically, armed robbery is inherently a crime against society at large because of the apprehension of fear and violence that it naturally creates against those being robbed. In addition, the agreement to commit armed robbery does in fact pose the distinct kind of threat to society that *963 the law of conspiracy seeks to prevent. See Payan, supra, 992 F.2d at 1390 (collective criminal activity "increases the chances that the criminal objective will be attained, decreases the chances that the involved individuals will abandon the criminal path, makes larger criminal objective attainable, and increases the probability that crimes unrelated to the original purpose for which the group was formed will be committed") (citing Iannelli, 420 U.S. at 778, 95 S.Ct. 1284). Wharton's Rule does not preclude conviction in a single trial of conspiracy to commit armed robbery and the substantive offense of armed robbery or its lesser-included offense of attempted armed robbery.[12]
III.
Appellant argues that there was insufficient evidence at trial to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that he kidnaped the decedent while armed and with the intent to rob or steal his property. Specifically, he contends that the evidence showed only that the "automobile ride was merely a friendly foray, at least with respect to [his] actions and intentions vis a' vis [the decedent]."
In weighing a claim of evidentiary insufficiency, this court must "view the evidence in the light most favorable to the government, draw all reasonable inferences from that evidence, and defer to the jury the right to weigh the credibility of witnesses." Marshall v. United States, 623 A.2d 551, 557 (D.C.1992) (citing Wells v. United States, 515 A.2d 1108, 1111 (D.C. 1986)). We will reverse a conviction for insufficiency of the evidence "only where there is no evidence upon which a reasonable mind could infer guilt beyond a reasonable doubt." Head v. United States, 451 A.2d 615, 622 (D.C.1982), cert. denied, 513 U.S. 854, 115 S.Ct. 156, 130 L.Ed.2d 95 (1994) (citations omitted).
In order to prove armed kidnaping, the government must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that appellant, while armed, seized or detained the victim, among other elements. D.C.Code §§ 22-2901, -3202; Head, supra, 451 A.2d at 624. "The involuntary nature of the seizure and detention is the essence of the crime of kidnaping." Id. (citation omitted). To support his argument that the evidence was insufficient to prove that he seized Jones and detained him against his will, appellant relies on this court's opinions in Head, supra, 451 A.2d at 615 and Smothers v. United States, 403 A.2d 306 (D.C. 1979), where we reversed armed kidnaping convictions because the evidence failed to establish the seizure and detention.
In Head, the defendant was convicted of multiple felonies, including armed kidnaping, arising out of the shooting deaths of two gas station employees. Head, supra, 451 A.2d at 618-19. The evidence showed that the two employees had been on duty the night before they were murdered. The body of one of the men was found the next morning in Fort Dupont Park, and the body of the other was located on the playground of Kelly Miller School. Id. at 619. Evidence showed that both men had been shot in the area where their bodies were found. Id. Since the gas station had been locked, and there was no sign of a struggle at the station or in the victim's car, this court concluded that the evidence was insufficient to show that the defendant had taken the victims from one place to another against their will, and reversed the armed kidnaping convictions. Id.
*964 Similarly, in Smothers, supra, we found that the evidence was insufficient to support an inference that the murder victim was taken from one place to another against her will and reversed convictions of kidnaping, armed kidnaping and felony-murder (kidnaping). Smothers, supra, 403 A.2d at 313. The victim, who had left work and gone shopping at Iverson Mall, was found murdered behind St. Elizabeths Hospital. Id. at 308. There were no signs of a struggle in her car, and medical evidence established that she suffered all of her injuries immediately prior to her death. Id.
The present case is factually distinguishable from both Smothers and Head. Here, unlike those cases, there was evidence that appellant and his companion took Jones from one place to another against his will. Both appellant and Barnes stated that appellant was armed with a .357 revolver when the four went to Chesapeake Street to look for Jones and when appellant and Mitchell returned to Chesapeake Street with Jones. Appellant stated that when he and Mitchell reached South Capitol Street, Mitchell approached Jones and was talking to him, but that Jones "still didn't want, didn't want to get in the car" with appellant and Mitchell. Jones' sister testified that while on South Capitol Street, she overhead Mitchell say to Jones "if you don't come with us, it's going to be the Fourth of July out here." A jury could find that this statement was coercive in nature. Ms. Jones also testified that Jones repeatedly stated that he did not want to go to see Carpenter about a gun and that Mitchell then replied to Jones "we got one here, you know." In addition, after appellant, Mitchell, Jones, and Young got into the car, Young, Jones' friend, was ordered out of the car, and appellant pulled a gun out of his jacket and put his arm around Jones' neck. Jones appeared to be frightened when he arrived at the apartment where the men proceeded with their felonious plan to rob him and killed him in the process. Viewing the evidence, both direct and circumstantial, in the light most favorable to the government, as we must, we conclude that it was sufficient to support a finding that appellant seized and detained Jones and took him to his apartment against his will.
IV.
Finally, appellant argues that the trial court erred in denying without a hearing his pro se motion, as supplemented by counsel, pursuant to D.C.Code § 23-110 alleging ineffective assistance of counsel. The government argues that no hearing was required because appellant's claims were vague, conclusory, and unsupported by any factual allegations, and therefore, the trial court properly denied the motion.
To prevail on a § 23-110 motion, the defendant must "allege with particularity those facts and circumstances as would demonstrate the allegations of ineffectiveness." Ellerbe v. United States, 545 A.2d 1197, 1198 (D.C.), cert. denied, 488 U.S. 868, 109 S.Ct. 174, 102 L.Ed.2d 144 (1988). Although there is ordinarily a presumption that a defendant is entitled to hearing on a § 23-110 motion asserting a claim of ineffective assistance of counsel, a hearing is not required "when the motion consists of (1) vague and conclusory allegations, (2) palpably incredible claims, or (3) allegations that would merit no relief even if true." Little v. United States, 748 A.2d 920, 922 (D.C.2000) (citing Ready v. United States, 620 A.2d 233, 234 (D.C.1993)). The decision whether to conduct a hearing on a § 23-110 motion is confined to the sound discretion of the trial court. Id. (citations omitted). We review the trial court's decision denying the motion without a hearing for abuse of discretion. Id.
*965 By letter dated December 10, 1997, which the trial judge treated as a pro se motion alleging ineffective assistance of counsel, appellant stated that his attorney did not: 1) visit him enough before or after his trial; 2) subpoena unnamed witnesses; or 3) sufficiently prepare for trial. After appellant's trial counsel withdrew from the case, appellant's sentencing counsel filed a supplemental § 23-110 motion which incorporated appellant's earlier allegations of ineffective assistance and also alleged that trial counsel failed: 1) to investigate the case adequately; 2) to file unspecified motions; 3) to adequately prepare appellant to testify; or 4) to file post-trial motions. The trial court denied the motion without a hearing, concluding that appellant's allegations of ineffective assistance of counsel were merely conclusory and provided no factual basis for the claim that counsel's performance was deficient. We agree.
In this case, appellant has failed to plead facts establishing deficient trial counsel performance or prejudice within the meaning of Strickland. See Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668, 104 S.Ct. 2052, 80 L.Ed.2d 674 (1984). Appellant has not identified specific facts to support his claim and has stated only in the most conclusory terms that his trial counsel was ineffective. Appellant has not named the witnesses that his counsel allegedly failed to subpoena, nor has he specified the motions that his trial counsel failed to file. Assuming arguendo that appellant's trial counsel's representation was deficient, appellant has failed to specify how such deficiency has prejudiced him by affecting the outcome of his trial. See id. at 687, 104 S.Ct. 2052 ("the defendant must show that the deficient performance prejudiced the defense").
For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the trial court hereby is
Affirmed.
NOTES
[1]  D.C.Code § 22-2901 has been recodified as § 22-2801 (2001).
[2]  D.C.Code § 22-3202 has been recodified as § 22-4502 (2001).
[3]  D.C.Code § 22-1801 has been recodified as § 22-801 (2001).
[4]  D.C.Code § 22-2401 has been recodified as § 22-2101 (2001).
[5]  D.C.Code § 22-3204 has been recodified as § 22-4504 (2001).
[6]  Appellant was charged originally with two co-defendants, James Carpenter and Theo Mitchell. The trial court granted appellant's unopposed motion to sever, and he was tried separately. The trial court merged the attempted armed robbery conviction and the related felony-murder conviction, and sentenced appellant to consecutive sentences on the remaining counts.
[7]  Super. Ct.Crim. R. 12(b)(2) provides that certain defenses and objections "must be raised before the trial," including:
Defenses and objections based on defects in the indictment or information (other than that it fails to show jurisdiction in the Court or to charge an offense which objections shall be noticed by the Court at any time during the pendency of the proceedings); . . .
[8]  Appellant also argues that the conspiracy charge is invalid because the agreement and the alleged overt acts occurred within a couple of hours. However, D.C.Code § 22-105a (b) does not require that the agreement be in place for any specified length of time, and appellant cites no authority supporting this contention.
[9]  D.C.Code § 22-105a has been recodified as § 22-1805a.
[10]  Count Five of the indictment reads as follows:
On or about April 11, 1996, within the District of Columbia, James Carpenter, Jr., also known as Rat, Jimmy Pearsall, also known as Jimbo, Theo Mitchell and others known and unknown to the grand jury did unlawfully, willfully and knowingly conspire and agree together and with each other to commit criminal offenses in the District of Columbia in violation of Title 22 of the District of Columbia Code, Sections 2901 and 3202.
OBJECT OF THE CONSPIRACY
The object of the conspiracy was for James Carpenter, Jr., also known as Rat, Jimmy Pearsall, also known as Jimbo, and Theo Mitchell to steal money and other property from the immediate actual possession of Israel Jones, while armed with a pistol, by force and violence, against resistance, and by putting their victim in fear. The indictment then described various overt acts undertaken in furtherance of the conspiracy. These included that appellant, Carpenter and Mitchell: (1) met and agreed to drive to Chesapeake Street to rob Israel Jones; (2) armed themselves for the purpose of committing the offense; (3) traveled by car to the area agreed upon to find Jones and rob him; and (4) broke into Jones' residence. The indictment also alleged as an overt act that appellant and Mitchell forced Jones to ride with them to the apartment for the purpose of carrying out the robbery.
[11]  Even if the rule applies, initial dismissal of the conspiracy count is not required because the purpose of the rule is avoidance of dual punishment. Iannelli, supra, 420 U.S. at 786 n. 18, 95 S.Ct. 1284.
[12]  Appellant argues that it is unjust to allow the convictions to stand. However, we have no basis to ignore the lawfulness of his convictions under the law as it now stands. See Boyle, supra, 157 U.S.App. D.C. at 179, 482 F.2d at 768.

=== CASE 9737271 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:20:31.247586+00 ===

CATHELL, Judge.
On July 26, 1999, respondent was charged in a three-count indictment with various narcotics violations arising from his arrest on July 9, 1999. On February 1, 2000, the Circuit Court for Anne Arundel County held a hearing on a pre-trial motion to suppress evidence during which respondent argued that his search was not based upon probable cause and as a result the contraband seized from him on the night of his arrest should not be permitted into evidence at trial. On February 3, 2000, the motions court filed a written opinion denying respondent’s motion to suppress. On September 28, 2000, following a bench trial, respondent was convicted on an agreed statement of facts and was found guilty of possession with intent to distribute cocaine. On November 29, 2000, that court sentenced respondent to 20 years’ incarceration, with all but five years suspended. On December 14, 2000, respondent noted a timely appeal to the Court of Special Appeals. On *141February 27, 2002, in a reported opinion, the intermediate appellate court reversed the judgment of the circuit court. Wallace v. State, 142 Md.App. 673, 791 A.2d 968 (2002). On June 10, 2002, we granted the State’s Petition for Writ of Certiorari. State v. Wallace, 369 Md. 301, 799 A.2d 1262 (2002). Petitioner presents one question for our review:
“Did the Court of Special Appeals incorrectly hold that a passenger in a vehicle could not be searched after a drug dog has alerted an officer to the presence of illegal drugs in the vehicle, notwithstanding that the alert provided probable cause to believe drugs were present in the vehicle and/or on the person of one or more of the occupants of the vehicle?”
We affirm the judgment of the Court of Special Appeals, answer no to petitioner’s question, and hold that the police did not have probable cause to search respondent, a passenger in the vehicle. Further, we hold that the Court of Special Appeals properly held that a positive canine alert to contraband in a vehicle, without more, does not establish probable cause to search all of the passengers in a vehicle.
I. Facts
On July 9, 2000, at approximately 3:00 a.m., Officer Jessica Hertik was driving her marked police car eastbound on Forest Drive in Annapolis, Maryland. As she approached Hilltop Lane, a forty mile per hour road, she observed a four-door Buick driving at a high rate of speed in the opposite direction. She made a U-turn and accelerated to 90 m.p.h. to catch up to the Buick. In addition to speeding, Officer Hertik saw the vehicle run a red light. Officer Hertik then activated her emergency equipment and the Buick pulled over.
Officer Hertik stopped behind the vehicle, exited her car and approached the driver’s side of the Buick. Sitting inside of the vehicle was the male driver, a male front seat passenger, and three back seat passengers — respondent and two women. Officer Hertik recognized respondent and two of the other passengers from a previous encounter, although in her testimony at the suppression hearing she did not describe that *142encounter. She informed the driver that she had stopped the vehicle for speeding and for not stopping at a traffic light. The driver of the car complied when Officer Hertik requested to see his driver’s license and car registration.
When Officer Hertik walked back to her car, she met another officer who had arrived at the scene. She was Officer Elizabeth Nelson who was on duty with Bosco, her drug detection dog.1 Officer Hertik explained what had occurred and then proceeded to run a license check and write two tickets. In the meantime, other police units had arrived on the scene and these additional officers watched the Buick while Bosco scanned the vehicle. Bosco made two positive alerts to the presence of drugs at the front and rear seam of the driver’s side front door. Officer Nelson testified that, because of various factors, i.e., air currents in the vehicle, there is little correlation between where a canine alerts and where drugs are found in the vehicle; rather it is just a general alert to the whole of the passenger compartment of the car itself.
Officer Nelson advised Officer Hertik, who was still in the process of writing tickets, that Bosco had made a positive alert on the vehicle. While Officer Nelson returned Bosco to her patrol car, Officer Hertik approached the Buick to speak with the driver. She informed the driver that she suspected that the vehicle contained drugs and asked the occupants to exit the vehicle so the police could search them.
The occupants were taken out of the car one at a time and searched while the others remained in the car. The other officers watched the occupants of the car while the searches were being conducted. Officer Jonathan Supko, one of the officers who had arrived at the scene, searched the three males. Officer Supko testified that his actions were not a *143mere “frisk” or “pat down” but were intended to discover anything suspicious, for “anything apparent ... [wjeapons and what not.” Officer Supko first searched the driver and then he searched the front seat passenger.
Officer Supko next searched respondent, who was sitting behind the front passenger seat. During the search Officer Supko felt a hard object near respondent’s groin, which he said he knew was not a gun, knife, or other weapon. Officer Supko handcuffed respondent with his hands behind his back, told him he was “not under arrest at th[at] time” and walked him to a grassy area away from the road to complete the search. Officer Supko stated that he had handcuffed respondent “just for my safety and his safety.”
As they walked over to the grassy area, respondent moved his hips in an apparent attempt to shake the object loose. When the officer searched respondent’s groin area again, the object was gone. Officer Supko saw, however, something protruding from respondent’s left pants leg, which turned out to be a clear plastic baggie containing several pieces of suspected cocaine. Respondent was placed under arrest.
The two females were searched after respondent. Officer Hertik searched one of them herself. Officer Hertik searched the vehicle only after each of the occupants of the car was searched. She found $1,155 in cash in someone’s shorts in the front passenger seat and a knife in a purse in the backseat. No drugs were found in the car.
Respondent alleged at a suppression hearing that there was not probable cause for his search and, as a result, the cocaine seized from him at the time of his search should be suppressed as evidence to be used at trial. The trial court denied his suppression motion and respondent was, as indicated supra, ultimately convicted of possession with intent to distribute cocaine. On appeal, the Court of Special Appeals reversed the judgment of the circuit court and that court’s denial of respondent’s motion to suppress.
*144II. Standard of Review
Our review of a circuit court’s denial of a motion to suppress evidence under the Fourth Amendment, ordinarily, is limited to the information contained in the record of the suppression hearing and not the record of the trial. Carter v. State, 367 Md. 447, 788 A.2d 646 (2002); Ferris v. State, 355 Md. 356, 368, 735 A.2d 491, 497 (1999); In re Tariq A-R-Y, 347 Md. 484, 488, 701 A.2d 691, 693 (1997), cert. denied, 522 U.S. 1140, 118 S.Ct. 1105, 140 L.Ed.2d 158 (1998); Simpler v. State, 318 Md. 311, 312, 568 A.2d 22, 22 (1990); Trusty v. State, 308 Md. 658, 670, 521 A.2d 749, 755 (1987). When there is a denial of a motion to suppress, we are further limited to considering facts in the light most favorable to the State as the prevailing party on the motion. See Scott v. State, 366 Md. 121, 143, 782 A.2d 862, 875 (2001); Riddick v. State, 319 Md. 180, 183, 571 A.2d 1239, 1240 (1990); Simpler, 318 Md. at 312, 568 A.2d at 22. Even so, we review legal questions de novo, and where, as here, a party has raised a constitutional challenge to a search or seizure, we must make an independent constitutional evaluation by reviewing the relevant law and applying it to the unique facts and circumstances of the case. See Stokes v. State, 362 Md. 407, 414, 765 A.2d 612, 615 (2001) (quoting Jones v. State, 343 Md. 448, 457-58, 682 A.2d 248, 253 (1996)); Wilkes v. State, 364 Md. 554, 569, 774 A.2d 420 (2001); In re Tariq A-R-Y, 347 Md. at 489, 701 A.2d at 693. We will not disturb the trial court’s factual findings unless they are clearly erroneous. See Wengert v. State, 364 Md. 76, 84, 771 A.2d 389, 394 (2001).
III. Discussion
Petitioner contends that a positive canine alert in and of itself provides the police with probable cause to search all passengers in an automobile and that the Court of Special Appeals improperly held that the positive canine alert in this case did not give the police probable cause to search respondent on the night in question. As indicated supra, we disagree with petitioner’s contention and affirm the decision of the Court of Special Appeals.
*145The Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution states:
“The right of people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated, and no Warrants shall issue but upon probable cause, supported by Oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the place to be searched, and the persons or things to be seized.”
There are certain well-defined exceptions to the Fourth Amendment’s requirement that searches be based upon probable cause and conducted pursuant to a valid warrant, but for purposes of this opinion we need not note or discuss them all. See generally, United States v. Robinson, 414 U.S. 218, 94 S.Ct. 467, 38 L.Ed.2d 427(1973) (permitting a search of a person incident to a full custody arrest supported by probable cause to effectuate the arrest — the “search incident to arrest” exception) and New York v. Belton, 453 U.S. 454, 101 S.Ct. 2860, 69 L.Ed.2d 768 (1981) (permitting the warrantless search of a passenger compartment of a vehicle incident to a lawful custodial arrest).2
There is no argument made in this case that the warrantless search of the four-door Buick did not meet the constitutional requirements of the Fourth Amendment and that' the search of the car was based upon probable cause. Nor, is there any argument that the actions taken by the officers up to and including the canine sniff of the Buick were anything but proper and, thus, provided the police officers with probable cause to search the car. Accordingly, we do not directly *146address these events except as necessary to address the issue presented.
In Carroll v. United States, 267 U.S. 132, 45 S.Ct. 280, 69 L.Ed. 543 (1925), the Supreme Court first recognized an “automobile exception” to the Fourth Amendment’s warrant requirements, an exception such as the search incident to a lawful arrest exception set forth many years later in Robinson, referenced supra. Presently known as the “Carroll Doctrine,” the exception allows vehicles to be searched without a warrant provided that the officer has probable cause to believe that a crime — connected item is within the car. Following Carroll, the Supreme Court has held that during a lawful traffic stop officers can compel the driver of a vehicle to exit the car. See Pennsylvania v. Mimms, 434 U.S. 106, 98 S.Ct. 330, 54 L.Ed.2d 331 (1977). The Mimms holding was extended to passengers as well. See Maryland v. Wilson, 519 U.S. 408, 410-11, 117 S.Ct. 882, 884-85, 137 L.Ed.2d 41, 45-46 (1997). Since Wilson, with the case of Wyoming v. Houghton, 526 U.S. 295, 307, 119 S.Ct. 1297, 1303-04, 143 L.Ed.2d 408, 419 (1999), the Supreme Court has gone on to hold that a passenger’s property left within a vehicle, when occupants are ordered out of a car, falls within the permissible scope of a “Carroll Doctrine” warrantless search.
Further, the law is settled that when a properly trained canine alerts to a vehicle indicating the likelihood of contraband, sufficient probable cause exists to conduct a warrantless “Carroll ” search of the vehicle. See Gadson v. State, 341 Md. 1, 668 A.2d 22 (1995), cert. denied, 517 U.S. 1203, 116 S.Ct. 1704, 134 L.Ed.2d 803 (1996); Accord United States v. Dovali-Avila, 895 F.2d 206, 207 (5th Cir.1990); In re Montrail M., 87 Md.App. 420, 437, 589 A.2d 1318, 1327 (1991).
In this opinion we focus solely on the narrow question of whether the police officers had probable cause to search respondent, who was not the owner or driver but a mere passenger of the automobile, based only upon a positive canine alert that drugs were somewhere in the interior of the automobile.
*147a. Probable Cause
In order for a warrantless search or arrest to be legal it roust be based upon probable cause.3 Regarding arrests we have held that a police officer can arrest an accused without a warrant if the officer has probable cause to believe that a crime has been or is being committed by an alleged offender in the officer’s presence, the general standard for probable cause. Woods v. State, 315 Md. 591, 611-12, 556 A.2d 236, 246 (1989); Nilson v. State, 272 Md. 179, 184, 321 A.2d 301, 304 (1974).4
We have gone on to state that:
*148“Probable cause, we have frequently stated, is a nontechnical conception of a reasonable ground for belief of guilt. Doering v. State, 313 Md. 384, 403, 545 A.2d 1281 (1988); Edwardsen v. State, 243 Md. 131, 136, 220 A.2d 547 (1966). A finding of probable cause requires less evidence than is necessary to sustain a conviction, but more evidence than would merely arouse suspicion. Woods, supra, 315 Md. at 611, 556 A.2d 236; Sterling v. State, 248 Md. 240, 245, 235 A.2d 711 (1967); Edwardsen, supra, 243 Md. at 136, 220 A.2d 547. Our determination of whether probable cause exists requires a nontechnical, common sense evaluation of the totality of the circumstances in a given situation in light of the facts found to be credible by the trial judge. State v. Lemmon, 318 Md. 365, 379, 568 A.2d 48 (1990); Doering, supra, 313 Md. at 403-04, 545 A.2d 1281. Probable cause exists where the facts and circumstances taken as a whole would lead a reasonably cautious person to believe that a felony had been or is being committed by the person arrested. Woods, supra, 315 Md. at 611, 556 A.2d 236; Stevenson v. State, 287 Md. 504, 521, 413 A.2d 1340 (1980); Duffy v. State, 243 Md. 425, 432, 221 A.2d 653 (1966). Therefore, to justify a warrantless arrest the police must point to specific and articulable facts which, taken together with rational inferences from those facts, reasonably warranted the intrusion. Lemmon, supra, 318 Md. at 380, 568 A.2d 48.” Collins v. State, 322 Md. 675, 680, 589 A.2d 479, 481 (1991).
To determine whether an officer had probable cause in a specific case, here probable cause to search, “the reviewing court necessarily must relate the information known to the *149officer to the elements of the offense that the officer believed was being or had been committed.” DiPino v. Davis, 354 Md. 18, 32, 729 A.2d 354, 361 (1999).
In the case sub judice, in order for respondent’s warrantless search to be valid, the officer must have had probable cause at the time of the search to believe that respondent was in possession of a controlled dangerous substance. Possession is defined in the Maryland Code (2001), section 5-101(u) of the Criminal Law Article as “exercising] actual or constructive dominion or control over a thing by one or more persons.” This statute recognizes, as we have held, that possession may be constructive or actual, exclusive or joint. State v. Leach, 296 Md. 591, 596, 463 A.2d 872, 874 (1983).
b. Case Law
This Court has had the occasion to apply the elements of possession to cases involving a Fourth Amendment challenge, like the constitutional challenge which initiated the issue in the case sub judice. We had the occasion to do so very recently in Pringle v. State, 370 Md. 525, 805 A.2d 1016 (2002), where the defendant challenged his warrantless arrest for possession. In that case, Joseph Jermaine Pringle was a front seat passenger in a car being driven by its owner and there was another backseat passenger. The vehicle was pulled over for a routine traffic stop. During a search of the vehicle, a sum of rolled up money was found inside the closed glove compartment located in front of Pringle and drugs were found hidden behind a rear armrest. The officer who conducted the traffic stop only saw the money in the closed glove box when the driver/owner of the vehicle opened the glove compartment for the vehicle registration. The officer at the scene then asked the owner/driver of the car if he could search the vehicle and the owner/driver consented to the search. After the three occupants of the car were taken out of the vehicle, the officer searched the car and found five glassine baggies containing suspected cocaine hidden inside or behind an armrest in the backseat. The officer on the scene questioned all three men *150about the ownership of the drugs and money and told the three men that, if no one admitted to ownership of the drugs he was going to arrest them all. Because none of the three men offered any information regarding the ownership of the drugs and/or money, all three men were placed under arrest and transported to the police station.
Later, at the station house, Pringle acknowledged that the cocaine belonged to him. Subsequently, his friends, the owner/driver of the automobile and the other passenger, were released.
During a pre-trial suppression hearing, Pringle argued that the confession should be suppressed as the unlawful fruit of an illegal arrest because there was no probable cause for his arrest at the time of the traffic stop. The trial court denied his motion. Pringle made the same claim on appeal to the Court of Special Appeals. While we noted that the evidence might have constituted probable cause to arrest the owner or the driver of the vehicle, we held that Pringle’s mere presence as a front seat passenger in an automobile in which contraband was found in a concealed place in the rear seat and where money was found in a closed glove compartment did not constitute probable cause to arrest Pringle. In her concurring opinion in Pringle, Judge Raker stated:
“Apparently, proximity to concealed drugs is sufficient for the dissent to find probable cause to arrest.... Although it may be sufficient under certain circumstances, the discovery of three men riding in a car in the early morning hours, with some rolled money in a closed glove box and drugs hidden from view in a back arm rest, without more, hardly constitutes probable cause to arrest a front seat passenger who has no possessory interest in the automobile.
“I cannot improve on Judge Sonner’s analysis ... below:
‘... I believe the majority has stopped far short-of considering whether Pringle, in any way, knowingly exercised dominion or control over the secreted contraband, and has resorted instead to “speculation or conjecture.” *151Although Pringle ... may have been within an arm’s reach of the drugs, in fact, to expose the drugs, he would have had to stretch his body, maneuver around the back of his seat, and pull down the arm rest. And ... Pringle was not sitting in a closed car that emanated the pungent, easily detectable smell of marijuana, which were critical facts in Judge Moylan’s analysis sustaining Folk’s conviction thirty years ago. Although the majority [of the Court of Special Appeals] attaches some significance to the large roll of currency found in the glove compartment, located in front of Pringle’s seat, cash, in and of itself, is innocuous and certainly less suspicious than the scales and cutting tools discounted by the Court of Appeals in Leach. Further, there was no showing whatsoever that Pringle, as a passenger in the car, had any connection to, or knowledge of, the money found within the glove compartment of someone else’s car.’ ”
In Collins, supra, we also addressed a situation involving a warrantless arrest and a subsequent challenge to probable cause for that arrest. On September 20, 1988, at 3:00 a.m., Officer Holmes of the Salisbury Police Department noticed five men standing about five feet from a Mustang that was parked in the entrance to a car dealership. Officer Holmes approached the men and asked what they were doing. The driver of the Mustang, Steven Lewis, stated that they were looking at the BMW’s. Officer Ewing arrived on the scene to assist Officer Holmes. Officer Ewing saw a 35mm film canister on the rear seat of the Mustang and he asked one of the men to retrieve the canister for him. Inside the canister, Officer Ewing found over twenty cellophane wrapped packets containing cocaine and proceeded to arrest all of the men, including Collins. Collins alleged at a suppression hearing that there was not probable cause for his arrest. The trial court denied his suppression motion and Collins was convicted of possession of cocaine.
Collins appealed and, before this Court, asserted that there *152was not probable cause for his arrest.5 He claimed that his mere proximity to the incriminating evidence, or to an offender, was not enough for finding of probable cause for arrest. Collins also asserted that there was no further factual basis to connect him to the drugs or to having committed any crime. In addressing Collin’s claims, we discussed the United States Supreme Court case of United States v. Di Re, 332 U.S. 581, 68 S.Ct. 222, 92 L.Ed. 210 (1948) and our Livingston case and ultimately held in favor of Collins that there was not probable cause for his arrest.
Di Re is not a canine alert case, but it has influenced the discussion in cases such as the one at bar. Di Re was seated in the front passenger seat of a vehicle from which an informant had purchased counterfeit gasoline ration coupons from the driver and the backseat passenger was seen holding the gasoline ration coupons. The police arrested and searched all three men. The Supreme Court held that Di Re’s mere presence in a vehicle involved in criminal activity, without more, did not cause him to lose his right to be free from a search of his person. The Supreme Court explained:
“There is no evidence that it is a fact or that the officers had any information indicating that Di Re was in the car when Reed obtained ration coupons from Buttitta, and none that he heard or took part in any conversation on the subject....
“An inference of participation in conspiracy does not seem to be sustained by the facts particular to this case. The argument that one who ‘accompanies a criminal to a crime rendevous’ cannot be assumed to be a bystander, forceful enough in some circumstances, is farfetched when the meeting is not secretive or in a suspicious hide-out but in broad daylight, in plain sight of passers-by, in a public street of a large city, and where the alleged substantive crime is one which does not necessarily involve any act visibly criminal. *153If Di Re had witnessed the passing of papers from hand to hand, it would not follow that he knew they were ration coupons, and if he saw that they were ration coupons, it would not follow that he would know them to be counterfeit. Indeed it appeared at the trial to require an expert to establish that fact. Presumptions of guilt are not lightly to be indulged form mere meetings.” Di Re, 332 U.S. at 593, 68 S.Ct. at 228, 92 L.Ed. at 219-20.
Essentially, in Di Re, the Supreme Court held that “we are not convinced that a person, by mere presence in a suspected car, loses immunities from search of his person to which he would otherwise be entitled.” Id. at 587, 68 S.Ct. at 225, 92 L.Ed. at 216.
In Livingston v. State, 317 Md. 408, 564 A.2d 414 (1989), Wesley Livingston was one of three people in a vehicle that was stopped for speeding. Livingston, who was not the owner of the vehicle, was sitting in the backseat. During the stop, the state trooper saw two marijuana seeds on the floor of the front passenger’s side. The state trooper arrested all three occupants of the car and upon searching Livingston pursuant to the arrest, the state trooper discovered cocaine and marijuana in Livingston’s pocket. Livingston was charged with possession of cocaine with intent to distribute, possession of cocaine and possession of marijuana. We held that the two seeds on the floor in the front of the vehicle did not provide the state trooper with probable cause to arrest Livingston and then conduct a search incident to that arrest. Or, in the alternative, that the mere proximity to incriminating evidence or to an offender is not enough for a finding of probable cause for arrest generally.
In People v. Fondia, 317 Ill.App.3d 966, 251 Ill.Dec. 553, 740 N.E.2d 839 (2000), the Illinois Appellate Court considered a case with facts similar to the case sub judiee. There, after a lawful traffic stop, an officer requested a police canine unit while he was conducting computer inquires and a warrants check. The driver and two passengers remained in the car while the canine gave a positive alert to drugs in the car, specifically near the rear seam of the driver’s door. The *154police then had the driver exit the automobile and told the driver that the canine had given a positive alert to drugs in the car. The police officer then searched the occupants of the vehicle and the vehicle itself. The defendant, Fondia, a backseat passenger, was removed from the car and told “that the dog had alerted and that [Officer] Gallagher was going to search him.” Fondia, 251 Ill.Dec. 553, 740 N.E.2d at 841 (alteration added). The officer then put his hand into Fondia’s pocket when he felt a metal tube that he recognized to be a crack pipe. The officer then removed the tube, handcuffed Fondia and completed the search. The tube field-tested positive for cocaine and Fondia was arrested for possession of drug paraphernalia.
In Fondia, it was also stipulated to that the traffic stop was lawful and that the dog was properly trained. The trial court, in that case, ruled that the positive canine alert gave the police “probable cause to search the vehicle ..., ... and all of the occupants.’ ” Id. at 841. On appeal, the Illinois Appellate Court agreed that the alert by a dog trained to detect contraband gave the police “probable cause to believe that controlled substances were somewhere either within the car or on the person of one or more of its occupants.... However, before [Officer] Gallagher searched defendant’s person, he could have — and should have — had the dog sniff defendant to see if the dog would again alert.” Id. at 842 (alteration added) (emphasis added). The Illinois Appellate Court went on to note that it has been held that a canine sniff is not a search for purposes of the Fourth Amendment, pursuant to United States v. Place, 462 U.S. 696, 707, 103 S.Ct. 2637, 77 L.Ed.2d 110 (1983), and opined:
“If a dog sniff ... had occurred and the dog alerted, then probable cause would have existed to search defendant’s person. If, on the other hand, the dog did not alert after sniffing defendant but did alert as to one of the car’s other occupants or as to the now-unoccupied car interior, then no basis would have existed to search defendant’s person. By not conducting additional dog sniffs of defendant or the car’s other occupants (which the officers had it entirely in *155their power to do), the officers willfully denied themselves this additional, critical information that would have sharpened their focus on whom to search, leaving themselves in a position of ‘willful ignorance.’
“This posture of ‘willful ignorance’ dissipates the reasonableness of the police conduct in this case, given the nature of that conduct, which was a search of defendant’s person, not merely a container within the car. In Houghton ... the Supreme Court wrote of the ‘unique, significantly heightened protection afforded against searches of one’s person and quoted the following from Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1, 24-25, 88 S.Ct. 1868, 1881-82, 20 L.Ed.2d 889, 908 (1968): ‘ “Even a limited search of the outer clothing ... constitutes a severe, though brief, intrusion upon cherished personal security, and it must surely be an annoying, frightening, and perhaps humiliating experience.” ’ ”
Fondia, 251 Ill.Dec. 553, 740 N.E.2d at 842-43. See also State v. Kelly, 2001 WL 1561543 (Ohio App.2001) (ruling that a canine alert to the presence of drugs in a car gave police probable cause to search the interior of the car, but not to search the occupants of the car, one of which was the defendant, because the general canine alert was not specific to indicate that the defendant had drugs on his person).
c. Consideration of Probable Cause to Search Respondent
In the case sub judice and relying on our holdings in Pringle, Collins, Livingston, the Supreme Court’s holding in Di Re, the Illinois case of Fondia, we hold that there was not probable cause to search respondent. This case is similar to the situation in Fondia, where the defendant was in a car that had had a positive drug alert by a drug detection dog and the officer then removed the defendant from the car, searched him, found drug paraphernalia and arrested him. We emphasize, just as the Illinois court in Fondia emphasized, that while the alert by a drug dog trained to detect contraband, undisputedly, gave the police probable cause to believe there was contraband somewhere in the car or on the person of someone *156in the car, the canine sniff of the vehicle alone did not amount to probable cause to then search each of the passengers.
Without additional facts that would tend to establish respondent’s knowledge and dominion or control over the contraband before his search, the K-9 sniff of the car was insufficient to establish probable cause for a search of a non-owner, non-driver for possession. Merely sitting in the backseat of a car did not amount, in this case, to probable cause specific to respondent to search and subsequently arrest him. If the K-9 had sniffed respondent, and specifically alerted to respondent, before the officer searched him, probable cause for the search might have existed. If the officers simply had Bosco sniff each of the passengers of the car prior to searching them, then probable cause might have existed to search any of the passengers who positively re-alerted the canine to contraband. This did not happen here.6
Moreover, as the Court of Special Appeals in this case opined, some link between the passenger and the crime must exist or probable cause generally will not be found. That was the case here. Respondent was searched merely based upon the fact that probable cause existed to search the vehicle based upon a general canine scan of the car, nothing more. *157Without any other indicia of possession of contraband, specifically relating to respondent, there was no probable cause for the officer, at that point in time on the night in question, to have sufficient probable cause to search respondent. There simply was no link or further factual basis to connect respondent to drugs or to having committed any crime solely upon Bosco’s positive scan of the vehicle owned and driven by another person.
In contrast with the cases previously discussed, petitioner asserts that the dicta intimated by this Court and the Court of Special Appeals in the cases of Wilkes v. State, 364 Md. 554, 587 n. 24, 774 A.2d 420, 439 n. 24 and State v. Funkhouser, 140 Md.App. 696, 782 A.2d 387 (2001) support a finding of probable cause to search not only the vehicle itself but also the passengers of a vehicle when there has been a positive alert by a drug detection dog to contraband somewhere in a vehicle. In Wilkes, in a footnote, this Court recognized that the cases from some jurisdictions have taken the position that a positive alert to contraband by a drug dog amounted to probable cause to effectuate a warrantless arrest. In Funkhouser, the Court of Special Appeals held that when a qualified drug dog signals to its handler that narcotics are in a vehicle there is ipso facto probable cause to justify a warrantless Carroll doctrine search of the vehicle. But, petitioner fails to recognize that searches of vehicles pursuant to a positive canine alert and probable cause to do so is well-settled and is distinguishable from the issue raised in this case.7
Additionally, both Wilkes and Funkhouser are factually distinguishable because in both of those cases the person searched and arrested was the sole occupant of the car and the owner/driver of the car. In neither case was the person searched a mere passenger. In Funkhouser, the Court of Special Appeals stated “The police not only had probable cause [after a positive canine scan] to search the Jeep wrangler; they also had probable cause to arrest Funkhouser as its *158driver and lone occupant.” Funkhouser, 140 Md.App. 721, 782 A.2d 402 (alteration added). Admittedly, we stated in Wilkes “that once a drug dog has alerted the trooper to the presence of illegal drugs in a vehicle, sufficient probable cause existed to support a warrantless arrest.” 364 Md. at 554 n. 24, 774 A.2d at 439 n. 24. However, as in Funkhouser, Wilkes was the driver and the only person in the vehicle. Petitioner also asserts that the case of United States v. Klinginsmith, 25 F.3d 1507 (10th Cir.1994), cert. denied, 513 U.S. 1059, 115 S.Ct. 669, 130 L.Ed.2d 602 (1994), cited in Wilkes, supports the extension of probable cause to include passengers. Klinginsmith was a passenger in a car driven by another person. The police had placed a sign near the highway that read “Narcotic Check Lane Ahead,” but the sign was a ruse hoping to get narcotics traffickers who saw the sign to exit the highway on a particular exit. When the driver of the car exited the highway, the police pursued the car and stopped it at a gas station. The troopers began asking questions of both of the occupants, including Klinginsmith, and both men consented when the troopers asked to search the car. In the meantime, a canine unit had arrived on the scene and gave a positive alert for narcotics in the car. The Tenth Circuit held that “when the dog ‘alerted,’ there was probable cause to arrest [the driver and passenger].” Klinginsmith, 25 F.3d at 1510. We also recognize that the U.S. District Court for the District of Kansas recently reaffirmed the holding in Klinginsmith in United States v. Garcia, 52 F.Supp.2d 1239 (D.Kan. 1999). Despite the holdings in Klinginsmith and Garcia, we hold that those cases are not controlling as to the issue currently for our review. Rather, we hold in line with the body of case law discussed supra, especially our very recent holding in Pringle, and affirm that a positive canine scan to a vehicle’s interior compartment generally, without more, does not rise to probable cause to search all passengers of that vehicle.
A passenger in an automobile is generally not perceived to have the kind of control over the contents of the vehicle as does a driver and cases from this State have noted the distinction between drivers and owners and passengers of *159vehicles. Therefore, some additional substantive nexus between the passenger and the criminal conduct must appear to exist in order for an officer to have probable cause to either search or arrest a passenger.
Pursuant to the facts of the case sub judice, there was no link, beyond the positive canine alert to drugs in the car somewhere, between respondent and the drug scan by Bosco of the passenger compartment as a whole. At the time of the search of respondent, there was no evidence, other than Bosco’s alert to the car in which respondent and four others had been sitting, to establish respondent’s possible possession of drugs. There were no circumstances in this case indicating that there were drugs or drug paraphernalia visible to either the occupants of the car or the officers looking into the vehicle, there was no evidence of any odor of drugs emanating from the vehicle that would have been detectable to a passerby or even to a passenger, nor is there any evidence that any of the occupants prior to the search exhibited any suspicious behavior to the officers. We recognize that if, in a particular case, the facts justify it, there may be a constitutionally acceptable basis for searching the passengers, but that is not so under the facts of the case sub judice.
IV. Conclusion
As we have indicated we do not dispute that Bosco’s positive alert provided evidence of a commission of a crime and that Bosco’s alert, alone, provided adequate probable cause for the officers to search the automobile without a warrant. However, without anything more than the positive canine alert to drugs in the automobile somewhere, i.e., something more particular linking any one passenger in the car, including respondent, to the drugs sniffed by Bosco, there was insufficient probable cause to search the passengers of the automobile in question in this case. A canine alert on the exterior of a vehicle does not support the proposition that the drugs potentially in the car are concealed on a particular occupant of that vehicle. When the police get all of the occupants out of the vehicle and find no drugs in the vehicle, they cannot use a *160positive general canine scan of the car as authority to go further and search a non-owner/non-driver passenger. In the case sub judice, the search of respondent on these facts was unlawful. The motion to suppress should have been granted.
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT OF SPECIAL APPEALS AFFIRMED. COSTS TO BE PAID BY ANNE ARUNDEL COUNTY.
Dissenting Opinion follows.
. Officer Nelson had been with the Annapolis City Police Department for seven years and had been a certified K-9 officer for four of those years. Testimony at the suppression hearing revealed that both Officer Nelson and Bosco have undergone extensive training and updating of their skills each year.
. We note that the night respondent was arrested he was first asked to exit the vehicle and a police officer began to search him not as a “frisk” or “pat down” but to find anything “suspicious.” During this search, the officer felt something hard, which he admitted was not a gun, a knife or a weapon, but put handcuffs on respondent for safety and told respondent he was “not under arrest at the time.” Petitioner did not contend, prior to this appeal, that respondent was “arrested” at the time of his “search" potentially making his search lawful as a search incident to an arrest. See Klauenberg v. State, 355 Md. 528, 552, 735 A.2d 1061, 1074 (1999) (“[AJrguments not presented in a brief or not presented with particularity will not be considered on appeal.”).
. We note that our discussion of probable cause includes cases where probable cause to arrest was at issue. Nonetheless, our discussion of probable cause generally and whether there was probable cause to search respondent in this case is based upon the same standard for probable cause to arrest, because, "In terms of quantifiable probability, moreover, the probable cause for a ... search is the same as the probable cause for a warrantless arrest. Whatever the possible occurrence or circumstance, the likelihood of which we are assessing, probable cause itself is a constant. It does not take more probable cause to support a warrantless arrest than it does to support a warrantless ... search. The classic Brinegar v. United States, 338 U.S. 160, 69 S.Ct. 1302, 93 L.Ed. 1879 (1949), definition of probable cause is used for both situations, with no distinction made between the predicate for a[ ] ... search and the predicate for a lawful arrest.... The measure of likelihood is the same.” State v. Funkhouser, 140 Md.App. 696, 721, 782 A.2d 387, 402 (2001). Further, the United States Supreme Court stated in Ybarra v. Illinois, 444 U.S. 85, 91, 100 S.Ct. 338, 342, 62 L.Ed.2d 238, 245 (1979), that ”[w]here the standard is probable cause, a search or seizure of a person must be supported by probable cause particularized with respect to that person." (emphasis added).
. Maryland Code (2001), section 2-202 of the Criminal Procedure Article states:
" § 2-202. Warrantless arrests — In general.
(a) Crime committed in presence of police officer. — A police officer may arrest without a warrant a person who commits or attempts to commit a felony or misdemeanor in the presence or within the view of a police officer.
(b) Probable cause to believe crime committed in the presence of officer. — A police officer who has probable cause to believe that a felony or misdemeanor is being committed in the presence or within the view of the police officer may arrest without a warrant any person whom the police officer reasonably believes to have committed the crime.
*148(c) Probable cause to believe felony committed. — A police officer without a warrant may arrest a person if the police officer has probable cause to believe that a felony has been committed or attempted and the person has committed or attempted to commit the felony whether or not in the presence or within the view of the police officer.”
This provision of the Criminal Procedure Article in respect to arrest generally is language derived without substantive change from former Article 27, section 594B(a), (b) and (c) of the Maryland Code.
. Collins specifically relied upon the case of Livingston v. State, 317 Md. 408, 564 A.2d 414 (1989), discussed infra, when he asserted lack of probable cause for his arrest at his motion to suppress hearing.
. A certified drug detection dog is very accurate and minimally intrusive, much less so than a search because “Even a limited search of the outer clothing ... constitutes a severe, though brief, intrusion upon cherished personal security.’ ” Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1, 24-25, 88 S.Ct. 1868, 1881-82, 20 L.Ed.2d 889, 908 (1968). Also, a canine sniff, in and of itself, is not a search for purposes of the Fourth Amendment. See United States v. Place, 462 U.S. 696, 707, 103 S.Ct. 2637, 2644-45, 77 L.Ed.2d 110, 121 (1983). Therefore, a dog sniff of the passengers might have been appropriate after the K-9 alerting had established probable cause existed to search the vehicle. Under petitioner’s reasoning, if contraband were found in a twelve-passenger van, or perhaps a bus, trolley, or taxi that you share with someone for means of public transportation, the police would be permitted to search everyone in that vehicle simply because a drug detection dog gave a positive general alert to contraband in that vehicle somewhere. Simply stated, a policy of permitting officers to search on this basis alone until contraband is found on someone, without other indications of particularized suspicion of contraband on that person, is, in our view, constitutionally unacceptable. See Pringle, supra.
. See discussion in text supra regarding the Carroll doctrine.