=== CASE 2226889 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:21.715904+00 ===

305 N.W.2d 682 (1981)
SOUTH DAKOTA TRUCKING ASSOCIATION, INC., a South Dakota Corporation; United Parcel Service, Inc., an Ohio Corporation; American Freight Systems, Inc., a Delaware Corporation; Dan Dugan Transport Company, a South Dakota Corporation; Barber Transportation Company, a South Dakota Corporation; Campbell Supply Company, a South Dakota Corporation; L. G. Everist, Inc., an Iowa Corporation; Universal Transport, Inc., a South Dakota Corporation, Plaintiffs and Appellees,
v.
SOUTH DAKOTA DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION; Eugene L. Rowen, in his capacity as Secretary of the South Dakota Department of Transportation; South Dakota State Transportation Commission; Robert Appelwick, Patrick Beckman, Roger Bernard, James Doyle, Donald Jacobsen, Jerry Leidholt, James L. Rothstein, James H. Sharp, Jerry Shoener and Gene Grossenburg, in their capacity as members of the South Dakota State Transportation Commission, Defendants and Appellants.
Nos. 13334, 13341.
Supreme Court of South Dakota.
Argued March 18, 1981.
Decided May 6, 1981.
*683 Robert L. Thomas of May, Johnson, Doyle & Becker, Sioux Falls, for plaintiffs and appellees.
Carl W. Quist, Asst. Atty. Gen., Pierre, for defendants and appellants; Mark V. Meierhenry, Atty. Gen., Pierre, on the brief.
DUNN, Justice.
This is an appeal from a declaratory judgment and writ of mandamus entered in favor of appellees. We affirm.
The facts of this case are quite simple. On October 29, 1975, the South Dakota State Transportation Board (Board) adopted rules that allowed for vehicles with a gross weight of up to 95,000 pounds to be operated upon the interstate highway system. ARSD 70:01:04:41-45. Prior to that date the maximum weight limit was 80,000 pounds. Permits were required to operate at these heavier weights. These permits were granted by issuing single-trip permits in books of ten. On March 10, 1978, the Board adopted another resolution approving a one-year test to allow motor carriers to operate three-unit combinations with a gross vehicle weight of 129,000 pounds. This also required special permits, which were issued in books of ten single-trip permits.
On June 19, 1980, the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) notified the Board that continued issuance of single-trip permits for loads over 80,000 pounds on the interstate highways would result in its recommending to the United States Secretary of Transportation that future federal interstate funding apportionments to South Dakota be withheld in accordance with 23 U.S.C. § 127. This was based on FHWA's determination that South Dakota law as of July 1, 1956, did not allow the issuance of permits for weights over 80,000 pounds and therefore violated 23 U.S.C. § 127, which states that federal funds can be withheld.[1]
*684 The Board capitulated to the FHWA's demands and ceased issuing permits to appellees. Appellees thereafter sought a declaratory judgment and writ of mandamus to require the continuation of the issuance of these permits. The trial court held for appellees.
Two issues are raised on appeal: (1) Whether mandamus is a proper remedy; and (2) whether appellants were authorized under the laws in effect on July 1, 1956, to issue such single-trip permits.
Generally, for a party to be granted a writ of mandamus "`... he must have a clear legal right to have a service performed by the party to whom he seeks to have the writ directed.'" Bandy v. Mickelson, 73 S.D. 485, 488, 44 N.W.2d 341, 342 (1950), quoting from Bailey v. Lawrence, 2 S.D. 533, 537, 51 N.W. 331, 332 (1892). If the service or action which one seeks to compel is discretionary the proper exercise of such discretion will not be interfered with. This is not to say that there are no checks on such discretion.
"... The discretion must be exercised under the established rules of law, and it may be said to be abused within the foregoing rule where the action complained of has been arbitrary or capricious, or based on personal, selfish, or fraudulent motives, or on false information, or on a total lack of authority to act, or where it amounts to an evasion of a positive duty, or there has been a refusal to consider pertinent evidence, hear the parties when so required, or to entertain any proper question concerning the exercise of the discretion, or where the exercise of the discretion is in a manner entirely futile and known by the officer to be so and there are other methods which if adopted would be effective."
State v. Richards, 61 S.D. 28, 38-39, 245 N.W. 901, 905 (1932) (citations omitted). Moreover, an erroneous view of the law is sufficient to constitute an abuse of discretion. Richards, supra.
We must therefore ascertain whether the issuance of these permits is a discretionary function. If it is merely ministerial, mandamus will lie. If it is discretionary, we must further ascertain whether the Board abused its discretion and if so, mandamus will lie; otherwise, mandamus is improper.
The issuance of permits usually is a discretionary function. 52 Am.Jur.2d Mandamus § 208 (1970). See generally McAthie v. Frieberg, 66 S.D. 192, 280 N.W. 871 (1938). Appellees concede this. Also, the legislature, in enacting SDCL 32-22-38, recognized this as being discretionary, as do the administrative rules promulgated thereunder.[2]
We agree that the issuance of such permits is discretionary. Therefore, we must determine whether the Board abused its discretion in one of the manners set out in Richards, supra.
*685 Appellees' claim for the issuance of a writ of mandamus either rises or falls upon the theory that appellants abused their discretion in refusing to issue these permits. Appellees' argument must, in our view, rest upon whether the appellants' conduct was prompted by a misconstruction of the law involved to such a degree as to render it an arbitrary action and an abuse of discretion. Wood v. Waggoner, 67 S.D. 365, 293 N.W. 188 (1940). The answer to this question requires analysis of federal law and its relation to South Dakota law.
Under 23 U.S.C. § 127 we must examine the state laws in effect on July 1, 1956, to determine whether they allowed these maximum weights by special permit. In making this determination we are guided by State ex rel. Dick Irvin, Inc. v. Anderson, 164 Mont. 513, 525 P.2d 564 (1974). The Montana Court was faced with an identical factual setting and identical issues. Obviously Montana's law differs from our own and therefore may allow for such permits where South Dakota law does not; however, we find their analytical framework and criteria to be the proper approach. Therein it is stated:
The section [23 U.S.C. § 127] reveals the following criteria for determining permitted sizes and weights on the interstate system:
a. The state laws in effect on July 1, 1956, must be examined for the purpose of determining whether the maximums prescribed in the federal code or the maximums prescribed by state law apply. If the state law permitted greater maximums as of July 1, 1956, these are controlling, otherwise, the federal maximum prevails.
b. If the state law in effect on July 1, 1956, authorized variations from the maximums, by special permit or otherwise, such variations are also permitted by the federal statutes to be authorized over the interstate system. Furthermore, a state statute passed after July 1, 1956, setting forth procedures or limitations with respect to such variations may also apply to the interstate system, if the state statutes in effect on July 1, 1956, were broad enough to allow such operations. This is made clear by the following provisions of Title 23, Section 127, U.S.C.:
"This section shall not be construed to deny apportionment to any State allowing the operation within such State of any vehicles or combinations thereof that could be lawfully operated within such State on July 1, 1956."
Anderson, supra, at 567-568.
The maximum weight allowed in South Dakota as of July 1, 1956, was 64,650 pounds. SDC 44.0336(6)(e). Therefore, we must determine whether state law at that time allowed for issuance of permits similar to those here in issue.
SDC 44.0336(6)(e), 44.0337 and 44.0342, which were in effect on July 1, 1956, all dealt with the issuance of permits for overweight vehicles.[3] The basis of the FHWA's *686 determination that these permits were not allowed on July 1, 1956, is that SDC 44.0342 uses the term "vehicle" instead of vehicle and load. FHWA therefore determined that permits allowed under SDC 44.0342 applied only to a vehicle itself, exclusive of any load it is carrying.
We might be predisposed to agree with the FHWA's interpretation were it not for the presence of SDC 44.0338, 44.0341 and 44.0343. When viewed in conjunction with these sections, FHWA's otherwise logical argument loses its compulsion.
SDC 44.0338 refers to weights of a "vehicle and the load" until the last sentence, which then refers to "gross weight of the vehicle." SDC 44.0341 also uses the terms "vehicle and load" and "gross weight of such vehicle" interchangeably. Standing alone, these statutes probably would not be enough to defeat FHWA's arguments. SDC 44.0343, however, provides the straw which breaks the back of FHWA's logic.
SDC 44.0343 allows for local authorities to regulate the operation of "vehicles" on highways within their jurisdiction.[4] It is highly significant that SDC 44.0343 provides for "restrictions as to the weight of vehicles." Nowhere is any term other than vehicles used. Thus, if we were to follow the FHWA's logic, we must conclude that SDC 44.0343 only allowed for the regulation of the vehicle's weight; any load it carried could not be regulated, rendering the statute ineffective and meaningless. This is an aberration which could not have been intended by the legislature. We must "presume that the legislature intended to enact a valid and effective statute, and there is a presumption against a construction which would render a statute ineffective or meaningless." City of Sioux Falls v. State Board of Equalization, 87 S.D. 106, 109, 203 N.W.2d 419, 420 (1973). We therefore hold that SDC 44.0342 was not limited merely to the vehicle itself. Rather, it applied to the gross vehicle, to-wit: vehicle and any load.
FHWA also concluded that even if SDC 44.0342 allowed for issuance of such permits, the permits cannot now be routinely granted unless they were routinely granted on July 1, 1956; however, 23 U.S.C. § 127 contains no such requirement. Instead, 23 U.S.C. § 127 states in part that: "This section shall not be construed to deny apportionment to any State allowing the operation within such State of any vehicles or combinations thereof that could be lawfully operated within such State on July 1, 1956[.]" (Emphasis added.) This clearly does not require that such vehicles be currently operated within the state as of July 1, 1956, but only that they could have been. See Anderson, supra.
We find a statement by the Montana Court in Anderson, 525 P.2d at 570, conclusive here.
In conclusion, we observe that no useful purpose is served by the ... cancellation of these restricted route permits. Fuel costs have skyrocketed since last fall when the restricted route permits were authorized, and the energy shortage is still critical. No responsible authority would contend that our system of interstate *687 highways will not withstand the... weights[.]
We hold that the Board's action in denying these permits was based on an erroneous interpretation of state laws and therefore was an abuse of discretion. As for appellee's notice of review, in light of our decision, we choose not to reach it.
Accordingly, we affirm.
All the Justices concur.
NOTES
[1]  23 U.S.C. § 127 provides:
No funds authorized to be appropriated for any fiscal year under section 108(b) of the Federal-Aid Highway Act of 1956 shall be apportioned to any State within the boundaries of which the Interstate System may lawfully be used by vehicles ... with an overall gross weight on a group of two or more consecutive axles produced by application of the following formula:
(LN
W=500 (_____ + 12N + 36)
(N-1             )
where W = overall gross weight on any group of two or more consecutive axles to the nearest 500 pounds, L = distance in feet between the extreme of any group of two or more consecutive axles, and N = number of axles in group under consideration, except that two consecutive sets of tandem axles may carry a gross load of 34,000 pounds each providing the overall distance between the first and last axles of such consecutive sets of tandem axles is thirty-six feet or more: Provided, That such overall gross weight may not exceed eighty thousand pounds ... or the corresponding maximum weights ... permitted for vehicles using the public highways of such State under laws or regulations established by appropriate State authority in effect on July 1, 1956 .... Any amount which is withheld from apportionment to any State pursuant to the foregoing provisions shall lapse. This section shall not be construed to deny apportionment to any State allowing the operation within such State of any vehicles or combinations thereof that could be lawfully operated within such State on July 1, 1956[.] (Emphasis in original.)
[2]  SDCL 32-22-38, as amended in 1980, provides:
The secretary of the department of transportation or his designee or any county treasurer may issue a written or telegraphic permit for a fee or fees to be fixed, authorizing an applicant to move any kind or form of vehicle or building for a single trip over a route to be designated by the authority issuing the permit, to any point in or through this state upon its state trunk highways or the national system of interstate highways despite the fact that the maximum specifications of the vehicle and load or building exceed the maximum vehicle and load specifications set forth in this chapter.
ARSD 70:01:04:04 provides:
Permits will be issued at the discretion of the issuing authority as described in § 70:01:04:02 and exceptions thereto. An application for a permit does not assure permit approval and the permit issuing authority in exercising his discretion shall be guided by the rules in this chapter.
[3]  SDC 44.0336(6)(e) provides, in part:
The limitations herein imposed shall always apply, unless special permits are issued by the authorities empowered by the statutes of this state to issue same, shall have been issued in accordance with law allowing vehicles with different weights, heights, length or width to temporarily operate[.]
SDC 44.0337 provides:
Whenever it shall be necessary to transport a single article which cannot be divided and which exceeds the width of ninety-six inches or exceeds in weight the maximum fixed by statute, over any public highway, the same shall be transported only after the issuance of a special written permit for a single trip, to be issued by the county highway superintendent, or other person, charged with the maintenance of the highway over which such transportation is to be had.
SDC 44.0342 provides:
The State Highway Commission and local authorities in their respective jurisdictions may in their discretion upon application in writing and good cause being shown therefor, issue a special permit in writing authorizing the applicant to operate or move a vehicle of a size or weight exceeding the maximum specified in this chapter upon any highway under the jurisdiction of and for the maintenance of which the body granting the permit is responsible. Every such permit shall be issued for a single trip and may designate the route to be traversed and contain any other restrictions or conditions deemed necessary by the body granting such permit. Every such permit shall be carried in the vehicle to which it refers and shall be open to inspection by any peace officer.
[4]  SDC 44.0343 provides:
Local authorities may by ordinance or resolution prohibit the operation of vehicles upon any highway or impose restrictions as to the weight of vehicles for a total period not to exceed ninety days in any one calendar year, when operated upon any highway under the jurisdiction of and for the maintenance of which such local authorities are responsible whenever any said highway by reason of deterioration, rain, snow, or other climatic conditions will be seriously damaged or destroyed unless the use of vehicles thereon is prohibited or the permissible weights thereof reduced. Such local authorities enacting any such ordinance or resolution shall erect or cause to be erected and maintained signs designating the provisions of the ordinance or resolution at each end of that portion of any highway affected thereby and the ordinance or resolution shall not be effective until or unless such signs are erected and maintained. Local authorities may also by ordinance or resolution prohibit the operation of trucks or other commercial vehicles or impose limitations as to the weights thereof on designated highways, which prohibitions and limitations shall be designated by appropriate signs placed on such highways.

=== CASE 9741324 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:53:33.988931+00 ===

FOSHEIM, Justice (On reassignment).
Petitioner Richard Marshall was convicted of murder on April 6, 1976, and sentenced to life imprisonment. We affirmed that conviction in State v. Marshall, 264 N.W.2d 911 (S.D.1978). On June 15, 1978, petitioner filed a petition for post-conviction relief in the circuit court. This appeal is from an order denying such relief. We affirm.
The evidence shows that Martin Monti-leaux, an Indian male, entered the Longhorn Bar in Scenic, South Dakota, sometime in the afternoon of March 1, 1975. He was accompanied by several persons. They gathered at a booth and drank beer throughout the afternoon and evening. During the evening, there were approximately twenty customers in the bar.
At approximately midnight, a group of American Indian Movement members entered the bar and started “milling” around. The group included Richard Marshall and Russell Means. The owner of the bar became concerned and instructed his grandson to call the sheriff.
Shortly thereafter, Martin Montileaux went into the men’s room located in the rear area of the bar. He was allegedly followed by petitioner and Russell Means. Soon afterwards, a “thump” was heard and then a shot. Petitioner and Means then came out of the restroom. After a brief interval, petitioner and the other members of his group left the bar, entered cars, and started toward Rapid City, South Dakota. Petitioner and Means were passengers in a Ford automobile, which was pursued for seventeen miles by the sheriff in a pickup with a red light and by a patrol car with a siren and red lights operating. The Ford proceeded erratically from one shoulder of the road to the other at speeds varying from 40 to 80 miles per hour. The chase ended on the outskirts of Rapid City when the Ford entered a trailer court. As it attempted to leave, the sheriff struck and stopped it with his vehicle. Petitioner and Means were placed under arrest.
In the car occupied by petitioner and Means, the officers found two rifles and three pistols. All were fully loaded, except a “22 long rifle revolver,” which contained five loaded cartridges and one empty cartridge in its cylinder.
Martin Montileaux was found lying on the floor of the restroom with a small hole in his neck. When asked at the scene by a deputy sheriff whether he knew who shot him, he replied, “Russell Means’ friend.” Montileaux died several days later from the effects of the bullet, which had entered the front of his throat, severed his spinal cord, and lodged in the back of his neck. While in the hospital, Montileaux told the deputy sheriff the man who shot him was “shaggy haired” and wore “an army jacket.”
The bullet removed from decedent’s neck and the 22 revolver were sent to the Federal Bureau of Investigation for examination. The special agent who examined the exhibits testified that the fatal bullet was a 22 long rifle caliber lead bullet containing shearing marks caused by a misalignment, of the cylinder of the weapon from which it had been fired. He also testified that the revolver had a cylinder misalignment that could cause a shearing mark on bullets fired from it. However, he could not state that the bullet removed from the decedent’s neck was fired from the revolver removed from appellant’s car “to the exclusion of all other weapons,” because shearing is a common occurrence in cheaply-made guns.
The petition for post-conviction relief centers on the testimony of Myrtle Poor Bear. She testified at the trial that she attended a party at the Marshall home shortly after he was released on bail. During the course of the evening, petitioner came over to the table where she was sitting and said:
“You know, that guy that got killed at Scenic?” I said, “Yeah.” He said “I *840asked the guy if that was the right one and he said, ‘yeah,’ it was,” so he said, “We waited for him and we followed him in the bathroom,” and then he said, “I pulled the trigger.” He said, “I’ll never forget the look on the son-of-a-bitch’s face as he went down.”
Myrtle Poor Bear stated that petitioner told her at a later party: “I don’t know why I shot him.” She has recanted that testimony-
Petitioner contends that he is entitled to a new trial in light of Poor Bear’s recantation. Petitioner also notes a statement made by a United States Attorney to the United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit that Poor Bear was an incompetent witness in federal proceedings1 taking place at approximately the same time as petitioner’s murder trial. In addition, petitioner argues that medical records of Poor Bear, which were not available at the murder trial, together with the testimony of her family, indicate that Poor Bear is a seriously mentally-disturbed woman, who often fantasizes and lies. At the post-conviction hearing, petitioner introduced Poor Bear’s hospital records, which show that she frequently needed medical- attention and had a problem with alcohol and drugs.
In Pickering v. State, 260 N.W.2d 234 (S.D.1977), this Court, for the first time, addressed the standards for granting a new trial based upon a witness’ recantation of testimony. In that case, the petitioner’s brother recanted and confessed that it was he who had committed the homicide. After careful review of the existing standards in different jurisdictions for granting a new trial based upon a witness’ recantation, we adopted the standards set out in Larrison v. United States, 24 F.2d 82 (7th Cir. 1928), and stated that a new trial should be granted when:
‘(a) The court is reasonably well satisfied that the testimony given by a material witness is false.
(b) That without it the jury might have reached a different conclusion (emphasis added in original).
(c) That the party seeking the new trial was taken by surprise when the false testimony was given and was unable to meet it or did not know of its falsity until after the trial.’
Pickering v. State, supra, 260 N.W.2d at 235, quoting Larrison v. United States, supra, at 87-8. See also United States v. Wallace, 528 F.2d 863 (4th Cir. 1976); Newman v. United States, 238 F.2d 861 (5th Cir. 1956); Gordon v. United States, 178 F.2d 896 (6th Cir. 1949); cert. denied, 339 U.S. 935, 70 S.Ct. 664, 94 L.Ed. 1353 (1950); State v. Compiano, 261 Iowa 509, 154 N.W.2d 845 (1967); 2 Wright, Federal Practice & Procedure § 557 (1969).
We further noted in Pickering that verdicts would be insecure if they could always be set aside upon the testimony of witnesses who recant their former testimony. Recanted testimony is exceedingly unreliable and is to be regarded with suspicion, particularly where the recantation involves a confession of perjury.
The record discloses that the State moved to endorse the name of Myrtle Poor Bear as a witness on March 23,1976, six days before the trial was to begin, and that petitioner’s counsel talked to her prior to her testimony. Myrtle Poor Bear was proficiently and effectively cross-examined at the murder trial.
In addition, the recited strong circumstantial evidence indicates that petitioner brought a deadly weapon to the Longhorn Bar and used it to kill Martin Montileaux in the manner of a planned execution. After a cool and calm departure from the Longhorn Bar, the trip to Rapid City quickly turned into a frantic flight from law enforcement officers during which, in an apparent effort at deception, petitioner and Means exchanged jackets and petitioner apparently removed his ponytail. Ordinarily, evidence of flight and deception, standing alone, is insufficient to convict, but when accompanied by other *841evidence, it may justify an inference of guilt. United States v. Pennsylvania, 267 F.Supp. 316 (E.D.Pa.1966), aff’d. 378 F.2d 372 (3rd Cir. 1967), cert. denied sub nom. Gaspero v. Pennsylvania, 389 U.S. 870, 88 S.Ct. 151, 19 L.Ed.2d 149 (1967). An attempt by the accused to flee following commission of the alleged crime is circumstantially relevant to prove not only commission of the act, but also the intent and purpose with which it was committed. United States v. New Jersey, 405 F.2d 632 (3rd Cir. 1969), cert. denied sub nom., Yeager v. O’Connor, 395 U.S. 923, 89 S.Ct. 1770, 23 L.Ed.2d 240 (1969). See also: United States v. Blue Thunder, 604 F.2d 550 (8th Cir. 1979), cert. denied, 444 U.S. 902, 100 S.Ct. 215, 62 L.Ed.2d 139 (1979); United States v. Peltier, supra. The 22 caliber pistol found in the vehicle carrying petitioner, which was examined by the F.B.I., was evidence that petitioner possessed or had access to tools, weapons, implements, or other articles with which the crime was or might have been committed and connected the accused with the offense. State v. Schafer, 297 N.W.2d 473 (S.D.1980); State v. Brown, 285 N.W.2d 848 (S.D.1979). That circumstantial evidence was fortified by the solid testimony of witnesses who saw petitioner enter and exit the restroom while it was occupied by the victim and during the time when the shot was heard, thus providing proof of opportunity. Finally, there was the eyewitness statement of the murder victim. Statements made under an obvious sense of impending death are deemed sufficiently reliable as to fall within an exception to the hearsay rule. SDCL 23A-22-12; United States v. Mobley, 421 F.2d 345 (5th Cir. 1970).
All such evidence is independent of the testimony of Poor Bear that after petitioner was released on bail, he braggingly admitted killing Montileaux. Admittedly, the evidence was not without contradiction. There were discrepancies in the testimony of various witnesses, such as the failure of two of the State’s witnesses to correctly identify petitioner at a preliminary hearing. There were also some discrepancies with regard to the kind of jacket petitioner was wearing the night of the shooting and whether his hair was “shaggy or combed in a pony tail.” These, however, were all matters of credibility, and the weight and value to be given to the testimony was resolved by the jury. Such discrepancies do not reflect upon the credibility of Poor Bear.
With regard to the statement of the United States Attorney in the Peltier case, the trial court noted that the remark was made by an individual in an unrelated proceeding in an effort to justify the disallowance of Poor Bear’s testimony in that case. The trial court further specifically found that:
[Poor Bear’s] testimony at trial was subject to penetrating cross-examination, which clearly revealed significant inconsistencies in her testimony, which diminished its impact ... [upon] the jury.
Myrtle Poor Bear is a very easily led individual of limited intelligence.
Her testimony at the post-conviction hearing is fairly fraught with contradiction and is not credible.
The testimony at the post-conviction hearing is less credible than that produced at the time of trial.
The jury had overwhelming evidence at trial to base a verdict of guilt without the testimony of Myrtle Poor Bear. The jury would have concluded that the defendant was guilty had Myrtle Poor Bear not testified. The Court is not satisfied nor reasonably well satisfied that Myrtle Poor Bear’s testimony at trial was false.
These findings of fact may not be set aside unless clearly erroneous. SDCL 15-6-52(a). In re Estate of Hobelsberger, 85 S.D. 282,181 N.W.2d 455 (1970). In Pickering v. State, supra at 236, we said: “At best, it is difficult for an appellate court to assess the veracity of witnesses by reference to a bare record. The trial judge is in a far better position to determine which version of [the recanting witness’] testimony is more likely the truth, having observed the demeanor of the witnesses.”
Petitioner relies heavily on Mesarosh v. United States, 352 U.S. 1, 77 S.Ct. 1, 1 *842L.Ed.2d 1 (1956). In our view, that reliance is misplaced. In Mesarosh, the Solicitor General of the United States moved to remand the case to the trial court for further proceedings because of untruthful testimony given before other tribunals by a Government witness. The Mesarosh decision was based entirely upon the representations of the Government in it's written motion and upon the statements of the Solicitor General during argument on that motion. The Supreme Court reversed the convictions and ordered a new trial, with this important limitation:
It must be remembered that we are not dealing here with a motion for a new trial initiated by the defense, under Rule 33 of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure, presenting untruthful statements by a Government witness subsequent to the trial as newly discovered evidence affecting his credibility at the trial. Such an allegation by the defense ordinarily will not support a motion for a new trial, because new evidence which is “merely cumulative or impeaching” is not, according to the often-repeated statement of the courts, an adequate basis for the grant of a new trial.
352 U.S. at 9, 77 S.Ct. at 5, 1 L.Ed.2d at 7. Cf., United States v. Johnson, 142 F.2d 588 (7th Cir. 1944), appeal dismissed, 323 U.S. 806, 65 S.Ct. 264, 89 L.Ed. 643 (1944); United States v. Rutkin, 208 F.2d 647 (3rd Cir. 1953).
In Mesarosh, the Court further distinguished its decision from facts similar to those in this case:
The present situation is different from that in United States v. Flynn (D.C.N.Y.) 130 F.Supp. 412, rearg. den., 131 F.Supp. 742. There the defense moved for a new trial on the basis of an affidavit in which a witness recanted his testimony after the trial. The Government charged that the recantation, rather than the testimony it contradicted, was the lie. Hence there was a factual issue to be determined at the outset, unlike the present case, where there is no conflict between the trial testimony and the subsequent matter brought forward by the Government as bearing on credibility. This difference has been recognized by the courts as calling for the application of different tests in passing on a motion for new trial, even without the added distinction of this case that it is the Government which questions the witness’s credibility. See, e. g., United States v. Johnson (7th Cir.) 142 F.2d 588, 591, 592, cert. dismd., 323 U.S. 806, 65 S.Ct. 264, 89 L.Ed. 643; United States v. Hiss (D.C.N.Y.) 107 F.Supp. 128, 136, affd. (2 Cir.) 201 F.2d 372.
352 U.S. at 12, n. 6, 77 S.Ct. at 7, 1 L.Ed.2d at 8-9.
The Court further noted:
Because the situation raised by the Solicitor General’s motion is quite distinct from that of the ordinary defense motion for new trial, ... we would not consider ourselves bound on a review of the District Court’s ruling in this situation by the limitations expressed with reference to the defense motion in United States v. Johnson, 327 U.S. 106, 66 S.Ct. 464, 90 L.Ed. 562.
352 U.S. at 12, n. 7, 77 S.Ct. at 7, 1 L.Ed.2d at 9.
The limitations referred to in United States v. Johnson, 327 U.S. 106, 66 S.Ct. 464, 90 L.Ed. 562 (1946) are stated as follows:
[I]t is not the province of this Court or the Circuit Court of Appeals to review orders granting or denying motions for a new trial when such review is sought on the alleged ground that the trial court made erroneous findings. [Citations omitted] While the appellate court might intervene when the findings of fact are wholly unsupported by evidence, [citations omitted] it should never do so where it does not clearly appear that the findings are not supported by any evidence.
327 U.S. at 111-12, 66 S.Ct. at 466, 90 L.Ed. at 565-6.
It follows that the Mesarosh decision does not apply to the claims of petitioner. As we stated in Pickering, “the moving party has the burden of fulfilling the re*843quirements of all three standards before relief will be granted. Failure to meet any one of the three standards will defeat the movant’s prayer for relief.” 260 N.W.2d at 235. We conclude that petitioner has not met that burden. We are not reasonably well satisfied that Poor Bear’s testimony was false or that, without it, the jury might have reached a different conclusion. We further conclude that petitioner was able to effectively cross-examine Poor Bear at trial. Here, there were factual issues to be decided and the trial court made a determination with regard to the recanted testimony under the Pickering standards. We cannot say that the court’s findings are contrary to a clear preponderance of the evidence, nor are we left with a definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been committed. Cunningham v. Yankton Clinic, P.A., 262 N.W.2d 508 (S.D.1978).
Finally, we reject petitioner’s contention that reversal is required due to the prosecution’s failure to comply with the murder trial judge’s order to produce medical records of the witness, Poor Bear. We recognize that the suppression of evidence favorable to an accused upon request violates due process where the evidence is material to either guilt or punishment irrespective of the good or bad faith of the prosecution. Brady v. Maryland, 373 U.S. 83, 83 S.Ct. 1194, 10 L.Ed.2d 215 (1963); State v. Reiman, 284 N.W.2d 860 (S.D.1979); Geelan v. State, 85 S.D. 346, 182 N.W.2d 311 (1970). It is further clear that the jury’s estimate of the truthfulness and reliability of a given witness may well be determinative of guilt or innocence. Giglio v. United States, 405 U.S. 150, 92 S.Ct. 763, 31 L.Ed.2d 104 (1972); Napue v. Illinois, 360 U.S. 264, 79 S.Ct. 1173, 3 L.Ed.2d 1217 (1959).
Petitioner argues that knowledge of Poor Bear’s history of drug abuse and psychological problems would have greatly affected her credibility before the jury and that the failure to produce her medical records thus amounted to a denial of due process. However, as we indicated in State v. Reiman, supra, not every failure to produce evidence under court order will require reversal, for “implicit in the requirement of materiality is a concern that the suppressed evidence might have affected the outcome of the trial.” United States v. Agars, 427 U.S. 97, 104, 96 S.Ct. 2392, 2398, 49 L.Ed.2d 342, 350 (1976). See State v. Sahlie, 277 N.W.2d 591 (S.D.1979). In view of the strong circumstantial evidence of guilt presented at the murder trial, we cannot say as a matter of law that the medical records of Poor Bear would have been outcome-determinative in this case.
We have reviewed petitioner’s remaining arguments and find them to be without merit. The order of the trial court is affirmed.
DUNN, MORGAN and HENDERSON, JJ., concur.
WOLLMAN, C. J., dissents.
. Those proceedings involved the case of United States v. Peltier, 585 F.2d 314 (8th Cir. 1978), cert. denied, 440 U.S. 945, 99 S.Ct. 1422, 59 L.Ed.2d 634 (1979).

=== CASE 9741325 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:53:33.994322+00 ===

WOLLMAN, Chief Justice
(dissenting).
I agree with petitioner’s contention that he is entitled to a new trial because of information concerning Myrtle Poor Bear that has emerged since the murder trial. First, Poor Bear has recanted the testimony she gave at the trial. Second, a United States Attorney stated to the United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit that Poor Bear was an incompetent witness in federal proceedings taking place at approximately the same time as petitioner’s murder trial, representing to the Court of Appeals that there was absolutely no evidence that her affidavits with regard to those federal proceedings were correct. Third, the medical records of Poor Bear, which were not available at petitioner’s original murder trial, together with the testimony of Poor Bear’s family, indicate that Poor Bear is a seriously disturbed young woman who often fantasizes and tells stories and lies.
Poor Bear was first interviewed by agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation sometime after two FBI agents were murdered at the Jumping Bull site near Oglala, South Dakota, on June 26, 1975. On February 19,1976, she signed an affidavit stating that Leonard Peltier, who was *844later found guilty of killing the two FBI agents,1 was her boyfriend; that on June 26, 1975, Peltier knew that the FBI agents were serving a warrant on Jimmy Eagle; that Peltier told his companions to get ready to kill the agents; that she, Myrtle Poor Bear, left at that time and did not return; and that Peltier later talked to her about the killings and said that one of the FBI agents had surrendered but that he (Peltier) had kept on shooting.
On February 23, 1976, Myrtle Poor Bear signed a second affidavit, which in most respects was similar to the first affidavit. In the second affidavit, however, Poor Bear stated that she was present the day the FBI agents were killed and that she saw Peltier shoot the FBI agents. Poor Bear did not, however, describe the killings in any detail.
On February 24, 1976, Myrtle Poor Bear made a statement to an FBI agent in which she stated that not only was she at the scene of the murder, but that she had also tried to stop Peltier from killing the agents. Her statement included an explicit description of the point-blank murder of the FBI agents, a story about trying to get away from the scene of the murder and shooting at one of Peltier’s companions, and the facts regarding her purported rape two days before the murder incident by nine of Peltier’s companions.
On March 22,1976, Myrtle Poor Bear was taken by FBI agents to Rapid City, South Dakota, where she made her first statement regarding the Martin Montileaux murder to Pennington County Deputy Sheriff Don Phillips. Poor Bear told Deputy Phillips that she knew Richard Marshall and his wife Cleo very well and related to him substantially the same story she later told at petitioner’s murder trial.2 Three days later Poor Bear was endorsed as a witness in petitioner’s murder trial.
On March 31, 1976, just nine days after Poor Bear’s first statement to Deputy Phillips, she signed her third and final affidavit concerning the murder of the two FBI agents. This affidavit provided an explicit description of the murder of the two agents. This time, however, she stated that she had tried to get away from the scene of the murder, was unable to, and was instead held by someone and therefore watched the point-blank shooting of the agents. It was two days after the signing of this final affidavit that Poor Bear testified in petitioner’s murder trial. Petitioner’s counsel at the time of the murder trial had no knowledge of these affidavits.
On April 13, 1977, Myrtle Poor Bear, in testimony given outside the presence of the jury in the trial of Leonard Peltier,3 disclaimed virtually every allegation contained in the three affidavits about the killing of the two FBI agents. On May 11,1977, Poor Bear, by affidavit, recanted both her testimony regarding the murder of Martin Mon-tileaux and the murder of the two FBI agents.
On April 12, 1978, Evan L. Hultman, the United States Attorney who represented the prosecution in the Peltier murder trial, made certain statements in oral argument before the Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit during the argument in Peltier’s appeal. Mr. Hultman agreed that it was a correct statement that Myrtle Poor Bear was a witness whose mental imbalance was so gross as to render her testimony unbelievable. During oral argument, the following exchange took place:
Judge Ross: But anybody who read those affidavits would know that they contra-*845diet each other. And why the FBI and Prosecutor’s office continued to extract more to put into the affidavits in hope to get Mr. Peltier back to the United States is beyond my understanding.
Mr. Hultman: Yes.
Judge Ross: Because you should have known, and the FBI should have known that you were pressuring the woman to add to her statement.
Mr. Hultman: ... I did read these affidavits and put together the fact that ... her story didn’t later check out with anything in the record by any other witness in any other way. So I concluded then, in addition to her incompetence, first, that secondly, there was no relevance of any kind. Absolutely not one scentilla [sic] of any evidence of any kind that had anything to do with this case. And it was then that I personally made the decision that this witness was no witness. First of all, because she was incompetent in the utter, utter, utter ultimate sense of incompetency ... [and second] there was not one scentilla [sic] that showed Myrtle Poor Bear was there, knew anything, did anything, et cetera.
Mr. Hultman: [Myrtle Poor Bear] knew nothing, absolutely nothing, without question, about what took place.
Judge Ross: Was she there at the time? Mr. Hultman: No, she was not... ,4
At petitioner’s hearing for post-conviction relief, Myrtle Poor Bear testified that petitioner never told her that he had shot Martin Montileaux; that the FBI threatened her and her daughter to force her to testify; that she was taking medicine and drugs immediately before testifying in petitioner’s trial; that she was not in Oglala at the time the two FBI agents were shot; that she had never even met Leonard Peltier until she testified at his trial; and that her three affidavits regarding the Peltier matter were false.
During the course of the post-conviction hearing, petitioner introduced Myrtle Poor Bear’s hospital records, which were requested but not supplied at petitioner’s trial. In summary, these records show that Poor Bear frequently needed medical attention, had a problem with alcohol and drugs, and frequently lied to hospital personnel.5
Myrtle Poor Bear’s sister testified at the post-conviction hearing that Poor Bear has been making up stories since she was a child and that it is just a part of her personality. Poor Bear’s sister stated that “[s]he was forever lying to us, making up stories, and we expected it.” Poor Bear’s father also testified that Poor Bear “makes up stories.”
In Pickering v. State, 260 N.W.2d 234 (S.D.1977), this Court adopted the standards for granting a new trial based upon a witness’ recantation of testimony. We stated that a new trial should be granted when:
(a) The court is reasonably well satisfied that the testimony given by a material witness is false.
(b) That without it the jury might have reached a different conclusion (emphasis added in original).
*846(c) That the party seeking the new trial was taken by surprise when the false testimony was given and was unable to meet it or did not know of its falsity until after the trial.
State v. Pickering, supra, 260 N.W.2d at 235, quoting Larrison v. United States, 24 F.2d 82 (7th Cir. 1928). It is my opinion that application of the standards in Pickering to the facts in the instant case leads to the conclusion that petitioner is entitled to a new trial. I will address the three standards in reverse order.
I
With regard to the third standard in Pickering, the question is whether petitioner was taken by surprise when Myrtle Poor Bear’s allegedly false testimony was given and was unable to meet it or did not know of its falsity until after the trial.
Without a doubt, petitioner was taken by surprise when he learned only six days before trial that the State intended to call Poor Bear as a witness. Although Poor Bear had been in contact with the FBI since at least February 19,1976, she did not give her first statement to Deputy Phillips with regard to the Montileaux murder until March 22, 1976.6 Petitioner requested a continuance as soon as Poor Bear was endorsed as a witness, but this motion was denied. Petitioner’s counsel had no opportunity to talk to Poor Bear until the day she testified at the trial.
I agree with petitioner’s contention that he was unable to meet Poor Bear’s testimony. Petitioner did not know of the contemporaneous and apparently false affidavits given by Poor Bear with regard to the shooting of the two FBI agents, and did not even know Poor Bear’s true relationship with the FBI. Moreover, petitioner was unable to review Poor Bear’s medical history, which in itself would probably have had a substantial effect on her credibility.
The State nevertheless contends, and the majority opinion agrees, that Poor Bear was effectively cross-examined at petitioner’s murder trial. Although I agree that Poor Bear was cross-examined as proficiently as was possible under the circumstances, it is my opinion that her credibility would have been rendered far more suspect, if indeed the State would even have called her as a witness, had petitioner’s counsel at the murder trial been aware of the information that has come to light since the trial.
II
The second question under the Pickering standards is whether the jury might have reached a different conclusion without Myrtle Poor Bear’s testimony. It is my opinion that Poor Bear was a material witness at petitioner’s trial and that the jury might have reached a different conclusion without her testimony.
The evidence at petitioner’s murder trial was not without contradiction. In State v. Marshal], 264 N.W.2d 911, 915-16 (S.D. 1978), we stated:
As the defendant points out there were some differences in the testimony of the various witnesses such as the failure of two of the state’s witnesses to correctly identify defendant at a preliminary hearing, the kind of jacket defendant was wearing the night of the shooting, and whether his hair was “shaggy” or combed in a pony tail. These are all matters of credibility and the weight and value to be given to the testimony of each witness. Their resolution was a matter for the jury.
The testimony of the various witnesses with regard to who was in the rest room at the time Martin Montileaux was shot is anything but clear-cut. Essentially, two witnesses testified that petitioner and Russell Means followed Martin Montileaux into the rest room, after which the witnesses claimed they heard a thump and then a *847gunshot, and that petitioner and Russell Means then walked out of the rest room. Although both of these witnesses had known petitioner for a number of years, one witness misidentified petitioner and the other witness was unable to identify him at a preliminary hearing two months after the shooting.
Martin Montileaux made a number of statements to the police before his death six days after the shooting. These statements are at best contradictory. Montileaux identified the gunman as “Russell Means’ friend,” but there were a number of persons with Russell Means at the bar that night. Montileaux made the statement that only he and the gunman were in the rest room. The next day, however, Montileaux said there were two other men in the rest room, one of whom was Russell Means. Two days later Montileaux said that the two men were already in the rest room when he came in. Montileaux also said that the man who shot him had shaggy hair and was not wearing his hair in a pony tail. All of the other witnesses testified that petitioner had his hair in a pony tail on the night in question. Although Montileaux stated that his assailant was wearing an army field jacket, petitioner was not one of the men wearing army field jackets at the Longhorn Bar that night. Finally, Myrtle Poor Bear did not testify at the separate trial of Russell Means, at which Means was acquitted by a jury of the murder of Martin Monti-leaux.
In addition to the inconsistencies mentioned above, the testimony of Myrtle Poor Bear may have been the key evidence on several critical areas raised during the trial. Since petitioner was convicted of murder, the jury implicitly found that petitioner had a “premeditated design to effect death.” This Court, in affirming petitioner’s conviction, termed the shooting a “planned execution.” State v. Marshall, supra, 264 N.W.2d at 916. We also stated that a number of factors may go toward proving “premeditated design,” viz: “the use of a lethal or deadly weapon; the manner of the killing; the accused’s conduct before and after the killing; and whether or not there was provocation for the killing.” State v. Marshall, supra, 264 N.W.2d at 916.
Myrtle Poor Bear testified that petitioner told her he asked someone if that was the right person and then waited for Monti-leaux and followed him into the rest room.7 This is the only direct testimony that petitioner intended to kill Martin Montileaux. There was no evidence that petitioner brought a deadly weapon to the Longhorn Bar, nor was there any evidence that he knew or had reason to know that Martin Montileaux was in the Longhorn Bar. Poor Bear’s testimony also provided the only theory regarding the possible motivation that petitioner had for killing Montileaux. Poor Bear testified that petitioner told her that Montileaux had beaten petitioner sometime prior to the shooting.
The fact that petitioner and Means immediately followed Montileaux into the rest room was evidence relating to the manner of killing and would tend to prove premeditated design. Whether or not petitioner immediately followed Montileaux into the rest room, however, was a disputed point at petitioner’s trial. The following exchange took place between Deputy Phillips and Martin , Montileaux several days before Montileaux died:
Q. Okay, and you said Russell [Means] was, had come in the bathroom with the other guy?
A. They were in there already.
Q. They what?
A. They were in there.
*848Q. Who wasn’t in there?
A. They were in there.
Q. They were just in there?
A. Yeah, both of them.
Given the differences in the testimony of various witnesses and the lack of other independent evidence regarding premeditation, Myrtle Poor Bear’s testimony assumed special importance. It can hardly be disputed that a defendant’s admission, such as the one alleged in this case, ranks just short of a formal confession in terms of its impact upon a jury.
Although I adhere to this Court’s statement in State v. Marshall, supra, that these inconsistencies were to be resolved by the jury, it is my opinion that given the apparent contradictions and differences in testimony a jury might have reached a different conclusion without Myrtle Poor Bear’s testimony.
Ill
The final standard under Pickering is whether the court is reasonably well satisfied that the testimony given by Myrtle Poor Bear, a material witness, is false.
As noted in State v. Pickering, supra, 260 N.W.2d at 235, recanted testimony must be scrutinized with extreme care. Indeed, based on Poor Bear’s recantation alone, I might well agree with the post-conviction court’s finding that her testimony at the murder trial was not false. In addition to Poor Bear’s recantation of her testimony, however, there is the additional fact that immediately before her testimony in petitioner’s trial she signed affidavits concerning another serious matter that so contradicted each other that she had to be lying in one or more or all of them.
Moreover, there are the statements of Mr. Hultman, who all but stated that Myrtle Poor Bear was lying when she said that she was at the site where the two FBI agents were killed. I am not disposed to take lightly statements made by a United States Attorney before a panel of judges in a United States Court of Appeals.
Finally, we have before us the medical history of Myrtle Poor Bear, which shows that she has a problem with alcohol and drugs, fabricates stories about rapes and shootings, and obviously has problems discerning reality from fantasy, a pattern of untruth and fantasy testified to by her own sister and father. In sum, the cumulative effect of this evidence persuades me that Poor Bear testified falsely at petitioner’s murder trial.
I would hold that the circuit court erred in not granting petitioner a new trial.
. See United States v. Peltier, 585 F.2d 314 (8th Cir. 1978).
. Other remarks made that day by Myrtle Poor Bear included the description of an episode where petitioner allegedly told Poor Bear that she knew a lot about him, after which a companion of petitioner apparently fired a shot towards Poor Bear, who fell to the floor to avoid the shot. Poor Bear also stated that petitioner might not show up for his trial and would instead go to Canada, and had asked her to join him.
.The prosecution did not even call Myrtle Poor Bear as a witness. Rather, the defense called her to support Peltier’s theory that the FBI had framed him by manufacturing evidence and inducing witnesses to testify against him. Poor Bear’s testimony was subsequently not admitted into evidence. United States v. Peltier, supra, 585 F.2d at 332.
. See United States v. Peltier, supra, 585 F.2d at 335, n. 18, for the Court of Appeals’ analysis of the government’s use of Poor Bear’s affidavits.
. Examples of the apparent stories Myrtle Poor Bear would tell hospital personnel include:
1) On three occasions Poor Bear reported having fallen off a horse when in fact she had apparently never been thrown from a horse.
2) On two separate occasions Poor Bear reported that she had been gang raped in 1975. There is no evidence that this is true.
3) Poor Bear said she had one child and was getting married, whereas in fact she had two children and was not getting married.
4) Poor Bear said her former husband was trying to take her child away from her. Poor Bear never had a husband and the father of her children had never tried to take her children away from her.
5) Poor Bear said she had a boyfriend who was shot at Wounded Knee. Apparently this statement is not true.
6) Poor Bear, after being admitted to the hospital, told hospital personnel that she had been beaten several times in the previous month and had had to flee for her life several times.
. Poor Bear testified at the original murder trial that she had told the FBI about petitioner’s alleged conversation with her sometime in late 1975, which would mean that the FBI waited at least three months before they informed the Pennington County Sheriff’s Office of Poor Bear’s possible testimony.
. In contrast to this statement, Poor Bear testified that petitioner later told her that he didn’t know why he shot Montileaux. The State attempted to explain this inconsistency when petitioner appealed his murder conviction to this Court in State v. Marshall, supra. The State, in its brief submitted on the earlier appeal, wrote that this statement “may mean that while [petitioner] did, in fact, plan to kill the decedent at the direction of a second person, he did not himself know why the second person wanted the victim killed.” Later the State makes the statement that “it is the State’s belief that the jury probably believed the story that the killing was at the direction of the second person.”

=== CASE 2226894 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:21.882117+00 ===

104 Mich. App. 700 (1981)
305 N.W.2d 297
KLINE
v.
KLINE
Docket No. 50261.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided March 17, 1981.
Kirk & Robertson, for the intervening plaintiff.
Frederick W. Lauck, for defendant.
Before: D.C. RILEY, P.J., and D.E. HOLBROOK, JR., and M.B. BREIGHNER,[*] JJ.
PER CURIAM.
This is an appeal by leave granted from an order denying plaintiff-intervenor's motion to quash writs of garnishment. The intervenor claimed that the obligation of the garnishee was to *702 it, the professional corporation, and not to its sole shareholder, Robert L. Kline.
Robert L. Kline and Dorothy A. Kline were parties to an action which ended in a judgment of divorce. As part of the property settlement, Dr. Kline agreed to pay a certain sum of money to defendant. He did not pay and defendant sought to garnish debts owed to him by, among others, Delta Dental Plan. Delta disclosed that it owed debts, not to Robert L. Kline, but to Robert L. Kline, D.D.S., P.C., a professional service corporation organized pursuant to MCL 450.221 et seq.; MSA 21.315(1) et seq., and owned wholly by Robert L. Kline. The lower court held that Robert L. Kline and the professional corporation should be treated as one and the same, disregarding the corporate entity.
Generally, the law treats a corporation as an entirely separate entity from its stockholders, even where one person owns all of the corporation's stock. Bourne v Muskegon Circuit Judge, 327 Mich. 175, 191; 41 NW2d 515 (1950). Complete identity of interest between sole shareholder and corporation may lead courts to treat them as one for certain purposes. Williams v American Title Ins Co, 83 Mich. App. 686; 269 NW2d 481 (1978). Where the corporation is a mere agent or instrumentality of its shareholders or a device to avoid legal obligations, the corporate entity may be ignored. People ex rel Attorney General v Michigan Bell Telephone Co, 246 Mich. 198, 205; 224 N.W. 438 (1929). A court may look through the veil of corporate structure to avoid fraud or injustice. Schusterman v Employment Security Comm, 336 Mich. 246; 57 NW2d 869 (1953). The community of interest between corporation and shareholders may be so great that, to meet the purposes of justice, they *703 should be considered as one and the same. L A Walden & Co v Consolidated Underwriters, 316 Mich. 341, 346; 25 NW2d 248 (1946). When the notion of a corporation as a legal entity is used to defeat public convenience, justify a wrong, protect fraud or defend crime, that notion must be set aside and the corporation treated as the individuals who own it. Paul v University Motor Sales Co, 283 Mich. 587, 602; 278 N.W. 714 (1938). The fiction of a corporate entity different from the stockholders themselves was introduced for convenience and to serve the ends of justice, but when it is invoked to subvert the ends of justice it should be and is disregarded by the courts. Paul, supra. A court's treatment of a corporate entity clearly rests on notions of equity, whether it is an action at law or at equity. Each case involving disregard of the corporate entity rests on its own special facts. Brown Brothers Equipment Co v State Highway Comm, 51 Mich. App. 448; 215 NW2d 591 (1974).
The lower court held that this professional corporation established for tax and pension purposes is a "hybrid" type of corporation and for that reason denied the motion to quash the writ of garnishment. We cannot agree that this is a sufficient reason for ignoring the corporate entity. We therefore remand to the trial court for a hearing on the issue.
The Professional Service Corporation Act, 1962 PA 192, as amended, MCL 450.221 et seq.; MSA 21.315(1) et seq., allowed certain licensed professionals to incorporate for the first time. Professional corporation laws were enacted largely as a result of efforts by professionals to enjoy the same Federal tax advantages available to corporations. Note, Accident and Malpractice Liability of Professional Corporation Shareholders, 10 Mich J L Reform *704 364, 365 (1977). In passing the statute, the Legislature invested professional corporations with most of the properties of other business corporations. The Legislature specifically refused to limit liability for certain torts committed by the employees of a professional corporation, including professional malpractice. By implication, the Legislature intended professional corporations to be otherwise treated like other corporations in determining liability. This Court will not hold that the purpose of incorporating to enjoy Federal tax benefits is such a purpose as will entitle a court to automatically disregard the corporate fiction.
A professional corporation owned by a single shareholder may often present such a community of interest that the corporate entity should be disregarded. Where a court finds that justice so requires, it will ignore the corporate entity. We do not believe that the lower court made such a finding. While the record shows that the court considered the injustice which might result from respecting the corporate entity, it failed to hear evidence concerning employees and other third-party creditors of the professional corporation. If the court finds that ignoring the corporate entity will work a fraud or injustice on third parties, it may decide to respect the corporate entity if the interests of justice so demand.
We direct that plaintiff-intervenor's motion to intervene be granted for the purpose of determining if the corporate entity should be disregarded. Remanded to the lower court for proceedings not inconsistent with this opinion. We retain no jurisdiction. Costs to abide the final result.
NOTES
[*]  Circuit judge, sitting on the Court of Appeals by assignment.

=== CASE 2226900 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:22.002286+00 ===

636 N.E.2d 1214 (1994)
264 Ill. App. 3d 111
201 Ill. Dec. 782
Dolores URBAS, Guardian of the Estate and Person of Mitchell S. Urbas, Jr., a Disabled Person, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
SAINTCO, INC., Defendant-Appellant.
No. 5-91-0296.
Appellate Court of Illinois, Fifth District.
June 30, 1994.
*1216 Edward J. Szewczyk, Donovan, Rose, Nester & Szewczyk, P.C., Belleville, for appellant.
Harry J. Sterling, Harry J. Sterling, P.C., Fairview Heights, for appellee.
Justice GOLDENHERSH delivered the opinion of the court:
Defendant, Saintco, Inc., appeals from a judgment entered by the circuit court of St. Clair County on a jury verdict in the amount of $1,391,700 in favor of plaintiff, Dolores Urbas, guardian of the estate and person of Mitchell S. Urbas, Jr. (hereinafter Mitch), a disabled adult. On appeal, defendant contends that (1) the circuit court erred in denying its motions for a directed verdict and/or judgment notwithstanding the verdict (judgment n.o.v.), (2) the circuit court erred in directing a verdict against defendant on its affirmative defense that plaintiff's exclusive remedy was workers' compensation, (3) the jury reached its verdict by an impermissible quotient procedure, (4) the verdict was excessive, (5) the circuit court erred in instructing the jury, (6) the circuit court improperly restricted defendant's cross-examination of plaintiff's expert, and (7) the trial court improperly permitted a nonexpert, Mark Prosser, a licensed emergency medical technician (EMT), to express an opinion regarding the cause of Mitch's condition. We affirm.
I. FACTS
As plaintiff aptly points out in her brief, the evidence in this case is full of inconsistencies and overlaps. Therefore, a somewhat exhaustive statement of facts is necessary for a sufficient understanding of this case and necessary to show the jury's verdict is supported by the evidence. Defendant owned and operated an adult entertainment nightclub, *1217 P.T.'s, in Sauget. Mitch was an employee of P.T.'s. On the evening of April 28, 1988, Mitch was found on the parking lot of P.T.'s in his car in an unconscious state. He had been missing since the night before when he left his shift early due to illness. Mitch was transported by ambulance to a local hospital where he was diagnosed as being in a coma. He eventually came out of the coma but suffered permanent brain damage. He has no recollection of the events surrounding the onset of his illness and did not testify at trial.
Plaintiff filed suit against defendant for Mitch's injuries. Plaintiff also filed suit against Hal Lowrie, individually, who owned 100% of the stock in P.T.'s. However, the jury returned a verdict in favor of Hal Lowrie; therefore, Hal Lowrie takes no part in this appeal. In its final version, plaintiff's complaint against defendant alleged, in pertinent part:
"4. That at approximately 10:00 p.m. on April 27, 1988, the plaintiff's ward became ill and so advised the management of the defendant.
5. That thereafter, the plaintiff's ward returned to his motor vehicle parked in the parking lot of the defendant in clear view of the defendant's agents and employees.
6. That it was the policy and practice of the defendant to provide security personnel on its parking lot to periodically check the parking lot for any disturbances and for any persons who might have become intoxicated or ill.
7. That the plaintiff's ward collapsed in his motor vehicle and remained in the same from at or about 10:00 p.m. on April 27, 1988, until approximately 10:30 p.m. on April 28, 1988, by which time the plaintiff's ward had become dehydrated from high body temperatures and suffered severe and permanent brain damage therefrom.
8. That the defendant was then and there guilty of one or more of the following negligent acts or omissions:
(a) failed to discover the plaintiff's ward while ill although he could and should have been discovered;
(b) failed to adequately patrol the parking lot of the defendant's business establishment so as to discover persons who were ill;
(c) failed to provide medical attention to the plaintiff's ward in violation of the defendant's standards, policies and procedures;
(d) failed to perform the patrol of the parking lot once it had undertaken to do so for other persons.
9. That as a result of one or more of the foregoing negligent acts or omissions, the plaintiff's ward suffered severe and permanent brain injuries and other anatomical results from dehydration and high fever * * *."
Plaintiff's theory is that a duty to assist Mitch arose by virtue of defendant establishing a courtesy patrol to patrol its parking lot at P.T.'s and to render assistance to those in need. The courtesy patrol was in operation daily between 8 p.m. and 4 a.m. A copy of the written duties of the courtesy patrol was introduced at trial. Art Feole, director of operations for P.T.'s, assisted in authoring the duties of the courtesy patrol, which stated, in pertinent part:
"RESPONSIBILITY
... To insure the safety of the employees, guests, P.T.'s and Roxy's property, the property of the employees and the property of the guests!
* * * * * *
Your primary responsibility is to insure the physical safety of the arriving and departing female employees. They are to be escorted to and from the club. You must have a watch to be aware of the shift changes, which are; 8:00 pm, 9:00 pm, 10:00 pm and closing. When escorting a lady to her vehicle always inspect the interior of the vehicle to insure no potential danger exists.
* * * * * *
B.) If any intoxicated person leaves the club and tries to drive, be courteous, but try to discourage the person from driving. Offer to call the courtesy van or a cab. If person agrees, do not leave the person alone. Have him come back into the club with you. Contact Director immediately. *1218 He will take care of the guest from there. If the guest is belligerent and refuses your assistance, make a note who, what, where and when (be sure to include license #, color of the car, make, model, and year). Notify the Director immediately.
* * * * * *
E.) Escort all unescorted ladies to and from the club. This includes female guests as well as employees.
F.) At closing time Courtesy Patrol should not be outside of the club without a partner. When clearing the lots, stay close enough to assist each other, should it be necessary. All guests must be off the lot prior to any employees leaving the club. Be alert for guests waiting across the street or on one of the adjacent streets. If you suspect a guest waiting just off the property, advise the Director. If you have a guest that refuses to leave the premises advise the Director, again take notes of who, what, when, where! Any person waiting on the lot who claims to be there to give an employee a ride, take notes and verify this with the employee. If the employee verifies the ride, have the individual wait in the front of the club (Advise your partners of the status of the vehicle). If the employee denies the ride, inform the Director. Once the lot is cleared inform the Director. All female employees are to be escorted from the club to their vehicles. Escort in small groups; make sure that the people being escorted are parked in the same area. Advise the Director of any employee that just walks out without a security escort. Male employees may leave together in groups of 2 or more without a courtesy patrol. All females must have courtesy patrol escort. Advise the Director when all employees are escorted to their vehicles. Remember the closing time is the most critical time of your courtesy patrol shift. Always work in pairs and be aware that your fellow employees are relying on you to insure their physical safety."
Several employees of P.T.'s testified about their understanding of the courtesy patrol.
Harold Lowrie said it was the function of the courtesy patrol to protect employees and their property. Larry Tyler, supervisor of P.T.'s at the time in question, testified that the courtesy patrol operated to greet people, survey parking areas, assist patrons, and patrol the area. Tom Kelly, manager of P.T.'s at the time in question, testified that the courtesy patrol operated to greet guests, escort entertainers to cars, and secure the parking lot. Kelly added that courtesy patrolmen had no duty to patrol the lots; however, some patrolmen did patrol the lots while others did not. John Kistner, a bartender at P.T.'s for seven years, testified that it was the duty of the courtesy patrol to ensure that the female employees of the club were able to get into and out of the club without incident. He also stated that he believed it was the patrolmen's responsibility to go up and down the lot looking into cars. Christine Kufskie, a waitress at P.T.'s for five years, testified it was common practice for the courtesy patrolmen to go up and down the parking lots checking the cars. Michael Bloodworth, who occasionally worked as a courtesy patrolman at P.T.'s, would look into the cars of the entertainers he was escorting to their car. As the written responsibilities indicate, closing time at P.T.'s is most critical, and all witnesses agreed that extra precautions were taken at that time to ensure employees' safety.
At trial, conflicting evidence was adduced as to Mitch's activities on the night of April 27, 1988. By all accounts, Mitch was to work from 8 p.m. to 4 a.m. as a courtesy patrolman. As usual, Mitch reported early for work, somewhere between 7 and 7:30 p.m. Sometime between 8 and 9:30 p.m., Mitch told his supervisor, Tom Kelly, that he was not feeling well and wanted to go home. According to Kelly, Mitch waited for his replacement until 10 or 10:30 p.m., at which time Kelly walked Mitch to his car and watched him exit P.T.'s parking lot and drive down Monsanto Avenue to Route 3. Kelly reported that even though Mitch did look ill, he watched Mitch leave because it was his experience that employees would feign illness and then retreat to a bar on the corner of Route 3. Kelly wanted to make sure that that did not happen with Mitch. Kelly testified that he did not see Mitch until the next *1219 evening when he discovered Mitch lying unconscious in his car. According to Kelly, Mitch's car was in a different spot on April 28 and facing a different direction than it had been on April 27.
Mitch's car was in the repair shop earlier on April 27. The mechanic who worked on the car testified that he wrote down the odometer reading when Mitch dropped off his car. After completing the repairs, the mechanic test-drove the car exactly 3.8 miles. Mitch picked up his car from the mechanic at 5 or 5:30 p.m. Mitch's mother testified that Mitch ate dinner at home and then left at approximately 6 p.m. Mitch's girl friend picked up his car at P.T.'s parking lot on Friday, April 29. At that time, there were 73 more miles on the odometer than when Mitch dropped off his car at the mechanic's shop. Accounting for the mileage between Mitch's home, the garage, and P.T.'s, Mitch's car was driven an additional 50 miles.
Two Sauget police officers, Parisi and Lee, who were working the 11:30 p.m.-to-7:30 a.m. shift, testified that they saw Mitch at the entrance of P.T.'s performing his duties as courtesy patrolman at approximately midnight. Mitch explained he did not feel well and was waiting for a relief worker so he could leave. Another Sauget police officer, Ed Bastin, went to P.T.'s on the evening of the 28th around 8 p.m., inquiring as to Mitch's whereabouts after the Sauget Police Department received a call from Mitch's mother concerned about Mitch's well-being. According to Bastin, he was informed by Tom Kelly and the doorman for the evening that no one had seen Mitch since 8 a.m. that morning. The doorman then went out on the lot to assist Officer Bastin in locating Mitch's car. Bastin testified that Mitch's car was not on the lot at that time. Kelly denied telling Bastin that he had not seen Mitch since 8 a.m. that morning. Kelly insisted that he did not see Mitch after he left on April 27 until he found Mitch unconscious on April 28.
Another employee of P.T.'s, Otis Bloodworth, testified that he relieved Mitch on the evening of April 27. Bloodworth was supposed to get off at 8 p.m. but stayed until another worker could arrive to take Mitch's place. According to Bloodworth, Mitch left around 8 p.m. with another man. Bloodworth saw Mitch's car return sometime before midnight. At that time, the man who left with Mitch returned to P.T.'s. Mitch's car then drove away again. Bloodworth could not say if Mitch was in the car at that point. Because it was Mitch's car, Bloodworth assumed that Mitch was driving it at that time. On the following morning, Bloodworth returned to work sometime between 11 and 11:30 a.m. At that time Bloodworth noticed Mitch's car parked in the employee parking lot. Throughout the day, according to Bloodworth, at least three persons telephoned P.T.'s to inquire about Mitch's whereabouts. Bloodworth went to the bank at approximately 4 p.m. on the 28th, and Mitch's car was on the parking lot at that time, but it was now in a different parking space than it was when Bloodworth arrived that morning. Upon Bloodworth's return from the bank, Mitch's car was again in another parking space. Bloodworth testified that Mitch's mother and girl friend came to P.T.'s inquiring about Mitch's whereabouts. Bloodworth told both to talk to the director. Bloodworth testified that Mitch's car was still on the parking lot when Bloodworth left at approximately 8 p.m. on April 28.
Both Mitch's mother and his girl friend denied talking with Bloodworth on April 28. Mrs. Urbas testified that she did call P.T.'s, as well as the Sauget police department, attempting to locate her son. Connie Arnold, Mitch's girl friend, also made some telephone calls attempting to locate Mitch. Larry Tyler, supervisor of P.T.'s, testified he went to P.T.'s at approximately 9 or 9:15 a.m. on April 28. At that time, Mitch's car was not on the parking lot. Tyler further testified that he received a call from Mitch's mother between 12:15 and 12:30 p.m. Mrs. Urbas was concerned because Mitch did not come home from work the previous evening. Tyler returned to P.T.'s about 1:30 p.m. in an attempt to locate Mitch but did not see Mitch's car on the parking lot. Mrs. Urbas testified she called Tyler at approximately 11 a.m. on the 28th to say Mitch did not return from the previous evening. Tyler told her he would go to P.T.'s and look for Mitch. Tyler called Mrs. Urbas back and told her no one *1220 had seen Mitch and his car was not on the parking lot. Art Feole, director of operations for P.T.'s, went to P.T.'s between 8 and 10 a.m. on the 28th. According to Feole, Mitch's car was not on the lot at that time.
Ultimately, Mitch's girl friend called her friend, Kathy Prosser, whose husband was an O'Fallon police officer. Kathy's husband, Mark Prosser, went down to P.T.'s in an attempt to locate Mitch. According to Officer Prosser, he received a description of Mitch's car and the license number from Mitch's girl friend. At about 10:15 p.m. Prosser entered P.T.'s parking lot and immediately spotted Mitch's car. Prosser assumed Mitch was inside the club, so he went to the front door and asked to speak to him. The doorman informed him Mitch was not on duty that night but would be back the next evening. Prosser then identified himself as a police officer and was escorted inside. Prosser asked to see the manager that evening and was introduced to Tom Kelly. Kelly informed Prosser he had not seen Mitch since approximately 10:30 the previous evening when Mitch went home due to illness. According to Prosser, Kelly looked surprised when he told him that Mitch's car was on the lot. Prosser and Kelly then went out to Mitch's car where they discovered Mitch in the front seat.
The window on the passenger side was open somewhere between three and five inches. Kelly was able to get his hand in and unlock the door. Both Kelly and Prosser felt a rush of hot air when the door was opened. Mitch was saturated with perspiration, but his skin was cold and clammy. Mitch was dressed in an orderly fashion with no signs of trauma. The keys to the car were lying on the floorboard under the steering column. According to Kelly, Mitch was in the passenger seat with his head down to the right resting on the door. Kelly testified that Mitch was not slumped down, so that if a person walked by the car, he or she would have been able to see Mitch in the front seat. Mitch was wearing his tux suit and dark pants, which were part of his work uniform. Kelly explained that when the door to the car was opened the heat "rolled out" and hit him in the face. Mitch was drenched with perspiration, and there was a strong odor of urine. Kelly stated that no part of Mitch's buttocks were over by the driver's side of the car.
Prosser, an O'Fallon police officer with specialized training as an EMT, testified that it looked to him like Mitch got in behind the steering wheel and just rolled onto his right side. Mitch's head was against the passenger door. Once Kelly and Prosser opened the door of the vehicle, Prosser also felt the heat roll out of the vehicle. Prosser took hold of Mitch's head to stabilize it. Mitch's skin was cold and clammy, and Prosser could feel the heat coming from within Mitch's clothing. Prosser opened Mitch's collar and loosened his clothing to ventilate Mitch as per his EMT training. Prosser testified that Mitch was wearing a police winter jacket, almost a uniform-type, a white tuxedo shirt, and black pants with a thermal long-john top underneath. Prosser saw no signs of trauma and found Mitch to be dressed in an orderly fashion. According to Prosser, Mitch's wallet was completely saturated with perspiration or some sort of body fluid. The leather was nearly melted like putty in his hands. Kelly, on the other hand, does not remember the wallet being like putty or even being wet or drenched. Prosser opined that based upon his experience as an EMT it appeared to him that Mitch had probably been in the sun the entire day. When Prosser and Kelly were unable to get any response from Mitch, an ambulance was summoned.
Mitch was transported to St. Mary's Hospital in East St. Louis. The ambulance drivers testified from their report that they were contacted at approximately 11:10 p.m. on April 27, to respond to an emergency at P.T.'s. Upon their arrival at approximately 11:15 p.m., they found Mitch unconscious in the front seat. The ambulance crew found Mitch sitting in the driver's seat slumped over with his head toward the passenger door. Mitch was having difficulty breathing, but there were no visible signs of injury. Mitch was cyanotic, bluish in color, which can be caused by a lack of oxygen. He was cold and clammy to the touch, but his clothes were drenched in sweat.
Upon arrival at the hospital, Mitch was examined by Dr. Sana Ullah at 11:33 a.m. *1221 Dr. Ullah testified that Mitch was in a coma and was running a temperature of 103.1° Fahrenheit. No signs of trauma were visible, but Dr. Ullah discovered red excoriated areas on both sides of Mitch's waistline, which he opined were caused by sitting in one position for eight to 12 hours or more in tight pants. Dr. Ullah ordered that the drug Narcon be administered to counteract any effects of narcotics. It was later determined through blood and urine tests that Mitch had not ingested any alcohol or narcotics. A battery of tests was performed on Mitch. Based upon the results, Dr. Ullah was unable to rule out any trauma or damage to the brain and any bleeding of the brain. Dr. Ullah's diagnosis consisted of coma and pneumonia, but beyond that, he was unable to make any diagnosis. At 2:40 a.m., Mitch was transferred to St. Elizabeth's Hospital in Belleville.
Upon arrival at St. Elizabeth's, Mitch was examined by Dr. John Boeren, who specializes in family practice. In addition to the information provided from St. Mary's Hospital, Mitch's family told Dr. Boeren that Mitch suffered from cold or flu-like symptoms for a week preceding the incident. Dr. Boeren testified that Mitch was dehydrated and had an electrolyte imbalance due to lack of liquid intake. Dr. Boeren also found a discolored or bruised area over the upper and mid portion of Mitch's buttocks in the sacral area. Dr. Boeren testified that this injury was caused by the pressure of sitting in the same position for at least a 24-hour period. Dr. Boeren testified that the results of an electroencephalogram performed on Mitch showed:
"moderately severe generalized dysrhythmia non-focal, * * * a generalized flowing of the electrical brainwave activity which could be due from any of a lot of causes. It was not consistent with any kind of tumor or trauma, but rather, just depression of brain function. This could be due to lack of oxygen. It could be due to poisonous substances. It could be possibly due to infection in the brain. There are a lot of things that might cause this."
Additional tests were run on Mitch, but everything came back negative. There was no evidence of a recent viral infection. Mitch remained in intensive care for an extended period of time after which he was transferred to a Veterans Administration Hospital in St. Louis, Missouri. Two or three days prior to his transfer, Mitch suffered a grand mal seizure.
Dr. Boeren testified that he believed the dehydration played a part in Mitch's injuries. If Mitch had a viral infection and a fever and was also placed in a hot car that sat in the sun all day, the failure to render or delay some sort of medical assistance might or could have aggravated Mitch's condition. Dr. Boeren believed that the electrolyte imbalance found in Mitch could have been the result of dehydration. According to Dr. Boeren, Mitch suffered some sort of neurologic brain insult, injury, infection, or toxin which rendered him unable to drink, thereby causing him to become dehydrated. Dr. Boeren believed that dehydration was secondary to some sort of neurologic injury or impairment and adding dehydration on top of that "could worsen it." On cross-examination, Dr. Boeren admitted that he did not have an opinion to a reasonable degree of medical certainty why Mitch was in a coma when he saw him, why Mitch went into that coma, or at what moment Mitch suffered permanent brain damage.
Dr. Ronald Welch, a neurologist who consulted with Dr. Boeren on Mitch's case, made the following diagnosis:
"I felt he had a metabolic encephalopathy. It was some sort of extraneous cause. The most likely thing, in view of the fact he had bitten his tongue, is that he had a seizure. Now the cause of that seizure, I couldn't tell you based on when I examined him at that time. All the tests that came back were normal from my viewpoint, the neurologic testing, so I was unable to formulate the cause basically."
Dr. Welch opined that if Mitch suffered some sort of medical problem resulting in the encephala from which Mitch suffered and then was left in a car for 24 hours, such inattention could certainly aggravate or contribute to the encephalopathy. There was a discussion whether Mitch suffered from hyperthermia. Dr. Welch stated it would be easily *1222 determined by Mitch's temperature at the hospital. On cross-examination, Dr. Welch admitted that, since he did not know what caused Mitch to go into a coma and suffer brain damage, he would only be guessing if he said it would have been medically beneficial for Mitch to have been found five minutes or five hours after the occurrence. Moreover, Dr. Welch could not specifically say whether high temperatures caused Mitch to go into a coma and suffer brain damage.
Dr. Carl Berg saw Mitch when Mitch was transferred to the Veterans Administration Medical Center nearly one month after his original injury. Dr. Berg was intrigued with Mitch's case because no one was ever able to formulate an opinion as to the cause of Mitch's original problem. Dr. Berg was also unable to determine the exact cause. Dr. Berg described a purplish bruise which extended around Mitch's waist. Berg also described a small decubitus ulcer on Mitch's buttocks presumed to be from prolonged immobilization at sometime prior to Dr. Berg's examination. Dr. Berg believed that Mitch suffered some diffuse brain injury caused by either not enough oxygen or not enough blood, but he could not say what the primary event was that caused the damage. Dr. Berg could not say whether it would have made a difference in this case whether Mitch had been found and treated earlier. He could say that there are scenarios in which a difference in treatment from five minutes to five hours might have made a difference and other instances in which it would have made no difference.
Dr. Joseph Prosser, board certified in internal medicine and critical care medicine, also treated Mitch. Dr. Prosser first saw Mitch on July 7, 1988, when Mitch was admitted to Parkview Nursing Home. Dr. Prosser discussed the decubitus ulcers Mitch developed. Dr. Prosser surmised that if Mitch was lying in one position for an extended period of time in the car, he may well have developed sufficient necrosis to cause a breakdown of the skin and an ulcer. Dr. Prosser was also questioned about anoxia, deprivation of oxygen to the brain. Dr. Prosser explained that with total deprivation, permanent, irreversible brain damage occurs within approximately four minutes. Dr. Prosser refused to speculate about partial or intermittent blood flow. Dr. Prosser also discussed hyperthermia and could not say, if a person was brought into the hospital with a temperature in the range of what Mitch had on April 27, whether such person might have suffered from hyperthermia. Dr. Prosser deferred to a neurologist on such matters.
Dr. Mary Elizabeth Case, a forensic pathologist, testified for defendant. Dr. Case reviewed all of Mitch's medical records. In her opinion, based upon the markings found on Mitch's body, there was no way to determine with any certainty that Mitch was in a stationary position for a prolonged period of time versus a shorter period of time. Dr. Case opined that a tight belt could cause markings in a short period of time and that since Mitch lost bladder control when he became unconscious, his pants were wet, and in such a condition, it probably did not take long to cause the excoriated area on Mitch's buttocks. Dr. Case disagreed with those doctors who attempted to fix the time it took to produce such markings and believed no one could say with any degree of medical certainty how much time a person would need to be in a fixed position for such markings to occur. Dr. Case opined that neither hyperthermia nor dehydration affected Mitch in any way that caused brain damage. Based upon the temperatures on April 27 and 28, Dr. Case felt that there was no way that the car heated up sufficiently to cause Mitch's temperature to be elevated to 106° Fahrenheit. The parties stipulated to the following temperatures in the weather:
DATE       TIME       TEMPERATURE (°F)
April 27   9:55 p.m.         53
April 27  10:55 p.m.         49
April 27  11:55 p.m.         51
April 28   0:55 a.m.         50
April 28   3:55 a.m.         44
April 28   6:55 a.m.         50
April 28  10:55 a.m.         64
April 28   3:55 a.m.         69
April 28   4:55 p.m.         68
April 28   5:55 p.m.         65
April 28   6:55 p.m.         62
April 28   7:55 p.m.         56
April 28   8:55 p.m.         51
April 28   9:55 p.m.         50
April 28  10:55 p.m.         48
April 28  11:55 p.m.         44
*1223 Dr. Case believed Mitch suffered only a mild degree of dehydration based on his blood sodium level and his blood urea nitrogen level. Dr. Case considered the possibilities of what happened to Mitch to produce the damage to his brain, but he could not say within a reasonable degree of medical certainty what occurred. Dr. Case agreed that if someone is injured or ill, it is best to render medical assistance as soon as possible. Dr. Case disagreed with hypoxic encephalopathy as the primary diagnosis for Mitch. Dr. Case testified that she could only speculate as to whether Mitch would have recovered more successfully had he been treated earlier because she was unsure of the underlying cause of his brain damage. Dr. Case did agree that Mitch's skin condition, the decubitus ulcers, would have been less severe had they been treated earlier.
Evidence was presented on the issue of damages. Dr. Leonard Grossman, an economist, testified to Mitch's lost income and future lost earnings. The trial court refused to allow Dr. Grossman to be cross-examined about the adverse effect of a prior felony conviction; however, an offer of proof was made. Mitch was convicted of armed robbery and use of a deadly weapon in January 1982. An in limine order was entered prior to the start of trial prohibiting discussion of these convictions because they were found to be remote in time and irrelevant to the instant action. Ultimately, the jury returned a verdict in the amount of $1,391,700. Defendant filed a posttrial motion raising numerous issues. The trial court denied defendant's posttrial motion, and defendant now appeals. Additional facts necessary for an understanding of this case are addressed in the issues portion of this opinion.
II. ISSUES
We first consider whether the trial court erred in refusing to direct a verdict or enter a judgment n.o.v. in favor of defendant. The law is well settled that verdicts ought to be directed and judgments n.o.v.'s entered only in those cases in which all of the evidence, when viewed in its aspect most favorable to the opponent, so overwhelmingly favors movant that no contrary verdict based on the evidence could ever stand. Pedrick v. Peoria & Eastern R.R. Co. (1967), 37 Ill. 2d 494, 229 N.E.2d 504.
A. DUTY
To recover on the theory of common law negligence, there first must exist a duty or obligation requiring one to conform to a certain standard of conduct for the protection of another against an unreasonable risk. (Barnes v. Washington (1973), 56 Ill. 2d 22, 305 N.E.2d 535.) Plaintiff must also allege and prove a breach of that duty and that the breach was the proximate cause of plaintiff's injuries. (Wojdyla v. City of Park Ridge (1992), 148 Ill. 2d 417, 421, 170 Ill. Dec. 418, 420, 592 N.E.2d 1098, 1100.) The existence of a duty is a matter of law to be determined by the court, while the questions of whether the duty has been breached and whether the breach proximately caused an injury are factual matters to be determined by the jury. First National Bank v. City of Aurora (1978), 71 Ill. 2d 1, 12, 15 Ill. Dec. 642, 647, 373 N.E.2d 1326, 1331.
In Nelson v. Union Wire Rope Corp. (1964), 31 Ill. 2d 69, 74, 199 N.E.2d 769, 773-74, our supreme court gave recognition to the principle that liability can arise from the negligent performance of a voluntary undertaking. (See Restatement (Second) of Torts § 324(a) (1965).) Defendant contends that no evidence was presented to support plaintiff's allegation that defendant voluntarily assumed a duty to plaintiff to check the interior of parked automobiles while checking the lot. While the courtesy patrol did check the interior of cars, P.T.'s also voluntarily assumed a duty to ensure the safety of their employees and patrons.
It was the common knowledge of all witnesses that P.T.'s parking lot was a place teeming with potential trouble. For example, a Sauget police officer, Ed Bastin, testified that during a routine shift, he drives through P.T.'s parking lot approximately 12 times. On such occasions, he comes into contact with intoxicated persons, "people sleeping off a drunk," and people fighting. According to Bastin, there is a drug overdose on the parking lot at least once a week. Additional witnesses discussed the problems *1224 with vandalism and the need to protect the dancers and all employees. In fact, the written duties of the courtesy patrol state that it is the responsibility of the courtesy patrol to "insure the safety of the employees [and] guests" of P.T.'s. The written responsibilities also state that at closing time extra care is to be taken to ensure the safety of P.T.'s employees.
Employees of P.T.'s testified as to their understanding of the duties of the courtesy patrol. Tom Kelly, Mitch's supervisor, testified that the basic function of the courtesy patrol was to secure the parking lot. He testified that on one occasion he checked the interior of an automobile. John Kistner, an employee of P.T.'s, believed that it was the responsibility of the courtesy patrol to go up and down the parking lots looking into cars. There is every indication in the instant case that the courtesy patrol's main reason for being was to protect both the employees and the patrons of the club from all types of harm that might befall them on the parking lots. (For a contrary holding, see Yassin v. Certified Grocers of Illinois, Inc. (1986), 150 Ill.App.3d 1052, 104 Ill. Dec. 52, 502 N.E.2d 315, where the inspection of a meat tenderizer machine which injured the plaintiff was not done to ensure the safety of patrons of a grocery store, but rather to ensure sanitation.) Evidence was adduced that the courtesy patrol was established to protect against many problems on P.T.'s parking lots and to protect those involved in such situations, particularly P.T.'s own employees. Furthermore, it is clear that P.T.'s assumed a duty in order to protect itself from potential liability in dram shop actions and other liability situations. The testimony, along with the written duties of the courtesy patrol in discussing intoxicated drivers, makes it clear that defendant was well aware of the possible danger that existed in finding those in need of medical assistance due to drug or alcohol ingestion in cars parked on the lots. While defendant initially had no duty to protect plaintiff against the situation at hand, we agree with the trial court that defendant voluntarily assumed a duty to protect plaintiff while he was on the parking lot during the time the courtesy patrol was in operation.
B. BREACH
Next, defendant argues that even if a duty is found to exist, plaintiff's evidence on the remaining elements of a negligence cause of action was insufficient. Defendant contends that plaintiff introduced no evidence indicating exactly what defendant did wrong and, thus, failed to establish breach of a duty. For example, defendant contends plaintiff had the burden of establishing the time of his return to P.T.'s as a precondition to any conclusion that defendant was negligent in failing to find him earlier. We disagree.
The propriety of a directed verdict or a judgment n.o.v. presents the issue whether there is any evidence in the record to support the jury verdict. (Guidani v. Cumerlato (1965), 59 Ill.App.2d 13, 19, 207 N.E.2d 1, 4.) Moreover, in considering this case, it must be remembered that the jury is free to disregard or disbelieve whatever facts are inconsistent with its conclusion. (Guidani, 59 Ill. App.2d at 18, 207 N.E.2d at 4.) In the instant case, plaintiff's theory was that Mitch collapsed in his automobile at or about 10 p.m. on April 27 and was not found until approximately 10:30 p.m. on April 28, during which time Mitch became dehydrated from high body temperature from being in a hot automobile during the day and as a result suffered permanent brain damage. Defendant's theory, on the other hand, was that some person drove Mitch around and returned back to the P.T.'s parking lot only a short time before he was discovered by Kelly and Prosser. Plaintiff presented evidence, which was indeed conflicting, about when, if ever, Mitch left the parking lot and returned to the parking lot on April 27 and what condition Mitch was in when he was found on the 28th. While defendant claims Tom Kelly's testimony about when defendant left for the evening was uncontradicted, defendant is clearly mistaken.
There was testimony from two Sauget police officers that Mitch was still waiting for a replacement to show up at midnight. Larry Tyler testified that Mitch's replacement never arrived, and thus, the jury could reasonably have concluded that plaintiff never left the lot or returned prior to the time the *1225 courtesy patrol ceased operating at 4 a.m. and, thus, should have been found by the courtesy patrol prior to their dismissal at 4 a.m. We believe the circumstantial evidence presented in this case and the inferences therefrom, when viewed in the aspect most favorable to plaintiff, make it more probable than not that defendant did, in fact, breach its duty to plaintiff by failing to properly patrol the parking lot and thereby discover Mitch, especially in light of the fact that several persons working at P.T.'s on the evening in question were aware of the fact that Mitch was ill. See Hocker v. O'Klock (1959), 16 Ill. 2d 414, 158 N.E.2d 7.
C. PROXIMATE CAUSE
Defendant next contends that plaintiff failed to prove proximate cause because plaintiff failed to prove that a delay in treatment proximately caused Mitch's injuries. Defendant incorrectly asserts that none of the doctors could render an opinion as to whether earlier treatment would have been medically beneficial to Mitch or would have improved his recovery. Both parties cite numerous cases and have made numerous requests to cite additional authority, which we granted. We have reviewed all of these cases and more.
It is fundamental law that in negligence cases there may be more than one proximate cause of an injury and that one is liable for one's negligent conduct whether it contributed in whole or in part to the injury as long as proximate cause exists. (Ray v. Cock Robin, Inc. (1974), 57 Ill. 2d 19, 23, 310 N.E.2d 9, 11-12.) It is also well settled that the existence of proximate cause is a question of fact for the jury. (Ney v. Yellow Cab Co. (1954), 2 Ill. 2d 74, 84, 117 N.E.2d 74, 80.) Such issues upon which reasonable persons can arrive at different conclusions should never be determined as matters of law:
"Questions of negligence, due care and proximate cause are ordinarily questions of fact for a jury to decide. The right of trial by jury is recognized in the Magna Charta, our Declaration of Independence and both our State and Federal constitutions. It is a fundamental right in our democratic judicial system. Questions which are composed of such qualities sufficient to cause reasonable men to arrive at different results should never be determined as matters of law. The debatable quality of issues such as negligence and proximate cause, the fact that fair-minded men might reach different conclusions, emphasize the appropriateness and necessity of leaving such questions to a fact-finding body. The jury is the tribunal under our legal system to decide that type of issue. To withdraw such questions from the jury is to usurp its function." Bailey v. Central Vermont Railway[, Inc. (1943),] 319 U.S. 350[, 63 S. Ct. 1062, 87 L. Ed. 1444]." Ney, 2 Ill.2d at 84, 117 N.E.2d at 80.
All the doctors who testified agreed that a delay in treatment is generally harmful, and it is best to render medical assistance as soon as possible. Even defendant's expert, Dr. Case, agreed with this general statement. While some doctors could not determine whether a delay in treatment aggravated Mitch's injuries, Dr. Boeren concluded that delay was indeed a proximate cause of Mitch's injuries.
Dr. Boeren opined that Mitch was suffering from moderate-to-severe dehydration when he first examined him during the early morning hours of April 29. There was testimony adduced that Mitch's dehydration and electrolyte imbalance were caused by a delay in treatment which might or could have aggravated his condition:
"Q. (Mr. Sterling [plaintiff's counsel]:) And do you have an opinion, doctor, based upon a reasonable degree of medical certainty, based upon the history that was given to you, based upon the exam that you conducted and the various tests that you performed, do you have an opinion as to what effect if any the dehydration that you diagnosed in Mitch might have had on his brain?
A. I think it may haveif Mitch already had an altered state of consciousness, I think dehydration would aggravate that. If he was having difficulty raising secretions or coughing and was not breathing deeply, dehydration would thicken his lung secretions, make them more difficult to cough up and increase the likelihood of *1226 pneumonia. Electrolyte imbalance can have an adverse effect on brain function. Beyond that I really can't speculate.
* * * * * *
Q. And do you have an opinion based upon a reasonable degree of medical certainty as to whether the electrolyte imbalance that was found might or could have caused or contributed to the brain damage that wasthat's been diagnosed in Mitch Urbas?
* * * * * *
A. My feeling is that Mitch Urbas suffered some sort of neurologic or brain insult, injury, infection or toxin which then rendered him unable to drink and he also became dehydrated. I think dehydration was secondary to something else before that but assuming that there was some sort of neurologic injury or some sort of brain injury or impairment, adding the insult of dehydration on top of that could worsen it.
Q. All right. Now doctor, I want you to assume that on April 27th, 19April 28th, 1988 it was a clear day, Mitchell Urbas was in a car facing west. The car was light green on the bottom and had a dark green vinyl top. That the high temperature during the day was somewhere between sixty-seven and sixty-nine degrees. And then when Mitch was found, he was dressed in a long john top, a tuxedo coat and shirt and a winter police type jacket and I want you to assume further that the car seats were light green but darker than the car. The seats were made out of material and not vinyl. The dash was a dark green and the police officer who found Mitch indicated that as he opened the door, the heat rolled out of the car. And I want you to assume further all of the physical findings that you saw and observed on Mitch and the test results that you had run; do you have an opinion based upon a reasonable degree of medical certainty as to whether the failure of Mitchell Urbas to receive some sort of medical attention for a period of perhaps twenty-four hours might or could have aggravated his medical conditions?
* * * * * *
A. All right. In review, and I may have failed to mention this earlier in this deposition, Mitch Urbas, when he was taken to St. Mary's Hospital and also when he arrived at St. Elizabeth's Hospital, had a fever. To the best of my recollection it was approximately one hundred one or one hundred two degrees fahrenheit temperature. Certainly I'm no physicist and I'm unable to tell you how hot the temperature may have risen in an automobile such as you described but certainly if it was out in the sun, I imagine it could get very warm in such a car. An elevated temperature from whatever reason, if Mitch had a viral infection and had a fever, the mere presence or the mere having of a fever increases water loss by evaporation as the body tries to cool itself to lower the fever. It's a normal physiological response. So even if you're in comfortable room temperatures, if a person has a fever, we don't knowat that time we know Mitch had a fever when he got to the hospital; we don't know if he had a fever before that. But if he had a fever before that, just having a temperature would increase his water requirements or his water losses through evaporation. If a person had a fever and if he was placed in an environment that had an elevated ambient temperature or room temperature or temperature within a car, that would further increase his body core temperature and would further cause further water loss through evaporation and cooling efforts of the body and that could increase both his body temperature and water losses and dehydration. Now the human brain can withstand temperatures pretty well. And most of us, if we get a fever or if our children get a fever of one hundred one or one hundred two or one hundred three, it's frightening to us but probably doesn't do any damage to the brain. If you start getting temperatures of the body one hundred five and above, it certainly can be damaging to an otherwise normal brain. If a brain were injured because of infection, toxin, trauma or other *1227 things, then it might theoretically be subject to injury at temperatures less than one hundred five or one hundred six degrees.
Q. (Mr. Sterling:) All right. Now so then, doctor, do you have an opinion under those circumstances that the failure to render or a delay in the rendering of some sort of medical assistance might or could aggravate a condition
* * * * * *
A. Referring back to my immediately past statement, depending upon the length of time a person were in that car and depending upon the ultimate temperatures obtained in the car, I believe that those set of circumstances and conditions that you described could or might have aggravated his conditions."
Our review of the evidence indicates that the most logical explanation for what happened initially is that Mitch suffered some type of seizure of unknown origin, not drug or alcohol induced, which rendered him unable to seek assistance. Mark Prosser, a licensed EMT who found Mitch, opined:
"Based on my observations when I located Mitch, on the heat coming out of both the vehicle and the clothing around Mitch, the fact that he was, did not appear to be abused in any way, it was my opinion that he had probably lied there in the sun all day."
Dr. Ullah, the emergency room doctor, found red excoriated areas at Mitch's waistline that he believed were caused by lying in the same position for a period of 8 to 12 hours or more. Dr. Boeren found bruising and some blood-filled blisters on Mitch's upper sacral area which he opined were probably caused by applying pressure to that area for a 24-hour period. Dr. Welch agreed that a person would have to be in a stationary position for 12 to 24 hours in order to suffer pressure necrosis such as Mitch suffered. Dr. Prosser discussed the decubitus ulcers which developed in the same general area in which Dr. Boeren observed the bruising and blistering. In other words, Mitch was in the same position for a long period of time. Only Dr. Case, an expert hired by defendant, testified to the contrary that such markings could have developed in a relatively short period of time. The jury was aware that Mitch was in a dark car, facing the sun, and dressed in heavy clothing, with the passenger window rolled down only three to five inches, so that the heat "rolled out" of the car at 10:30 p.m. when he was found. Add to this Dr. Boeren's testimony about how dehydration was the secondary cause of Mitch's injuries, and plaintiff has made a submissible case for the jury's determination on the question of defendant's negligence in not finding Mitch and such delay being a proximate cause of Mitch's injuries.
D. DAMAGES
Defendant further contends that plaintiff failed to prove damages because plaintiff provided the jury with no appropriate way to assess a portion of Mitch's injuries attributable to defendant's negligence. In a subsequent portion of its brief, defendant contends that the initial incident which allegedly left plaintiff helpless was a preexisting condition and defendant's failure to find Mitch and render assistance aggravated that condition. An aggravation of a preexisting ailment or condition is recognized as a separate element of compensable damages in Illinois. (Behles v. Chicago Transit Authority (1952), 346 Ill.App. 220, 231, 104 N.E.2d 635, 640.) Damages are a question of fact for the jury, and courts are reluctant to interfere with a jury's exercise of discretion in this area. (Chambers v. Rush-Presbyterian-St. Luke's Medical Center (1987), 155 Ill.App.3d 458, 108 Ill. Dec. 265, 271, 508 N.E.2d 426, 432.) We believe that plaintiff made a case for proximate cause submissible to the jury and that Dr. Boeren's testimony discussing how a delay in treatment aggravated Mitch's condition supports the award of damages in this case.
E. WORKERS' COMPENSATION
Defendant next contends that the workers' compensation defense should have been submitted to the jury, as it involved questions of fact for the jury's determination. Defendant argues that the facts of this case made alternative pleading necessary, asserting that if Mitch left the parking lot on the *1228 night in question, the negligence action failed, and if Mitch never left the parking lot, the case still fails because of the affirmative defense of workers' compensation. We do not agree with defendant's position and find no error in the trial court's refusal to submit workers' compensation instructions to the jury.
"The Workers' Compensation Act provides employers with a defense against any action that may be asserted against them in tort, but that defense is an affirmative one whose elementsthe employment relationship and the nexus between the employment and the injurymust be established by the employer, and which is waived if not asserted by him in the trial court." (Doyle v. Rhodes (1984), 101 Ill. 2d 1, 10, 77 Ill. Dec. 759, 763, 461 N.E.2d 382, 386.)
An injury will be found to be compensable, in a workers' compensation context, if it "aris[es] out of and in the course of employment." (820 ILCS 305/2 (West 1992).)" Arising out of" refers to the causal connection between the employment and the accidental injury, which exists when the injury's origin is in some risk related to the employment. (Scheffler Greenhouses, Inc. v. Industrial Comm'n (1977), 66 Ill. 2d 361, 366, 5 Ill. Dec. 854, 856, 362 N.E.2d 325, 327.) The requirement that the injury occur "in the course of" employment is concerned with the "time, place, and circumstances of the injury." (Scheffler Greenhouses, Inc., 66 Ill.2d at 366, 5 Ill. Dec. at 856, 362 N.E.2d at 327.) An injury will generally be found to arise "in the course of the employment when it occurs within the period of employment at a place where the employee may reasonably be in the performance of his duties, and while he is fulfilling those duties or engaged in something incidental thereto" and necessarily includes a reasonable time before commencing and after concluding actual employment. Chmelik v. Vana (1964), 31 Ill. 2d 272, 278, 201 N.E.2d 434, 438.
In the present case, Tom Kelly, Mitch's supervisor for the evening, was adamant that Mitch was relieved of his duties and left the premises at approximately 10:30 p.m. on April 27. Even assuming that Mitch did not leave the parking lot, as Kelly testified, we believe the evidence established that Mitch was relieved of his duties or abandoned those duties on April 27. Evidence was presented that Mitch was not paid for the date of April 28. Moreover, Mitch was found in his car, not a place where a member of the courtesy patrol would reasonably be in the performance of his duties. The markings found on Mitch's body indicated he was in the same position for an extended period of time and, as such, presents a contrary situation from those where an employee is injured within a "reasonable" time before or after work and such injury can be said to arise out of and in the course of employment. (See, e.g., Christman v. Industrial Comm'n (1987), 159 Ill.App.3d 479, 111 Ill. Dec. 415, 512 N.E.2d 804; Chmelik v. Vana (1964), 31 Ill. 2d 272, 201 N.E.2d 434.) Additionally, applying our supreme court's analysis in Brady v. Louis Ruffolo & Sons Construction Co. (1991), 143 Ill. 2d 542, 161 Ill. Dec. 275, 578 N.E.2d 921, the injury Mitch sustained did not arise out of his employment. In Brady, the claimant was working at a drafting table attached to his office wall when a truck left the highway, hit the building, and caused severe injuries to claimant from the table puncturing his abdomen. The arbitrator determined that the injuries were not compensable, reasoning that the claimant's employment did not expose him to risk greater than the general public's risk, so the injuries did not arise out of his employment. The Industrial Commission, the circuit court, and the appellate court agreed. Our supreme court explained the applicable rules of law as follows:
"To be compensable under the Workers' Compensation Act, an employee's injury must arise out of and in the course of his employment. (See Ill.Rev.Stat.1987, ch. 48, par. 138.1.) `Arising out of' refers to the causal connection between the employment and the injury. The causal connection is demonstrated if the claimant establishes that the injury's origin lies in some risk related to the employment. (Paganelis v. Industrial Comm'n (1989), 132 Ill. 2d 468, 480[, 139 Ill. Dec. 477, 548 N.E.2d 1033]; Scheffler Greenhouses, Inc. v. Industrial Comm'n (1977), 66 Ill. 2d 361, 366[, 5 Ill. Dec. 854, 362 N.E.2d 325].) In *1229 addition, an injury may be said to arise out of the employment if the conditions or nature of the employment increases the employee's risk of harm beyond that to which the general public is exposed. (Caterpillar Tractor Co. v. Industrial Comm'n (1989), 129 Ill. 2d 52, 58[, 133 Ill. Dec. 454, 541 N.E.2d 665]; Campbell `66' Express, Inc. v. Industrial Comm'n (1980), 83 Ill. 2d 353[, 47 Ill. Dec. 730, 415 N.E.2d 1043].) `In the course of employment' refers to the time, place, and circumstances under which the injury is received. (Scheffler Greenhouses, 66 Ill.2d at 366-67[, 362 N.E.2d 325].) A claimant has the burden of establishing the necessary causal relationship between the employment and the injury. (Caterpillar Tractor, 129 Ill.2d at 63[, 133 Ill. Dec. 454, 541 N.E.2d 665]; Rosenbaum v. Industrial Comm'n (1982), 93 Ill. 2d 381, 386[, 67 Ill. Dec. 83, 444 N.E.2d 122].) Each claim for compensation must be determined on its own facts. (Campbell `66' Express, 83 Ill.2d at 357[, 47 Ill. Dec. 730, 415 N.E.2d 1043].
* * * * * *
The mere fact that claimant was present at the place of injury because of his employment duties will not by itself suffice to establish that the injury arose out of the employment. (State House Inn v. Industrial Comm'n (1965), 32 Ill. 2d 160[, 204 N.E.2d 17]; Illinois Country Club, Inc. v. Industrial Comm'n (1944), 387 Ill. 484[, 56 N.E.2d 786].) Rather, a claimant must demonstrate that his risk of the injury sustained is peculiar to his employment, or that it is increased as a consequence of the work. (Orsini v. Industrial Comm'n (1987), 117 Ill. 2d 38[, 109 Ill. Dec. 166, 509 N.E.2d 1005]; Chmelik v. Vana (1964), 31 Ill. 2d 272[, 201 N.E.2d 434].) If an industrial accident is caused by a risk unrelated to the nature of the employment, or is not fairly traceable to the workplace environment, but results instead from a hazard to which the claimant would have been equally exposed apart from his work, the injury cannot be said to arise out of the employment. (Material Service Corp. v. Industrial Comm'n (1973), 53 Ill. 2d 429[, 292 N.E.2d 367].)" Brady, 143 Ill.2d at 547-50, 161 Ill. Dec. at 277-78, 578 N.E.2d at 923-24.
Applying Brady to the case at bar, we conclude that Mitch's injuries were not sustained in the course of his employment (see discussion above) and did not arise out of his employment. There is no causal connection between his injury and some risk related to his employment. The link between defendant and plaintiff's injuries rests on the actions of defendant's courtesy patrol. In this regard, Mitch was in no greater position of risk or danger than any other member of the general public at defendant's establishment. Accordingly, defendant has failed to show Mitch's injuries arose out of his employment.
Defendant has failed to establish a nexus between Mitch's employment and his injury, which it was required to do prior to instructions on a workers' compensation defense being submitted to the jury. Accordingly, we find no error in the trial court's refusal to submit the instructions.
F. DIRECTED VERDICT/JUDGMENT N.O.V.
After reviewing the record as a whole and following the Pedrick standard, we find that plaintiff made a submissible case on the issue of negligence for the jury's determination. The fact that the jury decided in favor of the other defendant in this case, Hal Lowrie, is also significant, because it shows that the jury followed the court's instructions and that the verdict was not the result of antipathy toward defendant or the nature of defendant's business.
G. QUOTIENT VERDICT
Defendant next contends that the verdict rendered was the result of an impermissible quotient process and, as such, defendant is entitled to a new trial on all issues. Plaintiff responds that defendant failed to prove by clear and convincing evidence that a quotient verdict was rendered and, at best, the method described in four jurors' affidavits amounts to permissible "experimentation" in arriving at their verdict.
The law is clear that when a jury agrees in advance to arrive at a verdict by *1230 averaging, the verdict thereafter rendered is improper. (Illinois Central R.R. Co. v. Able (1871), 59 Ill. 131.) However, in order to establish that a void quotient verdict was rendered, an advance agreement must be shown. (German v. Illinois Power Co. (1983), 115 Ill.App.3d 977, 986-87, 71 Ill. Dec. 749, 755-56, 451 N.E.2d 903, 909-10.) The jury may experiment by considering average figures. Kelley v. Call (1944), 324 Ill.App. 143, 57 N.E.2d 501.
In the instant case, the jury was polled prior to being dismissed at defendant's request, and all 12 stated that the verdict was his or her verdict. (See German, 115 Ill.App.3d at 987, 71 Ill. Dec. at 756, 451 N.E.2d at 910.) However, defendant's posttrial motion included the affidavits of four jurors which stated:
"2. In order to reach its verdict as to Saintco, Inc., in the case, the jury agreed that as to each separate element of damage listed on the verdict form, each juror would write down what the juror thought was Saintco's percentage of negligence as to that element of damage. As to each element of damage, the 12 assigned percentages were then added together and divided by 12, in order to reach an average percentage for that element of damage. The average percentage was then multiplied by the amount which the plaintiff's attorney * * * requested in his final argument in order to reach an amount for that element of damage. The same procedure was followed for each of the separately listed elements of damage on the verdict form."
Upon the trial court's denial of defendant's posttrial motion, defendant failed to request an evidentiary hearing. (See Department of Transportation v. Graham (1985), 130 Ill. App. 3d 589, 85 Ill. Dec. 850, 474 N.E.2d 810 (wherein the defendant did request an evidentiary hearing).) Moreover, defendant in its brief admits that "certain aspects of the procedure employed by the jury herein may be subject to several interpretations." Under such circumstances, defendant has failed to prove an impermissible quotient verdict was used, and we refuse to disturb the jury's verdict on these grounds.
H. JURY INSTRUCTIONS
Defendant further contends that the trial court erred in instructing the jury on the issue of duty in this case and in refusing to instruct the jury on defendant's defense under the Workers' Compensation Act and in refusing defendant's special interrogatories regarding its affirmative defense. We need only address defendant's arguments regarding the duty instruction, as we previously determined that no error occurred because of the trial court's refusal to instruct the jury on defendant's affirmative defense of workers' compensation. Defendant specifically contends that plaintiff's instruction No. 13D and plaintiff's instructions No. 28 and No. 29 assume that the general-duty instruction applied in this case and ignored the limited nature of the duty hereinthe hours the courtesy patrol was in operation. However, because defendant's own instruction, No. 7A, clearly sets forth the limited nature of the duty, we find that the jury was adequately instructed on the limited nature of defendant's duty.
I. EXCESSIVE VERDICT
Defendant next contends that the damages returned by the jury were excessive because plaintiff failed to prove that any damages were proximately caused by defendant's negligence as opposed to the initial injury or insult. Accordingly, defendant contends that a verdict of nearly $1.4 million is excessive. We previously determined that plaintiff did make a submissible case to the jury on the issue of defendant's negligence. Mitch's injuries were quite severe and the elements of damages were attested to by Mitch's treating physicians, Mitch's rehabilitation nurse, and Dr. Grossman, plaintiff's expert economist. Thus, we do not agree that the damages returned by the jury were excessive.
J. RESTRICTIONS ON CROSS-EXAMINATION OF PLAINTIFF'S ECONOMIST
Defendant also asserts that the trial court erred in limiting defendant's cross-examination of Dr. Grossman, who testified regarding *1231 Mitch's lost income and lost future income. The trial court specifically prohibited defendant from discussing the adverse effect of Mitch's prior felony conviction for armed robbery and use of a deadly weapon for which he was sentenced to concurrent terms of 8½ years in the Nevada State Prison. We have reviewed the offer of proof and must agree with the trial court that the information concerning Mitch's prior conviction would have only served to prejudice Mitch's case. In the offer of proof, Dr. Grossman testified that while it is generally true that a criminal conviction damages one's employability and earning potential, he believed his calculations in the instant case were correct notwithstanding Mitch's prior conviction. This was so because Dr. Grossman based his predictions on future income substantially less than that of an average white male because Mitch only earned minimum wage for the year preceding his injury. Moreover, Mitch proved he was employable, albeit at a low wage, by working for defendant after his incarceration. Consequently, we find no error in the trial court's refusal to allow Dr. Grossman to be cross-examined about the effect of Mitch's prior conviction on his employability.
K. TESTIMONY OF MARK PROSSER
The final contention raised by defendant is that the trial court erred in permitting Mark Prosser to express an opinion as to the cause of Mitch's condition. Defendant contends Mark Prosser was not qualified to render an expert opinion, as he failed to possess the skills necessary to form an expert opinion. Defendant cites Hawkins v. Richardson (1975), 29 Ill.App.3d 597, 331 N.E.2d 201, which held that the plaintiff's testimony that glasses prescribed by defendant "caused" his headaches was improper expert testimony. In that case, however, it was clear that the plaintiff had no optical training. It is true that in order to testify as an expert, it must be shown that such person possesses "special skills beyond the ken of the average juror and that he employed those skills in forming an opinion." (Galindo v. Riddell, Inc. (1982), 107 Ill.App.3d 139, 146, 60 Ill. Dec. 849, 855, 437 N.E.2d 376, 382.) In the present case, Prosser was not qualified to give opinions on the amount of time that plaintiff had remained in the car, and the trial court erred in admitting that opinion. We conclude, however, that the admission of Prosser's opinion was harmless error because it was cumulative of the opinions of both Dr. Ullah and Dr. Boeren.
For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the circuit court of St. Clair County entered upon a jury verdict in plaintiff's favor is affirmed.
Affirmed.
RARICK and CHAPMAN, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 2226903 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:22.06139+00 ===

305 N.W.2d 703 (1981)
Sandra Sue FOREMAN and Lance Wayne Smith, by his next Friend and Mother, Sandra Sue Foreman, Appellees,
v.
Gary Wayne WILCOX, Appellant.
No. 64051.
Supreme Court of Iowa.
May 13, 1981.
L. Jeffrey Zearley, Tipton, for appellant.
Allan L. Harms, Asst. Linn County Atty., and James M. Redmond, Cedar Rapids, for appellees.
Considered by REYNOLDSON, C. J., and UHLENHOPP, HARRIS, ALLBEE and LARSON, JJ.
UHLENHOPP, Justice.
This appeal and cross appeal from a judgment requiring support by respondent Gary Wayne Wilcox of a child born out of wedlock presents three issues: whether the action is maintainable under chapter 252A, The Code 1981; whether Wilcox' parentage of the child was established by a preponderance of the evidence; and whether Wilcox should be required to make partial reimbursement for past support furnished by the mother, petitioner Sandra Sue Foreman.
*704 The action is in equity and we find the facts anew; we give weight to the findings of the trial court but are not bound by them. State Department of Social Services ex rel.Brecht v. Brecht, 255 N.W.2d 342, 344 (Iowa 1977).
I. Foreman has supported the child, copetitioner Lance Wayne Smith, since his birth on February 23, 1970, much of the time by her own efforts and part of the time with public assistance in the form of aid to dependent children under chapter 239, The Code. At the time of this action she was receiving ADC, and she had assigned any support payments received to the Iowa Department of Social Services.
Wilcox makes two contentions. He asserts, first, that petitioners could not sue under chapter 252A to recover for assistance provided under chapter 239, citing Butler County v. Strange, 221 N.W.2d 281 (Iowa 1974). This is not the holding of Strange. That action was brought by the governmental unit under chapter 252 of the Code (support of the poor). But the assistance which the county sought to recover from the putative father was not provided by the county under 252. It was provided under chapter 239, and we therefore held that a chapter-252 action could not be maintained by the county. Id. at 283. This action, however, is by the dependent himself as one petitioner. He is not suing to recover ADC as such, although the Department may ultimately get the money, but rather to enforce his own right to support from his alleged father, as chapter 252A authorizes. §§ 252A.2(5), 252A.3(9).
Moreover, differing from chapter 252 involved in Strange, chapter 252A expressly gives the governmental unit furnishing ADC or other assistance authority to bring an action under that chapter the same as the dependent may do. § 252A.5(5); see Stearns v. Kean, 303 N.W.2d 408 (Iowa 1981). This action could have been brought under chapter 252A by the governmental unit itself.
We do not find merit in Wilcox' first contention.
II. Wilcox next asserts that petitioners did not establish paternity. This issue is factual. The burden of persuasion is on petitioners, by a preponderance of the evidence, and the law does not require corroboration of the mother although the presence or absence of corroboration may influence the fact finder in the ultimate finding. State ex rel. Brown v. Middleton, 259 Iowa 1140, 1142, 147 N.W.2d 40, 41 (1966).
Lance was conceived in May or June 1970. Foreman testified she had sexual intercourse with Wilcox during that period and with no one else.
A witness testified that Foreman and Wilcox spent a night together within that time frame. Wilcox did not deny that he had intercourse with Foreman. The trial court found no reason to question Foreman's credibility and neither do we. On the record presented and under the preponderance of the evidence standard, we find that Wilcox is the father of Lance. We thus reject Wilcox' second contention.
III. The trial court required Wilcox to pay $35 each week prospectively until Lance becomes eighteen or is emancipated. We construe this as an allowance toward ongoing support. Petitioners claim that Foreman alone has had most of the burden of the support of Lance since his birth, in a very considerable sum, and that Wilcox should make payments also toward that past support.
Wilcox is single, supports only himself, earns good wages, and owns a home with some equity. He can pay at least $50 weekly, and we believe a requirement of payments toward past support as well as toward current support is consistent with the intent of sections 252A.4(2) and 252A.5(5), and with the rationale of Brown v. Brown, 269 N.W.2d 819, 822 (Iowa 1978). See also Rowell v. Rowell, 97 Kan. 16, 20, 154 P. 243, 245 (1916). The rule generally followed in analogous bastardy proceedings is that the father may be required to make payments to the mother toward past support, if justified by the evidence as it is here. 10 Am.Jur.2d Bastards § 127 (1963) *705 ("The award may include an amount for the support of the child from the date of his birth to the date of adjudication of paternity."); 10 C.J.S. Bastards § 111(a) (1938) ("[T]he usual practice is to make an order against defendant based on a judgment which shall include a reasonable allowance for the past, as well as the future, maintenance of the child . . . ").
The amount of $50 weekly is reasonable, considering Foreman's past support and her need and Wilcox' means. We thus approve the trial court's judgment but modify it to increase the child support to $50 per week to continue until Lance becomes eighteen or is emancipated, of which $35 is to be applied toward current support and $15 is to be applied toward past support furnished by Foreman. As to the portion relating to current support, the district court may subsequently make modifications upon a material change of circumstances, Brecht, 255 N.W.2d at 346; 10 Am.Jur.2d Bastards § 131 (1963); 10 C.J.S. Bastards § 114 (1938), and may also make a determination regarding support after age eighteen under section 252A.2(3). We direct the district court to enter a supplemental decree in accordance with this opinion.
MODIFIED AND AFFIRMED WITH DIRECTIONS.

=== CASE 9741326 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:53:43.516236+00 ===

COFFEY, J.
This is a review of a decision of the court of appeals1 affirming a judgment and order of the circuit court for Juneau county, Raymond E. Gieringer, presiding. The circuit court issued a peremptory writ of mandamus upholding the position of the Wisconsin Law Enforcement Standards Board (LESB),2 respondent, directing the Juneau county village of Lyndon Station (Village), appellant, and its president and board of trustees to remove and discharge William G. Jessen as the chief of police of the village of Lyndon Station. The question in this case deals with the authority of a village to employ a convicted felon as police chief after the LESB has deemed him ineligible for *476appointment to this position and refused to certify him as being qualified therefor citing the Wis. Adm. Code LES §2.01(1) (d), prohibiting the employment of a convicted felon as a law enforcement officer.3 William G. Jessen, the chief of police is not a party to this review.
On April 27, 1973, Jessen, was convicted of 26 felony counts of misconduct in public office, contrary to sec. 946.12 (4), Stats. 1973,4 after being found guilty of falsifying uniform traffic citations while serving as the chief deputy sheriff for Juneau county.5 Jessen was sentenced to 26 concurrent one-year terms in the Wisconsin state prison at Waupun for each felony conviction, but these sentences were stayed and he was placed on probation *477for two years. He completed his probation and received a certificate of discharge from the Department of Health and Social Services effective June 5,1975.
On September 30, 1974, the village board, although aware of Jessen’s convictions for misconduct in public office, hired Jessen as chief of police, sanitary landfill area attendant and sewer operator, believing that a violation of sec. 946.12(4), Stats. 1973, constituted a misdemeanor rather than a felony. The village supported its belief that a violation of this statute was a misdemeanor with two letters: one from Richard C. Kelley, the Juneau county district attorney, to Jessen and the other from the judge originally assigned to the case, the Hon. Thomas H. Barland, to the Juneau county clerk of courts.6
The board of trustees’ resolution hiring Jessen on September 30, 1974, provided that his employment as police chief would become permanent upon satisfactory *478completion of a six-month “probationary period.” During this time, the village requested the LESB to certify Jessen as a qualified law enforcement officer.7 In a letter dated December 9, 1974,8 the Enforcement Stan*479dards Board denied certification advising the village that a conviction for a violation of sec. 946.12(4), Stats. 1973, was a felony and that Jessen was, therefore, ineligible for employment as a law enforcement officer, pursuant to Wis. Adm. Code LES §2.01(1) (d). The village board did not accept the LESB’s determination and refused to comply with the Wis. Adm. Code LES §2.01(1) (d). Upon determining that Jessen had satisfactorily completed his six-month probationary period, the village hired him on a full-time basis beginning April 1, 1975.
In April of 1977, the LESB, having determined some three years earlier that Jessen’s felony convictions for misconduct in public office disqualified him for employment as a law enforcement officer pursuant to the Wisconsin Law Enforcement Standards (Wis. Adm; Code LES §2.01(1) (d)), demanded that the “mayor” (president) and board of trustees of Lyndon Station remove *480Jessen from his position as chief of police. On July 5, 1977, after the village had refused to comply with the LESB’s directive regarding the discharge of Jessen as police chief, the Law Enforcement Standards Board petitioned the circuit court for an alternative writ of mandamus to compel the village, its president and trustees, to terminate Jessen’s employment or, in the alternative, to show cause why they should not do so. In its return to the writ, the village alleged that it could not lawfully discharge Jessen because such action would be in violation of the prohibition against employment discrimination on the basis of a felony conviction (sec. 111.82(5) (h), Stats., effective November 1, 1977), depriving Jessen of his constitutional right of due process and equal protection. The cause was thereafter scheduled for a hearing on the merits.
While this hearing was pending, the village trustees entered into a written contract with Jessen, setting forth that his employment was permanent and that he could only be removed for cause. Cause was defined as “misconduct or malfeasance occurring in his [Jessen’s] position as chief of police of the village, or physical or mental incapacity of such nature that Jessen is no longer able to perform the duties of chief of police.” The agreement also provided that Jessen “will not be removed from his employment except upon notice and hearing before an impartial decision-maker appointed by the village board.” The written contract was executed on May 29, 1978, some three years after Jessen was hired but was made effective “as of the 1st day of April, 1975.”
Following the hearing, the trial court ruled that the village had violated Wis. Adm. Code LES §2.01(1) (d) in employing Jessen as its chief of police and entered a judgment and order granting the peremptory writ of mandamus directing the village and its board of trustees *481to remove Jessen from that position forthwith. The issuance of the writ was stayed pending an appeal to the court of appeals. The appellate court, in affirming the trial court, based its decision that the village was required to terminate Jessen’s employment upon Wis. Const., art. XIII, sec. 3 which prohibits persons who had been convicted of “infamous crimes” from holding “any office of trust, profit or honor in this state,”9 and ignored the Law Enforcement Standard prohibiting the employment of convicted felons as law enforcement officers. In reaching its decision, the court of appeals held that all felonies are infamous crimes within the meaning of this constitutional provision, and further, that the post of chief of police for a village is an office of “trust, profit or honor” and subject to the terms of Wis. Const, art. XIII, sec. 3. Wisconsin Law Enforcement Standards Bd. v. Lyndon Station Village, 98 Wis.2d 229, 238, 244-45, 295 N.W.2d 818 (Ct. App. 1980).
The following issues are presented for our review:
1. Is a violation of sec. 946.12(4), Stats. 1973, a felony?
2. Did the creation of sec. 111.32(5) (h), Stats., by ch. 125, Laws of 1977, relating to discrimination in employment and licensing on the basis of arrest and conviction records invalidate or modify Wis. Adm. Code LES §2.01(1) (d) ?
3. Did the trial court abuse its discretion in issuing the peremptory writ of mandamus?
I. Is a Violation of see. 9^6.12(4-), Stats. 1973, a Felony ?
The court of appeals, relying on the legislative history of the penalty for a violation of sec. 946.12(4), Stats. *4821973, held that a violation of this law constituted a felony and the village has not specifically challenged this determination in this court. In the oral argument before this court, the village’s counsel appeared to concede that the offenses for which Jessen was convicted were felonies, stating “We acknowledge that the [sic] felony was committed.” Our decision in State ex rel. McDonald v. Douglas County Circuit Court, 100 Wis.2d 569, 302 N.W.2d 462 (1981), dictates affirmance of the appellate court’s conclusion that a violation of sec. 946.12 (4), Stats. 1973, constitutes a felony.
In McDonald, this court held that a violation of a statute which does not specify the place of imprisonment, and is punishable by confinement for not more than one year is a felony. McDonald, supra, at 580. We reached this result upon an application of secs. 939.60 (definition of a felony)10 and 973.02 (place of confinement where none is specified)11 Stats., to the penalty provision at issue. We noted that an offense that fails to provide a place of confinement but which authorizes a prison sentence of one year is punishable with imprisonment in the state prisons, pursuant to sec. 973.02, Stats., and is, therefore, a “felony” as defined in sec. 939.60. Ibid.
*483In McDonald, supra, at 577-581, we re-examined State ex rel. Gaynon v. Krueger, 31 Wis.2d 609, 143 N.W.2d 437 (1966), and its progeny, and held that it is no longer necessary to engage in the legislative history analysis set forth therein when dealing with the question of whether an offense punishable with confinement of not more than one year and which fails to proscribe the institution of confinement is a felony or misdemeanor. In reviewing secs. 939.60 and 973.02, Stats., and analyzing the case law applicable thereto, we determined that the legislature intended that crimes failing to prescribe the place of imprisonment and punishable with incarceration for no more than one year, or a year or more, should be classified as felonies under these statutes. The analysis of the felony versus misdemeanor conflict adopted in McDonald was espoused in a dissent to Gaynon authored by Chief Justice CUR-RIE who stated that the classification statutes (sec. 939.60 and sec. 973.02) and the penalty provision of the offense in question were clear and unambiguous and should be applied because the legislature must be presumed to have enacted the classification statutes with full knowledge of and with reference to existing law:
“ ‘The language of the statute is plain and unambiguous. The cardinal principle of statutory construction is to save and not to destroy. As said in 82 C. J.S., Statutes, p. 794, sec. 362 “All statutes are presumed to be enacted by the legislature with full knowledge of the existing condition of the law and with reference to it; . . . they are therefore to be construed in connection with and in harmony with the existing law, and as part of a general and uniform system of jurisprudence, that is, they are to be construed with reference to the whole system of law of which they form a part. So the meaning and effect of statutes are to be determined in connection, not only with the common law, . . . and the constitution, but also with reference to other statutes, . . .” ’ ” Id. at 625.
*484In arguing before the court of appeals, relying on Gaynon and its progeny, the village contended that a violation of sec. 946.12(4), Stats. 1973,12 was only a misdemeanor for it was punishable by a fine of not more than $500 or imprisonment for not more than one year with no place of. imprisonment specified. This court rendered the McDonald decision some months after the date of oral argument in the appellate court. Thus, we hold that anyone convicted of a violation of sec. 946.12 (4), Stats. 1973, when read in conjunction with sec. 973.02, is punishable with confinement in the state prisons and, therefore, a violation of sec. 946.12(4), Stats. 1973, constitutes a felony. McDonald, supra; sec. 939.60.
II. Effect of Sec. 111.32(5) (h), Stats., on Wis. Adm. Code LES §2,01 (1) (d).
•The village contends that the other issue in this case is whether the Wis. Adm. Code LES §2.01(1) (d) is in conflict with ch. 125 of the Laws of 1977. Lyndon Station asserts that the aforementioned administrative rule (LES §2.01(1) (d)) conflicts with sec. 111.32(5) (h), Stats., as the administrative rule prohibits the employment of nonpardoned felons in the field of law enforcement and should be rendered invalid. Whereas sec. III.32(5) (h) prohibits employment and licensing discrimination on the basis of a conviction record unless the circumstances of the offense committed are substantially related to the duties and responsibilities attending the particular position to which the applicant aspires. See: sec. 111.32(5) (h)2, a. Thus, we are called upon to determine whether Wis. Adm. Code LES §2.01 *485(1) (d) can be harmonized with sec. 111.32(5) (h), when dealing with the question of possible discrimination in the employment and licensing of a law enforcement officer previously convicted of a felony.
Wis. Adm. Code LES §2.01(1) (d) provides :
“LES 2.01 Minimum qualifications for recruitment. (1) Before an individual may commence employment on a probationary, temporary, part-time, or full-time basis as a law enforcement officer, that individual must have met recruit qualifications established by the board. The minimum qualifications for recruitment shall be:
ii . . .
“(d) The applicant shall not have been convicted of any federal felony or of any offense which if committed in Wisconsin could be punished as a felony unless the applicant has been granted an absolute and unconditional pardon.”
This provision was adopted pursuant to the broad rule-making powers granted to the LESB by the legislature in sec. 165.85(1), (3) (a), (b)13 and (4) (c). Sec. 165.85 (4) (e) empowers the LESB to adopt rules specifying the minimum qualifications including character, educational and training standards which persons desiring employment as law enforcement officers must meet:
“(c) In addition to the requirements of par. (b),14 the board may, by rule, fix such other minimum qualifi*486cations for the employment of law enforcement officers as relate to the competence and reliability of persons to assume and discharge the responsibilities of law enforcement officers, and the board shall prescribe the means for presenting evidence of fulfillment of these requirements.”
Further, the legislature has granted the Enforcement Standards Board the power of certification, sec. 165.85 (3) (c), Stats.,15 and expressly mandated that no person shall receive a permanent appointment as a law enforcement officer in the absence of the LESB’s certification that such person is qualified to serve in that capacity, sec. 165.85(4) (b),16 and entrusted the LESB with the responsibility of ensuring that law enforcement officers in this state are minimally qualified in terms of professional character, education and training:
“ (1) Findings and Policy. The legislature finds that the administration of criminal justice is of state-wide concern, and that law enforcement work is of vital importance to the health, safety and welfare of the people of this state and is of such a nature as to require training, education and the establishment of standards of a proper professional character. It is in the public interest that such standards be established and that such training and education be made available to persons who *487seek to become law enforcement officers, persons who are serving as such officers in a temporary or probationary capacity and persons already in regular service.” Sec. 165.85(1), Stats.
Surely, an administrative rule prohibiting persons convicted of felonies from receiving appointments as law enforcement officers is designed to insure that only those who possess proper professional character, education and training are appointed to protect and promote the health, welfare and safety of the people of this state.
We turn how to a discussion of sec. 111.32(5) (h), Stats., effective November 1, 1977, which “prohibits discrimination in employment, membership or licensing on the basis of arrest or conviction record . . . [unless] . . . the subject of the conviction is substantially related to the ability of the person to perform the job or licensed activity.”17
Sec. 111.32(5) (h), Stats., provides in part:
“. . . It is discrimination because of arrest record or conviction record:18
“2. For any employer, labor organization, licensing agency or employment agency to refuse to hire, employ, admit or license any person, or to bar or terminate any person from employment, membership or licensing, or to discriminate against any person in promotion, compensation, terms, conditions or privileges of employment, membership or licensing, or otherwise to discriminate against any person because such person has an arrest record or a conviction record; provided, however, that it shall not be unlawf ul:
*488
((
“b. For an employer or licensing agency to refuse to employ or license, or to bar or terminate from employment or licensing, any person who has been convicted of any felony, misdemeanor or other offense the circumstances of which substantially relate to the circumstances of the particular job or licensed activity.”
The parties do not dispute that the LESB is considered a “licensing agency”19 within the purview of sec. 111.32(5) (h), Stats., as it has the exclusive power and responsibility in this state to certify persons as being qualified for employment as law enforcement officers. Next, we reach the question, Is Wis. Adm. Code LES §2.01(1) (d) in conflict with the above-quoted statute?
According to Josam Mfg. Co. v. State Board of Health, 26 Wis.2d 587, 596, 183 N.W.2d 301 (1965), this administrative rule has the force and effect of law and the village in its briefs and arguments to this court does not contend otherwise:
“ ‘Rules, regulations, and general orders enacted by administrative agencies pursuant to the powers delegated to them have the force and effect of law, ...’ 2 Am. Jur. (2d), Administrative Law, p. 119, sec. 292.”
In Josam, this court further stated:
“In Thomson v. Racine (1943), 242 Wis. 591, 9 N.W. (2d) 91, it was held that commission orders are superior to. municipal ordinances, where the two conflict. Commission rules, established within the jurisdiction of a commission, have the effect of public law. The court said, at page 597: ‘. . . the legislative control, either directly or through its designated administrative body, is superior to any conflicting action of the legislative body of the municipality.’ ” Id. at 596.
*489The municipality (village), through its legislative body (board of trustees), has acted in violation of an administrative rule in hiring a law enforcement officer who has been denied certification by the LESB. Thus, the rule of Thomson v. Racine, 242 Wis. 591, 9 N.W.2d 91 (1943), quoted in Josam, is applicable here and the administrative rule having the force and effect of law is superior to any conflicting action of the village.
As a corollary to the rule that validly enacted administrative rules are given the effect of law, it is generally accepted that the rules and regulations of administrative agencies are subject to the same principles of construction as apply to the construction of statutes and, in this case, the applicable rule is that conflicts between statutes should be harmonized when possible:
“In order to carry out the intent of the framers of an administrative rule or regulation, the court should harmonize the various parts and provisions of such rule or regulation and give them effect, if possible, provided this may be done without violating constitutional and statutory provisions . . .
“An administrative rule should ordinarily be given that construction which will, if possible, sustain its validity, and, where alternative interpretations of an administrative rule or regulation are possible, the more reasonable of the two is to be chosen, . . 73 C.J.S. Public Adm. Bodies & Procedure, §105 at 426 (1951).
and:
“Perhaps the first rule of construction as to administrative rules and regulations is that rules made in the exercise of a power delegated by statute should be construed together with the statute to make, if possible, an effectual piece of legislation in harmony with common sense and sound reason.
“The second rule is that generally the same rules of construction and interpretation govern the construction and interpretation of rules and regulations of administrative agencies as apply to statutes in the same field. . . .
*490“. . . An administrative construction of the agency’s own regulations is controlling in determining their meaning unless plainly erroneous or inconsistent with the regulations. ...” 2 Am. Jur.2d, Adm. Law §307 at 135-36 (1962).
Thus, according to the cardinal rule of statutory construction :
“. . . that conflicts between different statutes, by implication or otherwise, are not favored and will not be held to exist if they may otherwise be reasonably construed.” (citations omitted). Strong v. Milwaukee, 38 Wis.2d 564, 570, 157 N.W.2d 619 (1968).
and that:
“Construction of statutes should be done in a way which harmonizes the whole system of law of which they are a part, and any conflict should be reconciled if possible.” Muskego-Norway C.S.J.S.D. No. 9 v. W.E.R.B., 35 Wis.2d 540, 556, 151 N.W.2d 617 (1967). See also: Glinski v. Sheldon, 88 Wis.2d 509, 519, 276 N.W.2d 815 (1979); Kramer v. Hayward, 57 Wis.2d 302, 311, 203 N.W.2d 871 (1973); State v. Duffy, 54 Wis.2d 61, 64, 194 N.W.2d 624 (1972).
the Law Enforcement Standard (Wis. Adm Code LES §2.01(1) (d), and sec. 111.32(5) (h), Stats., insofar as they seem inconsistent and relate to the same subject matter (conviction record as a ground for disqualification from employment or licensing) should be harmonized.
As noted, the legislature, with the enactment of sec. 165.85, Stats., has entrusted the LESB with the responsibility of establishing “minimum qualifications for the employment of law enforcement officers as relate to the competence and reliability of persons to assume and discharge the responsibilities of law enforcement officers.” Sec. 165.85(4) (c). The LESB in accordance with its delegated authority to establish minimum qualifications for persons seeking employment as law enforcement officers promulgated Wis. Adm. Code LES §2.01(1) (d) *491prohibiting nonpardoned felons from serving as law enforcement officers. The legislature, when creating sec. 111.32(5) (h), in 1977, is presumed to have acted with full knowledge of this provision of the administrative code adopted in 1970. See: e.g., Kindy v. Hayes, 44 Wis.2d 301, 314, 171 N.W.2d 324 (1969) (holding that the legislature is presumed to act with full knowledge of the existing law, including an administrative rule that was involved in a prior decision). Indeed, the fact that the legislature, when enacting ch. 125, Laws of 1977, made the licensing criteria of a number of licensing and examining boards of both professional and trade groups subject to the provisions of sec. 111.32(5) (h), e.g., the examining board of architects and engineers, together with the barber and cosmetologists examining boards and the department of regulation and licensing of private detectives, investigators, watchmen and security guards, etc., is a strong indication that the legislature was cognizant that a felony conviction was, before the enactment of this legislation, a ground for denial or revocation of various licenses, including a Law Enforcement Standards Board certification.
Sec. 111.32(5) (h)2, b, expressly states that licensing (certification) discrimination on the basis of a conviction record does not violate this statute when the circumstances of the conviction “substantially relate to the circumstances of the particular job or licensed activity:”
“... . [I] t shall not be unlawful:
“b. For an employer or licensing agency to refuse to employ or license, or to bar or terminate from employment or licensing, any person who has been convicted of any felony . . . the circumstances of which substantially relate to the circumstances of the particular job or licensed activity.”
Thus, it is obvious that the statute, sec. 111.32(5) (h), modifies the administrative rule, LES §2.01(1) (d).
*492Jessen was convicted of misconduct in public office on 26 felony counts of falsifying uniform traffic citations. As a police officer for the village, Jessen would be charged with enforcing the traffic laws. See: secs. 61.31(2) Stats. Thus, under the facts of this case, it can hardly be said that the circumstances of the offense for which Jessen was convicted fail to meet the substantial relationship exception to the prohibition against employment and licensing discrimination on the basis of a conviction record set forth in sec. 111.32(5) (h) 2 b, Stats., as common sense dictates that a conviction of the felony of misconduct in public office for falsifying traffic tickets certainly bears a substantial relationship to the duties of a police officer who is called upon to issue traffic citations. Therefore, when reading sec. 111.32(5) (h), in conjunction with sec. 165.85(4) (c) (empowering the LESB to promulgate minimum competency and reliability qualifications for employment of law enforcement officers) and Wis. Adm. Code LES §2.01(1) (d) when dealing with the certification and employment of a law enforcement officer, we hold that the circumstances of Jessen’s convictions for falsifying uniform traffic citations substantially relate to his duties as police chief for the village of Lyndon Station and thus is barred from holding a law enforcement position in Wisconsin. Further, we hold that Wis. Adm. Code LES §2.01(1) (d), as modified herein, and sec. 111.32 (5) (h), are not in conflict.
Public trust in the integrity of our law enforcement officials is essential to the preservation of the public peace and for the enforcement of laws and ordinances. This trust and confidence is shaken by casting even the slightest suspicion against the professional character and integrity of a police chief. If the state authorities through our court system have convicted someone of 26 *493felonies, it stands to reason that his effectiveness as a law enforcement officer will be greatly diminished. What impression would be given to an impartial jury when the police chief, as the prosecution’s primary witness in a serious criminal case, has to explain on cross-examination that he stands convicted of 26 felonies? We agree with the LESB that employment of a non-pardoned felon in a law enforcement capacity would only serve to undermine the public’s trust in its police officers as well as the ability of such persons to adequately perform the duties of officers of the law.
Mandamus
This court in Miller v. Smith, 100 Wis.2d 609, 621, 622, 302 N.W.2d 468 (1981), set forth the standard of review and the criteria governing the issuance of a writ of mandamus as follows:
“A writ of mandamus is a discretionary writ in that it lies within the sound discretion of the trial court to either grant or deny. The trial judge’s actions in either granting or denying the writ will be affirmed unless the trial judge abused his discretion. Morrissette v. DeZonia, 63 Wis.2d 429, 434, 217 N.W.2d 377 (1974); State ex rel. Kurkierewicz v. Cannon, supra n. 11 at 375-76. This court has set forth the following prerequisites for the issuance of the writ:
“ . . a clear legal right; the duty sought to be enforced is positive and plain; the applicant for the writ shows that he will be substantially damaged by nonperformance. of such duty; and there is no other adequate specific legal remedy for the threatened injury, and no laches on the part of such applicant, and no special reasons exist rendering a resort on his part to the remedy, under the circumstances, inequitable. . . .’ Burns v. City of Madison, 92 Wis.2d 232, 243, 248 N.W.2d 631 (1979) quoting from State ex rel. Johnson v. County Court, 41 Wis.2d 188, 192, 163 N.W.2d 6 (1968) and Neu v. Voege, 96 Wis. 489, 493, 71 N.W. 880 (1897).”
*494It is an abuse of discretion to refuse to issue the writ when the noted prerequisites are present: (1) a clear legal right; (2) a positive and plain duty; (3) substantial damages; and (4) no other adequate remedy at law. Neu v. Voege, supra. Further, “ ‘ [m] andamus is the proper remedy to compel public officers to perform duties arising out of their office and presently due to be performed.’ ” (cite omitted) Walter Laev v. Karns, 40 Wis.2d 114, 118, 161 N.W.2d 227 (1968) and State ex rel. Portage Co. D. Dist. v. Newby, 169 Wis. 208, 213, 171 N.W. 953 (1919); provided, however, the duty to act must be clear and unequivocal. On the other hand, “It is an abuse of discretion to compel action through mandamus when the duty is not clear and unequivocal and requires the exercise of discretion.” (Cites omitted.) Burns, supra, at 239.
The village contends that the trial court abused its discretion in issuing the writ of mandamus without making a specific finding that Jessen’s discharge would not be unjust or inequitable. It cites 52 Am. Jur.2d, Mandamus §40 (1970), for the proposition that the trial court abused its discretion in issuing the writ of mandamus without specifically considering “the urgency of the situation, the equities of the parties, the efficacy or futility of the writ if issued, the public policy or interests that may be involved and the question whether, if issued, the writ will promote substantial justice or on the contrary cause injustice, hardship or oppression.” Id. at 365-66.
In answer to this claim, we note that compelling the removal of Jessen was urgent and promoted substantial justice as well as furthered public policy for, as previously stated, allowing one who stands convicted of the felony of misconduct in public office for falsifying traffic citations to serve in a law enforcement capacity seri*495ously undermines the public’s trust in its police officers as well as such person’s ability to adequately perform the duties and responsibilities of law enforcement officers.
Further, although a court, in exercising its discretion to grant or deny the writ, should consider all the facts and circumstances, including those referred to in 52 Am. Jur.2d, Mandamus, §40 (1970), we note that the section of Am. Jur. referenced by the village does temper the court’s reliance on the noted factors in exercising its discretion in the following language:
“However, discretion should not be so exercised as to defeat rights clearly recognized and supported by established principles of law. Thus, judicial discretion should not be exercised to withhold the writ of mandamus to enforce a clear right conferred by statute, where no other remedy is available to secure such right, for the law and the right are imperative upon the court. To deny the writ in such case would amount to judicial assumption of legislative prerogatives; it would tend to emasculate or annul legislation and savor of judicial government.
“It is held that if all of the requisites to issuance of the writ are shown to be present the granting of the writ is a matter of right, but, conversely, the granting of the writ may be an abuse of discretion if the relator does not show a right to the relief requested.” Id. at 366.
The rule alluded to in this provision of Am. Jur., namely, that it is an abuse of discretion to withhold the writ when it is sought to enforce a clear right conferred by statute and when other remedies are inadequate to secure that right was set forth by this court in State ex rel. Dempsey v. Wena A.F. Co., 173 Wis. 651, 654, 182 N.W. 354 (1921), where it held that when a party seeks to enforce a right conferred by statute:
“. . . courts cannot withhold the writ of mandamus to enforce that right without thwarting the legislative will. *496Judicial discretion should not be exercised to withhold the writ of mandamus to enforce a clear right conferred by statute when no other remedy is available to secure such right. To do so amounts to judicial assumption of legislative prerogative, emasculates or annuls legislative enactments, and savors of judicial government.”
This rule is applicable to properly enacted administrative rules as they have the force and effect of law. J.osam, sur-pra.
The legislature has authorized the Law Enforcement Standards Board to prescribe minimum qualifications which persons aspiring to employment as law enforcement officers must meet. Jessen stands convicted of felonies related to his employment and as such is ineligible to serve as a police officer in this state. Wis. Adm. Code LES §2.01(1) (d). The village hired him as its chief of police in 1974 despite being informed that such action would be violative of LES §2.01(1) (d), and further, made his employment in such capacity permanent notwithstanding the legislative mandate that “No person may be appointed as a law enforcement officer . . . unless the person . . . has been certified by the board [LESB] as being qualified to be a law enforcement officer.” Sec. 165.85(4) (b), Stats. Thus, the Law Enforcement Standards Board has demonstrated a clear legal right to have Jessen removed from his position as police chief and that the village of Lyndon Station had a clear and unequivocal duty to discharge him. The village’s duty to terminate Jessen’s employment as its chief of police was mandatory, Wis. Adm. Code LES §2.01(1) (d) and sec. 165.85(4) (b), and the village has never claimed that there is some other legal remedy, aside from mandamus, to adequately enforce the LESB’s right. Therefore, for the foregoing reasons, we hold the trial court properly issued the writ of mandamus. Nue v. Voege, supra.
*497The village has also challenged Wis. Adm. Code LES §2.01(1) (d) and the issuance of the writ of mandamus herein on the grounds that they have caused a denial of Jessen’s constitutional guarantees of due process and equal protection. We do not reach these issues as well as the question of whether Wis. Const, art. XIII, sec. 3, presents a bar to Jessen’s employment as police chief for Lyndon Station as our determinations that the enforcement of Wis. Adm. Code LES §2.01(1) (d) where the circumstances of the crime substantially relate to the circumstances of Jessen’s employment as chief of police, and that the village employed Jessen in violation of the provisions of sec. 165.85(4) (b), Stats, (requiring LESB certification as a condition precedent to the hiring of a law enforcement officer on a permanent basis) are dis-positive.
Although we do not reach the question of whether Jessen was subject to removal from his position as police chief under the provisions of Wis. Const, art. XIII, sec. 3, we disavow the appellate court’s language and ruling that all felonies constitute “infamous crimes” within the parameters of this constitutional provision.
By the Court. — The decision of the Court of Appeals is affirmed.
The decision of the court of appeals is reported at 98 Wis.2d 229, 295 N.W.2d 818 (Ct. App. 1980).
The LESB was created for the purpose of certifying only qualified persons for employment in law enforcement positions and for establishing minimum educational and training standards for persons seeking employment as law enforcement officers as well as to establish minimum curriculum requirements for the training of law enforcement recruits or officers. See: sec. 165.85, Stats.
Wis. Adm. Code LES §2.01(1) (Feb. 1981) provides in part:
“LES 2.01 Minimum qualifications for recruitment. (1) Before an individual may commence employment on a probationary, temporary, part-time, or full-time basis as a law enforcement officer, that individual must have met recruit qualifications established by the board. The minimum qualifications for recruitment shall be:
“(d) The applicant shall not have been convicted of any federal felony or of any offense which if committed in Wisconsin could be punished as a felony unless the applicant has been granted an absolute and unconditional pardon.”
This rule became effective on October 1, 1970. See: Wis. Adm. Register, Sept., 1970, No. 177. As originally adopted, it applied to all convicted felons regardless of whether they had received a pardon. The language exempting felons who have received absolute and unconditional pardons from the prohibitive scope of this rule was added in 1975 and became effective on February 1st of that year. See: Wis. Adm. Register, Jan., 1975, No. 229.
Sec. 946.12(4), Stats. 1978, provides:
“Misconduct in public office. Any public officer or public employe who does any of the following may be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned not more than one year or both:
“(4) In his capacity as such officer or employe, makes an entry in an account or record book or return, certificate, report or statement which in a material respect he intentionally falsifies;”
See: Jessen v. State, 95 Wis.2d 207, 209, 290 N.W.2d 685 (1980).
The Juneau county district attorney’s letter provided in part:
“July 30, 1972
“Mr. William Jessen
515 Division St.
Mauston, Wisconsin
“Dear Mr. Jessen:
“Tomorrow morning the executive committee of the Juneau County Board of Supervisors will he signing a criminal complaint charging you with one count of felony embezzlement* of $2,524.00 and 26 misdemeanor counts of misconduct in public office.
“Very truly yours,
/S/ RICHARD C. KELLEY
“Richard C. Kelley
“District Attorney”
The letter authored by the judge recited:
*478“September 12, 1972
“Mr. Everett Stark
Clerk of Courts
Juneau County Courthouse
Mauston, Wisconsin
“Re: State vs. William Jessen
Dear Mr. Stark:
“If there be no objection entered within eight days from this date from Mr. Richard Kelley representing the State of Wisconsin or Mr. William Skemp representing William Jessen, the misdemeanor charges in the complaint are ordered transferred with the felony charge to Circuit Court for arraignment and trial.
“Very truly yours,
/S/ THOMAS H. BARLAND
“Thomas H. Barland
“County Judge, Branch I”
It must be noted that the jury found Jessen not guilty of the felony embezzlement charge referred to in the letters and acquitted him of the same.
No person may receive a permanent appointment to a law enforcement position without certification from the LESB stating that he or she is qualified to serve as a law enforcement officer in this state. Sec. 165.85(4) (c), Stats. One who has been convicted of an offense punishable as a felony in this state is ineligible for employment as a police officer, pursuant to Wis. Adm. Code LES §2.01(1) (d) and therefore cannot be certified as being qualified to serve in that capacity.
This letter provided in part:
“December 9,1974
“The Honorable John Adams
Mayor
Lyndon Station, Wisconsin 53944
“Dear Mayor:
“I have been requested by the administrator of the Division of Law Enforcement Services of the Wisconsin Department of Justice to write you in regard to the information received from you in reference to Mr. William G. Jessen. He has asked that I discuss two specific items contained in the application for enrollment for training and your accompanying letter dated November 27, 1974.
*479“You further state in your letter that Mr. Jessen stands convicted of 26 counts of misconduct in public office contrary to see. 946.12, Stats., which you state are misdemeanors. We respectfully advise that a violation of sec. 946.12, Stats., is a felony.
“Therefore it is the position of the Law Enforcement Standards Board that Mr. Jessen is ineligible for employment on a probationary, temporary, part-time, or full time basis as a law enforcement officer by virtue of the disqualification contained in Wisconsin Administrative Code, section LES 2.01(1) (d).
“Yours truly,
/S/ JAMES C. McKAY, JR.
“James C. McKay, Jr.
“Assistant Attorney General”
The court of appeals erroneously struck this letter from the record on motion of the village on the ground that it was not contained in the record when, in fact, it was and is in the record at page M-2 attached to a “request to admit” made on the village’s behalf. See: Wisconsin Law Enforcement Standards Board v. Lyndon Station Village, 98 Wis.2d 229, 233, 295 N.W.2d 818 (Ct. App. 1980).
Wis. Const, art. XIII, sec. 3 provides in part:
“Eligibility to office . . . [N]o person convicted of any infamous crime in any court within the United States . . . shall he eligible to any office of trust, profit or honor in this state.”
Sec. 939.60, Stats., provides:
“Felony and misdemeanor defined. A crime punishable by imprisonment in the Wisconsin state prisons is a felony. Every other crime is a misdemeanor.”
Sec. 973.02, Stats., provides:
“Place of imprisonment when none expressed. When a statute authorizes imprisonment for its violation hut does not prescribe the place of imprisonment, 1) a sentence of less than one year shall be to the county jail, 2) a sentence of more than one year shall be to the Wisconsin state prisons and the minimum under the indeterminate sentence law shall be one year, and 3) a sentence of one year may be to either the Wisconsin state prisons or the county jail. But in any proper case sentence and commitment may nevertheless be to the department or any house of correction or other institution as provided by law.”
A violation of this statute is presently designated as a Class E felony. Sec. 946.12, Stats.
These paragraphs of see. 165.85, Stats., provide:
“(3) POWERS. The board may:
“(a) Promulgate rules for the administration of this section including the authority to require the submission of reports and information pertaining to the administration of this section by law enforcement agencies in this state.
“(b) Establish minimum educational and training standards for admission to employment as a law enforcement officer: 1) in permanent positions, and 2) in temporary, probationary or part-time status.”
Sub. (4) (b) contains the statutory minimum requirements of a law enforcement training curriculum.
Sec. 165.85(3) (c), Stats., provides:
“(3) Powers. The board may:
“(e) Certify persons as being qualified under this section to be law enforcement officers.”
Sec. 165.85(4) (b), Stats., provides in part:
“(4) Required STANDARDS.
“(b) No person may be appointed as a law enforcement officer, except on a temporary or probationary basis, unless the person has satisfactorily completed a preparatory program of law enforcement training approved by the board and has been certified by the board as being qualified to be a law enforcement officer. . . .” (Emphasis supplied.) There are two exceptions to the certification requirement, neither of which are applicable to Jessen. See: sec. 165.85(4) (a), Stats.
Analysis of the Legislative Reference Bureau regarding the 1977 Assembly Bill No. 219 which ultimately became ch. 125, Laws of 1977.
“Conviction record” is defined as including “. . . but is not limited to, information indicating that a person has been convicted of any felony, misdemeanor or other offense, placed on probation, fined, imprisoned or paroled pursuant to any law enforcement or military authority.” Sec. 111.32(5) (h), Stats.
See: Sec. 227.01(1), (3) and (4), Stats., defining “agency”, “license” and “licensing” for the purposes of administrative procedure and review.

=== CASE 9741327 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:53:43.523755+00 ===

SHIRLEY S. ABRAHAMSON, J.
(dissenting). William S. Jessen has served as chief of police, sanitary landfill area attendant and assistant sewer operator for the Village of Lyndon Station for more than six and one-half years.1 He also serves as the elected constable of the Village of Lyndon Station — elected April, 1977, reelected April, 1979, and reelected April, 1981.
*498The decision announced today means that Jessen can no longer serve as chief of police. He can continue to serve as constable,2 a position whose powers and duties, although unclear under the statute,3 may overlap those of the chief of police. I do not know whether Lyndon Station, a village whose population was 533 in 1970 and 375 in 19804 will continue to employ Jessen as sanitary landfill area attendant or assistant sewer operator if he cannot also perform as chief of police. Whether or not Jessen remains an employee, the Village is now without a police chief.
1 dissent because I believe it is error for this court to make the determination, as it does here, that the circumstances of Jessen’s felony convictions in 1973 substantially relate to the present circumstances of his job as police chief and that he is therefore disqualified from being police chief in 1981. In my view the Law Enforcement Standards Board (LESB), not this court, should make this determination. In making the determination itself the majority has, I believe, usurped the powers of the LESB and of the Village Board of Lyndon Station; has exceeded its appellate jurisdiction by acting as a fact-finder; and has violated rudimentary concepts of fair play.
The absence of an LESB determination of whether a substantial relation exists between the circumstances of the convictions and of the job and the need for such a determination as of this date is best shown by detailing the facts in chronological order.
*499Jessen was convicted of 26 counts of misconduct (falsification of uniform traffic citations in violation of sec. 946.12(4), Stats. 1971) while chief deputy sheriff of Juneau county.5 He was sentenced in June of 1973 to the Wisconsin State Prison at Waupun, one year on each count, sentence on all 26 counts to run concurrently. The sentence was stayed and Jessen was placed on probation for a term of two years.6
On September 30, 1974, the Village Board of Lyndon Station hired Jessen, who was then on probation, to serve as chief of police, sanitary landfill area attendant, and assistant sewer operator. Initially Jessen was hired for a six-month probationary period and then on a permanent basis. It was the belief of the Board at that time that Jessen had been convicted of misdemeanors not felonies.7 The district attorney of Juneau county had in fact represented the charges against Jessen as misdemeanors. This error was caused by the legislature’s error in failing to state expressly whether a violation of sec. 946.12(4), Stats. 1971, was a misdemeanor or a felony. The trial court, the court of appeals and this *500court8 conclude that violation of sec. 946.12(4) was a felony. The soundness of the Village Board’s judgment in hiring as chief of police in 1974 a former Juneau county deputy sheriff who, 17 months earlier, had been convicted of 26 counts of falsifying traffic citations and who was on probation at the time he was hired is not the issue in this case.
In December 1974, the Village requested the LESB to certify Jessen as a qualified law enforcement officer. *501The LESB concluded that Jessen was ineligible for employment on a probationary, temporary, part-time, or full-time basis as a law enforcement officer by virtue of his having failed to comply with LES 2.01(1) (d), Wis. Adm. Code, a rule promulgated by LESB, which provides that an applicant for a position as a law enforcement officer shall not have been convicted “of any offense which if committed in Wisconsin could be punished as a felony unless the applicant has been granted an absolute and unconditional pardon.”9 Over two and one-half years later, on April 1, 1977, the office of the attorney general, representing the LESB, wrote the president of the Village Board of Lyndon Station that unless the Village Board immediately removed Jessen as Lyndon Station chief of police, the LESB would “proceed to institute the appropriate proceedings on behalf of the Board for such removal.” On July 8, 1977, the LESB initiated action against the Village Board asking the circuit court for Juneau county for relief in the form of the issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the Village to remove and discharge Jessen from his employment as chief of police.
Before the matter came before the Juneau county circuit court, the legislature enacted Chapter 125, Laws of 1977, effective November 1, 1977, adopting sec. 111.32 (5) (a) and (5) (h), Stats. 1979-80, prohibiting discrimination in employment because of an applicant’s arrest record or conviction record. See also sec. 111.325, Stats. 1979-80. The Wisconsin legislature clearly set forth the public policy of the State: Prejudice and legal barriers which unfairly deny employment opportunities to ex-offenders should be eradicated.10 The legislature care*502fully provided, however, that “it shall not be unlawful . . . [f]or an employer or licensing agency to refuse to employ or license, or to bar or terminate from employment or licensing, any person who has been convicted of any felony, misdemeanor or other offense the circumstances of which substantially relate to the circumstances of the particular job or licensed activity.” Sec. 111.32 (5) (h)2.b., Stats. 1979-80.
The LESB however did not revise its rule, LES sec. 2.01(1) (d), Wis. Adm. Code, to bring it into harmony with sec. 111.32(5) (a) and (5) (h) and legislative policy.11 Nor did the LESB interpret LES sec. 2.01(1) (d), *503Wis. Adm. Code, as the majority now interprets it, as being modified by sec. 111.32(5) (h) to mean that an applicant for a position as a law enforcement officer shall not have been convicted “of any offense which if committed in Wisconsin could be punished as a felony” (LES sec. 2.01(1) (d), Wis. Adm. Code) if the “circumstances of [the felony conviction] substantially relate to the circumstances of the particular job or licensed activity” (sec. 111.32(5) (h)2.b.) “unless the applicant has been granted an absolute and unconditional pardon” (LES sec. 2.01(1) (d), Wis. Adm. Code).12
After enactment of sec. 111.32(5) (h), the Village Board specifically considered whether there was a substantial relation between the circumstances of Jessen’s conviction and his position of police chief and concluded that there was not.13 The LESB, by comparison, proceeded in its lawsuit without reviewing its rule or its position as to Jessen and urged the circuit court to hold that the LESB had authority to exclude all unpardoned felons from law enforcement positions.
*504The Juneau county circuit court in September 1978 adopted the LESB’s position. The circuit court concluded, as a matter of law, that LES 2.01(1) (d), Wis. Adm. Code, renders convicted and non-pardoned felons ineligible to serve as law enforcement officers; that LES 2.01(1) (d) is not voided by sec. 111.32(5) (h), Stats. 1979-80; and that sec. 111.32(5) (h) is not violated by enforcement of LES 2.01(1) (d). The majority rejects these conclusions of law and affirms the order and judgment on grounds not considered by the circuit court.
The court of appeals based its affirmance of the circuit court order and judgment not on LES 2.01(1) (d), Wis. Adm. Code, or on sec. 111.32(5) (h), but on the Wisconsin Constitution. The court of appeals held that sec. 3, Art. XIII, Wis. Const., barred Jessen from serving as chief of police. The majority need not and properly does not concern itself with this constitutional issue. I disagree with the reasoning of the court of appeals on this issue and find the reasoning set forth by Judge Bablitch in her dissenting opinion, Wisconsin Law Enforcement Stds. Bd. v. Lyndon Station Village, 98 Wis.2d 229, 251, 295 N.W.2d 818 (Ct. App. 1980), legally sound and persuasive.
As this restatement of the facts demonstrates, neither the LESB, nor the circuit court, nor the court of appeals has considered the issue of whether the circumstances of Jessen’s convictions substantially relate to the circumstances of the job.
The majority — after correctly concluding that rule LES 2.01(1) (d) must be interpreted in harmony with sec. 111.32(5) (h) as barring only those felons, “the circumstances of [whose convictions] substantially relate to the circumstances of the particular job or licensed activity” — goes on to make that determination on its own, without a factual record, and to “hold that the circumstances of Jessen’s convictions for falsifying uni*505form traffic citations substantially relate to his duties as police chief for the Village of Lyndon and thus [Jes-sen] is barred from holding a law enforcement position in Wisconsin.” Supra, p. 492.
The majority does not state its authority or rationale for this ab initio determination.
The courts may have power to review the decision of a village board or the LESB as to whether a particular applicant meets the qualifications, but a court should not, as the majority does here, ab initio determine whether or not an individual is disqualified on the basis of his conviction record. The legislature has said that the village boards and the LESB — not the courts — have the authority to determine whether an individual meets the qualifications which the village boards and the LESB have established for police officers.
The legislature has granted power to the village board to select police officers. The village board is empowered “to act for the government and good order of the village . . . for its health, safety, welfare and convenience of the public.” Sec. 61.34(1), Stats. 1979-80. The legislature makes clear that the statutory powers granted the village board are broad, and the powers granted in sec. 61.34(1), Stats., are “in addition to all other grants and shall be limited only by express language.” Sec. 61.34 (1), Stats. 1979-80.
The village board’s power to select police officers has, however, been limited by express statutory language. In 1969 the legislature created the LESB14 which is *506authorized to establish state-wide minimum educational and training standards for law enforcement officers15 and to certify persons as being qualified to be law enforcement officers.16 The legislature also empowered the LESB to fix “minimum qualifications for the employment of law enforcement officers as relate to the competence and reliability of persons to assume and discharge the responsibilities of law enforcement officers, and the [LESB] shall prescribe the means for presenting evidence of fulfillment of these requirements.” Sec. 165.85(4) (c), Stats. 1979-80. The LESB has not afforded Lyndon Station or Jessen the opportunity to present evidence to the LESB that Jessen has fulfilled the requirements set forth in LES 2.01 (1) (d), Wis. Adm. Code, as interpreted by the majority opinion announced today. The LESB has never determined — with or with*507out a hearing — that the circumstances of Jessen’s conviction substantially relate to the circumstances of the job.
The import of secs. 61.34(1), 165.85 and 111.32(5) (h), Stats. 1979-80, and LES 2.01, Wis. Adm. Code, is that the village board and the LESB, not this court, must make the determination whether the applicant meets the minimum qualifications for the job, including whether the circumstances of the conviction substantially relate to the circumstances of the job.17 In Wisconsin a conviction of a felony does not raise an irrebutable presumption of unfitness. The LESB must decide the issue of an ex-offender’s fitness on the basis of the statute, its rules and the evidence presented to it. When, as here, an agency fails to exercise the decision-making function delegated to it by the legislature, the court cannot and should not exercise it. Many cases can be cited to illustrate this well-recognized principle. Reidinger v. Optometry Examining Board, 81 Wis.2d 292, 260 N.W.2d 270 (1977), is particularly relevant to the instant case. Reidinger’s license to practice optometry was revoked by the Optometry Examining Board in 1975 pursuant to sec. 449.07 (1) (d), Stats. 1975, which empowered, but did not require, the Optometry Board to revoke a license if the licensee was convicted of any felony.18 Reidinger was convicted of federal income tax evasion. He was in*508vestigated by the Optometry Board and participated in the subsequent hearing on license revocation. The Optometry Board concluded that because Reidinger had been convicted of a felony, his license should be revoked. This court remanded the matter to the Optometry Board because the Optometry Board had failed to exercise its discretion. The Optometry Board’s duty to protect the public, we said, can only be done on facts set forth in the Board’s action based on the record before it.19 In the instant case, a mandamus action, this court cannot, as a matter of procedure, remand the matter to the LESB. The court can, however, reverse the decision of the court of appeals and quash the writ thereby enabling *509the LESB to make the essential determination which is missing in this case.20
One possible rationale supporting the majority’s making this ab initio determination is that the majority views the question of whether there is a substantial relation between the circumstances of the convictions and the position of police chief as a question of law which this court may decide ab initio.21 The application of the legal standard “substantially relates” to the facts is generally, but not invariably, viewed as a question of law for purposes of judicial review. This court might well give weight to a determination of the LESB if made after seeing and hearing the witnesses. Such a determination might well be viewed as being in the area *510of the LESB’s expertise.22 Here, however, the LESB has made no such determination.
The resolution of the issue of substantial relation, even if a legal question, must be predicated on findings of fact. A factfinder must determine the circumstances of Jes-sen’s conviction and of the duties of the job. A determination of the duties of the chief of police of Lyndon Station might involve both factual findings and conclusions of law, that is, an interpretation of the state statutes and the village ordinances. No such findings as to the conviction or the duties have been made by the LESB or the circuit court. The majority makes no mention of these missing factual determinations and apparently is prepared to act in a factual vacuum or supply the findings it needs. It is not the function of an appellate court to make factual determinations. Cf. Wurtz v. Fleichman, 97 Wis.2d 100, 107, 293 N.W.2d 155 (1980).
Even if I were to conclude, as the majority does, that this court can ab initio determine whether the circumstances of the convictions substantially relate to the circumstances of the job, I do not think that the court can on the basis of this record determine either the circumstances of Jessen’s conviction or his duties as police chief of Lyndon Station.
The record does not contain the circumstances of Jes-sen’s conviction. Essentially the record consists of the pleadings, lengthy briefs of the parties in the trial court, the decision of the trial court and the stipulation of facts entered into between the parties. The pleadings do not state facts which would be helpful, even if we *511considered the facts as admitted as true for purposes of deciding the question of substantial relation. There was no trial at which evidence was submitted and the parties’ stipulation does not supply the needed facts. The stipulation basically sets forth the chronology of events which is set forth in the majority opinion and in this opinion.23 None of these documents describes the circumstances of the offense. Certainly those circumstances exist.
I believe that Jessen and Lyndon Station might, if given the opportunity, provide relevant information about the circumstances of Jessen’s conviction. Jessen had defended himself against the charges by claiming that the sheriff of Juneau county and other employees had committed the offenses, not he. The jury obviously did not believe Jessen. After his conviction and after serving probation Jessen sought relief from the conviction, asserting that his attorney had learned that the Wis*512consin Department of Justice had not disclosed at trial information in its files which revealed that the sheriff of Juneau county had committed misdeeds in office. Jessen also asserted that a representative of the Wisconsin Department of Justice informed his counsel that the investigation against that particular sheriff of Juneau county was terminated when the sheriff resigned from office.24 Jessen’s motion for post-conviction relief came to this court. This court denied Jessen relief on procedural grounds and did not review the merits of Jes-sen’s claim that he had been denied due process of law as a result of the unconstitutional suppression of evidence by the state. This court held that a circuit court has no jurisdiction to entertain Jessen’s postconviction motion or grant him relief because he was no longer under sentence. Jessen v. State, 95 Wis.2d 207, 290 N.W.2d 685 (1980). Although Jessen was unsuccessful in reopening the convictions, his assertions might be important to the determination of whether the circumstances of his conviction substantially relate to the duties of his job.
The record is similarly devoid of facts relating to the circumstances of Jessen’s job. Is Jessen the only police officer in the Village? If not, how many officers does he command ? The duties of village police chief are probably set forth in part by law and in larger part by custom.25 Jessen has been police chief for six and one-half years. If this court is going to decide whether there is a substantial relation between the circumstances of the conviction and the circumstances of the job, as both *513the statute and the majority opinion require, it ought to look at what Jessen is doing on the job.
The majority errs, I believe, in deciding this case on a record devoid of facts or evidence regarding Jessen’s conduct prior to the convictions, Jessen’s conduct upon which the convictions are based, Jessen’s conduct after conviction, or the nature of the job of Lyndon Station police chief.
And the majority does not even consider the significant evidence there is on this threadbare record. For example the majority fails to consider that more than nine years have elapsed since Jessen committed the crimes; that Lyndon Station is prepared to prove that Jessen has successfully performed as a law enforcement officer for nearly seven years; that Lyndon Station can prove (I assume) that Jessen has had no convictions since 1973; that Jessen can continue to serve as constable; and that Lyndon Station is prepared to prove by testimony of Juneau county law enforcement officers that if Jessen is discharged law enforcement in the Village and Juneau county will be affected adversely.26 The *514only fact the majority has considered is that Jessen was convicted of felonies committed while he was a law enforcement officer. Although announcing a test which accurately reflects the statutory language, i.e., do the circumstances of the conviction substantially relate to the duties of the job, the majority in applying the test fails to recognize the difference between the circumstances of the conviction and the existence of a conviction.
Perhaps because the record lacks the necessary facts, the majority does not explain what the statutory phrase “substantially relate” means; it does not provide any guidelines for the agencies or circuit courts to use in applying the statutory test of “substantially relate;” and it does not explain how it applied the statutory test to the “facts of this case.”
In determining whether there is a substantial relation between the circumstances of the conviction and the circumstances of the job, I would consider such factors as the potential impact of the offense on job performance; whether the job provides an opportunity for the commission of similar offenses; whether the circumstances leading to the offense still exist or are likely to recur; whether the person has committed other offenses since conviction; whether the person’s conduct since conviction makes it likely that he will commit other offenses ; the rehabilitative efforts of the person including job history and reputation in the community; and the *515time elapsed since conviction.27 I do not propose at this time to give weights to each of these factors or to state further the way in which they should be balanced, but it is clear that the majority has not considered them and has not indicated what consideration these or similar factors ought to be given.
I view the majority opinion as limited to its facts— namely a felony committed nearly seven years ago by a law enforcement officer. Nevertheless, I am concerned that the opinion might be read to bar forever all un-pardoned felons from being law enforcement officers. The majority says “We agree with the LESB that employment of a non-pardoned felon in a law enforcement capacity would only serve to undermine the public’s trust in its police officers as well as the ability of such persons to adequately perform the duties of officers of the law.” The majority cannot intend this language to bar all unpardoned convicted felons from all law enforcement positions, because the majority would then be rewriting sec. 111.32(5) (h), not interpreting it. The Wisconsin legislature did not exclude law enforcement officers from the substantial relation test.28
I reluctantly conclude that the majority has violated rudimentary concepts of fair play by ordering Jessen *516removed without giving either Jessen or the Village of Lyndon Station an opportunity to present evidence on and to argue therefrom the issue of whether the circumstances of Jessen’s conviction in 1973 substantially relate to the circumstances of his job in 1981. Summary disposition of this issue by the majority without any factual record not only violates the state legislative mandate but also offends state and federal constitutional guarantees of due process. Cf. Application for Admission to Bar of Douglas Childs, 101 Wis.2d 159, 303 N.W.2d 663 (1981); Schware v. Board of Bar Examiners, 353 U.S. 232 (1957).
Because the LESB has not determined that the circumstances of Jessen’s conviction substantially relate to the circumstances of the job and because the LESB has not determined that it cannot certify Jessen as a law enforcement officer under Rule 2.01(1) (d), as interpreted by the majority, the LESB has not demonstrated that it has a clear legal right to the issuance of the writ or that Lyndon Station’s duty is positive or plain; and the LESB has not shown that it has not been guilty of laches. These showings are prerequisites for the issuance of the writ. See majority opinion, p. 494. Furthermore the record shows that special reasons exist rendering resort by the LESB to the remedy of mandamus inequitable in this case.
I conclude that the circuit court erred as a matter of law in issuing the writ of mandamus, and for the reasons I have set forth, I dissent.
At the time he was hired, Jessen’s salary as chief of police was $450 a month, as sanitary landfill area attendant $100 a month, and as assistant sewer operator $100 a month. He was to receive a raise of $50 per month after six months.
The LESB has no jurisdiction over popularly elected officials. Sec. 165.85(4) (a)2., Stats. 1979-80. See also paragraph 8 of the Stipulation of Facts.
See State v. Christensen, 100 Wis.2d 507, 510, 302 N.W.2d 448 (1981).
Wis. Legist Ref. Bureau, 1980 Census of Population, Tables 9 and 10 (April 3, 1981).
See Jessen v. State, 95 Wis.2d 207, 290 N.W.2d 685 (1980).
On May 15, 1975, Jessen received a discharge from the Department of Health and Social Services, Division of Corrections, effective June 5, 1975. The discharge stated that “Any civil rights lost as a result of such judgments of conviction are restored by virtue of this discharge, under the provisions of section 57.078 of the Statutes of the State of Wisconsin.”
See paragraph 13 of the Stipulation of Facts which states:
“13. At the time the Village Board first appointed Mr. Jessen as a law enforcement employee, the members of the Village Board believed that Mr. Jessen had been convicted of misdemeanors and not felonies. This belief was based upon two letters from the District Attorney’s office which were made available to the Village Board which stated that the offenses of which Mr. Jessen was convicted were misdemeanors. Copies of the letters are attached hereto and incorporated herein as Exhibits D and E.”
While the majority holding that violation of sec. 946.12, Stats. 1971, is a felony is supportable, the method by which it is reached is not. The majority states: “In McDonald, supra at 577-681, we re-examined State ex rel. Gaynon v. Krueger, 31 Wis.2d 609, 143 N.W.2d 437 (1966), and its progeny, and held that it is no longer necessary to engage in the legislative history analysis set forth therein when dealing with the question of whether an offense punishable with confinement of not more than one year and which fails to prescribe the institution of confinement is a felony or misdemeanor.”
In McDonald the court tracked two arguments together to reach its result, one based on a reading of secs. 346.67, 346.74(5), 939.60 and 973.02, Stats., the other based on the analysis of legislative history which State ex rel. Gaynon v. Krueger, 31 Wis.2d 609, 143 N.W.2d 437 (1966), requires. While the McDonald opinion was clearly critical of the Gaynon decision, and while the McDonald opinion is subject to the criticism that it straddles the approaches of both majority and dissenting opinions in Gaynon, the McDonald opinion deliberately stopped short of either overruling or abandoning the Gaynon decision. The court clearly stated in McDonald that it was not willing to go that far, saying:
“Our examination of these cases leads us to question seriously the rationale of Gaynon .... Despite the foregoing, our holding in this case does not require that we expressly overrule Gaynon. We believe the legislative history of sec. 346.67 and its accompanying penalty section, sec. 346.74(5), reveal a clear intent that failing to return to the scene of an accident involving death or injury to a person be a felony, and thus Gaynon is not an obstacle to reaching that result.” McDonald, supra, 100 Wis.2d at 577.
The majority opinion in the instant case interprets McDonald as saying that it is no longer necessary to engage in the legislative history analysis. Yet in McDonald the court did engage in legislative history analysis at length, see 100 Wis.2d at 579, n. 7.
LES 2.01(1) (d), Wis. Adm. Code, became effective October 1, 1970, and was amended, effective February 1, 1975, to exempt pardoned felons.
The subjects of civil disabilities imposed on ex-offenders and employment discrimination have received increasing amounts *502of attention from courts, state legislatures, and commentators. See Potato, A Model Proposal to Avoid Ex-Offender Employment Discrimination, 41 Ohio St. L. J. 77 (1980); Perlman & Potato, The Uniform Law Commissioners Model Sentencing and Corrections Act: An Overview, 58 Neb. L. Rev. 925 (1979); Brantiegan, Rehabilitation and Occupational Licensing: A Conflict of Interests, 13 Wm. & M. L. Rev. 794 (1972); Special Project, The Collateral Consequences of a Criminal Conviction, 23 Vand. L. Rev. 929, 1001-1117, 1155-1167 (1970); Comment, Employment of Former Criminals, 55 Corn. L. Rev. 306 (1970).
Several states have enacted statutes substantially similar to sec. 111.32(5) (h), Stats. 1979-80. See, e.g., Conn. Gen. Stat. Revision of 1958, Revised to 1981, see. 4-61q; Fla. Stat. sec. 112.011 (1979); Hawaii Rev. Stat. ch. 378 (1976); Minn. Stat., secs. 364.01-10 (1980); N.J. Stat. Ann., sec. 11:10-6.1 (West 1976) (civil service employment); Criminal Offender Employment Act N.M. Stat. Ann., secs. 28-2-1 to 28-2-6 (1978); N.Y. Corree. Law, sec. 750-755 (McKinney Supp. 1979-80); Wash. Rev. Code, secs. 9.96A.010-9.96A.050 (1979).
For the approach of the National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws, see sec. 4-1005, Model Sentencing and Corrections Act, 10 U.L.A. Cum. Ann. Pocket Part for use in 1981 at p. 212. For another view, see A.B.A. Criminal Justice Section Project on Standards Relating to the Legal Status of Prisoners, Tentative Draft of Standards Relating to the Legal Status of Prisoners, 14 Am. Crim. L. Rev. 377, 613-619 (1977).
Sec. 227.011(2), Stats. 1979-80, provides: “No agency may adopt a rule which conflicts with state law.”
The majority concludes that sec. 111.32(5) (h) modifies LES 2.01(1) (d), saying “Thus it is obvious that the statute, sec. 111.32(5) (h), modifies the administrative rule, LES sec. 2.01(1) (d) .... Further, we hold that Wis. Adm. Code LES sec. 2.01 (1) (d), as modified herein, and sec. 111.32(5) (h), Stats., are not in conflict.” Supra, pp. 491, 492.
The parties’ Stipulation of Facts states:
“15. As a result of the signing into law by Governer Schrieber on October 25, 1977, of Chapter 125, Laws of 1977, creating sec. 111.32(5) (h), Wis. Stats., the Village Board held a hearing at its regular meeting on March 13, 1978, to determine whether the circumstances of Mr. Jessen’s conviction of violation of sec. 946.12, Wis. Stats., related to the circumstances of his present law enforcement employment for the Village of Lyndon Station and concluded said conviction does not substantially relate to his current employment. Copies of the minutes of the March 13, 1978, hearing at the Village Board and the resolution duly passed by the Village Board are attached hereto and incorporated herein as Exhibits G and H.”
The legislature states its findings and policy in part as follows:
“165.85 Law enforcement standards board. (1) FINDINGS AND POLICY. The legislature finds that the administration of criminal justice is of state-wide concern, and that law enforcement work is of vital importance to the health, safety and welfare of the people of this state and is of such a nature as to require training, education and the establishment of standards *506of a proper professional character. It is in the public interest that such standards be established and that such training and education be made available to persons who seek to become law enforcement officers, persons who are serving as such officers in a temporary or probationary capacity and persons already in regular service.”
Sec. 168.85(3) (b), Stats. 1979-80:
“(3) POWERS. The board may:
“(b) Establish minimum educational and training standards for admission to employment as a law enforcement officer: 1) in permanent positions, and 2) in temporary, probationary or part-time status.”
Secs. 168.85(3) (c) and 168.85(4) (d), Stats. 1979-80:
“(c) [The board may:] Certify persons as being qualified under this section to be law enforcement officers.”
“(4) REQUIRED STANDARDS. . . . (d) The board shall issue a certificate evidencing satisfaction of the requirements of pars, (b) and (c) to any applicant who presents such evidence as is required by its rules, of satisfactory completion or requirements in another jurisdiction equivalent in content and quality to those fixed by the board under the board’s authority as set out in pars, (b) and (c).”
The Village Board argues, without citing authority, that it, not the LESB, has the final decision-making authority as to “substantial relation.” I cannot at this stage of the proceeding accept this position. It appears contrary to sec. 165.85. I do note, however, that the statutes do not make clear the relation of the LESB and the Village Board, the procedures to be used by the two, and the nature and scope of judicial review of their decisions.
The court noted in Reidinger that since the Optometry Board’s decision the legislature had amended the Optometry statute to make it subject to sec. 111.82(5) (a) and (h). Reidinger, supra, 81 Wis.2d at 299, n. 3.
In Reidinger the court said:
“In the statute under consideration here, it is clear that the Board ‘may’ revoke a license for conviction of a felony. It is equally clear that the Board may decide not to revoke a license when a licensee has been convicted of a felony. Under the statute, conviction of a felony does not raise an irrebuttable presumption of unfitness to practice optometry, but does raise a question for the board in the exercise of its discretion to determine. The choice lies within the discretion of the Board for one purpose only, to protect the public from incompetent or untrustworthy optometrists. As the Board pointed out in its brief, the legislative purpose in authorizing the suspension or revocation of a license for felony conviction is to protect the public interest and not to impose a second penalty for the criminal offense involved. Kachian v. Optometry Board, 44 Wis.2d 1, 6, 170 N.W.2d 743 (1969); State v. MacIntyre, 41 Wis.2d 481, 483-484, 164 N.W.2d 236 (1969). There is no reference to the protection of the public anywhere in the Board’s findings, conclusion or order. Neither is there any mention of the relationship between the particular felony conviction here, the circumstances surrounding it and the fitness of petitioner to continue in the practice of optometry.
“This court regards income tax evasion as a serious offense, but here there is not a word as to the Board’s view of the nature of the felony conviction much less as to how it relates to the protection of the public under the circumstances of this case.” Reidinger, supra, 81 Wis.2d at 298-299.
I believe Judge Bablitch of the court of appeals correctly analyzed the issue in her dissenting opinion in the court of appeals, 98 Wis.2d at 256-257, saying:
“The state undoubtedly has a high interest in protecting the public’s confidence in government and in ensuring that public offices are not misused for private gain, as the majority notes. It also has a high interest in identical goals with respect to the many professions it licenses to serve the public. I think the former interest is no better served than the latter by an across-the-board exclusion of a large class of individuals who may have committed a single act, remote in time, then characterized as felonious but having no ‘rational connection’ to the office they subsequently seek to hold. Schwwre v. Board of Bar Examiners, 353 U.S. 232, 239 (1957).
“For these reasons I would hold . . . that the Law Enforcement Standards Board could not lawfully require the discharge of this village police chief absent a factual showing that the circumstances of his conviction ‘substantially relate to the circumstances’ of his office. . . .”
But see Aetna Life Ins. Co. v. Mitchell, 101 Wis.2d 90, 303 N.W.2d 639 (1981), where a similar issue was classified as one of fact to be decided by the circuit court on the basis of a record made in the circuit court and reviewed by the supreme court to determine if the circuit court’s findings of fact are clearly erroneous and against the great weight and clear preponderance of the evidence.
See Aetna Life Ins. Co. v. Mitchell, 101 Wis.2d 90, 130, note 16, 303 N.W.2d 639 (1981) (Abrahamson, J. dissenting). See also Note, Labor Law — Unemployment Compensation — Voluntary Termination Not Found Where There is Meritorious Excuse for Refusal to Pay Union Dues Based on Religious Grounds, 64 Marq. L. Rev. 203, 207-210 (1980), for a discussion of judicial review of administrative agency decisions.
The Stipulation does state that if the matter went to trial witnesses would testify that Jessen served the Village well as Police Chief and that his removal would cause hardship:
“16. If this matter went to trial numerous citizens and officials would testify that Mr. Jessen has faithfully, diligently and honestly served the Village of Lyndon Station as a law enforcement employee.
“17. If the matter went to trial Juneau County District Attorney Michael Solovey, Juneau County State Probation and Parole Agent James Dallman; Juneau County Sheriff Jack Ripley, Father Gaffney of St. Marys, Lyndon Station and citizens and officials would testify the law enforcement needs of the Village of Lyndon Station include an increase in crime in juvenile delinquency and surrounding areas require a full-time law enforcement officer in Lyndon Station. Mr. Jessen is the only law enforcement employee of the Village of Lyndon Station, and his removal will result in danger to public health and safety. Moreover, 'this position will not be filled by another given the established salary of $700 per month which is all the Village is able to pay. Thus, the discharge of Mr. Jessen will result in great hardship and irreparable injury to the Village of Lyndon Station.”
It appears that prior to Jessen’s trial, the Governor had ordered an investigation of the Juneau County Sheriff’s office at Jessen’s request. Jessen v. State, 95 Wis.2d 207, 290 N.W.2d 685 (1980).
The Stipulation of Facts states:
“7. As a law enforcement employee, Mr. Jessen reports to, and obeys all orders of the President of the Village of Lyndon Station and the Village Board.”
The attorney general similarly concluded. In an opinion reviewing the legislative history and background of sec. 111.32 (5) (h) the attorney general stated that “the policy behind the antidiscrimination statute militates against any automatic disqualification of applicants with criminal records. The thrust of the statute indicates that all of the information presented by the applicant, including but not limited to the former offense, should be considered by the licensing agency.
“. . . [S]uch factors as the nature and number of offenses, the circumstances of the offense, the severity of the offense, the time intervening since the offense and any and all information evidencing rehabilitation of the offender, including job history and reputation in the community should be reviewed. Only then can an informed, nondiscriminatory decision be made as to the substantial relation of the conviction to the circumstances of the licensed activity and the applicant’s good moral character.” 68 OAG 202, 207-208 (1979).
See also sec. 4-100.5(c), Model Sentencing and Corrections Act adopted by the National Conference of Commissioners on Uni*514form State Laws in 1978, appearing in Cum. Ann. Pocket Part for use in 1981, 10 U.L.A., and sec. 10.4, A.B.A. Criminal Justice Section Project on Standards Belating to the Legal Status of Prisoners, Tentative Draft of Standards Belating to the Legal Stat-us of Prisoners, 14 Am. Crim. L. Rev. 377, 613-619 (1977), for criteria similar to the ones I have set forth.
For state statutes similar to Wisconsin, some setting forth guidelines similar to the ones 1 set forth for determining the “relationship”, see note 10 supra.
See Stipulation of Facts quoted at note 23 supra.
The legislature knew how to exempt law enforcement officers if it wished to do so. Sec. 111.32(5) (e), Stats. 1979-80, expressly exempts law enforcement employment from prohibitions against age discrimination. Prior to 1977 legislative bills prohibiting criminal-record based disqualifications contained specific exemptions for law enforcement.
Statutes in several states exempt law enforcement officers from the operation of the prohibition against discrimination against ex-offenders. See, e.g., Conn. Gen. Stat. Revision of 1958, Revised to 1981, sec. 4-6; Fla. Stat., sec. 112.011(2)(a) (1979); Minn. Stat., sec. 364.09 (1980); N.M. Stat. Ann., sec. 28-2-5 (1978); N.Y. Corree. Law, sec. 750(5) (McKinney Supp. 1979-80).

=== CASE 9741343 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:53:57.882703+00 ===

Krivosha, C.J.,
concurring in result.
I concur in the result reached by the majority in this case. I believe, however, that much of the difficulty and confusion which cases of this type create could easily be resolved if we would simply recognize the reality of the matter and permit the insured under an “uninsured motorist” policy provision to directly sue its insurance carrier on the basis that the action really is one arising out of contract, though the right to actually *725recover and the amount of recovery is based upon another’s negligence. To suggest that we must not utter the words “insurance company” else unsuspecting jurors will reject their statutory duty and cease to be fair and impartial is unsupported in fact and serves no useful purpose.
The inconsistency of the matter is made even clearer when we recognize that we permit the carrier to intervene at its discretion, though we must not explain to the jury who the intervenor is or who it is that its counsel represents. The justification for permitting the carrier to intervene is founded upon the provisions of Neb. Rev. Stat. § 25-328 (Reissue 1979) which permit any person who has or claims an interest in the matter in litigation to join either the plaintiff or the defendant. I am, however, unable to find any language in that statute which says that once a party has made that election it may remain anonymous throughout the trial. I acknowledge that that has been our practice; I simply question the authority for doing it.
Those jurisdictions which have simply faced up to the issue appear not to have suffered any significant dire consequences.
The majority suggests that there may be instances where such action as proposed here might be appropriate, such as in the case of “hit-and-run” drivers. I do not perceive the basis for having two rules; one when the negligent driver is known and another when unknown.

=== CASE 9741344 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:53:58.209776+00 ===

CHIEF JUSTICE BILANDIC delivered the opinion of the court: Following a jury trial in the circuit court of Cook County, defendant, Ronald Kitchen, was convicted of five counts of murder. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 38, par. 9 — 1(a)(1).) After finding defendant eligible for the death penalty based on the statutory aggravating factor of murder of two or more individuals (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 38, par. 9 — 1(b)(3)), the same jury found insufficient mitigating factors to preclude imposition of the death sentence. Accordingly, the trial court sentenced defendant to death. Defendant’s execution has been stayed (134 Ill. 2d R. 609(a)) pending direct appeal to this court Oil. Const. 1970, art. VI, § 4(b); 134 Ill. 2d R. 603). Codefendant Marvin Reeves was tried separately from defendant, and was also found guilty of five counts of murder (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 38, par. 9 — 1(a)(1)) and five counts of aggravated arson. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 38, par. 20 — 1.1(a)(2).) Codefendant Reeves was sentenced to natural life imprisonment. The present appeal involves only defendant’s convictions and sentence. BACKGROUND FACTS The evidence adduced at trial showed that during the early morning hours of July 27, 1988, the bodies of 26-year-old Deborah Sepulveda, her son Peter Jr., age three, and daughter Rebecca, age two; together with 30-year-old Rose Marie Rodriguez and her son Daniel, age three, were recovered following a fire in the Sepulveda residence located at 6028 South Campbell Street in Chicago. The bodies of Deborah Sepulveda and her two children were found in the front bedroom of the home. Deborah’s naked body was found face down on the floor, and the bodies of Peter Jr. and Rebecca were found lying together holding hands on the bed. The bodies of Rose Marie and Daniel Rodriguez were found lying on the bed in the rear bedroom. All five bodies were severely charred. There were no eyewitnesses to the murders. The Chicago fire department responded to the call of a fire at 6028 South Campbell and extinguished the fire. Detective Mclnerney of the bomb and arson unit found a number of areas as origins of the fire: the front and rear bedroom mattresses, the top of the basement stairs, and a wall in the dining room. Mclnerney determined that the fires had been intentionally set using available materials and hand-ignited with an available flame, and had been smoldering and burning slowly for approximately three hours before they were extinguished. Dr. Robert Stein, chief medical examiner for Cook County, performed the autopsies of the victims. Dr. Stein opined that Rose Marie died of manual strangulation based upon hemorrhage areas in the internal neck muscles, as well as a number of external abrasions and contusions to her neck. The cause of death of the other four victims was asphyxia due to suffocation. The absence of carbon monoxide in the victims’ blood and lack of soot in the trachea revealed that all the victims were dead before their bodies were set on fire. Detective Craig Cegielski of the Chicago police department investigated the premises immediately following the fire. In the basement, Cegielski found numerous small manila envelopes, approximately 1 by l1/2 inches, lying on a workbench. A large box containing the same type of envelopes was found next to the workbench. Cegielski testified that based upon his extensive experience, these types of envelopes are commonly used to package narcotics. On August 8, 1988, Chicago Police Officer Frank Balzano of the canine unit performed a narcotics search in the Sepulvedas’ home. The search dog indicated the presence or odor of narcotics in the rear bedroom and on a workbench located in the basement of the house. Balzano also saw the box of small manila envelopes near the workbench; however, the envelopes were not inventoried by the police department or admitted into evidence. Search of the premises did not reveal any controlled substances. Defendant and codefendant Marvin Reeves were implicated as the perpetrators of the multiple murders by Willie Williams, a long-time friend of both defendant and codefendant Reeves. Williams was an inmate at the Vandalia penitentiary. On August 1, 1988, Williams stated that he called defendant collect1 from the prison. In that conversation, defendant told Williams that he and codefendant Reeves went “over to 60th and Campbell and killed Debbie and Mary because they owed them some money.” Defendant told Williams that he smothered the children to death because he did not want to leave any witnesses to the murders. Defendant told Williams that he had set the fires that burned the victims’ bodies to cover up the murders. On August 5, 1988, Williams telephoned Detective John Smith of the Chicago police department and informed him of the substance of his conversation with defendant. Later that same day, Williams again spoke with defendant. During that conversation, defendant told Williams that he had killed “Debbie” and “Mary” and the kids, and that, if he had to, he would do it again. Defendant told Williams that he and codefendant Reeves had strangled “Mary” to death, but suffocated “Debbie” and the three children with a pillow. The women owed them $1,225 for drugs. Codefendant Reeves went into the trunk of the car and got some alcohol, and defendant set the bodies on fire to cover up the details of the murders. According to Williams, defendant and codefendant Reeves worked for a major drug supplier located on the south side of Chicago by delivering cocaine and collecting money. It was Williams’ testimony that Rose Marie and Deborah purchased drugs on a regular basis from defendant and codefendant Reeves. Williams positively identified photographs of Rose Marie and Deborah as the women to whom cocaine was sold on numerous occasions. During the early months of 1988, Williams drove codefendant Reeves and defendant to the Sepulveda home at 6028 Campbell on approximately five different occasions to deliver cocaine and collect money. On August 25, 1988, defendant was brought into the police station for questioning. Defendant made an oral statement to the detectives implicating himself and co-defendant Reeves in the multiple murders. Defendant later agreed to give a handwritten statement to the assistant State’s Attorney. In the statement, defendant indicated that codefendant Reeves picked him up in front of his home around 11 p.m. on July 26, 1988, in a 1977 yellow Buick Regal, and asked whether he wanted to go for a ride to see a woman who owed him some money. Defendant agreed, and drove to the Sepulveda residence. Codefendant Reeves told defendant to wait, and walked up the stairs and knocked on the front door. Codefendant Reeves entered the house alone. The living room windows were open, and defendant heard a conversation between codefendant Reeves and a woman. After approximately five minutes, the conversation turned into an heated argument. Codefendant Reeves and the woman exchanged profanities. At that time, defendant got out of the car and walked up to the porch and knocked on the front door. Defendant entered the home, and saw codefendant Reeves go to the back bedroom and close the door behind him. Defendant heard punching and slapping noises, followed by the sound of a woman screaming and, finally, gasping for breath. Codefendant Reeves left the rear bedroom and told defendant that he wanted to leave. Both men walked out through the front door to the car. Defendant saw codefendant Reeves take a plastic quart bottle out of the trunk and walk back into the house. Defendant noticed that all of the living room windows and the front door were now closed. Codefendant Reeves returned to the car and placed the bottle back into the trunk. As they drove off, codefendant Reeves laughed and told defendant that he thought he had "killed the bitch.” Codefendant Reeves took defendant to buy a sandwich, and then drove him home. At the conclusion of the statement, defendant indicated that he had been treated well by both the police and the assistant State’s Attorney. Defendant also indicated that he had given the statement voluntarily, and that no threats or promises had been made to him. Chicago Police Officer Thomas Ptak testified that he searched the trunk of the 1977 Buick Regal belonging to codefendant Reeves. In the trunk of Reeve’s car, Ptak found a plastic container containing a small amount of charcoal fluid, and an empty canister of gasoline hidden beneath a blanket. The parties stipulated that the gasoline can contained a residue of gasoline, and that the plastic container held flammable lighter fluid. It was also stipulated that no suitable fingerprints for comparison purposes could be found from either of these articles. Around 6 p.m. on the evening of the murder, Victor Guajardo, Jr., who lived in the home next to the Sepulveda residence, saw a yellow, rusted, two-door, older model car parked in front of the Sepulveda home. Guajardo positively identified the car parked in front of the Sepulveda residence as the one driven by codefendant Reeves. Karen Williams, keeper of the company records for Illinois Bell, testified in defendant’s case in chief. Based upon company telephone records, there were only two collect telephone calls made to the defendant’s residence. Those calls were made on August 1, 1988, from Joliet, Illinois. However, Williams explained that if a calling party billed their call to a third-party billing number, the calling party’s telephone number would not appear on the receiving party’s telephone records. Leslie Jenkins, defendant’s sister, offered alibi testimony in defendant’s behalf. Jenkins testified that on the night of the murders, defendant was at a "splash” party at the home of Irene Morrison located at 825 West 50th Place in Chicago. Although Jenkins was aware that her brother had been arrested on August 25, 1988, she did not tell anyone that he was with her on the night of the murders until two weeks prior to trial. Defendant also testified on his own behalf. Similar to Jenkins, defendant stated that on the evening of July 26, 1988, he attended a pool party with his son at Morrison’s home. Defendant spent the night at the party, and did not return home until 9 a.m. the following day. The State presented the testimony of several police officers in rebuttal. Detective Kill testified that on August 25, 1988, Eric Wilson, defendant’s cousin, arrived at the police station. It was Kill’s testimony that on August 1, 1988, codefendant Reeves told Wilson that he and defendant "had killed some people who lived on the other side of Western because they owed them some money.” Wilson also told the detective that on August 16, 1988, he had a conversation with defendant on the front porch of his uncle’s home. At one point, codefendant Reeves walked up and interrupted their conversatian by saying: "I hope Willie [Williams] doesn’t say anything. He is the only one that can get me in trouble over those people and knows what I did to them.” Officer Dowling testified that he was very familiar with the house located at 825 West 50th Place, and that he had also been there during July 1988. According to Dowling, there has never been a pool in the backyard of that home, or anywhere else in the 800 block of 50th Place. In defendant’s rebuttal case, Jenkins testified that she was mistaken as to the exact location of the pool party. Jenkins testified that the pool was located at 815 West 50th Place, instead of 825 West 50th. However, Morrison had since relocated the pool. Photographs were introduced to show the area where the pool was allegedly located. Three other witnesses who were acquainted with defendant and Jenkins corroborated her testimony that Morrison had moved the pool the previous year to her new residence. Following trial, the jury returned a guilty verdict for the first degree murder of all five victims, but acquitted defendant of aggravated arson. The jury also found defendant eligible for the death penalty under the statutory aggravating factor of murder of two or more individuals. Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 38, par. 9 — 1(b)(3). The jury heard the testimony of several witnesses at the sentencing phase of the trial, and found no mitigating factors sufficient to preclude the imposition of a death sentence. The judge sentenced defendant to death for the murder of the five victims. PRETRIAL ISSUES Defendant contends that he was denied his right to equal protection under the fourteenth amendment when the State engaged in purposeful discrimination against him in violation of Batson v. Kentucky (1986), 476 U.S. 79, 90 L. Ed. 2d 69, 106 S. Ct. 1712. Defendant offers two challenges to the Batson procedure employed by the trial court. We first address defendant’s contention that the State engaged in purposeful racial discrimination in the manner in which it exercised its peremptory challenges. This case involved an interracial crime committed by an African-American defendant against five Hispanic victims. As a preliminary matter, the record shows that the venire was composed of 62 members, and that approximately 20 individuals were representative of minority groups. Three African-Americans and one Hispanic individual were seated on the jury. The State exercised a total of 12 of its 14 peremptory challenges, and six (50% of its peremptory challenges) were exercised against African-Americans. The trial court made no finding that defendant demonstrated a prima facie case of purposeful racial discrimination under Batson. Nonetheless, the State volunteered its race-neutral explanation for the record after each strike of a black venireperson. Defendant correctly notes that the issue of whether defendant has made a prima facie showing becomes moot where the trial court fails to determine whether a prima facie case has been made, the State offers an explanation for the peremptory challenge, and the trial court rules on the ultimate question of intentional discrimination. (Hernandez v. New York (1991), 500 U.S. 352, 114 L. Ed. 2d 395, 111 S. Ct. 1859; People v. Mitchell (1992), 152 Ill. 2d 274, 288-90.) Thus, the issue we need address is whether the trial judge’s findings were clearly erroneous. In Hernandez, the Supreme Court established the following guiding principles to evaluate the race neutrality of an attorney’s explanation. A court must determine whether, assuming the proffered reasons for the peremptory challenges are true, the challenges violate the equal protection clause as a matter of law. (Hernandez, 500 U.S. at 359,114 L. Ed. 2d at 406, 111 S. Ct. at 1866.) A neutral explanation is defined as an explanation based on something other than the race of the venireperson. (Hernandez, 500 U.S. at 360, 114 L. Ed. 2d at 406, 111 S. Ct. at 1866.) Unless a discriminatory intent is inherent in the prosecutor’s explanation, the reason offered will be deemed race neutral (Hernandez, 500 U.S. at 360, 114 L. Ed. 2d at 406, 111 S. a. at 1866) and need not rise to the level of a challenge for cause. Batson, 476 U.S. at 97, 90 L. Ed. 2d at 88, 106 S. a. at 1723. Once the prosecutor offers a race-neutral basis for his exercise of peremptory challenges, it is the trial court’s duty to determine if the defendant has established purposeful discrimination. (Batson, 476 U.S. at 98, 90 L. Ed. 2d at 88-89, 106 S. Ct. at 1723-24.) Since the trial judge’s finding constitutes a credibility determination, it should be given great deference (Batson, 476 U.S. at 98 n.21, 90 L. Ed. 2d at 89 n.21, 106 S. Ct. at 1724 n.21) and will not be overturned unless it is clearly erroneous (Hernandez, 500 U.S. at 369, 114 L. Ed. 2d at 412, 111 S. Ct. at 1871). Defendant challenges the State’s exercise of peremptory challenges against four African-American venire members. We address the State’s proffered explanation for each excluded venire member in turn. Marie Shorter Marie Shorter, a divorced mother of three adult children, worked for Quaker Oats as a computer operator for over 14 years. The State’s explanation for removing Shorter was that the victim, Deborah Sepulveda, also worked for Quaker Oats. In its brief, the State argues that it did not want to have a juror who might have a negative view of the victim, thereby tainting the jury and preventing a fair trial. Defendant contends, however, that the State failed to demonstrate the manner in which the fact that Shorter worked for the same corporation as the victim would prevent her from functioning as a fair and impartial juror. Specifically, defendant contends that the record is devoid of any factual information to show that Shorter and the victim knew each other. The trial judge afforded the State the opportunity to question the jurors during voir dire; however, the only question asked by the State was the length of time that Shorter had been employed by Quaker Oats. The State concedes that Shorter did possess characteristics of a number of other venirepersons whom the State did not challenge and who ultimately sat on the jury. For example, Shorter had been the victim of a crime, and stated that she did not have any strong personal or religious beliefs that would prevent her from imposing the death penalty under appropriate circumstances. Said characteristics were also possessed by 5 of the 12 seated jurors and one alternate juror. However, the State maintains that the additional factor of Shorter’s employment at the same corporation as the victim, Deborah Sepulveda, distinguished her from the other acceptable jurors. Pursuant to Batson, it is the State’s burden to "articulate” "a 'clear and reasonably specific’ explanation” for its use of peremptory challenges against minority venirepersons. (People v. Harris (1989), 129 Ill. 2d 123, 181, citing Batson, 476 U.S. at 98 & n.20, 90 L. Ed. 2d at 88 & n.20, 106 S. Ct. at 1724 & n.20, quoting Texas Department of Community Affairs v. Burdine (1981), 450 U.S. 248, 258, 67 L. Ed. 2d 207, 218, 101 S. Ct. 1089, 1096.) As instructed by Hernandez, the State’s rationale for exercising a peremptory challenge must be race neutral. In this case, the State’s exclusion of juror Shorter does not demonstrate racial motivation. While it is true that the State might have inquired further to establish a connection between Shorter and Deborah Sepulveda, it cannot be said that the proffered explanation was based upon the race of the juror or demonstrated a discriminatory intent. The trial court did not err in finding the State’s reasons race neutral. Steven Gillenwater Gillenwater, a 35-year-old married man, was employed as a social worker for pregnant teenagers at a Chicago area hospital. The State’s explanation for the exclusion of Gillenwater was based not only upon his educational background as a social worker, but also because of his demeanor and his highly equivocal answers as to whether he could actually sign a verdict to impose the death penalty. Defendant argues that the State’s reason for excluding Gillenwater based upon his employment as a social worker is inconsistent with the fact that other jurors who were seated possessed similar occupations. Review of the record during the voir dire of Gillenwater reveals his level of discomfort with imposing the death penalty. Gillenwater stated that he was "pretty strongly opposed to the death penalty.” Although he could put his feelings aside and base his decision on the evidence presented at trial, he indicated that he did not "like it, but there is not a heck of a lot I can do about it right now.” In resolving Batson claims, this court has consistently upheld prosecutor’s challenges concerning the person’s viewpoints toward the death penalty. (People v. Howard (1991), 147 Ill. 2d 103; People v. Mack (1989), 128 Ill. 2d 231.) We therefore find that the trial court correctly concluded that the State’s reason for challenging Gillenwater on the basis of his viewpoint on capital punishment was legitimate and race neutral. Thelma Palmer The State exercised a peremptory challenge against Palmer, a married woman with two children who worked as a hospital dietary clerk. The State excluded Palmer because according to her rap sheet, she had a previous arrest which she did not divulge during voir dire. Concealment of a prior criminal charge is a sufficient race-neutral reason for the State to exercise a peremptory challenge. People v. Hudson (1993), 157 Ill. 2d 401; People v. Smith (1992), 152 Ill. 2d 229. Harold Dickey In its explanation of the exclusion of Harold Dickey, single, age 26, the State indicated that the peremptory challenge was based upon the fact that Dickey had never been employed. Additionally, Dickey was challenged because of his demeanor. Unemployment is a sufficiently race-neutral reason for excluding a venireperson. (People v. Hudson, 157 Ill. 2d at 432; see also People v. Smith (1992), 236 Ill. App. 3d 812, 817; People v. Lovelady (1991), 221 Ill. App. 3d 829.) In addition, this court has held that the demeanor of a venireperson also constitutes a legitimate race-neutral reason for the exercise of a peremptory challenge. (People v. Harris (1989), 129 Ill. 2d 123,176; People v. Young (1989), 128 Ill. 2d 1, 20.) Thus, we conclude that the trial judge’s finding that the State advanced sufficiently race-neutral reasons to justify its challenge of Dickey was not clearly erroneous. Shannon Brooks The State contended that it exercised a peremptory challenge against Brooks because she was unsure of her answers, and hesitated for a very long period of time before answering the questions posed to her. Moreover, she could not answer questions directly and concisely. Brooks worked as an administrative assistant at the State’s Attorney’s office in the civil division. Subjective explanations such as those presented by the State must be closely scrutinized because they can be easily used by a prosecutor as a pretext for excluding persons on the basis of race. (Harris, 129 Ill. 2d at 176.) Nonetheless, the prosecutor’s exclusion of a prospective juror on the basis of her demeanor has been held to be sufficient. (Harris, 129 Ill. 2d at 176; Young, 128 Ill. 2d at 20.) Upon careful review of the record, we note that a number of questions posed to Brooks had to be repeated before she could understand them. In light of the fact that the trial judge is in the best position to observe the demeanor of potential jurors and evaluate their explanations, and given the deference accorded the trial court’s ruling, we decline to disturb his finding upon review. For the foregoing reasons, we find that there is no evidence of discriminatory intent in the State’s explanation for the exclusion of Shorter, Gillenwater, Palmer, Dickey and Brooks. Therefore, we find that the trial judge’s finding that the State’s explanation for the exercise of peremptory challenges against these jurors was valid and race neutral was not clearly erroneous. Hernandez v. New York, 500 U.S. at 369, 114 L. Ed. 2d at 412, 111 S. Ct. at 1871; Andrews, 155 Ill. 2d at 293-94; Ramey, 151 Ill. 2d at 519. Defendant also contends that the trial court failed to apply the correct Batson standard, and instead erroneously applied the outdated "systematic exclusion” test announced in Swain v. Alabama (1965), 380 U.S. 202, 13 L. Ed. 2d 759, 85 S. Ct. 824. Previously, under Swain, a constitutional issue of equal protection could not arise unless there was a systematic and purposeful exclusion of blacks because of race from juries in case after case. (Swain, 380 U.S. at 223, 13 L. Ed. 2d at 774, 85 S. Ct. at 837.) The Swain test was later overruled and replaced by the standard articulated in Batson. Under Batson, a defendant’s prima facie case of purposeful racial discrimination in jury selection may be based solely on evidence regarding the State’s use of peremptory challenges in the defendant’s own case. Defendant cites the following colloquy which purportedly demonstrates the trial judge’s misplaced reliance upon the Swain standard. "[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Judge, I don’t have the case citation. I have read Supreme Court cases, Judge, even though there are some minority members on the jury, my recollection reflects only three minority members on the jury. But what was established was the State systematically excluding jurors, potential jurors, that in itself is reversible error. [THE COURT]: It may be but what proof do you have to come forward with, what evidence do you have that the State systematically sought to challenge minority group persons?” (Emphasis added.) It appears from the record that the trial judge was merely responding to the issue raised by defense counsel by repeating the same phrase that defense counsel used in his statement. Moreover, as previously noted, the trial judge assessed the State’s explanation for the exercise of its peremptory challenges on an individual basis, and no reference was made to rulings made by the trial judge in previous cases. As such, we find defendant’s argument that the trial judge improperly used the outdated Swain standard instead of the Batson test to be without merit. TRIAL ISSUES Defendant initially contends that the State did not prove him guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. Defendant maintains that he was not sufficiently proven guilty because of the strongly corroborated alibi evidence; the testimony of the State’s chief witness, Willie Williams, was highly improbable; the State’s theory that the murders were the result of an unpaid drug debt is incredible; the nonspecific and largely inaccurate detail in defendant’s statement was not corroborated by Williams’ testimony; and because of the absence of physical evidence linking defendant to the crimes. The standard of review on a challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence is well-established: " ' "A criminal conviction will not be set aside on review unless the evidence is so improbable or unsatisfactory that there remains a reasonable doubt of the defendant’s guilt.” [Citations.] It is not the function of this court to retry a defendant when considering a challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence. [Citation.] Instead, determination of the weight to be given to witnesses’ testimony, their credibility, and the reasonable inferences to be drawn from the evidence are the responsibility of the fact finder. [Citation.] On review: " 'the relevant question is whether, after viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the prosecution, any rational trier of fact could have found the essential elements of the crime beyond a reasonable doubt.’ *** '[0]nce a defendant has been found guilty of the crime charged, the fact-finder’s role as weigher of the evidence is preserved through the legal conclusion that upon judicial review all of the evidence is to be considered in the light most favorable to the prosecution.’ (Emphasis in original.)” Collins, 106 111. 2d at 261, quoting Jackson v. Virginia (1979), 443 U.S. 307, 319, 61 L. Ed. 2d 560, 573, 99 S. Ct. 2781, 2789.’ ” People v. Burrows (1992), 148 111. 2d 196, 225, quoting People v. Steidl (1991), 142 111. 2d 204, 226. Application of the aforementioned principles to the instant case leads to the conclusion that sufficient evidence was produced at trial to support the jury’s verdict. As a preliminary matter, we note that defendant’s alibi testimony was obviously inconsistent and contained fatal flaws. While defendant testified that he told Detective Kill that he was at a pool party on the night of the murders, Detective Kill testified in rebuttal that defendant never made that statement to him at the time that he was first questioned regarding these offenses. In addition, defendant admitted that as Assistant State’s Attorney Lukanich prepared the handwritten statement, he never mentioned to him that he was at the pool party. Leslie Jenkins, defendant’s sister who offered alibi testimony on his behalf, admitted that she visited defendant in jail more than 10 times subsequent to his arrest. Yet she allowed defendant to languish in jail for two full years before contacting the authorities with personal knowledge that she was with him on the night of the murders. The controverted testimony concerning the location of the party also diminishes the credibility of defendant’s alibi. Defendant and Jenkins both initially testified that the pool party was located at 825 W. 50th Place. However, in the State’s rebuttal case, Officer Dowling testified that a pool was never located at 825 W. 50th Place because the back yard was far too small to accommodate a pool, nor had a pool ever been located in the 800 block of 50th Place. Consequently, during defendant’s rebuttal case, testimony was introduced to show that both defendant and Jenkins were mistaken as to the exact location of the party. However, the mere introduction of photographs showing pool lights and a fence surrounding the back yard does not, in itself, conclusively establish that defendant did in fact attend the alleged pool party on the night of the murders. We also note that Irene Morrison, the purported owner of the home where the pool party was held, was not called by defendant as a testifying witness. Moreover, further inconsistencies exist in Jenkins’ testimony concerning the details of the party itself. At first, Jenkins testified that she did not know anyone at the party; however, she later stated that she knew half the people at the party. In view of the substantial inconsistencies apparent in defendant’s alibi, we find that the jury’s rejection of this defense was properly supported by the evidence. Defendant next contends that Williams’ testimony lacks credibility because of his prior convictions, and that his obvious motivation for giving false testimony implicating defendant was to secure an early release from prison. The testimony offered by Williams provided the initial connection between defendant and codefendant Reeves and the adult victims through the cocaine transactions. The State produced other evidence to support its theory that defendant and codefendant Reeves murdered the women and their children over a drug debt. Williams testified that he had driven defendant and codefendant Reeves to deliver drugs and collect money from "Debbie” and "Mary” on a number of occasions, accurately described certain details of the Sepulveda residence, and positively identified photographs of Sepulveda and Rodriguez as the women to whom cocaine was sold. Chicago Police Officers Frank Balzano and Craig Cegielski found numerous small manila envelopes in the basement of the home which are commonly used to package narcotics, which supports the State’s theory that the women were involved in drug trafficking. Rose Marie’s aunt, Shirlee Garcia, testified that despite her limited income, Rose Marie was recently able to purchase a $57,000 home and car. In addition, shortly before her death, Rose Marie told Garcia that she had a friend who owed her $2,000. The fire in the residence destroyed any physical evidence left by defendant and codefendant Reeves. Nonetheless, sufficient corroboration exists between defendant’s statement and Williams’ testimony. In his statement, defendant indicated that around 11 p.m., he accompanied codefendant Reeves in the 1977 yellow Buick to the Sepulveda residence at 6028 S. Campbell to collect some money owed to him by a woman. Victor Guajardo, Jr., testified that he saw the yellow 1977 Buick parked in front of the Sepulveda residence around 6 p.m. on the night of the murders. This testimony supports the State’s theory that codefendant Reeves first made a demand to the women for the money earlier in the evening. The autopsy report indicated that Rose Marie died of manual strangulation, which is corroborated by defendant’s statement that following an altercation with codefendant Reeves, he heard the sound of a woman screaming and gasping for breath. The other victims were smothered to death, which is consistent with the placement of a pillow over their breathing passages resulting in asphyxia. Finally, the police search of codefendant Reeves’ trunk yielded a plastic container holding charcoal fluid and an empty container of gasoline. Given all of the evidence adduced at trial, and reviewing it in the light most favorable to the prosecution, we conclude that any rational trier of fact could have found defendant guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. We next address defendant’s argument that he was deprived of his sixth amendment right to effective assistance of counsel. Although defendant raises a number of ineffective assistance claims, at this point we address only the contention that trial counsel should have withdrawn from the case so that he could testify about defendant’s physical condition following his arrest and written statement. Defendant does not claim on appeal that his oral and written confessions were not properly admitted into evidence. Defendant asserts that the conflict of interest standard should be employed to determine whether defense counsel’s failure to withdraw constitutes reversible error. In People v. Spreitzer (1988), 123 Ill. 2d 1, this court held that a per se conflict of interest exists in instances where defense counsel had an association with the prosecution or victim, or with a person or entity who would benefit from the defendant’s prosecution. Conflicts of interest, which have been categorized as denying the right to counsel per se, may warrant reversal without any showing that the attorney’s performance was actually affected, unless the record reflects that the defendant was made aware of the conflict and knowingly waived his right to conflict-free counsel. Spreitzer, 123 Ill. 2d at 17. A second class of conflicts exists where a defense attorney is involved in joint or multiple representation of codefendants. (Cuyler v. Sullivan (1980), 446 U.S. 335, 64 L. Ed. 2d 333, 100 S. Ct. 1708; People v. Jones (1988), 121 Ill. 2d 21; Spreitzer, 123 Ill. 2d at 17.) In those instances, where defense counsel brings the potential conflict to the attention of the trial court at an early stage, a trial court has a duty to either appoint new counsel or determine whether the conflict will be too remote to warrant new counsel. (Holloway v. Arkansas (1978), 435 U.S. 475, 484, 55 L. Ed. 2d 426, 434, 98 S. Ct. 1173, 1178; Spreitzer, 123 Ill. 2d at 18.) Reversal of a conviction under this rule does not require a showing that the attorney’s actual performance was in any way affected by the purported conflict or a showing of "specific prejudice.” (Holloway, 435 U.S. at 487, 55 L. Ed. 2d at 436, 98 S. Ct. at 1180.) However, if the trial court is not apprised of the potential conflict, then reversal of the conviction will only be had upon a showing that "an actual conflict of interest adversely affected” counsel’s performance. Cuyler, 446 U.S. at 350, 64 L. Ed. 2d at 348, 100 S. Ct. at 1719. We are not persuaded by defendant’s argument that the Holloway standard is applicable to the factual circumstances in this case. Initially, we note the absence of a per se conflict of interest as defined above, for there is no indication that defense counsel was familiar with the prosecution, victim, or that he would have benefited from an unfavorable verdict. Nor is there evidence in the record that defense counsel ever informed the trial judge that a potential conflict of interest existed. Defendant contends, nonetheless, that it should have been apparent to the trial judge following the motion to suppress statements that trial counsel’s testimony would be essential to defendant at trial. At the motion to suppress statements, the State presented the testimony of four Chicago police officers, each of whom testified that defendant was not beaten and that his confession was voluntary. Assistant State’s Attorney Mark Lukanich also testified that he did not see any of the police officers physically strike, threaten, or assault defendant. Most importantly, a videotape was presented at the suppression hearing which showed defendant’s exit from the police station to the police wagon. In the videotape, defendant was walking normally and not limping in any manner, nor did he show any visible signs of injury. Defendant testified on his own behalf that he was handcuffed to the wall; that the police officers repeatedly kicked and hit him during the time that he was interrogated; and that he also received blows to his head, chest, and groin. Eric Wilson, defendant’s cousin, who was also detained by the police at the time that defendant was in custody, testified that he was kicked in the groin by a police officer. Wilson and codefendant Reeves both testified that they heard defendant scream in pain as he was being beaten by the police. The trial judge denied defendant’s motion to suppress, finding that the testimony of defendant, Wilson and codefendant Reeves was incredible and biased. We reject defendant’s unsupported contention that defense counsel’s alleged testimony would have resulted in a different outcome. The record does not contain any sworn testimony, offer of proof, or motion supported by affidavit to establish what, if anything, defense counsel would have testified to at the suppression hearing or at trial. Moreover, as noted above, the State presented substantial testimony, including the videotape of defendant walking from the police station, which demonstrated defendant’s physical appearance following his arrest and confession. We find, therefore, that it was not improper for the trial judge to have permitted defense counsel to proceed in his representation of defendant following the substantial evidence produced at the motion to suppress. Alternatively, defendant argues that defense counsel should have recognized the conflict of interest that existed between his representation of defendant and the ethical provisions of Disciplinary Rules 5 — 101(b) and 5 — 102(a) of the Code of Professional Responsibility (the Code) (107 111. 2d R. 5 — 102(a)), which were in effect on the date defense counsel involved himself in the case. (By order dated February 8, 1990 the Code was repealed effective August 1, 1990, and was replaced by the Illinois Rules of Professional Conduct (134 111. 2d R. 1.1 et seq.).) Rule 5 — 102(a) of the Code provides in pertinent part: "If a lawyer learns after undertaking employment in contemplated or pending litigation or if it is obvious that he *** ought to be called as a witness on behalf of his client, he shall withdraw from the conduct of the trial and neither he nor his firm *** shall continue representation in the trial ***.” 107 Ill. 2d R. 5 — 102(a). Rule 5 — 101(b) states: "A lawyer shall not accept employment in contemplated or pending litigation if he knows or if it is obvious that he *** ought to be called as a witness ***.” 107 Ill. 2d R. 5 — 101(b). Defendant argues that one of the critical issues in this case was the determination of whether defendant’s confession and handwritten statement were the product of police beating and coercion. As stated, the State offered the testimony of four Chicago police officers to refute those allegations. Thus, defendant contends that it should have been perfectly "obvious” to defense counsel that his testimony was essential, for he would have been the only neutral, unbiased witness who could have testified concerning defendant’s condition, and that such testimony would have supported the other defense witnesses and impeached the testifying police officers. Defendant speculates that defense counsel could have testified that both defendant and Wilson told him that they had been beaten by the officers; defense counsel heard defendant moaning and screaming; and that defense counsel advised him to seek medical attention. Defendant also asserts that in closing arguments, as defense counsel offered his observations about the contested point of whether Wilson was handcuffed at the police station, defense counsel indicated that he would be "willing to take the stand and testify.” However, the trial judge immediately ordered that those comments be stricken from the record as volunteered comments. In this case, defendant has failed to show that, had his attorney testified, a reasonable probability existed that the outcome of the trial would have been different. (Strickland v. Washington (1984), 466 U.S. 668, 80 L. Ed. 2d 674, 104 S. Ct. 2052; People v. Albanese (1984), 104 Ill. 2d 504, 527.) The record does not establish what defense counsel’s testimony would have been had he been called as a witness. Because the record does not adequately set forth what defense counsel’s testimony would have been, we cannot resolve this ineffectiveness claim in defendant’s favor. Burrows, 148 Ill. 2d at 248. We next address defendant’s argument that the State deliberately elicited prejudicial victim impact testimony from three surviving family members, including Deborah’s sister and mother, and Rose Marie’s aunt. Defendant maintains that it was unnecessary for the State to have asked these witnesses questions regarding the following: the burial arrangements and, in particular, the fact the children were buried in the same casket with their respective mothers; that Rose Marie’s surviving son was now being raised by his "quite disabled” grandmother; the details as to how each witness learned about the fire and conveyed the news to other members of the family; that Deborah’s mother rushed to the house and saw the bodies being carried out; the children’s demeanor as "happy and normal” before their deaths; and that Deborah’s mother went through the house following the fire and recovered her grandson’s photograph. In general, evidence regarding the impact of the victim’s death on the victim’s family is improper. However, a new trial is not required every time there is mention of a victim’s family because in certain instances that statement may be harmless. (People v. Del Vecchio (1989), 129 Ill. 2d 265, 288; People v. Simms (1988), 121 Ill. 2d 259.) This court recognizes that a distinction exists between making the jury aware of the family left behind and cases where the prosecution has dwelt upon the deceased’s family to the point that the jury would have related that evidence to the defendant’s guilt. (Del Vecchio, 129 Ill. 2d at 288; People v. Bernette (1964), 30 Ill. 2d 359, 371.) Nonetheless, common sense tells us that murder victims do not live in a vacuum and that in most cases they leave behind family members. People v. Free (1983), 94 Ill. 2d 378. Defendant acknowledges that his trial attorney failed to object to the testimony at trial and include this issue in his post-trial motion. As such, this issue is waived. (People v. Enoch (1988), 122 Ill. 2d 176.) Nonetheless, defendant urges us to review this issue to determine whether it amounted to plain error. The plain error rule can be invoked in instances where the evidence is closely balanced, or where the error is of such magnitude that it deprived the defendant of a fair trial. People v. Fields (1990), 135 Ill. 2d 18, 60; People v. Carlson (1980), 79 Ill. 2d 564, 576-77. Upon review of the record, we initially note that the comments complained of by defendant occurred only during the testimony of these witnesses, and were not mentioned by the State during opening or closing arguments, thereby distinguishing the instant case from others relied upon by defendant. (Cf. People v. Hope (1986), 116 Ill. 2d 265; People v. Bernette (1964), 30 Ill. 2d 359.) Moreover, viewed in its proper context, the remarks made by the testifying witnesses were admissible for the purpose of identification of the victims (see Free, 94 Ill. 2d 378, citing People v. Brown (1964), 30 Ill. 2d 297) or were incidental to other testimony. While it may have been irrelevant for the State to question the witnesses about the above-indicated matters, we do not find the testimony given so prejudicial as to deprive defendant of a fair trial, for the irrelevant information was not stressed or emphasized. (People v. Pitsonbarger (1990), 142 Ill. 2d 353.) Accordingly, it cannot be said that the victim impact testimony complained of by defendant constitutes plain error. Defendant next assigns as reversible error the decision of the trial court to send to the jury six crime scene and 11 morgue photographs of the charred remains of the five victims. Whether or not a jury is allowed to see photographs of a decedent is a decision made by a trial judge in the exercise of his sound discretion. (People v. Henderson (1990), 142 Ill. 2d 258, 319; People v. Nicholls (1969), 42 Ill. 2d 91.) Among the valid reasons for admitting photographs of a decedent is to prove the nature and extent of injuries and the force needed to inflict them, the position, condition, and location of the body, the manner and cause of death; and to aid in understanding the testimony of a pathologist or other witness. (People v. Owens (1976), 65 Ill. 2d 83, 90; Nicholls, 42 Ill. 2d at 99; People v. Speck (1968), 41 Ill. 2d 177, 203; People v. Kolep (1963), 29 Ill. 2d 116, 124.) If photographs are relevant to prove facts at issue, they are admissible and can be shown to the jury unless their nature is so prejudicial and so likely to inflame the jurors’ passions that their probativeness is outweighed. See People v. Foster (1979), 76 Ill. 2d 365, 377-78; People v. Lefler (1967), 38 Ill. 2d 216, 221. In this case, it was not an abuse of discretion for the trial judge to send 11 morgue and six crime scene photographs of the five victims to the jury. In view of the fact that defendant pied not guilty, the State is allowed to prove every element of the crime charged and every relevant fact. (Henderson, 142 Ill. 2d at 319.) The crime scene photographs were necessary to corroborate defendant’s statement that Rose Marie was strangled in the rear bedroom of the home. Similarly, the crime scene photograph of Peter and Rebecca depicted the children lying on the bed holding hands in the burned remnants of their pajamas, and was corroborated by the testimony of Detective Cegielski as to the position and condition of the bodies following the fire. The morgue photographs corroborated Dr. Stein’s explanation concerning the manner and cause of the victims’ deaths, namely, that the victims died either by strangulation or suffocation, and were then set on fire. Moreover, we do not find the number of photographs shown to the jury to be excessive, as this case involved five victims. In addition, defendant complains that in closing argument, the prosecutor held up a life photograph of each of the five victims followed by a death photograph, to illustrate "good” versus the "evil” allegedly perpetrated by defendant. However, this court has considered similar issues relating to the submission of life photographs to the jury, and has found such photographs admissible as part of the corpus delicti of the murder, as well as to corroborate testimony from a "life and death” witness. See Smith, 152 Ill. 2d 229; People v. Morgan (1991) , 142 Ill. 2d 410, 461-62, rev’d on other grounds (1992) , 504 U.S. 719, 119 L. Ed. 2d 492, 112 S. Ct. 2222. Defendant further raises several arguments concerning improper questioning of defendant and other witnesses. Specifically, defendant claims that the State elicited testimony during direct examination from Officer Dowling that he was familiar with defendant through several contacts that he had with him over the years. During redirect examination, the trial court improperly allowed Willie Williams to testify that individuals on parole do not have their parole status violated when they commit misdemeanor offenses. Also, the prosecutor cross-examined defendant and one of his alibi witnesses concerning prior alias names and false addresses. The State counters defendant’s contention by arguing that defendant’s failure to raise these issues in his written post-trial motion results in waiver of this issue upon review. (Enoch, 122 Ill. 2d at 190.) We agree. Defendant urges this court, nonetheless, to review these issues under the plain error rule. However, we do not find the evidence against defendant to be closely balanced, for the State produced overwhelming evidence to prove defendant guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. Additionally, we do not find the allegedly improper testimony so egregious as to deprive defendant of his right to a fair trial. We next address defendant’s argument that the State improperly cross-examined defense witness Lonnie Richardson about the "dope house” where Richardson allegedly resided. Richardson testified in defendant’s rebuttal case that there was a portable swimming pool at the residence described by defendant and other witnesses in July 1988, which was later moved by its owner to another location. During cross-examination, the State attempted to impeach Richardson by asking him whether he lived in a "dope house” owned by the drug dealer for whom defendant allegedly worked, and if the police had been to his home on several occasions. The trial judge denied defense counsel’s motion for a mistrial on the basis of this allegedly improper cross-examination. In general, a witness may be cross-examined concerning those matters which would show the witness’ bias, motive, or willingness to testify. (People v. Thompkins (1988), 121 Ill. 2d 401, 441.) Any permissible matter may be developed on cross-examination, since one of the purposes of cross-examination is to test the credibility of witnesses. (Collins, 106 Ill. 2d at 269; see People v. Columbo (1983), 118 Ill. App. 3d 882, 966; People v. Mannen (1977), 46 Ill. App. 3d 61, 64.) The latitude to be allowed on cross-examination and rebuttal is a matter within the sound discretion of the trial court, and a reviewing court should not interfere unless there has been a clear abuse of discretion resulting in manifest prejudice to the defendant. Collins, 106 Ill. 2d at 269; People v. Peter (1973), 55 Ill. 2d 443, 451-52. We do not believe that the trial court abused its discretion in allowing the prosecution to make inquiries of Richardson to show that the house where he resided was owned by the drug dealer for whom defendant purportedly worked. The prosecution was attempting to show Richardson’s bias and motive to testify favorably on behalf of defendant. Moreover, Richardson’s testimony concerning the pool party was merely cumulative to the testimony of five other witnesses on this point, and did not result in any substantial prejudice to defendant. Defendant next makes several challenges to the remarks made by the prosecutor during closing arguments. He asserts that the prosecutor made comments designed to distort the evidence, alter the burden of proof, and improperly inflame the emotions and racial prejudices of the jury. The majority of the comments about which defendant now complains were not objected to at trial and therefore will not be considered by this court on appeal. (Collins, 106 Ill. 2d at 275.) We decline to review these comments under the plain error exception because the evidence of defendant’s guilt was overwhelming. In rebuttal closing argument, the prosecutor argued that the trial judge had previously ruled that defendant’s handwritten statement to the police was admissible, thereby erroneously suggesting that the judge had found the statement to be factually reliable. The State maintains that the prosecutor’s remarks were proper where defense counsel repeatedly insinuated during his closing argument that the statement had been obtained illegally, thereby inviting comment by the State on rebuttal. It is well established that prosecutors are afforded wide latitude in closing argument, and improper remarks will not merit reversal unless they result in substantial prejudice to the defendant. (People v. Pittman (1982), 93 Ill. 2d 169, 176.) In reviewing allegations of prosecutorial misconduct, the closing arguments of both the State and the defendant must be examined in their entirety, and the complained-of remarks must be placed in their proper context. People v. Cisweski (1987), 118 Ill. 2d 163, 176, citing People v. Nemke (1970), 46 Ill. 2d 49, 59. Defense counsel made several comments during closing argument attacking the credibility of the police officers and the assistant State’s Attorney who took defendant’s statement without providing defendant with his own lawyer, thereby violating defendant’s constitutional rights. As such, it cannot be said that the comments now complained of were improper; rather, the prosecutor merely responded to remarks made during defendant’s closing arguments. The prosecutor may respond to comments by defense counsel which clearly invite a response. (People v. Williams (1991), 147 Ill. 2d 173.) We therefore find defendant’s claim concerning improper closing arguments to be without merit. JURY INSTRUCTIONS As the instructions were read to the jury, the judge inadvertently stated that the jury should convict defendant of the murder of Peter Sepulveda if it found "any one” of two first degree murder elements to have been proved beyond a reasonable doubt. A similar misreading was made concerning the aggravated arson count for Rebecca Sepulveda, for which defendant was acquitted. Defendant failed to properly preserve this issue for review. We find, nevertheless, that the judge’s inadvertent misreading of the jury instructions for one of the victims was insignificant and harmless beyond a reasonable doubt, given the overwhelming evidence of defendant’s guilt. A reviewing court must look to all the circumstances to determine whether defendant received a fair trial, "including all the instructions to the jury, the arguments of counsel, whether the weight of the evidence was overwhelming, and other relevant factors.” (Kentucky v. Whorton (1979), 441 U.S. 786, 789, 60 L. Ed. 2d 640, 643, 99 S. Ct. 2088, 2090; People v. Layhew (1990), 139 Ill. 2d 476, 492.) We note that in this case the correct written instructions for murder and aggravated arson were submitted to the jury for each victim. Moreover, the trial court informed the jury for the other four victims that they were required to find that each one of the propositions for murder was proved beyond a reasonable doubt before they could find defendant guilty. In a related argument, defendant contends that the jury was instructed that one of the ways it could convict defendant of murder was by finding him guilty of felony murder based on aggravated arson. The jury acquitted defendant of all five aggravated arson counts, but convicted him of the five murders. Defendant argues, therefore, that because the murder convictions were returned in the form of a general verdict, there is no way to determine if defendant was convicted on a valid and proper ground. We note that defendant failed to object at trial to the form of verdict used, nor was any objection included in defendant’s post-trial motion. Therefore, in the absence of plain error, the issue is waived. See Enoch, 122 Ill. 2d 176; People v. Jones (1975), 60 Ill. 2d 300, 309. As defendant’s last challenge to the trial proceedings, he contends that he was denied effective assistance because his counsel failed to object to, or preserve in his post-trial motion, various alleged errors during jury selection, trial and sentencing. Defendant points out that these errors, in conjunction with the previously addressed claim that defense counsel should have withdrawn to testify as to defendant’s injuries, combined to deprive him of his constitutional right to effective assistance of counsel. In order to prevail under a claim of ineffective assistance of counsel, the defendant must show that there is a reasonable probability that, but for counsel’s unprofessional errors, the result of the proceeding would have been different. (Strickland, 466 U.S. at 694, 80 L. Ed. 2d at 698, 104 S. Ct. at 2068.) A reviewing court "need not determine whether counsel’s performance was deficient before examining the prejudice suffered by the defendant as a result of the alleged deficiencies.” Strickland, 466 U.S. at 697, 80 L. Ed. 2d at 699, 104 S. Ct. at 2069. As earlier discussed, defendant was unable to demonstrate that defense counsel’s failure to withdraw to testify on his behalf was error given the substantial evidence produced by the State at the motion to suppress. Assuming, arguendo, that counsel’s failure to interpose objections at various times at trial and sentencing did constitute error, when the overwhelming evidence supporting the verdict is considered, defendant clearly has failed to meet the burden of demonstrating a reasonable probability that, but for counsel’s errors, the result of the proceeding would have been different. SENTENCING ISSUES Defendant first asserts that he was denied his right to a fair and impartial jury at capital sentencing because the trial judge excused for cause two potential jurors who did not show their inability to be impartial regarding the imposition of the death penalty. Defendant suggests that additional questions should have been posed to the jurors to fully ascertain their views on the death penalty. Carol Massel. During voir dire, Massel stated that she had strong personal beliefs that would prevent her from imposing the death penalty in an appropriate case. Massel later equivocated, and indicated that, in certain circumstances, she thought she "would be biased where children were involved.” However, during questioning by the State, Massel responded that she would not impose the death penalty. Charlie Mae Isom. Based upon her religious and personal beliefs, Isom indicated that she did not "think” that she could impose the death penalty. Further, Isom stated that regardless of what a person has done, she would not feel right in imposing a sentence of death. Pursuant to Witherspoon v. Illinois (1968), 391 U.S. 510, 20 L. Ed. 2d 776, 88 S. Ct. 1770, the exclusion for cause of prospective jurors who express only general objections to the death penalty is prohibited. As stated, however, both Massel and Isom indicated that they did not think they could impose a death penalty based upon their personal beliefs. In similar situations, this court has held that such responses did not render the prospective juror’s answer ambiguous. (See People v. Gacho (1988), 122 Ill. 2d 221, 240; People v. Emerson (1987), 122 Ill. 411, 431; People v. Brisbon (1985), 106 Ill. 2d 342, 357-60.) We find, therefore, that both jurors were properly excused for cause. Defendant next contends that the prosecutor’s closing arguments at the close of the capital sentencing hearing directed the jury’s attention away from a proper consideration of defendant’s mitigation evidence. In a related argument, defendant contends that the prosecution improperly argued that the legislature had determined that the death penalty was an appropriate penalty in the case at bar, thereby diminishing the jury’s responsibility for imposing the death penalty. Defendant’s supplemental brief maintains that the prosecutor improperly argued that defendant could not be "rehabilitated or restored to useful citizenship,” which is inconsistent with the fact that, as a multiple murderer, defendant was ineligible to receive any sentence of less than natural life in prison. Defendant failed to specifically include these alleged errors in his post-trial motion; as such, we find that the issues are waived. (Enoch, 122 Ill. 2d 176.) An exception to the waiver rule is provided by Rule 615(a) (134 Ill. 2d R. 615(a)), but that exception is expressly limited to cases in which the plain error affected substantial rights. Decisions of this court have consistently noted that while the plain error doctrine may come into play when reviewing a sentencing hearing involving the death penalty (People v. Szabo (1983), 94 Ill. 2d 327, 355) issues which were waived will be addressed only when the evidence is closely balanced (People v. Gacho (1988), 122 Ill. 2d 221, 239; People v. Garcia (1983), 97 Ill. 2d 58, 86-87). In light of the overwhelming evidence of defendant’s guilt, we decline to conduct a review of the alleged errors under Rule 615(a) (134 Ill. 2d R. 615(a)). Defendant further argues that his sentence of death is disparate from the natural life sentence received by codefendant Reeves, who was convicted of five counts of aggravated arson in addition to murder. Defendant points to the following factors as evidence of the disparate sentencing: the prosecution vehemently argued to the judge at codefendant Reeves’ trial and sentencing hearing that he was more culpable for this offense; codefendant Reeves was 29 years old on the date of these offenses, while defendant was only 22; codefendant Reeves drove his car to the Sepulveda residence and provided the fire accelerant; according to defendant’s statement, he was merely an uninformed and uninvolved bystander to the actions committed by codefendant Reeves alone; and that codefendant Reeves was found eligible for a death sentence under more than one section of the statute. This court’s duty, under the United States and Illinois Constitutions, is to determine whether a death sentence has been imposed arbitrarily or capriciously, or is unduly severe considering the circumstances of the offense and the character and rehabilitative prospects of the defendant. Pulley v. Harris (1984), 465 U.S. 37, 79 L. Ed. 2d 29, 104 S. Ct. 871 (eighth amendment does not require comparative proportionality review if statute contains provisions that ensure rational, consistent, non-arbitrary imposition of death penalty, such as a statute that narrows the types of cases in which the death penalty is an available sentence by requiring the existence of one or more statutory aggravating factors, that allows sentencer to consider mitigating evidence, and that provides for meaningful appellate review); People v. Bean (1990), 137 Ill. 2d 65,134; People v. Jimerson (1989), 127 Ill. 2d 12, 54; People v. Brownell (1980), 79 Ill. 2d 508, 541-44; Ill. Const. 1970, art. I, § 11. However, this court has previously considered whether a sentence of death in a particular case is disproportionately harsh in comparison with the less severe sanction imposed on a codefendant convicted of the same crime. See Bean, 137 Ill. 2d 65; People v. Jackson (1991), 145 Ill. 2d 43; Jimerson, 127 Ill. 2d at 54; People v. Ashford (1988), 121 Ill. 2d 55, 82-90; People v. Erickson (1987), 117 Ill. 2d 271, 302-03; Szabo, 94 Ill. 2d at 351-53; People v. Gleckler (1980), 82 Ill. 2d 145, 167-69, 171. Our focus is on the particular defendant’s extent of involvement in the offense, the nature of the offense, the character and background of the defendant, including any criminal record, and his potential for rehabilitation. (Bean, 137 Ill. 2d 65; Free, 94 Ill. 2d at 428, citing Woodson v. North Carolina (1976), 428 U.S. 280, 304, 49 L. Ed. 2d 944, 961, 96 S. Ct. 2978, 2991.) This focus guarantees the individualized sentencing required by the eighth amendment. (See Lockett v. Ohio (1978), 438 U.S. 586, 605, 57 L. Ed. 2d 973, 990, 98 S. Ct. 2954, 2965.) In sum, in reviewing the appropriateness of a death sentence, this court will examine the facts of that particular case and the evidence introduced at the trial and death penalty hearing, and, as a matter of reference, it may consider the sentence imposed on an accomplice or a codefendant in light of his involvement in the offense. Bean, 137 Ill. 2d at 135. While defendant’s statement attempted to shift the blame for the murders to codefendant Reeves, we are mindful of the fact that defendant twice admitted to Williams that he was personally involved in the murders. In his first conversation with Williams on August 1, 1988, defendant told Williams that he had smothered the children. He also indicated that he had set the fires to burn the bodies to cover up the murders. In the August 5, 1988, conversation, defendant again told Williams that he had killed "Debbie” and "Mary” and the kids, and if necessary, he would have committed the murders again. Moreover, the cases in which this court has vacated the death sentence are factually distinguishable from the case sub judice. For instance, in Carlson, 79 Ill. 2d at 590, the defendant was sentenced to death for the murder of a police officer, which occurred as the defendant was attempting to avoid arrest for the murder of his former wife which he committed earlier on that same day. Focusing on the defendant and the circumstances of the particular offense, the court noted the absence of a criminal record. The court found that defendant was one "who would in all probability be leading a life acceptable to our society had not his unfortunate marital affair triggered this tragic sequence of events.” In short, this court found mitigating circumstances which did not "bespeak a man with a malignant heart who must be permanently eliminated from society.” Carlson, 79 Ill. 2d 564. The same common thread runs through other cases in which this court has vacated the death penalty. In Gleckler, 82 Ill. 2d at 171, the defendant was sentenced to death for the murder of two teenage boys. The sentence was found to be excessive, in view of the fact that the defendant had "no criminal history, the personality of a doormat, and a problem with alcohol.” Similarly, in People v. Buggs (1989), 112 Ill. 2d 284, 294, this court found the death sentence an excessive punishment for a man convicted of the murder of his wife and child, who perished in a house fire set by the defendant after an argument with his wife. Relying upon the logic employed in Carlson, the court found that the defendant "would presumably be leading a life acceptable to our society” but for "this marital disharmony and a dispute which triggered this tragic sequence of events.” Buggs, 112 Ill. 2d at 295. Applying the principles developed in Carlson, Gleckler and Buggs, we find the extenuating circumstances which provoked the defendant’s actions in those cases are not present here. Defendant took part in the brutal multiple murder of two women and their three small children, after which he set their bodies on fire. Defendant’s argument that his death sentence should be vacated because his conduct was less culpable than that of his codefendant fares no better. As stated, defendant did admit to Williams that he smothered the children with the pillow, and that he lit their bodies on fire. Additionally, this court held in Jimerson, a case factually analogous to the instant case, that merely because "some or all of the members of [codefendant’s] sentencing jury chose not to impose the death penalty in [codefendant’s] case does not, in our view, render the defendant’s own sentence disproportionate.” Jimerson, 127 Ill. 2d at 54-55. Defendant also claims that the trial court denied his eighth and fourteenth amendment rights by not affording him the right of allocution at the death penalty hearing. Defendant acknowledges that in People v. Gaines (1981), 88 Ill. 2d 342, this court held that a defendant in a death penalty hearing does not have the right of allocution. (See also People v. Williams (1983), 97 Ill. 2d 252, 303.) We decline defendant’s invitation to revisit this issue. Similarly, we choose not to reconsider the issue of whether a defendant is denied a fair sentencing hearing at the second stage of the death penalty hearing when the State was allowed to give opening-closing and rebuttal-closing arguments at the close of evidence, which this court previously addressed in Williams, 97 Ill. 2d at 302. CONSTITUTIONALITY OF THE ILLINOIS DEATH PENALTY As a final matter, defendant raises several constitutional challenges to the death penalty statute. We see no reason to reexamine the following arguments: (1) the death penalty statute is unconstitutional because it does not sufficiently minimize the risk of arbitrarily or capriciously imposed death sentences (Spreitzer, 123 Ill. 2d at 44); and (2) the death penalty statute places a burden of proof on the defendant which precludes meaningful consideration of mitigation (Bean, 137 Ill. 2d at 138; People v. Whitehead (1987), 116 Ill. 2d 425, 465). Defendant’s last argument posits that based upon the Federal district court’s decision in United States ex rel. Free v. Peters (N.D. Ill. 1992), 806 F. Supp. 705, the Illinois death penalty statute is unconstitutional because the jury instructions impose a presumption in favor of death, and that it is too vague. We note that this decision has been reversed by the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals (Free v. Peters (1993), 12 F.3d 700). We find the reasoning in that decision sound, and therefore reject defendant’s contention. Accordingly, we find no merit to defendant’s challenges to the constitutionality of the Illinois death penalty statute. CONCLUSION For the reasons set forth above, we affirm defendant’s convictions and death sentence. We direct the clerk of this court to enter an order setting Wednesday, May 11, 1994, as the date on which the sentence of death, entered by the circuit court of Cook County, shall be carried out. Defendant shall be executed in the manner provided by law. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1991, ch. 38, par. 119 — 5.) The clerk of this court shall send a certified copy of this mandate to the Director of Corrections, to the warden of Stateville Correctional Center, and to the warden of the institution where defendant is now confined. Affirmed.   According to Williams, when he called defendant’s house on August 1 and 5, he would call "collect.” It was his belief that to call "collect” from prison meant to bill the call either to his girlfriend’s or mother’s telephone numbers.

=== CASE 9741345 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:53:58.216636+00 ===

JUSTICE HARRISON, dissenting: Defendant is entitled to a new trial under Batson v. Kentucky (1986), 476 U.S. 79, 90 L. Ed. 2d 69, 106 S. Ct. 1712, as the result of the State’s decision to exclude Marie Shorter from the jury. The record shows that fewer than a third of the venirepersons were of the same race as defendant (African-American), yet half of the State’s peremptory challenges were exercised against persons of African-American descent. Marie Shorter was one of those persons. As the majority points out, Shorter was excluded from the venire even though she shared characteristics, unrelated to race, which were common to 5 of the 12 seated jurors and one alternate juror. At trial, there was no dispute as to whether defendant could establish a prima facie case of purposeful racial discrimination under Batson. Rather, the State proceeded directly to the next step in the Batson process, namely, to advance race-neutral explanations for the peremptory challenges it had made. In the case of Shorter, the State claimed that it had struck her from the venire only because she worked for the same company as Deborah Sepulveda, one of the five victims. The existence of a common employer was pertinent, according to the State, because the prosecution did not want to have a juror "who might be familiar with Debbie Sepulveda in a negative manner, thereby tainting the jury and preventing a fair trial.” On its face, this explanation has nothing to do with Shorter’s race. To this extent, the majority is quite correct that the State was able to proffer a race-neutral reason for Shorter’s exclusion. Where the majority goes awry is in treating this as the end of the inquiry. Contrary to what the majority may believe, the mere assertion of a facially neutral reason for striking a juror cannot be sufficient to defeat a Batson challenge. If it were, the protections of Batson would be illusory, for facially neutral reasons are an easy thing for prosecutors to generate. (See Batson, 476 U.S. at 106, 90 L. Ed. 2d at 94, 106 S. Ct. at 1728 (Marshall, J., concurring).) To avoid this problem, the law makes clear that once a facially neutral explanation is proffered, the court still has a duty to consider the explanation and determine if the defendant has established purposeful discrimination. People v. Andrews (1993), 155 Ill. 2d 286, 293. On such a review, the prosecutor’s explanation must demonstrate that the excluded venire members exhibited a specific bias related to the particular case to be tried. (Andrews, 155 Ill. 2d at 293.) Moreover, the explanation must be legitimate (Batson, 476 U.S. at 98 nn. 20 & 22, 90 L. Ed. 2d at 88, 89 nn. 20 & 22, 106 S. Ct. at 1724 nn. 20 & 22) and not pretextual or contrived (see People v. Gaston (1993), 256 Ill. App. 3d 621, 624; People v. Cannon (1992), 227 Ill. App. 3d 551, 554; People v. Lovelady (1991), 221 Ill. App. 3d 829, 839). The explanation offered by the State here does not meet this standard. As a preliminary matter, there is nothing in the record to substantiate the prosecution’s claim that Shorter and the victim Sepulveda worked for the same employer. To the contrary, the evidence adduced at trial suggests that Sepulveda worked for someone completely different. Even if the two women had worked for the same employer, however, the prosecution’s professed concern over possible negative feelings about Sepulveda is belied by the fact that it made absolutely no inquiry into whether Shorter actually had any connection with her. The employer in question is a major United States corporation, and the prosecution made no attempt to ascertain whether Shorter worked in the same place as Sepulveda, knew her, or had even ever heard of her. In addition, there is nothing to indicate why any familiarity, if it existed, might have left Shorter with negative feelings about Sepulveda. Sepulveda could well have been an exemplary co-worker with a positive reputation. During voir dire, the prosecution had no reason for assuming otherwise. The record shows simply that Sepulveda was Hispanic and that Shorter was African-American. The only way the prosecution could surmise the existence of ill feelings based on this limited information is by assuming that there is some inevitable hostility among co-workers of different races. This, however, is precisely the sort of racial stereotyping the law prohibits. For the foregoing reasons, the fear of jury taint through negative familiarity had no legitimate basis, and the prosecutor’s reasoning must be regarded as pretextual. (See Gaston, 256 Ill. App. 3d at 624.) The circuit court’s decision to uphold the exclusion of Shorter against defendant’s Batson challenge is therefore clearly erroneous, and the judgment must be reversed and the cause remanded for a new trial. Accordingly, I dissent. JUSTICE FREEMAN joins in this dissent.

=== CASE 2226962 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:23.318473+00 ===

305 N.W.2d 13 (1981)
William E. EVENSON, Plaintiff and Appellee,
v.
David R. HLEBECHUK and Janice B. Hlebechuk, Defendants and Appellants.
Civ No. 9899.
Supreme Court of North Dakota.
April 23, 1981.
*14 Tenneson, Serkland, Lundberg, Erickson & Marcil, Fargo, for plaintiff and appellee; argued by Roger J. Minch, Fargo.
Schuster & Brothers, Fargo, for defendants and appellants; argued by Michael J. Garrison, Fargo.
ERICKSTAD, Chief Justice.
The defendants, David and Janice Hlebechuk, appeal from a summary judgment entered against them by the District Court of Cass County contending that they should have been allowed to present parol evidence concerning a promissory note issued by them to plaintiff, William Evenson. We affirm the summary judgment entered by the district court.
It is undisputed that Evenson was employed by the Hlebechuks to sell a twelve-plex apartment building in Casselton, North Dakota. A purchaser, Darwin Jacobson, was procured by Evenson. An earnest money receipt and agreement was entered into between Jacobson and the Hlebechuks. Jacobson paid $12,500 as a down payment. The Hlebechuks were to carry a contract for deed for the balance of $237,500 for a term of 20 years with a balloon payment due at the end of two years. At the end of this period, Jacobson had an option for an additional two-year period to pay the balloon.
On June 1, 1977, when the sale was consummated, the Hlebechuks executed a promissory note to Evenson in the amount of $12,500 "for services rendered by the payee to the makers in connection with the sale" of the apartment.[1] Subsequently, Jacobson failed to make any payments and in lieu of a foreclosure deeded the apartment building back to the Hlebechuks. Evenson demanded payment under the promissory note and the Hlebechuks refused to pay. They assert that the note was to become payable only if the balloon payment was made by Jacobson. Evenson contended that the promissory note was clear and unambiguous and that any parol evidence which contradicts the note is excluded by the parol evidence rule. The trial court, *15 after receiving briefs and holding a hearing, entered summary judgment for Evenson. The Hlebechuks assert the following issues on appeal:
"I.
"Whether the written contract of the parties, as evidenced by an Earnest Money Agreement and a Promissory Note executed by the parties, is ambiguous and uncertain as to Defendants' obligation to pay Plaintiff his real estate commission for the sale of real property.
"II.
"Whether parol evidence is admissible to show the oral agreement of the parties subjecting Plaintiff's real estate commission to a condition precedent that the purchaser make the deferred payments on a Contract for Deed with the Defendants, when that parol agreement was the inducing cause of a Promissory Note and an integral part of the consideration for the Promissory Note.
"III.
"Whether parol evidence is admissible to establish that a Promissory Note given for the commission on a sale of realty by the payee was delivered on the express condition that it was to be operative only when the purchaser made the deferred payments on the purchase price.
"IV.
"Whether Summary Judgment was appropriate under the circumstances of the present case."
I. Scope of Review
On appeal from a summary judgment, we review the evidence in the light most favorable to the party against whom the summary judgment was granted. Jacob v. Hokanson, 300 N.W.2d 852, 854 (N.D.1980). The summary judgment will be upheld only if it appears that there is no genuine issue of any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Rule 56, N.D.R.Civ.P.; Jacob v. Hokanson, supra; Winkjer v. Herr, 277 N.W.2d 579 (N.D.1979).
II. Admission of Parol Evidence
The district court determined that "[t]he promissory note together with the asserted earnest money contract and the asserted Contract for Deed are clear, certain and unambiguous on their face,"[2] and that parol evidence was not admissible.
A. Ambiguous Contract
The Hlebechuks assert that the written agreement of the parties concerning the real estate commission is ambiguous and that parol evidence is admissible to explain the true meaning of the terms of the agreement.
The promissory note falls under the commercial paper chapter of North Dakota's Uniform Commercial Code as it is a negotiable instrument. § 41-03-04, N.D.C.C. As required by Section 41-03-04, the note (a) was signed by the makers, the Hlebechuks; (b) contained an unconditional promise to pay a sum certain, $12,500 at 9¾% interest; (c) is payable at a definite time; and (d) is payable to the order of William Evenson. § 41-03-04, N.D.C.C. Thus, the note is governed by the Uniform Commercial Code.
The parol evidence rule of Section 9-06-07, N.D.C.C., also is applicable as a general principle of law to supplement the U.C.C. § 41-01-03, N.D.C.C.; Peoples Bank & Trust v. Reiff, 256 N.W.2d 336, 340 (N.D.1977).
Section 9-06-07, N.D.C.C., provides:
"9-06-07. Written contract supersedes oral negotiations.The execution of a contract in writing, whether the law requires it to be written or not, supersedes all the oral negotiations or stipulations concerning its matter which preceded or accompanied the execution of the instrument."
*16 We have previously held that "[t]his is a legislative enactment, in part, of the parol evidence rule. * * * This is not an evidentiary or interpretive rule, but rather one of substantive law." Gajewski v. Bratcher, 221 N.W.2d 614, 626 (N.D.1974). Parol evidence is admissible, however, when the writing is ambiguous. Johnson v. Auran, 214 N.W.2d 641, 652 (N.D.1974). Whether or not the writing is ambiguous is a question of law for the court to determine. Id. at 653.
The district court considered the earnest money receipt and agreement between Jacobson and the Hlebechuks in reaching its determination that the writing was not ambiguous. At the bottom of this writing there is a handwritten note after the printed statement "OWNER'S CLOSING INSTRUCTIONS AND AGREEMENT TO PAY COMMISSION" which simply states "Deferred with Balloon". This portion of the earnest money receipt and agreement is not signed by any of the parties. The Hlebechuks contend that when this writing is interpreted and construed together with the promissory note it raises an ambiguity. We disagree.
The district court properly construed the promissory note and the earnest money receipt and agreement together as they were both executed as part of the same transaction and contained terms relating to the commission to be paid. § 41-03-19, N.D.C.C.; see also Sanden v. Hanson, 201 N.W.2d 404, 408 (N.D.1972).
Even when the writings are construed together, however, they are not ambiguous. The promissory note provides that the commission may be deferred if Jacobson exercised his option to extend payment of the balloon two years. The earnest money receipt and agreement states the same thing in a short-hand manner. As there is no ambiguity in these writings, that exception to the parol evidence rule does not apply.
B. Oral Agreement as Inducing Contract
The Hlebechuks next assert that parol evidence is admissible when an oral agreement is the inducing cause of the written contract. See Smith v. Michael Kurtz Construction Co., 232 N.W.2d 35 (N.D.1975).
Evenson argues that this issue was not raised in the trial court. Our review of the briefs on the motion for summary judgment and the transcript of the hearing confirms Evenson's contention.
In Mattis v. Mattis, 274 N.W.2d 201, 204 (N.D.1979), we said:
"... ordinarily on appeals to this court the record must reflect that the appellant brought all matters necessary for the disposition of the issues raised on appeal before the trial court or that they were improperly excluded by the court; and that all issues raised on appeal were presented to the trial court but were not resolved in accordance with law. The appeal process is designed to review action taken by the trial court. It is not designed to give the appellant an opportunity to develop different strategy or theories. The appellant is bound by the record he made."
Accordingly, this issue is not appropriately before us on this appeal.
C. Parol Evidence of a Condition Precedent
The Hlebechuks final assertion is that parol evidence is admissible to show that the note was delivered on a condition precedent that it was to become operative only when the balloon payment was made.
The district court in its memorandum opinion said:
"The Defendants urge that they should be able to show intrinsic evidence that a condition precedent was to happen (full payment) before the note is operative. Amendment of Defendants' Answer to specifically plead this will not change the parol evidence rule. Neither will it come under any exception to the rule. It still results in an attempt to alter the terms of a written document which is clear, certain and unambiguous on its face."
*17 In Mattco, Inc. v. Mandan Radio Ass'n, Inc., 224 N.W.2d 822, 825 (N.D.1974) we said:
"North Dakota recognizes that a condition precedent under appropriate circumstances may be a prerequisite to the existence of a contract. Section 9-01-11, N.D.C.C., defines a `condition precedent' as 
`... [A] condition which is to be performed before some right dependent thereon accrues or some act dependent thereon is performed.'
"On several occasions, this Court has considered the matter of conditions precedent, their existence and legal effect." 224 N.W.2d at 825.
"The existence of a condition precedent may be considered an exception to the rule or a situation where the rule has no application. Parol testimony is admissible to prove a condition precedent to the legal effectiveness of a written agreement, if the condition does not contradict the express terms of such written agreement." 224 N.W.2d at 825 (concurring opinion by Johnson).
A condition precedent cannot be used to contradict express terms of a written contract. Mattco, Inc. v. Mandan Radio Ass'n, Inc., 246 N.W.2d 222, 228 (N.D.1976).
It is also the established law in North Dakota that promissory notes may be subject to conditions precedent. First State Bank v. Kelly, 30 N.D. 84, 152 N.W. 125, 127 (N.D.1915). Parol evidence is admissible to prove the existence of a condition precedent to the effectiveness of the writing. Id.
We agree with the reasoning used by the Supreme Court of Idaho in deciding Ventures, Inc. v. Jones, 623 P.2d 145 (Idaho 1981). In that case, the court held that the law prior to enactment of the U.C.C. regarding the admissibility of parole evidence to prove a condition precedent to a negotiable instrument was equally applicable to post U.C.C. cases. 623 P.2d at 149. In that case, the court said:
"Thus, even before the enactment of the Uniform Commercial Code, it was the rule in Idaho that where promissory notes are given subject to conditions upon their delivery, observance of those conditions is essential to the validity of the notes and that the annexing of such conditions to the delivery is not an oral contradiction of the written obligation....
"The theory behind the cases cited above is that when a note is delivered subject to a condition, it does not become enforceable until the condition has been fulfilled. This theory has continued application in the code in I.C. § 28-3-306(c) [which is similar to § 41-03-36, N.D.C.C.], which lists the defense of nonperformance of any condition precedent as available against one not a holder in due course." 623 P.2d at 149.
The Supreme Court of Idaho was discussing delivery for a special purpose but used the law concerning conditional delivery.
Evenson contends that such parol evidence contradicts the unconditional promissory note and is inadmissible. Mattco, Inc. v. Mandan Radio Ass'n, Inc., supra, 246 N.W.2d at 228. We agree. Although there may be conditions precedent to negotiable instruments, this is not such a case at the condition precedent alleged by the Hlebechuks conflicts with the terms of the note. Such a conflict does not arise simply because a condition precedent would make the unconditional promissory note unenforceable; rather, the condition precedent is so inconsistent with the note as to require it to be in writing. Mattco, Inc. v. Mandan Radio Ass'n, Inc., supra, 246 N.W.2d at 228.
In this case, the note does more than just establish a definite due date as all negotiable instruments must. The note contains four conceivable times for payment: (1) the note may be paid on the due date, two years after June 1, 1977; (2) the note may be prepaid at any time by the Hlebechuks; (3) the note may be accelerated by Evenson at any time that Jacobson renders full performance of the contract for deed; and (4) the note may be extended to June 1, 1981, if Jacobson chooses to exercise his option to extend the due date of the balloon payment under the contract for *18 deed. It appears that all eventualities contemplated for payment of the note were included by the parties. Had the parties intended payment of the balloon payment as a condition precedent, it would have been easy to have so included it in the note. Having not done so, they cannot attempt to do so now through parol evidence, for to permit that would be to permit evidence of a condition precedent which is inconsistent with the other terms of the note relevant to payment.
The condition precedent alleged by the Hlebechuks is so inconsistent with the terms of the note that oral evidence concerning it was properly excluded.
III. Summary Judgment
The note itself is clear, certain, and unambiguous. As there were no issues of material fact, the motion for summary judgment was properly granted by the district court.
The summary judgment is affirmed.
VANDE WALLE, PEDERSON, PAULSON and SAND, JJ., concur.
NOTES
[1]                      "PROMISSORY NOTE
"$12,500.00                 Fargo, North Dakota
June 1, 1977
"Two years after date, for value received, the undersigned, David R. Hlebechuk and Janice B. Hlebechuk, husband and wife, promise to pay to the order of William E. Evenson, at Fargo, North Dakota, the sum of Twelve Thousand Five Hundred and no/100ths Dollars ($12,500.00), with interest from date hereon at the rate of 9¾% per annum. The several makers, signers, guarantors and endorsers hereof hereby waive presentment, demand, notice of dishonor and protest and consent that the time of payment may be extended or this note renewed without affecting their liability thereon.
"The makers hereof reserve the privilege of prepaying this note in whole or in part at any time.
"This note is given in consideration for services rendered by the payee to the makers in connection with the sale of real property located in Casselton, North Dakota, under the terms of a certain Contract for Deed bearing this date between the makers and Darwin Jacobson. The due date of this note may be accelerated by the payee to the date of full performance of the said contract by Darwin Jacobson. The aforesaid Contract for Deed contains an option on the part of said Darwin Jacobson to extend the date of final performance under the contract to June 1, 1981. If the date of final performance under said Contract for Deed is extended, the makers hereof reserve the right to extend the due date of this note for an additional time up to June 1, 1981, said option must be exercised by the makers hereof in writing addressed to the payee and deposited in the United States mail on or before May 1, 1979."
[2]  This court did not have the Contract for Deed before it in the Judgment Role.

=== CASE 9741346 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:54:00.088578+00 ===

JUSTICE GOLDENHERSH delivered the opinion of the court: Defendant, Johnny R. Clemons, Jr., appeals from a judgment in favor of plaintiff, Johanna King, special administrator of the estate of Robert King, deceased (plaintiff Charles King died before trial and is not a party to this appeal), in a wrongful death action plaintiff filed after her son, Robert King (decedent), was killed while he was riding in defendant’s car. The jury found defendant to be negligent and returned a verdict for plaintiff in the amount of $334,856.97. The circuit court of Madison County entered judgment on the verdict and denied defendant’s post-trial motion. In this appeal, defendant presents the following issues for review: (1) whether the trial court erred in allowing plaintiff’s motion to bar defendant’s evidence of a defective steering column; (2) whether the trial court erred in not sustaining defendant’s objection to comments made by plaintiff’s counsel in closing argument; (3) whether the trial court erred in instructing the jury on damages and submitting plaintiff’s verdict form; and (4) whether there was any evidence to support plaintiff’s claim that the decedent contributed income to plaintiff prior to his death. We affirm. On March 16, 1989, defendant came home from high school and found decedent waiting for him. Defendant and decedent were friends, and decedent had spent the previous night at defendant’s house. Defendant had planned to take his recently purchased 1973 Pontiac Trans Am to an exhaust shop in Staunton for some repairs that afternoon. Since decedent was still at the house, he decided to ride to Staunton with defendant. Defendant had driven the car on one prior occasion and experienced no problems. Defendant testified that to get to Staunton from Livingston, where defendant lived, he had to drive on Livingston Avenue. On Livingston Avenue, he drove through one curve, drove straight for one-eighth to one-quarter mile, and then had to drive through a second curve. On the straightaway, defendant was driving approximately 50 miles per hour. As he approached the second curve, he took his foot off the accelerator, but the pedal stuck. Defendant testified that he tried to pry the gas pedal from its position with his feet but was unable to do so. Defendant then pumped the brakes and was able to slow the car down to approximately 40 miles per hour. Defendant also turned the ignition off, hoping that would slow the car down, to no avail. At the curve, the car went off the road, across a grassy area, and crashed into a tree, at which time decedent was fatally injured. Although defendant wanted to present evidence that the steering wheel locked pursuant to a defective condition in the steering column, the trial court barred him from doing so. Prior to trial, plaintiff filed and served on defendant a document entitled "Notice To Preserve Material Evidence.” That document stated that plaintiff intended to use and examine the 1973 Pontiac defendant was driving at the time of the accident, and plaintiff "required defendant to preserve said evidence and not otherwise dispose of or *** alter said evidence.” Upon receipt of that document, defendant’s attorney placed it in the client file. Sometime thereafter, defendant changed attorneys. In the course of preparing the defense, defendant’s second attorney hired an engineer to remove the steering column from the car for an examination. On the first day of trial, plaintiff filed a motion to bar defendant from introducing any evidence concerning the condition of the steering column. Plaintiff argued that defendant’s removal of the steering column violated the "Notice To Preserve Material Evidence.” At that time, defense counsel stated that he was unaware of the document but acknowledged that he had the responsibility of thoroughly reviewing the file after he took over the case. The trial court granted plaintiff’s motion to bar evidence and entered an order preventing defendant from introducing any evidence or raising any defense regarding the condition of the steering column. This order was entered as a sanction pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 219(c) (134 Ill. 2d R. 219(c)). Defendant first argues on appeal that the trial court erred in granting plaintiff’s motion to bar all evidence concerning the steering column. Supreme Court Rule 219(c) provides that courts may, upon motion, enter sanctions against a party for unreasonably refusing to comply with discovery requests. (134 Ill. 2d R. 219(c).) Two such sanctions are: (1) that the party be debarred from maintaining any particular claim, counterclaim, third-party complaint, or defense relating to that issue, and (2) that a witness be barred from testifying concerning that issue. (134 El. 2d Rules 219(c)(iii), (iv).) The imposition of these sanctions rests largely in the discretion of the trial court and will not be disturbed on review unless that discretion was abused. Graves v. Daley (1988), 172 Ill. App. 3d 35, 37, 526 N.E.2d 679, 680; Ralston v. Casanova (1984), 129 Ill. App. 3d 1050, 1056, 473 N.E.2d 444, 449.  Plaintiff notified defendant of her interest in keeping the automobile intact by sending defendant the "Notice To Preserve Material Evidence,” but defendant’s action of removing the steering column denied plaintiff the opportunity to examine or use the automobile as it was after the crash. Although defendant argues that the trial court’s ruling was unjust, we disagree. The trial court was in the best position to assess the appropriate sanction for defendant’s disregard of plaintiff’s notice to preserve. After a thorough examination of the record, we find no abuse of discretion by the trial court and thus will not disturb its ruling on this issue. Defendant next contends that the trial court erred in not sustaining his objection to comments made by plaintiff’s counsel during closing argument. When the trial court granted plaintiff’s motion to bar any evidence relating to the steering column, it was agreed that plaintiff could not capitalize on the order by referring to or challenging defendant on the inadmissible evidence. Defendant argues that plaintiff violated that agreement by making certain statements during closing argument. Defense counsel objected at trial to the following comment regarding defendant’s actions when he approached the curve in the road: "[Defendant] was at a point in the road where *** the speed limit changed from 55 miles an hour to 40 miles an hour for the curve so he had gotten his speed down to an acceptable speed for negotiating the turn. Why not merely go through the turn at 35 miles an hour?” After the parties approached the bench on defendant’s objection, plaintiff’s counsel continued his closing argument, making the following statements: "Anyway, when he gets to the position where he is at the curve in the road and is going 35 miles an hour at a location where a 40 mile per hour is placed, he drives straight ahead. Now, the question for you to resolve is, is that what a reasonable person would do under the circumstances. And if you decide a reasonable person traveling less than the posted speed limit and having available the ability to downshift, the ability to use an emergency brake, having available to them any other avenue of handling the car, if you feel that a reasonable person would not drive straight ahead into a tree and leave the roadway, then that is negligence. *** Having met those three burdens which she has to prove — and the defense, by the way, offered no contradictory evidence on any of these, in fact offered no witnesses whatsoever ***.” Defendant contends that the above remarks were inflammatory and capitalized on the court’s order of debarment. Defendant was unable to rebut the comments without violating the court’s order himself and now claims that the comments were so prejudicial that he was denied a fair trial.  Improper comments generally do not constitute reversible error unless the other party has been substantially prejudiced. (Soto v. E. W. Bliss Division of Gulf & Western Manufacturing Co. (1983), 116 Ill. App. 3d 880, 892, 452 N.E.2d 572, 581.) The trial court is in a superior position to evaluate the effect of the alleged improper comments upon the jury, and its ruling will not be disturbed by a reviewing court absent an abuse of discretion. (Soto, 116 Ill. App. 3d at 892-93, 452 N.E.2d at 581.) Although plaintiff’s counsel’s comments may have been improper, we do not conclude that they prejudiced defendant to the extent that he was denied a fair trial. The trial judge was in the best position to evaluate the comments’ effect on the jury, and it determined that the comments, if improper, did not prejudice defendant. After review of the record, we do not find the trial court’s ruling to be an abuse of discretion and will not disturb it in this appeal. The next issue we address is whether the trial court erred in using plaintiff’s tendered jury instruction regarding damages and plaintiff’s tendered verdict form. Although plaintiff makes an argument that defendant waived this issue on appeal, we choose to address the merits of defendant’s argument. Plaintiff’s instruction No. 22 stated, in pertinent part: "If you decide for the plaintiff on the question of liability, you must then fix the amount of money which will reasonably and fairly compensate Johanna King, mother of the decedent, for the pecuniary loss proved by the evidence to have resulted to the mother, from the death of the decedent. 'Pecuniary loss’ may include loss of money, goods, services and society. Where a decedent leaves his mother, the law recognizes a presumption that the mother of the decedent has sustained some substantial pecuniary loss by reason of the death.” The jury was also given the instruction submitted by defendant, which states, in pertinent part: "In calculating the amount of pecuniary losses consisting of money, goods or services, you must not simply multiply the life expectancies by the annual losses. Instead, you must determine their present cash value. 'Present cash value’ means the sum of money needed now, which, together with what that sum may reasonably be expected to earn in the future, will equal the amount of those pecuniary losses at the times in the future when they will be sustained. Damages for loss of society are not reduced to present cash value.” The verdict form given to the jury provided two entries for plaintiff s damages, one for pecuniary losses and a separate one for loss of society. Defendant argues that the jury was misled and confused by the verdict form containing the two entries. We disagree. Section 2 — 1109 of the Civil Practice Law provides, in pertinent part: "In every case where damages for injury to the person are assessed by the jury the verdict shall be itemized so as to reflect the monetary distribution among economic loss and non-economic loss ***.” (735 ILCS 5/2 — 1109 (West 1992).) Additionally, our supreme court has held that although damages for economic losses should be reduced to present cash value, damages in a wrongful death action for loss of future society should not be reduced to present cash value. (Drews v. Gobel Freight Lines, Inc. (1991), 144 Ill. 2d 84, 578 N.E.2d 970.) A reviewing court will not reverse a cause on the basis of an improper jury instruction unless it is able to conclude that the instruction clearly misled the jury. (Phelps v. Chicago Transit Authority (1991), 224 Ill. App. 3d 229, 234, 586 N.E.2d 352, 355.) The relevant determination is whether the instructions considered as a whole were sufficiently clear so as not to mislead the jury. Phelps, 224 Ill. App. 3d at 234, 586 N.E.2d at 355.  We are not able to conclude that the instructions and the verdict form given in this case clearly misled the jury. Looking at the instructions tendered by both parties as they were given to the jury, we find that, as a whole, they were sufficiently clear in stating the law, and there was no reversible error by the trial court.  The final issue we must address is whether the trial court erred in permitting plaintiff to recover for decedent’s future lost wages. In Bullard v. Barnes (1984), 102 Ill. 2d 505, 468 N.E.2d 1228, the court held that "there can be no presumption of loss of earnings upon the death of a child since such a presumption represents an aberration from, rather than a reflection of, the typical family experience.” (Bullard, 102 Ill. 2d at 517, 468 N.E.2d at 1234.) The court further stated that "[although the presumption of a loss of earnings no longer applies, in the rare case where the child earned income that was used to support the family these facts may, of course, be proved and a recovery had.” (Bullard, 102 Ill. 2d at 517, 468 N.E.2d at 1234.) Plaintiff presented uncontroverted evidence that the decedent had been employed periodically in the four to five years prior to his death, that on two occasions decedent gave plaintiff money to pay her bills for a total of $900, and that decedent occasionally contributed groceries to the household. There was also testimony that decedent performed various services around the house for his parents. We find this evidence sufficient to present the matter to the jury for determination of what decedent’s economic contributions were to the family, if any. For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the circuit court of Madison County is affirmed. Affirmed. WELCH, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9741347 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:54:00.093556+00 ===

JUSTICE RARICK, concurring in part and dissenting in part: Although not specifically addressed by the majority in its opinion, I agree the rules of discovery are broad enough to accommodate plaintiff’s notice to preserve. And, because the rules recognize notices such as plaintiff’s, I therefore reluctantly concur in upholding the sanction imposed in this instance. (See American Family Insurance Co. v. Village Pontiac-GMC, Inc. (1992), 223 Ill. App. 3d 624, 626-28, 585 N.E.2d 1115, 1118-19; Graves v. Daley (1988), 172 Ill. App. 3d 35, 38-39, 526 N.E.2d 679, 681-82.) I believe the more appropriate method, however, would have been to secure a protective order explicitly detailing the handling, testing, and preservation of the vehicle involved in the accident. (See Klick v. R.D. Werner Co. (1976), 38 Ill. App. 3d 575, 578, 348 N.E.2d 314, 317.) Such protective orders not only preserve the evidence and guide the parties, they also "further the principle that litigation is best served when each party knows as much about the controversy as is reasonably practicable.” Klick, 38 Ill. App. 3d at 579, 348 N.E.2d at 317. Recognizing this, however, I must dissent as to the majority’s treatment of defendant’s objections to plaintiff’s closing argument. The parties agreed, once evidence relating to the steering column was barred, that plaintiff could not "capitalize” on the order by referring to or challenging defendant on the inadmissible evidence. Plaintiff’s counsel, however, did exactly that; he capitalized on the inadmissible evidence by suggesting a reasonable person would have attempted to negotiate the turn in the roadway. The only way defendant could have met this challenge would have been by violating the court’s order. Clearly defendant was prejudiced, and, in my mind, the trial court’s ruling to the contrary constituted an abuse of discretion. (See Wille v. Navistar International Transportation Corp. (1991), 222 Ill. App. 3d 833, 837-39, 584 N.E.2d 425, 428-29.) Because the majority concludes otherwise, I must dissent to this portion of the disposition. .

=== CASE 9741348 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:54:00.357041+00 ===

Per Curiam.
On. August 27, 1979, defendant
pled guilty as charged to breaking and entering an occupied dwelling in violation of MCL 750.110; MSA 28.305. On October 18, 1979, he was sentenced to from 3-1/2 to 15 years imprisonment. He appeals of right, raising an issue of first impression.
At the time of his plea, defendant was not informed by the court of the effect of the 1978 Initiated law commonly known as Proposal B. MCL 791.233b; MSA 28.2303(3). The provisions of Proposal B preclude parole for certain described offenses until the minimum term has been served and further provide that the minimum term shall *697not be diminished by allowances for good time, special good time, or special parole. The effective date of Proposal B was December 10, 1978.
Since breaking and entering is a crime included in Proposal B, defendant is absolutely barred from any parole consideration until he has served his minimum 3-1/2-year term. Defendant claims that the trial court’s failure to inform defendant sua sponte of the consequences of Proposal B was error, justifying a new trial. The identical issue raised here has been considered by this Court.1
While defendant cites Justice Williams’ dissent in Guilty Plea Cases, 395 Mich 96, 147; 235 NW2d 132 (1975), which stated that a defendant must be informed of the major sentence consequences of a guilty plea, this Court is bound by the majority opinion which holds that the court rules do "not require the judge to inform the defendant of all sentence consequences — only the maximum sentence, any mandatory minimum and, * * * if he is on probation or parole, the possible effect on his status as a probationer or parolee”. Id., 118. In the present case, the trial court fulfilled all of the requirements of the court rules at the plea-taking hearing.
Although the statute in question had been in effect for more than eight months when defendant pled and has now been in effect nearly two years, the Supreme Court has not modified GCR 1963, 785.7 to require an explanation of the statute as part of the plea taking. Absent direction from the Supreme Court or the Legislature, we will not go beyond the clear requirements of the court rule. Cf. People v Larkins, 59 Mich App 199, 202; 229 NW2d 378 (1975), People v Bennett, 76 Mich App 264, 267; 256 NW2d 459 (1977).
*698Affirmed.
Allen and C. L. Hoehn, JJ., concurred.
People v Elder, 104 Mich App 651; 305 NW2d 563 (1981).

=== CASE 9741349 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:54:00.36099+00 ===

M. J. Kelly, P.J.
(dissenting). In People v Elder, 104 Mich App 651; 305 NW2d 563 (1981), I noted in dissent the impossibility of informed consent to a guilty plea where the defendant was not told of the Proposal B, MCL 791.233; MSA 28.2303, consequences of his plea. This failure to inform was even more serious in Elder, because of the defendant’s prior knowledge of the "lifer law” and other information indicating a possible early release. As I view it, this defendant’s lack of knowledge of prior sentence-shortening procedures does not alter the basic premise that a defendant cannot make an understanding guilty plea without first being informed of the effect of Proposal B on his ultimate sentence. GCR 1963, 785.7(l)(d).
The requirement that a defendant be told of the maximum and mandatory minimum sentence consequences of a guilty plea, GCR 1963, 785.7(l)(b), (d), has been consistently enunciated by our Supreme Court. The importance of imparting such information was just underscored by the Court’s adherence to a rule requiring strict compliance with these provisions, People v Jones, 410 Mich 407; 301 NW2d 822 (1981), and mandatory reversal where the lower court does not acquiesce. Guilty Plea Cases, 395 Mich 96; 235 NW2d 132 (1975). Because of the extreme effect of Proposal B on the sentence of a defendant who pleads guilty to one of its enumerated offenses, I cannot agree that an understanding plea can be made without such information. Simply stated, absent an explanation of the effect of Proposal B, a defendant has no knowledge of "the true minimum time” he will serve. People v Mitchell, 102 Mich App 554; 302 NW2d 230 (1980).
*699The lower court herein treated defendant’s motion for new trial as a motion to withdraw his prior guilty plea. I would reverse the trial court’s order denying said motion and remand the case to permit defendant to withdraw his guilty plea.

=== CASE 2226966 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:23.388271+00 ===

636 N.E.2d 1029 (1994)
262 Ill. App. 3d 522
201 Ill. Dec. 597
CITY OF PEORIA, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
Joanne OHL, Defendant-Appellee.
No. 3-93-0732.
Appellate Court of Illinois, Third District.
June 8, 1994.
Clifton J. Mitchell, Peoria, for City of Peoria.
Joanne Ohl, pro se.
Justice BRESLIN delivered the opinion of the court:
The plaintiff, the City of Peoria, filed a complaint alleging that the defendant, Joanne Ohl, violated section 5-4 of the Peoria City Code (the Code) which prohibited farm animals. (Peoria, Ill., City Code § 5-4 (1993).) The circuit court subsequently entered summary judgment in favor of Ohl, finding that her Vietnamese pot-bellied pig was "a pet and not a farm animal as defined by the City Code." The City appeals. We affirm.
*1030 The facts of this case are undisputed. Section 5-4 of the Code prohibits farm animals in areas zoned as R-4 Single-Family Residence Districts. Ohl lives in an R-4 zoned district and has a pet pot-bellied pig. At issue is whether her pet is included in section 5-4's prohibition against farm animals.
Section 5-4 of the Code provides:
"Except as provided in Appendix B of the city Code and section 5-5 of this chapter, all farm animals, including, but not limited to, members of the swine, ovine, bovine, caprine or equine families, poultry and rabbits, shall be prohibited." Peoria, Ill., City Code § 5-4 (1993).
Read by itself, section 5-4 is an ambiguous and open-ended prohibition against animals. First, the section is ambiguous because it does not clearly state whether all animals in the enumerated families are prohibited, or whether only farm animals belonging to those families are restricted. Second, the section is overbroad. Read literally, the section might prohibit any animal which could be found on a farm, including such common household pets as dogs and cats. However, when section 5-4 is read in context with other portions of the Code, it becomes clear that such an ambiguous and overbroad prohibition was not intended. See County of Will v. Village of Rockdale (3rd Dist. 1992), 226 Ill.App.3d 634, 168 Ill. Dec. 617, 589 N.E.2d 1017 (holding that statutes which relate to the same subject matter should be construed together, especially where one statute makes a cross-reference to the other).
The City concedes that Appendix B of the Code allows farming and farm animals in Al Agricultural Districts. (Peoria, Ill., City Code Appendix B, § 7.2 (1993).) Thus, it is apparent that section 5-4 was not enacted because "farm animals" are per se objectionable. Rather, it appears that section 5-4 was intended to promote the general welfare through efficient land use by preventing residentially zoned land from being used for farming or ranching. This intent to exclude farming from residentially zoned areas is re-evidenced later in Appendix B where private noncommercial gardens are listed as a permissible use for land in R-4 residential districts, while farming is not listed. Peoria, Ill., City Code Appendix B, § 7.7.b (1993).
Moreover, a close reading of the language used in section 5-4 itself reveals that its purpose is to prevent residentially zoned land from being used for farming. Specifically, we note that section 5-4 prohibits "poultry," which the Code defines as "domesticated birds raised for show, eggs or meat. "(Peoria, Ill., City Code § 4-1 (1993).) Thus, as the City acknowledges, domesticated birds kept for a purpose other than for show, eggs or meat are permitted. The logical implication is that section 5-4 does not seek to prohibit the animals themselves, but only use of the animal for farming purposes in residentially zoned areas.
Based upon our reading of the Code as a whole, we conclude that section 5-4 does not prohibit all animals which might be found on a farm. Nor does it prohibit all members of the animal families listed. Instead, we conclude that section 5-4 prohibits only animals kept for farming purposes. Accordingly, we find that it does not prohibit pets.
In the instant case, the City failed to allege Ohl was keeping the animal in question for any purposes other than as a pet. Had the City made such an allegation, the trial court would have had to have made a factual determination of whether the animal was being kept as a pet or for agrarian purposes. However, since no such allegation was made, there was no question of material fact and the trial court properly granted summary judgment in favor of the defendant. See Alcorn v. Stepzinski (3rd Dist.1989), 185 Ill.App.3d 1, 132 Ill. Dec. 901, 540 N.E.2d 823 (holding that summary judgment is proper where there is no genuine issue of material fact).
Accordingly, the judgment of the circuit court of Peoria County is affirmed.
Affirmed.
McCUSKEY and STOUDER, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9741350 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:54:01.811228+00 ===

JUSTICE GOLDENHERSH delivered the opinion of the court: Respondents, Fred V. Bartelsmeyer (Bartelsmeyer) and the Department of Public Works and Public Buildings of the State of Illinois (the Department), appeal from an order of the circuit court of St. Clair County in favor of petitioners, Bernard Vogt and James Vogt, ordering respondents to construct an overpass over Interstate 255 in the exact location shown on petitioners’ exhibits 1 through 4, pursuant to the terms of a 1977 settlement agreement between the parties. The principal issue raised by respondents is one of jurisdiction. Respondents contend that under the doctrine of sovereign immunity, the Court of Claims has exclusive jurisdiction over petitioners’ cause of action, and the circuit court erred in refusing to dismiss petitioners’ case. Assuming, arguendo, that the circuit court had jurisdiction, respondents additionally contend that the circuit court erred in deciding the case in favor of petitioners because (1) the circuit court’s determination that an agreement existed to build an overpass was against the manifest weight of the evidence, (2) petitioners’ cause of action was barred by the five-year statute of limitations applicable to oral contracts (111. Rev. Stat. 1991, ch. 110, par. 13 — 205 (now 735 ILCS 5/13 — 205 (West 1992)), (3) the Statute of Frauds was applicable, and (4) the Department cannot build the overpass without Federal approval or sufficient funds. We affirm. I While the facts are not in dispute, the history of this case is important to its resolution. On August 25, 1971, the Department filed a petition to acquire land owned by petitioners and Sharon Vogt under the authority of articles III and IV of the Illinois Highway Code (111. Rev. Stat. 1971, ch. 121, pars. 3 — 101 through 4 — 508 (now 605 ILCS 5/3 — 101 through 4 — 508 (West 1992))). Sharon Vogt takes no part in this appeal. The purpose for the taking was construction of a bridge across the Mississippi River. A cross-petition was filed, alleging that certain land would be damaged as a result of the taking and requesting damages for such loss. On November 16, 1971, the Department filed a motion for immediate vesting of title in accordance with the Eminent Domain Act "quick take” provisions. (111. Rev. Stat. 1971, ch. 47, pars. 2.1 through 2.10 (modified effective July 1, 1982: see 111. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 110, par. 7 — 101 et seq. (now 735 ILCS 5/7 — 101 et seq. (West 1992))).) On November 30, 1971, the circuit court entered an order finding authority for the "quick take” and setting preliminary and just compensation. Three years after this order was entered, the plans for the highway remained incomplete and final compensation remained undetermined. As a result, the circuit court vacated its original order, dismissed the Department’s petition, and entered an order revesting title to petitioners herein and Sharon Vogt. The Department appealed the circuit court’s decision, and on March 10, 1977, this court affirmed the circuit court’s determination. (Department of Public Works & Buildings v. Vogt (1977), 51 Ill. App. 3d 770, 366 N.E.2d 310.) Our supreme court granted leave to appeal but, after reviewing the matter, dismissed the appeal as moot. (Department of Transportation v. Schien (1978), 72 Ill. 2d 287, 381 N.E.2d 241.) The parties worked out a settlement as evidenced by: "copies of documents executed by respondents on March 30, 1977, designated as dedications of right-of-way for a freeway, a release for freeway, temporary construction easements and a special agreement, in return for which they were paid sums greatly in excess of the amounts fixed by the court as preliminary just compensation for the taking of the property.” (Schien, 72 Ill. 2d at 291, 381 N.E.2d at 243.) Accordingly, our supreme court determined: "There is no issue here of right to possession, nor is there any issue of the just compensation to be paid. *** It is obvious that the issues presented in the original proceeding are moot and the appeal is therefore dismissed.” Schien, 72 Ill. 2d at 292, 381 N.E.2d at 243. On June 3, 1991, petitioners filed the instant action against respondents, alleging that respondents breached the settlement agreement. On July 29, 1991, petitioners filed their second and final amended petition. Petitioners alleged that in March 1977, Bartelsmeyer entered into a series of agreements in which petitioners agreed to sell to the Department certain parcels of land to be used for construction of Interstate 255. The Department orally agreed to build an overpass over Interstate 255 in order to connect two parcels of petitioners’ land which would be divided by the highway. The highway was completed in November 1990 but did not include the overpass agreed to by the parties. Count I of the petition requested enforcement of the settlement agreement, while count II requested a mandatory injunction (specific performance). Respondents filed several motions to dismiss. Attached to the first motion was the affidavit of Jerry Rank, a design-squad leader at the Department of Transportation. Rank stated in the affidavit that on December 28, 1982, he informed petitioners that the overpass would not be built on their property. Attached to a motion for summary judgment filed by respondents was a Department memorandum of Jerry Rank, dated December 28, 1982, summarizing his conversation with petitioners. Also attached were newspaper articles published in February 1981, in the St. Louis Globe-Democrat and the Belleville News-Democrat which noted the location of the overpass. Respondents also submitted the Department’s written policy explaining that the Bureau of Land Acquisitions could only acquire land to obtain right-of-way rights for highways. In response, petitioners filed their own affidavits denying that they had such a conversation with Rank in 1982. Ultimately, the circuit court denied respondents’ motions. On November 5, 1992, an evidentiary hearing was held in which several witnesses testified concerning the agreement in question. Fred V. Bartelsmeyer, who negotiated with petitioners on behalf of the Department, testified that the parties initially agreed to a price of $160,000 as compensation for the taking of petitioners’ land, but that petitioners would not agree to sign the deeds or complete the execution of the documents until additional matters were agreed upon, including the building of the overpass to connect petitioners’ property. On March 30, 1977, a meeting took place between the parties at which time petitioners were shown the plans for the highway. On these plans, an "X” was marked in the location where the overpass was to be built to connect petitioners’ property. Bernard Vogt testified that he was orally assured by Bartelsmeyer and engineers for the Department that the overpass would be built as described in the plans. Vogt specifically stated that the overpass was one of the things he "held out for so he could get from one side to the other, to the fields, or to the farm.” He further claimed he would not have sold the land unless the overpass was built. He believed Bartelsmeyer had the authority to enter into such an agreement. Bartelsmeyer signed the plans as "true and correct” copies and initialed them. Bartelsmeyer testified that the plans were subject to change until signed by the Director of the Highway Department; however, Bartelsmeyer agreed that petitioners were never told that the plans could be changed. The Department failed to build the overpass in the location agreed to with petitioners but instead built the overpass one mile east of petitioners’ property to allow access to a proposed industrial park. Bernard Vogt testified that he was never informed of the change in plans and learned of the change in the location of the overpass when reading the newspaper in 1990. After reading in the newspaper that Interstate 255 was complete, petitioners brought the present action. On November 9, 1992, the circuit court issued its final order in this case. The circuit court found that the parties entered into an agreement and the "agreement was the underlying basis for settling and ultimately the Illinois Supreme Court dismissing the underlying litigation, and therefore it is absolutely enforceable by this Court.” The circuit court ordered the overpass to be built in the location shown on petitioners’ exhibits 1 through 4. Respondents filed a notice of appeal, and the circuit court granted respondents’ motion for stay of judgment pending appeal. II Respondents first contend that under the doctrine of sovereign immunity, the Court of Claims has exclusive jurisdiction over petitioners’ cause of action and that the circuit court erred in refusing to dismiss petitioners’ case. Petitioners respond that the doctrine of sovereign immunity is inapplicable to the case at bar and that it was appropriate under the present circumstances for the circuit court to enforce the settlement agreement entered into between the parties. We agree with petitioners. In determining whether an action is against the State of Illinois and thus prohibited by law, the courts not only look to the identity of the formal parties but also consider the issues involved and the relief sought. (City of Springfield v. Allphin (1978), 74 Ill. 2d 117, 124, 384 N.E.2d 310, 312.) Numerous cases have held that a suit against a State officer alleging that he or she abused his or her discretion or authority is not barred by sovereign immunity, especially if the petitioner is seeking equitable relief. (Houseknecht v. Zagel (1983), 112 Ill. App. 3d 284, 445 N.E.2d 402; Bio-Medical Laboratories, Inc. v. Trainor (1977), 68 Ill. 2d 540, 370 N.E.2d 223; County of Cook v. Ogilvie (1972), 50 Ill. 2d 379, 280 N.E.2d 224.) For example, in Bio-Medical Laboratories, Inc. v. Trainor (1977), 68 Ill. 2d 540, 370 N.E.2d 223 (superseded by statute: see 111. Rev. Stat. 1979, ch. 23, pars. 12 — 4.25, 4.26, 4.27 (now 305 ILCS 5/12 — 4.25, 12 — 1.26, 12 — 4.27 (West 1992))), a corporation brought an action to restrain the Director of Public Aid from suspending the corporation’s right to participate in the Illinois Medical Assistance program. Our supreme court determined that the corporation’s actions were not barred by the doctrine of sovereign immunity, as the corporation was not attempting to enforce a present claim against the State but was seeking to enjoin the Director from taking actions in excess of his delegated authority in violation of the corporation’s protectable legal interest. Bio-Medical Laboratories, 68 Ill. 2d at 548, 370 N.E.2d at 227.  The instant case is similar to Bio-Medical Laboratories because petitioners herein also seek injunctive relief but do so through enforcement of the settlement agreement. Therefore, petitioners do not seek to enforce a present claim against the State but seek to enforce a previously-entered-into settlement agreement. Our supreme court previously determined that the original "quick take” action was resolved pursuant to the March 20, 1977, settlement agreement with the parties. (See Department of Transportation v. Schien (1978), 72 Ill. 2d 287, 381 N.E.2d 241.) Illinois adheres to the policy that settlements are to be encouraged and given full force and effect (Sheffield Poly-Glaz, Inc. v. Humboldt Glass Co. (1976), 42 Ill. App. 3d 865, 356 N.E.2d 837), including when such agreements are oral. (Fishburn v. Barker (1988), 165 Ill. App. 3d 229, 518 N.E.2d 1054.) While respondents maintain that the instant action amounts to a breach of contract action, the record shows that this is an action to enforce a previously-entered-into settlement agreement, and we find that the circuit court was the proper forum in which to enforce it. Respondents analogize the instant case to Smith v. Jones (1986), 113 Ill. 2d 126, 497 N.E.2d 738, in which the plaintiffs were among 78 winners in a lottery game which had been advertised as having a grand prize of $1,750,000. After the drawing, the winners were notified that the grand prize amounted to only $744,471. The plaintiffs filed a breach of contract suit against the lottery and its director, claiming "that the lottery 'acted *** in violation of contract law’ by refusing to pay the advertised prize, and in doing so went 'beyond the authority’ in the Illinois Lottery Law.” (Smith, 113 Ill. 2d at 129-30, 497 N.E.2d at 739.) The Smith majority determined that the plaintiffs’ complaint failed to allege fraud, contrary to the appellate court’s determination that the complaint was one which was generally grounded in fraud. Instead, the majority decided: "The plaintiffs^] complaint *** alleges only that the Director exceeded his authority by breaching a contract. Such an allegation does not deprive the defendants of the protection of the bar of sovereign immunity.” (Smith, 113 Ill. 2d at 132-33, 497 N.E.2d at 741.) In the instant case, however, petitioners alleged more than a breach of contract. The second amended petition included count I, "verified petition for enforcement of settlement agreement,” and count II, a "verified petition for mandatory injunction.” The complaint maintains that the overpass "has a unique and immeasurable value to the petitioners” and that "money damages cannot compensate the petitioners for the breach, there is no adequate remedy at law, and *** petitioners are entitled to injunctive relief (specific performance) in order to make them whole.” Thus, the situation in the instant case is clearly distinguishable from the situation addressed in Smith. Moreover, a dissent in Smith shows that the court was divided and that two of the justices believed that the complaint alleged facts sufficient to allege fraud. The dissent points out that in Smith what is at stake is the trust and faith of the people who purchase lottery tickets believing it is run properly. "The State should be beyond reproach in something like this because it is important for people to have faith in their government.” (Smith, 113 Ill. 2d at 136, 497 N.E.2d at 742.) Likewise, in the instant case, petitioners negotiated a settlement agreement and had faith in Bartelsmeyer that the terms agreed upon, including the positioning of the overpass, would be faithfully carried out. Petitioners were so trusting that they did not question the Department for the next 13 years until they read in the newspaper that Interstate 255 was complete. Petitioners trusted Bartelsmeyer and their State government to keep their word. This is not the type of suit which should be cloaked with the doctrine of sovereign immunity.  Respondents next contend that the circuit court’s decision that an agreement existed to build an overpass was against the manifest weight of the evidence. We disagree and find that the record supports the circuit court’s determination that an agreement existed between the parties to build an overpass as shown in petitioners’ exhibits 1 through 4. Bernard Vogt testified that petitioners only agreed to sell the property after the Department agreed to build an overpass to connect their property. All parties agree that petitioners’ exhibits 1 through 4 clearly show an "X” where the overpass was to be built. Bartelsmeyer admitted petitioners were never told the plans were preliminary and subject to change. Moreover, at petitioners’ request, Bartelsmeyer signed and marked the plans as "true and correct.” The record is replete with evidence that an agreement existed between the parties to build an overpass at the location shown by the "X” in petitioners’ exhibits 1 through 4.  Respondents also contend that petitioners’ action was barred by the five-year statute of limitations applicable to oral contracts. (111. Rev. Stat. 1991, ch. 110, par. 13 — 205 (now 735 ILCS 5/13 — 205 (West 1992)).) Respondents assert that petitioners were required to file their petition within five years of the alleged December 1982 conversation with Jerry Rank. Petitioners respond that the period of limitations does not begin to run until the settlement agreement was breached, namely, when Interstate 255 was completed. Additionally, petitioners maintain that the settlement agreement constitutes a written contract and, thus, a 10-year statute of limitations is applicable. (111. Rev. Stat. 1992, ch. 110, par. 13 — 206 (now 735 ILCS 5/13 — 206 (West 1992)).) We find it unnecessary to determine whether the five-year statute of limitations pertaining to oral contracts or the 10-year statute of limitations pertaining to written contracts applies because in either case it is clear that the period of limitations did not expire. Illinois follows the "discovery rule” in determining when a period of limitation begins to run. "The effect of the discovery rule is to postpone the starting of the period of limitations until the injured party knows or should have known of his injury.” (Knox College v. Celotex Corp. (1981), 88 Ill. 2d 407, 414, 430 N.E.2d 976, 979.) Under the discovery rule, determining the point at which the running of the limitations period begins is a question for the trier of fact, unless the parties do not dispute the facts or only one conclusion can be drawn. Santa Claus Industries, Inc. v. First National Bank (1991), 216 Ill. App. 3d 231, 576 N.E.2d 326; Saunders v. Klungboonkrong (1986), 150 Ill. App. 3d 56, 501 N.E.2d 882. In the instant case, a factual issue existed concerning the alleged conversation between petitioners and Jerry Rank. An affidavit from Rank and a memo outlining the conversation between Rank and petitioners dated in 1982, as well as articles from two local newspapers noting the actual location of the overpass, were attached to various motions filed by respondents. In response, petitioners filed affidavits denying that a conversation with Rank even occurred. Petitioners were adamant that they did not discover that the overpass would not be built in the location promised until they read a newspaper article disclosing that Interstate 255 was complete. The circuit court denied respondents’ motions to dismiss based upon the statute of limitations. At the evidentiary hearing, the circuit court granted petitioners’ motion to strike the testimony of Rank because it had previously ruled on the statute of limitations issue. After reviewing the record, we cannot say as a matter of law that the period of limitations began to run prior to petitioners’ notification through the newspaper article written in 1990 which disclosed that Interstate 255 was complete. Thus, petitioners’ cause of action was not barred under either the five-year or the 10-year statute of limitations.  Respondents next contend that the circuit court erred in not applying the Statute of Frauds because all of the terms of the contract for the sale of land were not in writing. What defendants failed to consider is that the instant case is enforcement of a settlement agreement between the parties. Our supreme court authorized the agreement by finding the quick-take issues moot due to the March 20, 1977, settlement agreement. (See Department of Transportation v. Schien (1978), 72 Ill. 2d 287, 381 N.E.2d 241.) Bartelsmeyer testified that the parties agreed on an overpass to be built as specified in petitioners’ exhibits 1 through 4 and that petitioners were never told plans were subject to change. Under these circumstances, the Statute of Frauds argument is a red herring, and the circuit court was correct in not applying it.  Finally, defendants maintain that even assuming, arguendo, that there is an enforceable agreement to build an overpass, the Department cannot do so without Federal approval or sufficient funds. Petitioners respond, and we agree, that defendants failed to cite any criteria which would prevent the Federal Highway Administration from approving petitioners’ overpass. We will not refuse to enforce the settlement agreement on these speculative grounds. Ill Petitioners reached a good-faith settlement with our State to resolve the underlying eminent domain proceeding. Petitioners fulfilled their obligations and trusted the State to fulfill its obligations. After refusing to do so, the State aggressively attempted to evade compliance with its obligations both in the circuit court and this court. The citizens of our State deserve better treatment from our government. For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the circuit court of St. Clair County is affirmed. Affirmed. RARICK, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9741351 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:54:01.816471+00 ===

PRESIDING JUSTICE LEWIS, specially concurring: I am very concerned about the conduct of the State in this case, and, so, while I agree with the majority ruling, I feel it necessary to express my misgivings. The Bill of Rights in the Constitution of the State of Illinois of 1970, article I, section 15, provides: "Private property shall not be taken or damaged for public use without just compensation as provided by law. Such compensation shall be determined by a jury as provided by law.” (111. Const. 1970, art. I, § 15.) The legislature provided by law that any party may have a trial by jury to determine the just compensation for damages upon application made to the court. 735 ILCS 5/7 — 101 (West 1992). The State in this case agreed, as part of the compensation for the taking and damage to plaintiffs’ land, to build an overpass on plaintiffs’ land. If the State had not induced the plaintiffs into settling, the plaintiffs would have been able to submit the amount of compensation to a jury. Now the State is blatantly attempting and persisting in denying the plaintiffs their constitutional right to a trial by jury to determine "just compensation” for the land and the damage to the remainder that the State has seized by reneging on the contract and arguing that only the Court of Claims can now set the just compensation. We should not and cannot sanction a circumvention of the constitutional rights of a citizen of this State. This issue could arise frequently, and so we should put a stop to it here and now, not only for the benefit of future landowners, whose land is taken involuntarily, but also because we should not, as a matter of public policy, allow the State to renege on its promises. The State may agree in many instances to provide access, drainage, landfill, leveling of the land, a lake where dirt or rock was excavated, and so forth, as part of the compensation to the landowner for land taken or damaged. The landowner may take less cash or even no cash for the land taken in return for the State’s promise to provide certain improvements to the remainder. We do not know in this case, for instance, if the plaintiffs settled for less than they would have, because they believed that the overpass would possibly increase the value of the remainder of their land. Without the overpass, two pieces of property with roads that dead-end at Interstate 255 might be worth considerably less than two pieces of property connected by a highway and an overpass. If the State reneges on its promise, then, according to the State’s argument, the only recourse for the property owner is to liquidate his loss through the Court of Claims. The State could bypass a landowner’s right to a trial by jury to determine just compensation for property taken or damaged simply by duping or suckering a landowner into signing a contract whereby the State promises to do many wonderful things on the landowner’s property in lieu of cash. The Court of Claims does not have jurisdiction to determine just compensation for land taken or damaged by the State in eminent domain cases. However, what the State is asking this court to do in reality is to transfer the jurisdiction of setting the just compensation for the damage to the plaintiffs’ land from the jury to the Court of Claims. We also are aware of cases where claims have been denied in the Court of Claims because of insufficient funding by the legislature. (See State Employees’ Retirement System v. State (1984), 37 Ill. Ct. Cl. 288; Board of Education of the Illinois Valley Central Unit District No. 321 v. State (1982), 35 Ill. Ct. Cl. 716; Loewenberg| Fitch Partnership v. State (1986), 38 Ill. Ct. Cl. 227.) So, not only is the State attempting to maneuver the landowner into a position whereby the Court of Claims determines the just compensation, the State may also be maneuvering the landowner into a position whereby the landowner receives no compensation for the taking or damaging of his land by the State. If the State does not wish to meet its contractual obligations to build the overpass, then it should at least have the decency to afford the property owner his constitutional right to a trial by jury by refiling the eminent domain action. If we had ruled in favor of the State in this case, what sensible and cautious property owner would dare enter into a settlement with the State in eminent domain proceedings?

=== CASE 2226971 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:23.489247+00 ===

305 N.W.2d 1 (1981)
208 Neb. 607
JED CONSTRUCTION COMPANY, INC., a corporation, Appellant,
v.
Gene LILLY, doing business as Gene Lilly Surety Bonds and Insurance, Appellee.
No. 43218.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
April 24, 1981.
Kenneth Cobb of Law Offices of Kenneth Cobb, P.C., Lincoln, for appellant.
Knudsen, Berkheimer, Beam, Richardson & Endacott, Lincoln, for appellee.
Heard before KRIVOSHA, C. J., and BOSLAUGH, McCOWN, CLINTON, BRODKEY, WHITE, and HASTINGS, JJ.
CLINTON, Justice.
This is an action brought in the District Court for Lancaster County, by JED Construction Company, Inc., against Gene Lilly, its alleged agent, doing business as Gene Lilly Surety Bonds and Insurance, an insurance broker, to recover damages alleged to have been suffered because Lilly violated his instructions and exceeded his authority *2 while acting as such agent in not causing an application for an indemnity agreement and a contractor's bond and indemnity agreement executed by JED in blank to be completed in accordance with the terms of the actual agreement. The beneficiary of the indemnity agreement was Universal Surety Company which, in reliance on the indemnity, issued a performance bond to Erik Hansen Construction Co. in connection with the construction of an addition to Norris Junior-Senior High School. In the case of Universal Surety Co. v. JED Constr. Co., Inc., 200 Neb. 712, 265 N.W.2d 219 (1978), this court affirmed a judgment which Universal Surety obtained against JED on the indemnity agreement in the amount of $61,872.68 and denied an offset of $18,516.12 claimed by JED on its counterclaim. A more detailed statement of the facts surrounding the transaction is set forth in the above case and we will not repeat those facts except as necessary for an understanding of the issue here presented.
JED, in this action, seeks to recover from Lilly the amount it was required to pay in the case of Universal Surety Co. v. JED Constr. Co., Inc., supra, as well as other expenses in connection with that litigation. The issues in this case were submitted to the jury, which rendered a judgment for Lilly. JED then appealed to this court, assigning various errors pertaining to instructions given to the jury or refused by the court and an error in connection with the reception of evidence.
In his answer Lilly pleaded, among other defenses: "[T]hat if the Amended Petition states any cause of action, such action is barred and estopped by principles of collateral estoppel and res judicata for the reason that all issues raised by the Amended Petition have been concluded by the judgment of the District Court of Lancaster County, Nebraska in Universal Surety Co. v. JED Construction Co., Docket 296, Page 244, which judgment was duly given."
At trial Lilly introduced and there was received in evidence the transcript and bill of exceptions in Universal Surety Co. v. Jed Constr. Co., Inc., supra. Lilly, after both parties had rested, asked the trial court for a directed verdict for the defendant on the ground of collateral estoppel or, as it is more usually referred to, issue preclusion. The trial court reserved ruling on that motion and, after the jury verdict, held that the issue was moot and did not rule thereon.
Lilly, on this appeal, responds to the claims of error but also urges that even if there was error it was immaterial because, in any event, its motion for a directed verdict, based upon issue preclusion, should have been granted. We sustain this contention, hence it becomes unnecessary for us to examine JED's assignments of error.
In the prior case, among the issues decided were: (1) What was the actual agreement, and (2) The nature and extent of Lilly's authority and instruction. The first issue depended upon the facts in the second. In the previous action JED maintained that Lilly was the agent of Universal Surety. In this action it claims that Lilly was its agent. However, be that as it may, the issue of Lilly's authority and whether he acted in accordance with instructions from JED was an issue in both cases and was decided against JED in the previous action. JED had an opportunity to and did fully litigate those issues in the prior action. We quote from JED's brief in the previous case. "Applying the principle that the form contract must be completed in accordance with the authority granted, it is clear that the Form 2 is subject to reformation on the basis that Universal failed to conform it to the oral agreement reached between JED and Eugene Lilly, Universal's agent. The Form 2 could easily have been so conformed via deletions and insertion of superseding language in blank spaces, including that reserved for Paragraph 17. JED does not dispute that an agreement existed whereby it was to indemnify Universal, but the Form 2 does not constitute that agreement and should be reformed." (Emphasis supplied.)
Lilly testified as a witness in the previous action, as did the officers of JED. Both Lilly and the officers testified in the case before us. Their testimony relates Lilly's *3 authority and instructions given him by JED. The issue now before us was before us on the earlier appeal. In our opinion in Universal Surety Co. v. Jed Constr. Co., Inc., supra, we said at 714-15, 265 N.W.2d at 221: "Jed advances two theories, mutual mistake of fact and failure to complete the agreement according to its terms. Mistake as a ground for reformation of a contract must be a mutual mistake. [Citations omitted.]
"It is conceded that the officers of Jed did not read the contract and that they did not even talk with an agent or officers of Universal. The evidence does not show that the claimed mistakes were ever discussed with Lilly prior to the signing in blank by Jed's officers. The officers of Jed testified that the agreement they signed contained provisions different from the actual agreement. There is no evidence that Universal thought the terms of the contract were other than those contained in the actual agreement. Even if the officers of Jed were mistaken, it was a unilateral mistake rather than a mutual one. Furthermore, one who does not read a contract before signing it cannot relieve himself of its burdens. [Citations omitted.]
"The second theory fails for the reasons discussed above. No evidence was offered tending to prove that the agreement was to be completed to include the provisions relating to exhaustion of the assets of the Hansens, retainage, or consent to extras. Again, the evidence could only establish that the Jed officers may have intended or thought that the agreement contained those provisions."
In Peterson v. The Nebraska Nat. Gas Co., 204 Neb. 136, 281 N.W.2d 525 (1979), we held: "Collateral estoppel may be applied if the identical issue was decided in a prior action, there was a judgment on the merits which was final, the party against whom the rule is to be applied was a party or in privity with a party to the prior action, and there was an opportunity to fully and fairly litigate the issue in the prior action.
"Mutuality of estoppel is no longer considered to be a requirement for the application of collateral estoppel." (Syllabi of the court.) In that case The Nebraska Natural Gas Company was a defendant in a prior action where the issues of its negligence and legal responsibility for a gas explosion were litigated and a verdict was rendered against it. In Peterson v. The Nebraska Nat. Gas Co., supra, the negligence issue was the same as that in the prior case but a different injured party was plaintiff.
The Supreme Court of Iowa has given a clear exposition of the principles of issue preclusion in the case of Schneberger v. United States Fidelity & Guar. Co., 213 N.W.2d 913 (Iowa 1973). The court there held at 917: "To bar further litigation on a specific issue four requirements must be established:
"(1) The issue concluded must be identical.
"(2) The issue must have been raised and litigated in the prior action.
"(3) The issue must have been material and relevant to the disposition of the prior action, and
"(4) The determination made of the issue in the prior action must have been necessary and essential to the resulting judgment. [Citations omitted.]
"Identity of parties is not necessary to give validity to a claim of issue preclusion. A stranger to a primary suit can assert the theory of issue preclusion as a defense in a subsequent suit provided other elements of the theory of issue preclusion coincide."
Professor Allan D. Vestal, in his text Res Judicata/Preclusion (1969), analyzes the various situations in which issue preclusion might arise. At V-317 he says: "In these situations where the losing defendants take the offensive and initiate subsequent lawsuits, it is very helpful to apply the test of reasonable expectations. Here it would again appear obvious that the person who once loses after having had his day in court would not be reasonable in expecting to be able to recover later when he sues someone not a party to the first suit. It is completely *4 reasonable to hold that the nonparticipating nonparty to the first suit is able to assert preclusion against a plaintiff in the second suit if the plaintiff in Suit II was a losing party in the first suit, regardless of the position he occupied in Suit I.
"In these situations in which a defendant in Suit I has had an opportunity to present his side of a controversy fully and completely and has lost, it seems completely unreasonable to say that he can then start an action as a plaintiff and relitigate the matters which have been decided against him. Such a party should be bound by the decision which has been handed down."
For the reasons set forth we affirm the judgment for the defendant.
AFFIRMED.

=== CASE 9741355 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:54:05.80282+00 ===

WOLLMAN, Chief Justice
(dissenting).
I agree generally with everything said in the majority opinion but the holding that there was no evidence of damage to the entire unit. The testimony presented by appellee and his witnesses, conceded by the majority opinion to be competent, presented a jury issue on the question of consequential damages to the entire unit resulting from the easement. This testimony revealed that because of the rough terrain, which ranged from marshy areas covered by high reeds to boulder-strewn hills and knolls, it is extremely difficult to monitor quickly and efficiently the 1000-cow herd that the unit is capable of supporting other than by means of a small plane. Appellee may well have over-emphasized the extent to which the transmission line would interfere with his aerial monitoring of the unit. When one considers the terrain and the generally rectangular shape of the unit, however, appellee’s argument that an east-west flight pattern is the most efficient method of surveying the unit is not so implausible as not to form the basis for a finding of damages to the entire tract. In any event, the jury obviously discounted the adverse impact upon the market value of the entire tract outlined in appellee’s testimony.
After considering the evidence as a whole, I am satisfied that the trial court correctly applied the rule laid down in Neb. Elec. Generation & Trans. Co-op. v. Tinant, 90 S.D. 284, 241 N.W.2d 134 (1976), and Basin Electric Power Cooperative, Inc. v. Cutler, 88 S.D. 214, 217 N.W.2d 798 (1974). Accordingly, I would affirm the judgment.
I am authorized to state that Justice Henderson joins in this dissent.^

=== CASE 3784475 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2016-07-06 07:34:12.05783+00 ===

This is a suit in mandamus originally filed in this court in which the petition alleges that the relator is the owner of certain premises on Lake avenue in the city of Cleveland, and desires to erect a gasoline filling station thereon; that application was made to the commissioner *Page 328
of buildings for a building permit on August 19, 1927, which was refused, and thereupon relator appealed to the board of appeals, under the provisions of Section 1033 of the municipal code of said city, which board likewise denied the permit. The petition further alleges that relator has complied with all of the requirements of the building code of the city of Cleveland, and that there is therefore a duty specially enjoined by law upon the commissioner of buildings, and also upon the board of appeals, to issue such permit. The answer admits the compliance with all the requirements of the building code, other than a certain stop-gap zoning ordinance, which ordinance, if in full effect, would deny the right of relator to the permit. It is alleged in the reply that the said stop-gap zoning ordinance is subject to a referendum which will be submitted to the voters of the city of Cleveland on November 8, 1927, and that by recent judgment of this court the referendum petition was held to be valid, and the effective date of the ordinance is thereby suspended until an affirmative vote upon the referendum.
Inasmuch as this court will take judicial notice of its own judgment in the case of Dillon v. City of Cleveland (No. 20676), ante, 258, 158 N.E. 606, decided October 5, 1927, the answer does not allege a valid defense to the petition, and the peremptory writ of mandamus will therefore be awarded.
Writ awarded.
MARSHALL, C.J., DAY, ALLEN and ROBINSON, JJ., concur.
JONES, J., not participating. *Page 329

=== CASE 3784476 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2016-07-06 07:34:12.225529+00 ===

The cause of action, if any, against the defendants as trustees arose when their jurisdiction and control over the res of the trust terminated. According to the amended petition this was on May 11, *Page 242
1933. This action was commenced on November 10, 1941, eight years and six months after the alleged cause of action arose. The trial court held, and the Court of Appeals concurred in such holding, that the four-year statute of limitation, Section 11224, General Code, applied, and barred the plaintiff's cause of action. That section of the General Code is as follows:
"An action for either of the following cases, shall be brought within four years after the cause thereof accrued:
"1. For trespassing on real property;
"2. For the recovery of personal property, or for taking or detaining it;
"3. For relief on the ground of fraud;
"4. For an injury to the rights of the plaintiff not arising on contract nor hereinafter enumerated * * *."
It is the contention of the superintendent that this is an equitable rather than a legal action, dealing with an express trust, and that as a consequence the four-year statute of limitation above quoted has no application. On the other hand he claims that the ten-year statute of limitation, Section 11227, General Code, governs. That section of the General Code reads as follows:
"An action for relief not hereinbefore provided for, shall be brought within ten years after the cause thereof accrued. This section does not apply to an action on a judgment rendered in another state or territory."
The reasoning back of the superintendent's contention is that the four-year statute, now Section 11224, General Code, was first enacted as a catchall limitation statute in 1831; that all limitation-of-action statutes then applied to common-law actions and not to bills or suits in equity; that when the reformed procedure act of 1853, abolishing the distinctions between purely legal and equitable actions, was adopted, section 18 of the act, now Section 11227, General Code, was included *Page 243
as a new and additional catchall limitation statute with the intent and purpose that it apply to bar "relief" in actions in equity only; that if this were not the purpose and intent in adding section 18 of the act, its adoption was purposeless because the subject matter was already fully covered under section 15 of the act (the four-year limitation statute); and finally that the longer period of limitation provided by the ten-year statute is indicative of the fact that it was intended as a substitute for the defense of laches in equity jurisprudence which was traditionally reluctant to allow the mere lapse of time, without some negligence or fault on the part of a plaintiff, to defeat his right of action.
The superintendent alleged that as a direct result of the acts of the defendants in violation of their express trust, the value of the interest of the beneficiaries and successor trustees of the trust and of this plaintiff, the assignee of their interest, was diminished through the acquisition and retention of the shares, and through the payment of superadded liability imposed. What limitation period must be applied to the right of recovery against the defendants on a cause of action charging a breach of trust? This court has held that courts of equity are not open for the recovery of money unless some peculiarly equitable relief is sought (Willson ImprovementCo. v. Malone, 78 Ohio St. 232, 85 N.E. 51), and if there is an adequate remedy at law, an equitable action cannot be maintained. Chapman v. Lee, 45 Ohio St. 356, 13 N.E. 736.
In the case last cited this court held that an accounting in equity is not necessary in an action against several defendants charged with a conspiracy to defraud the plaintiffs thereby procuring for their own use a single sum of money which rightfully belonged to the plaintiffs and which plaintiffs were entitled to recover, and for which they sought a joint judgment against the *Page 244
defendants, notwithstanding that plaintiffs prayed for a full discovery and for an accounting for the full amount due them.
To bring a cause within the jurisdiction of a court of equity, it is requisite that the primary right involved be an equitable right as distinguished from a legal right, or that the remedy at law as to the right involved is not full, adequate and complete. 30 Corpus Juris Secundum, 338, Section 20. A court of equity will not ordinarily take jurisdiction where a money judgment is the ultimate relief sought.Weidman v. Weidman, 274 Mass. 118, 174 N.E. 206, 76 A.L.R., 1359.
The period of limitation within which an action must be commenced, is determined from the nature of the demand and the ground of the action as set out in the pleadings. When a fiduciary relationship exists and there is a breach of trust through mistake, illegal action, bad faith or fraud, the beneficiary may have an accounting. If the basis of the breach of trust is fraud, the four-year statute (Section 11224, General Code) clearly applies, because the action is "for relief on the ground of fraud."
By a divided court, this court has held that a cause of action by one partner against his copartner for accounting on dissolution of the partnership, where there were no bad faith, illegality or fraud, and no wrongful disposition of funds on the part of the defendant partner, is barred by the ten-year statute of limitation. Gray v. Kerr, 46 Ohio St. 652,23 N.E. 136. But this court has, on numerous occasions, held that Section 11224, General Code, and its predecessor, Section 4982, Revised Statutes, applies to equitable as well as legal actions. Carpenter v. Cincinnati  Whitewater Canal Co.,35 Ohio St. 307, 316; Howk v. Minnick, 19 Ohio St. 462, 2 Am.Rep., 413; Combs v. Watson, 32 Ohio St. 228; Loffland v. Bush,26 Ohio St. 559. And this court has subsequently held that where an *Page 245
executor or administrator has filed in the Probate Court an account of final distribution and the same has been approved and confirmed by the court, and the executor or administrator discharged from the trust, such account is conclusive unless impeached for manifest error or for fraud within four years after the discovery of the fraud. Henry, Exr., v. Doyle, Exr.,82 Ohio St. 113, 91 N.E. 990, 137 Am. St. Rep., 769.
Other courts in this state have made similar holdings. For instance, it has been held that where an action is brought by a corporation against its promoter to recover secret profits, the ground of the action is not fraud, although fraud may be averred in the petition. The action is not one for "relief on the ground of fraud" within the meaning of Section 11224, General Code, but the ground of the action in such case is breach of duty. The action is nevertheless covered by that statute. Marblehead Bank Co. v. Raridon, 4 Ohio App. 468.
An action by a corporation to recover damages for theultra vires and negligent acts of its former directors and officers is based on the common-law rule which renders every agent liable who violates his authority or neglects his duty to the damage of his principal, and such action is one "for an injury to the rights of the plaintiff not arising on contract nor hereinafter enumerated" and must be brought within four years after the cause of action accrues. Minster Loan  SavingsCo. v. Laufersweiler, 67 Ohio App. 375, 36 N.E.2d 895. And the court in the case of Hilliker v. Grand Lodge, K. of P.,112 F.2d 382, held that a cause of action for the recovery of funds allegedly withdrawn with the connivance of the Superintendent of Banks, subsequent to the taking over of a bank for liquidation, is barred in four years under Section 11224, General Code.
But what limitation bar shall be applied where the *Page 246
cause of action is based upon the tortious conduct of trustees involving bad faith and negligence in purchasing for a trust investment shares of stock of a corporation in which they are directors, where the action, if maintained, will result in a money judgment measured by the loss suffered by the trust?
It is a general rule that when a trustee has terminated his trust and parted with control of the property, the statute of limitation begins to run in his favor as to a cause of action against him for breach of trust (Barnes v. Barnes, Admx.,282 Ill. 593, 118 N.E. 1004, 4 A. L. R., 4) and after the trust relationship is at an end and the trustee has yielded the estate to a successor, the running of the statute begins and only actual or intentional fraud will be effective to suspend it. Spallholz v. Sheldon, 216 N.Y. 205, 110 N.E. 431. See, also, Daugherty v. Daugherty, 116 Iowa 245, 90 N.W. 65;Gibson v. Gillespie, 291 Pa. 77, 139 A. 588.
Under the facts set out in the amended petition, the operation of the trust in question had terminated and the trust was dead. The trustees had resigned and the creator of the trust was in the process of liquidation. The question presented does not relate to dereliction in the operation of an active, existing, express trust, but to the recovery of loss alleged to have occurred through the tortious conduct of the defendants while acting as trustees, and incidentally to the proper distribution of that recovery, if and when made. The primary issue was whether the defendants, as individuals, were guilty of tortious conduct resulting in loss to the trust while the issues with reference to the amount of recovery and its distribution arose only in the case the primary issue was determined against the defendants.
This court has heretofore held that an action is equitable if it is necessary to determine first whether the plaintiff is entitled to equitable relief before legal redress can be granted; but if the primary or paramount *Page 247
relief sought is legal and the equitable redress merely incidental, it is an action at law. Nordin v. Coulton, 142 Ohio St. 277,  51 N.E.2d 717; La Bounty v. Brumback, 126 Ohio St. 96,  184 N.E. 5. And it has been held that an action by a beneficiary claiming damages from a trustee for his breach of duty in refusing to pay or deliver the trust fund, or in making improper investments, is one at law, triable by a jury.Dettenhorn v. Hartford National Bank  Trust Co.,121 Conn. 388, 185 A. 82. See, also, Minster Loan  Savings Co. v.Laufersweiler, supra; United States v. Bitter Root DevelopmentCo., 200 U.S. 451, 475 and 478, 50 L.Ed., 550, 26 S.Ct., 318;City of Sedalia, ex rel. Bauman, Treas., v. Standard Oil Co.of Indiana, 66 F.2d 757, 95 A. L. R., 1514.
It is the policy of the law, as disclosed by our scheme of statutes of limitation of actions, to require actions which involve the alleged tortious conduct of a defendant to be asserted and prosecuted promptly unless concealment or undiscovered fraud on the part of the defendant is found to exist, for which exceptions are usually made in the general plan for limitation of actions.
We conclude that since this action is based upon an alleged breach of trust on the part of the defendants, it is one for "an injury to the rights of the plaintiff not arising on contract nor hereinafter enumerated" and is governed by Section 11224, General Code, popularly known as the four-year statute. The demurrer to the amended petition was properly sustained and the judgment of the Court of Appeals is affirmed.
Judgment affirmed.
WEYGANDT, C.J., MATTHIAS, ZIMMERMAN and WILLIAMS, JJ., concur.
BELL, J., concurs in judgment. *Page 248

=== CASE 9741360 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:54:07.342618+00 ===

Liacos, C.J.
The defendants, South Boston Allied War Veterans Council (council)3 and John J. “Wacko” Hurley (Hurley), appeal from a judgment of the Superior Court dated December 24, 1993, which, among other things, granted permanent injunctive relief to the plaintiffs.4, 5 On *240appeal, the defendants raise a myriad of issues: (1) whether the annual St. Patrick’s Day-Evacuation Day Parade sponsored by the council and held in the South Boston section of Boston is speech protected by the First and Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution and art. 1, as amended, art. 12, art. 16, as amended, and art. 19 of the Massachusetts Declaration of Rights; (2) whether the trial judge committed error when he “examined, evaluated and passed judgment on the content of the parade and deemed that content unworthy of constitutional protection, thereby enabling the court to apply statutory law to speech, in violation of the [council’s] Federal and State [constitutional rights of freedom of speech, expression, exercise of religion, assembly, and due process and equal protection of the laws, as enumerated in the First and Fourteenth Amendments [to] the United States Constitution, and arts. 1, 12, 16 and 19”; (3) whether a parade is a place of public accommodation, resort, or amusement under the public accommodation discrimination law, G. L. c. 272, §§ 92A, 98; (4) whether the judgment of the Superior Court constituted a “prior restraint of the [council’s] Federal and State constitutional rights of freedom of speech, expression, exercise of religion, assembly, and due process and equal protection of the laws as enumerated in the First and Fourteenth Amendments . . . and arts. 1, 12, 16 and 19”; (5) whether the issuance of a parade permit by operation of law converts a place of public accommodation to the exclusive use of the private permit holder; (6) whether the judgment of the Superior Court “should be reversed as to the liability of the City of Boston to the Veterans as the findings of fact by the trial judge were clearly *241against the weight of the uncontroverted evidence”; (7) whether “the City of Boston, acting under color of law, [did] threaten, intimidate, coerce, deprive and interfere with the [council’s] Federal and State rights of freedom of speech, expression, exercise of religion, assembly, and due process and equal protection of the laws as enumerated in the First and Fourteenth Amendments . . . and arts. 1, 12, 16 and 19 . . . and in violation of the Massachusetts Civil Rights Act, G. L. c. 12, [§§ 11H, 111], 42 U.S.C. § 1983, City of Boston Traffic Rules and Regulations Art. VIII (as amended through January 2, 1988); and City of Boston Ordinance of 1984, c. 16 (as amended by [c.] 17 and [c.] 18)”; (8) whether G. L. c. 272, §§ 92A and 98, are unconstitutionally overbroad and vague; and (9) whether the judgment of the Superior Court should be reversed because the “finding [of the trial judge] of discrimination [perpetrated by the council] was faulty in its reasoning, unsupported by the record, and against the weight of the evidence.” We discuss those issues we deem relevant to this appeal.
We state the facts found by the trial judge.6 In January, 1992, several individuals, including the plaintiff Barbra Kay, formed the Irish-American Gay, Lesbian and Bisexual Group of Boston (GLIB). GLIB is a social organization consisting of individuals who are homosexual or bisexual and their supporters. GLIB was formed to march in the annual St. Patrick’s Day-Evacuation Day Parade7 held in South Boston. GLIB’s purposes are to express its members’ pride in their dual identities as Irish or Irish-American persons who are also homosexual or bisexual, to demonstrate to the Irish-American community and to the gay, lesbian, and bisexual *242community the diversity within those respective communities, and to show support for the Irish-American homosexual and bisexual men and women in New York City who were seeking to participate in that city’s St. Patrick’s Day Parade.
GLIB submitted an application to the council to march in the 1992 parade. The council denied the application, citing “safety reasons ánd insufficient information regarding [the] social club.” Ultimately, GLIB was allowed to march in the 1992 parade under court order, with several restrictions placed on its participation that were not applied to other participants in the parade.
The following year, GLIB sought permission to participate in the 1993 parade. The council refused to admit the group, asserting that the “decision to exclude groups with sexual themes merely formalized that the Parade expresses traditional religious and social values.” The judge found that excluding groups with sexual themes was itself a form of discrimination in violation of the public accommodation law’s prohibition against discrimination based on sexual orientation.
At trial, Hurley “equivocated about his reasons for excluding GLIB” but ultimately testified that he would never allow them to march in the parade.8 The judge concluded that the inconsistent and changing explanations for excluding GLIB demonstrated the “pretextual nature” of those explanations. The judge found that GLIB was excluded from the parade because of the sexual orientation of its members. Based on our review of the record before us, we cannot say that this finding of the judge was clearly erroneous. Mass. R. Civ. P. 52 (a), 365 Mass. 816 (1974). Cox v. New England Tel. & Tel. Co., 414 Mass. 375, 384 (1993).
*243The judge concluded also that the parade constitutes a public accommodation under G. L. c. 272, § 92A (quoted, infra at 246). In arriving at that conclusion, the judge relied on the lack of selectivity exerted by the veterans over the parade’s participants and sponsors and the parade’s historical roots. The judge found that “[djuring the first half of this century, the South Boston Citizens Association and the City of Boston organized the various Evacuation Day activities. In 1901, the City celebrated the 125th anniversary of Evacuation Day by a parade, artillery salute, concert, and fireworks display, among other events. In 1947 Mayor James Michael Curley granted the [council] authority to organize and conduct the Parade. Since that time, the City has annually granted the [council] a parade permit. No other applicant has applied for the permit.
“Over the years, the Parade has featured as many as 20.000 participants and as many as 1,000,000 spectators. In 1992, the Parade featured about 10,000 participants and 750.000 spectators. The 1993 Parade, postponed due to inclement weather, had fewer than 10,000 participants, about 400.000 spectators, and was aired live by Boston’s community access cable television channel. The Parade is one of the six largest parades held in Boston annually, and the largest New England event for Irish-Americans, their friends, and well-wishers.”
The Parade has followed substantially the same route in South Boston for at least forty-seven years, “providing entertainment, amusement, and recreation to participants and spectators alike.” The council has demonstrated a lack of selectivity in admitting participants and sponsors.9 The judge *244characterized the parade by noting that “the interests and viewpoints represented are truly catholic: commercial . . . , religious . . . , political. . . , eleemosynary . . . , patriotic . . . , moral. . . , theatrical. . . , athletic . . . , public service . . . , trade union . . . , and so on. Indeed, since 1947 the only groups that have been excluded from the Parade besides GLIB have been the Ku Klux Klan and ROAR (Restore our Alienated Rights). Neither of these groups, however, is protected by M. G. L. c. 272, §§ 92A and 98.”10
Additionally, the judge found that there are no written procedures, criteria, or standards for selecting participants or sponsors of the parade. Participants from previous parades are sent an application for the upcoming parade. Those who have not previously participated and who inquire about participation in the upcoming parade are sent applications. Some groups receive reimbursement for their parade-related expenses. The council votes on applications for participation in “batches,” and the council generally does not inquire into the message or views of each applicant.11
*245Certain groups or individuals have been allowed to participate in the parade even if they have not submitted an application prior to the parade. In 1993, members of the Boston Bruins hockey club merely showed up at the start of the parade and were permitted to march, without having filed an application. Others, such as the Massachusetts Water Pollution Control Association and several mayoral candidates, gained entrance by making a contribution to the parade without filling out an application. The judge concluded that the procedures for admittance into the parade were not uniformly applied.
Based on the foregoing, the judge concluded that “it is impossible to discern any specific expressive purpose entitling the Parade to protection under the First Amendment. . . . [T]he [council’s] Parade is not an exercise of their constitutionally protected right of expressive association. It is an open recreational event that is subject to the public accommodation law. . . . [T]he [council’s] exclusion of GLIB from the . . . Parade violates M. G. L. C. 272, §§ 92A and 98, the public accommodations law; absent state action, the exclusion does not violate GLIB’s rights under the Federal Constitution; the broadly inclusive Parade is not constitutionally protected expressive association; the [council’s] cross-claims that the City has violated their constitutional and statutory rights are meritless.”
The judge dismissed GLIB’s claims against the city and entered judgment for the city on those claims.12 The judge dismissed the council’s cross claims against the city and entered judgment for the city on those claims. Finally, the judge issued the following order: “The defendants South Bos*246ton Allied War Veterans Council, John J. “Wacko” Hurley, their officers, agents, servants, employees, attorneys, and all other persons in active concert or participation with them who have actual notice of this Order: (a) are permanently enjoined from discriminating against the plaintiff on the basis of sexual orientation with respect to participation in the defendant’s annual St. Patrick’s/Evacuation Day Parade; (b) shall accommodate in the Parade in all respects representatives of the plaintiff on the terms and conditions generally applicable to all other Parade participants.”
The plaintiffs invoked and the judge essentially relied on the public accommodation law, G. L. c. 272, §§ 92A and 98. Among the prohibitions in those sections is the prohibition against discrimination based on sexual orientation in the admission to or treatment in any place of public accommodation, resort or amusement. G. L. c. 272, § 98. “A place of public accommodation, resort or amusement” is “defined as and shall be deemed to include any place, whether licensed or unlicensed, which is open to and accepts or solicits the patronage of the general public and, without limiting the generality of this definition, whether or not it be (1) an inn, tavern, hotel, shelter, roadhouse, motel, trailer camp or resort for transient or permanent guests or patrons seeking housing or lodging, food, drink, entertainment, health, recreation or rest; (2) a carrier, conveyance or elevator for the transportation of persons, whether operated on land, water or in the air, and the stations, terminals and facilities appurtenant thereto; (3) a gas station, garage, retail store or establishment, including those dispensing personal services; (4) a restaurant, bar or eating place, where food, beverages, confections or their derivatives are sold for consumption on or off the premises; (5) a rest room, barber shop, beauty parlor, bathhouse, seashore facilities or swimming pool, except such rest room, bathhouse or seashore facility as may be segregated on the basis of sex; (6) a boardwalk or other public highway, (7) an auditorium, theatre, music hall, meeting place or hall, including the commons halls of buildings; (8) a place of public amusement, recreation, sport, exercise or entertainment-, (9) *247a public library, museum or planetarium; or (10) a hospital, dispensary or clinic operating for profit . . .” (emphasis supplied). G. L. c. 272, § 92A.
The judge ruled that the parade was a place of public accommodation within the ambit of § 92A. The language of § 92A itself and our case law require that the statute be given a broad and inclusive interpretation. Concord Rod & Gun Club, Inc. v. Massachusetts Comm’n Against Discrimination, 402 Mass. 716, 720 (1988). Local Fin. Co. v. Massachusetts Comm’n Against Discrimination, 355 Mass. 10, 14 (1968). Section 92A itself specifically includes “a boardwalk or other public highway,” G. L. c. 272, § 92A (6), and also includes “a place of public amusement, recreation, sport, exercise or entertainment,” G. L. c. 272, § 92A (8). The plain language of the statute shows that the St. Patrick’s Day-Evacuation Day Parade falls within the scope of the public accommodation law. The parade occurs on the public streets of South Boston. Nothing in § 92A or any other statute suggests that a boardwalk or other public highway loses its character as a place of public accommodation, resort, or amusement, which it gains by operation of that statute, merely because a parade is conducted there. Given that the statute is remedial and was intended to be interpreted broadly and in-elusively, Concord Rod & Gun Club, Inc., supra, such a narrowing interpretation would be contrary to the intent of the Legislature which we have heretofore perceived.
In addition, the judge found that the parade provides entertainment, recreation, and amusement to the participants as well as to the spectators, and that, in essence, almost any individual or group would be admitted to the parade if they either apply or show up at the start of the parade and offer to make a contribution to the council.13 We cannot say, *248based on the evidence in the record before us, that these findings by the trial judge were clearly erroneous. See Mass. R. Civ. P. 52 (a); Cox v. New England Tel. & Tel. Co., 414 Mass. 375, 384 (1993). Thus, the parade additionally falls within the public accommodation law under G. L. c. 272, § 92A (8).14
The defendants assert that the public accommodation law, as applied to the parade, violates their rights under the First Amendment to the United States Constitution.15 In discuss*249ing the First Amendment rights of the defendants, the judge referred to their right of expressive association. See generally Directors of Rotary Int’l v. Rotary Club of Duarte, 481 U.S. 537, 544-549 (1987). On appeal, the defendants argue that their right to freedom of speech was implicated and that this right, see generally Shuttlesworth v. Birmingham, 394 U.S. 147, 152 (1969), not their right of expressive association, was the operative right in this case. For the purposes of this case, however, we need not decide whether the free speech rights or the expressive association right, or both, might be implicated by the factual situation asserted by the defendants. This is so because, as the judge found, it is “impossible to discern any specific expressive purpose entitling the Parade to protection under the First Amendment.”16
The defendants assert that a parade is a “pristine form of speech,” and refer us to New York County Bd. of Ancient Order of Hibernians v. Dinkins, 814 F. Supp. 358 (S.D.N.Y. 1993) (Hibernians), among other cases. That case involved a group of homosexuals and bisexuals who wanted to march in the New York City St. Patrick’s Day Parade. Id. at 360-361. At the outset, we note that Hibernians is distinguishable from the facts of this case because in Hibernians, the judge found that the Ancient Order of Hibernians in fact had used the parade as a means of expression, that the admission process was selective, and that it had adopted rules to prevent parade participants from using that parade as a forum to express views inconsistent with the views of the Ancient Order of Hibernians or the Roman Catholic Church. Hibernians, supra at 361-362, 367.17 Such is not the case here. Furthermore, contrary to the assumption of the defendants, not *250every parade is per se an exercise of those rights protected by the First Amendment. Shuttlesworth v. Birmingham, supra (“parading may nonetheless constitute [a] method [ ] of expression entitled to First Amendment protection” [emphasis supplied]).18
In order to rely on the protections of the First Amendment for speech or expressive association, the defendants initially had to demonstrate that the parade truly was an exercise of those First Amendment rights. Clark v. Community for Creative Non-Violence, 468 U.S. 288, 293 n.5 (1984). This, the judge found, they did not do.
In arguing for reversal, the defendants point to evidence in the record suggesting that the parade did have an intended message (i.e., that the parade was intended as an expressive vehicle). This evidence and other extensive evidence, including a videotape of the 1993 parade, however, were before the judge when he made his decision, and we assume that he considered all the evidence. It was for the judge to assign the appropriate weight and credibility to the evidence presented to him. The defendants failed to demonstrate and, on our own review of the record, we could not conclude that the findings of the judge were clearly erroneous. Mass. R. Civ. P. 52 (a). Cox v. New England Tel. & Tel. Co., supra.19
*251We conclude, therefore, that the judge committed no error when he found that the defendants discriminated against the plaintiffs because of the plaintiffs’ sexual orientation in refusing to admit them into the parade, which is a place of public accommodation. Likewise, there was no error in his finding that the parade was not used by the council for expressive purposes, and that, as a result, the defendants could not cloak their discriminatory acts in the mantle of the First Amendment.
The defendants argue that the public accommodation law, G. L. c. 272, §§ 92A and 98, is unconstitutionally vague and overbroad. It does not appear from the record, submitted by the defendants, that they raised these issues below. We shall address them nevertheless because the claim is of possible public significance and because we can dispose of them briefly.
The defendants argue that the public accommodation law is overbroad because it reaches constitutionally protected speech in that it allows the court to examine the content of speech with standardless discretion. This is not so. By their terms, G. L. c. 272, §§ 92A and 98, facially do not reach speech or expression or association protected by the First Amendment. They do not allow a judge, or any public official, to examine the content of speech.20 Nor would we inter*252pret those sections so that they could reach and unconstitutionally infringe on speech. Cf. R.A.V. v. St. Paul, Minn., 505 U.S. 377, 382 (1992); Forsyth County, Ga. v. Nationalist Movement, 505 U.S. 123, 130-131 (1992); Broadrick v. Oklahoma, 413 U.S. 601, 613 (1973).21 We already have concluded that, in this case, the public accommodation law did not infringe on the defendants’ First Amendment rights.
The defendants’ vagueness argument is that “ ‘men of common intelligence must necessarily guess at [the] meaning [of the public accommodation law].’ Connally v. General Construction Co., 269 U.S. 385, 391 (1926).” The defendants argue this is true, because three State judges (two in the Superior Court and one in the Appeals Court) have interpreted the statutes as reaching parades and one Federal judge has suggested that the statute was ambiguous.
We note that the judges mentioned by the defendants did not find that the statute applied to parades in general, but rather to the St. Patrick’s Day-Evacuation Day Parade in particular, because of the unique characteristics of the parade. The defendants’ argument rests on the assumption that the statute reaches their speech. The judge below found and we have affirmed, however, that the defendants did not prove that they truly were exercising First Amendment rights. Thus, their vagueness argument fails because it rests on a faulty assumption. Furthermore, the public accommodation law gives persons of ordinary intelligence a reasonable opportunity to know what is prohibited, provides standards to those who must enforce those laws, and does not inhibit the valid exercise of First Amendment rights. See Grayned v. Rockford, 408 U.S. 104, 108-109 (1972).
*253Because the defendants had no right to discriminate against members of GLIB, by operation of logic the city could not possibly have interfered with or infringed on any of their rights as asserted by the defendants. Thus, the judge properly dismissed the defendants’ cross claims against the city.
The council is an unincorporated association consisting of members elected from various South Boston veterans’ groups.
Unless otherwise indicated, we use the term “defendants” to refer to the council and to Hurley, collectively.
We acknowledge the assistance provided to us by the briefs of the amici, Massachusetts Commission Against Discrimination and The Catholic League for Religious and Civil Rights.
We granted the defendants’ application for direct appellate review. After oral argument on March 10, 1994, we issued an order on March 11, 1994, affirming the judgment of the Superior Court and noting that an opinion or opinions would follow. We did so upon the request of the city so *240that it could plan adequately for the public safety related to the parade, scheduled for March 20, 1994.
The order states: “ORDERED, that the following entry be made in the docket; viz., — A majority of the Justices having concluded that there was no error below, the judgment of the Superior Court, dated December 24, 1993, is affirmed. Opinion or opinions to follow.” On March 15, 1994, we denied the defendants’ motion for stay of judgment and order. This opinion is issued to explain the basis for that order.
The judge presided over a four-day bench trial at which twelve witnesses testified and 113 exhibits were admitted in evidence.
The judge noted Evacuation Day “commemorates General Washington’s initial military victory over the British in 1776, and the British departure from South Boston. It is an officially recognized historical event in Massachusetts and a Suffolk County holiday. . . . The General Court of Massachusetts established Evacuation Day in 1938. See M. G. L. c. 6, § 12K.”
The judge noted that “Hurley speaks for the Veterans Council and he testified on its behalf. He indicated that the objection to GLIB's participation was based on the belief, although unsubstantiated, that its members were also members of ACT-UP and Queer Nation. The group’s potential for being disorderly was offered as a reason for excluding it. The defendant’s final position was that GLIB would be excluded because of its values and its messages, i.e., its members’ sexual orientation.”
The following, among others, sponsored or participated in the 1992 parade: Raytheon Corporation (Patriot Missile); Hallamore Clydesdale Horses; radio station 98.5 Mix FM; Boston municipal police department; Irish basketball players; South Boston resident group; Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority color guard; “McGruff the Crime Dog”; South Boston Against Drugs (SOBAD); Marion Manor Nursing Home; National Parks Service; South Boston Baptist “Bible Trolley”; Vietnam Era Veterans; Princeman singing group; Leukemia Society; City Councillors Rosaría Salerno, Albert “Dapper” O’Neil, and John Nucci; radio station WZOU *24494.5 FM; Houlihan’s restaurant; Amrheins restaurant; Irish Mist restaurant; Shuberts Smoke Shop; Hub Video; Miss South Boston; Miss Ice-O-Rama; Miss Junior Ice-O-Rama; Lexington Minutemen; AFL-CIO; various high school bands; NORAID (Northern Ireland Aid); Massachusetts Citizens for Life; “Joey Clowns” of Salem, New Hampshire; and radio stations WZLX FM and WAAF.
In addition to many of the above, the following and others sponsored or participated in the 1993 parade: Boston Bruins hockey club, Massachusetts Port Authority, Budweiser beer, Mt. Washington Bank, Pepsi Cola, several candidates for city council, various State representatives and senators, the “Cycling Murrays,” Citizens Committee for JFK Day, Massachusetts Water Pollution Control Association, South Boston Savings Bank, all declared and undeclared mayoral candidates in Boston, and others.
ROAR was excluded because of its antibusing message. The judge made no finding as to why the Ku Klux Klan was excluded.
The council argues that the Massachusetts Right to Life group and a truck carrying antihomosexual signs also were excluded, and that the message of NORAID was limited. Assuming this to be true, we perceive no legal relevance of this fact to the findings of the judge or to the conclusion we reach.
The judge found that, despite the formality of voting on applications by the council, decisions regarding participation are made by Hurley. The *245judge also found that, as to participation by GLIB, the council and Hurley are of the same opinion.
In their brief, the plaintiffs did not take issue with the dismissal of their claims against the city. The plaintiffs seek to raise this issue for the first time in a reply brief. It does not appear from the record that the plaintiffs filed a cross appeal, and therefore it is doubtful that they had the right to file a reply brief. Mass. R. A. P. 16 (c), as amended, 399 Mass. 1217 (1987). Absent a cross appeal, the plaintiffs’ claim of error on this issue is not properly before us.
The defendants argue that, by operation of law, issuance of a parade permit closes the streets of the parade route to the public. We need not decide whether that is true. The findings of the judge suggest that virtually any member or group drawn from the public may apply or pay to enter the parade. Thus, while spectators along the route during the parade cannot join the parade, they most likely would have been able to join if they had *248applied or appeared at the start of the parade and paid a fee. Under the defendants’ reasoning, a restaurant which admits only diners who have made reservations or those who generously tip the maitre d’ would be exempt from the public accommodation laws. Such a result would be contrary to the purposes of the public accommodation laws. See Concord Rod & Gun, Inc., supra.
The defendants argue that, since the parade is an event rather than a fixed, physical location, it is not a “place” as required by G. L. c. 272, §§ 92A and 98. The common meaning of the word indeed has physical connotations, but it also has temporal connotations as well. See Webster’s Third New Int’l Dictionary 1727 (1961). In light of the remedial nature of this statute, and the Legislature’s intention that it be interpreted broadly and with an eye toward inclusiveness, we cannot adopt the restrictive definition of “place” advanced by the defendants. Concord Rod & Gun Club, Inc. v. Massachusetts Comm’n Against Discrimination, 402 Mass. 716, 720 (1988). Local Fin. Co. v. Massachusetts Comm’n Against Discrimination, 355 Mass. 10, 14 (1968). See United States Jaycees v. Massachusetts Comm’n Against Discrimination, 391 Mass. 594, 611-612 (1984) (Abrams, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part, with whom Hennessy, C.J., and Liacos, J., joined).
The defendants’ reliance on the majority opinion in United States Jaycees, is misplaced. In that case, the organization was found not to be a place of public accommodation because it maintained no physical place of operations in Massachusetts. United States Jaycees, supra at 603. It cannot be said of the parade that it is not associated with some physical place or location in Massachusetts.
The defendants attempt to invoke the free speech and associational rights guaranteed by the Constitution of the Commonwealth. Aside from referring to our Constitution in the argument headings of their brief, however, the defendants make no separate argument under our Constitution. Accordingly, the defendants have waived those issues and we do not address them. Mass. R. A. P. 16 (a) (4), as amended, 367 Mass. 921 (1975). Similarly, the defendants do not argue in their brief as to their asserted rights under the religious freedom and equal protection provisions of either the Massachusetts or the Federal Constitution. We do not address those issues. Id.
To be clear, the inquiry focuses on the rights of the members of the council and whether they exercised those rights through the parade, not on the rights of the parade or the parade participants.
We also note that the New York parade celebrates only St. Patrick’s Day, while the Boston parade celebrates, in addition, Evacuation Day. See New York County Bd. of Ancient Order of Hibernians v. Dinkins, 814 F. Supp. 358, 368-369 (S.D.N.Y. 1993). It was partly on this basis that the judge characterized the Boston parade as a “public event.”
We note also that we uphold the findings and rulings of the judge based on the record before us, particularly the history and nature of the parade here in issue. We do not suggest that every parade is nonexpressive or that every parade is necessarily a place of public accommodation. Rather, we base our conclusions on the unique nature of the facts found as to the parade in controversy.
The dissent suggests that the finding of the judge that the parade did not have an expressive purpose was clearly erroneous because the parade provides entertainment to the spectators. Aside from the fact that the defendants themselves did not assert this as evidence of an expressive purpose, we are puzzled by the dissent’s assertion, without citation, that the mere provision of entertainment would transform the parade into an expressive event. This assertion is especially puzzling in light of the detailed and exhaustive discussion by the judge of the evidence which led him to conclude that the parade was a civic, nonexpressive celebration. Cf. Augat, Inc. v. Aegis, Inc., 417 Mass. 484, 497 (1994) (Nolan, J., dissenting) (this court may not “ignore both the record and the trial judge’s findings of fact *251by baldly ‘assuming’ facts on its own to reach an alternative conclusion which it feels is appropriate”).
The dissent’s reliance on Wooley v. Maynard, 430 U.S. 705, 715 (1977), is misplaced. Post at 255, 256, 257. The private automobile of a New Hampshire resident could not possibly be characterized as a public accommodation. Here, on the contrary, the judge found, we agreed, and the dissent assumes, that the parade is a public accommodation within the statute. Thus, the burden was on the defendants to demonstrate that they were exercising their First Amendment rights and as a result were entitled to exemption from the public accommodation laws. See Clark v. Community for Creative Non-Violence, 468 U.S. 288, 293 n.5 (1984).
Contrary to the defendants’ assertion, the judge did not inquire into the content of speech in this case. Instead, he examined whether there existed speech or any other activity protected by the First Amendment. That he permissibly can, and must, do. See United States v. O’Brien, 391 U.S. 367, 376 (1968) (not all conduct is protected speech even if so labeled by the actor); Clark, supra at 293 n.5 (one seeking relief under First Amend*252ment must show that he is entitled to it, since there is no presumption of expressiveness).
We leave open for an appropriate case the question whether the public accommodation law permissibly could be applied to a genuine exercise of First Amendment rights. See R.A.V. v. St. Paul, Minn., 505 U.S. 377, 381-393 (1992).

=== CASE 9741361 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:54:07.349179+00 ===

Nolan, J.
(dissenting). Today will be regarded as a sad and frustrating day in the history of the First Amendment to the United States Constitution. Today, a majority of this court upholds, and thereby endorses, a trial judge’s flagrant violation of the free speech rights, of citizens of this Commonwealth. The majority acquiesces in a judge’s order instructing a private group that if it wishes to express itself at all, it must include in its expression a particular idea, one with which the group does not agree. One must strain to recall or even to imagine such an obvious violation of the revered right to free speech.
The majority upholds a Superior Court judge’s decision that the South Boston Allied War Veterans Council’s (Veterans Council) exclusion of the Irish-American Gay, Lesbian and Bisexual Group of Boston (GLIB) from the St. Patrick’s Day-Evacuation Day Parade violates GLIB’s members’ statutory right to be free from discrimination on the basis of their sexual preference in places of public accommodation, and that the application of the statute to the facts of this case does not violate the Veterans Council’s rights under the First Amendment. It is because I conclude that the Veterans Council’s rights were violated by the judge’s decision and order compelling it to allow GLIB to march and express its message in the Veterans Council’s parade that I dissent from the decision of the majority.
1. G. L. c. 272, §§ 92A, 98. The majority finds no error in the judge’s determination that the conduct of the Veterans Council in excluding GLIB from its parade violates the Commonwealth’s public accommodation law, G. L. c. 272, §§ 92A, 98. I do not fully concur with the judge’s reasoning in determining the applicability of the statute. Further, for *254reasons discussed, infra, I do not agree that the judge’s findings support his conclusion that the conduct of the Veterans Council violated the statute, even if it otherwise applies. I reserve extended discussion on these matters, however, and proceed to issues concerning rights under the First Amendment. I shall assume for the purpose of the following discussion that the statute applies to the conduct of the Veterans Council.
2. First Amendment. The judge limited his discussion of the First Amendment to the freedom of expressive associatian. He ruled that the freedom of speech was not at issue. This determination is erroneous. The defendants’ freedom of speech is certainly at issue in this case — and was properly raised and argued1 — and is violated by the judge’s application of G. L. c. 272, §§ 92A, 98.
a. Freedom of speech. The First Amendment to the Constitution of the United States reads, in part: “Congress shall make no law . . . abridging the freedom of speech.” Through the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution, the First Amendment limitation on Congress’s power to legislate is applied to the legislative power of the States. Wallace v. Jaffree, 472 U.S. 38, 48-49 (1985). Further, “[tjhat the action of state courts and judicial officers in their official capacities is to be regarded as action of the State within the meaning of the Fourteenth Amendment, is a proposition which has long been established.” Shelley v. Kraemer, 334 U.S. 1, 14 (1948). Thus, it is as constitutionally objectionable for a judge sitting in a court of this Commonwealth to issue an order improperly “abridging the freedom of speech,” as it is for Congress to enact a law doing the same.
As a general proposition, the State acts within its power when it enacts reasonable “time, place and manner” regula*255tians which affect speech or expression. Cox v. New Hampshire, 312 U.S. 569, 576 (1941) (“If a municipality has authority to control the use of its public streets for parades or processions, as it undoubtedly has, it cannot be denied authority to give consideration, without unfair discrimination, to time, place and manner in relation to the other proper uses of the streets”). Conversely, restrictions on the content of speech are generally improper. See Riley v. National Fed’n of the Blind of N.C., 487 U.S. 781, 798 (1988) (“[The State’s] content-based regulation is subject to exacting First Amendment scrutiny”); Southeastern Promotions, Ltd. v. Conrad, 420 U.S. 546, 558 (1975), quoting Bantam Books, Inc. v. Sullivan, 372 U.S. 58, 70 (1963) (“Any system of prior restraint . . . ‘comes to this Court bearing a heavy presumption against its constitutional validity’ ”); Police Dep’t of Chicago v. Mosley, 408 U.S. 92, 96 (1972) (“government may not grant the use of a forum to people whose views it finds acceptable, but deny use to those wishing to express less favored or more controversial views”). The freedom of speech comprises both the right to speak and the right to refrain from speaking. Riley, supra at 795. Wooley v. Maynard, 430 U.S. 705, 715 (1977). Thus, “[t]he First Amendment protects the right of individuals ... to refuse to foster ... an idea they find morally objectionable.” Wooley, supra. “Mandating speech that a speaker would not otherwise make necessarily alters the content of the speech.” Riley, supra.
In the present case, the judge’s decision and order requires the Veterans Council to allow the members of GLIB to march in the parade as an identifiable group.2 As noted by the judge and the majority, GLIB’s organizational purposes are expressive in nature: to express its members’ pride in their sexual preference; to demonstrate to the community the *256diversity which exists therein; and to show support for homosexuals and bisexuals in New York who sought to march in a St. Patrick’s Day Parade in New York City. The Veterans Council, as license holder of the St. Patrick’s Day-Evacuatian Day Parade, determines who marches in the parade. Except for GLIB, there would be no group marching in the parade whose message supports homosexuality or bisexuality. Therefore, the judge’s decision and order permitting GLIB to march as an identifiable group results in GLIB’s message being added to the parade. This is “[mjandating speech that [the Veterans Council] would not otherwise make,” and is thus content-based regulation. Riley, supra.
Supreme Court cases concerning content-based regulation of speech examine such regulation with a strict scrutiny, or “exacting” scrutiny standard. See, e.g., Riley, supra at 798; Pacific Gas & Elec. Co. v. Public Utils. Comm’n of Cal., 475 U.S. 1, 19-20 (1986); Wooley, supra at 716. If we assume that evisceration of discrimination on the basis of sexual preference is a compelling State interest, the judge’s action in this case is not narrowly tailored to attaining that end: “[T]he State can serve that interest through means that would not violate [defendants’] First Amendment rights.” Pacific Gas & Elec. Co., supra at 19. To compel the Veterans Council to express GLIB’s message is not narrowly tailored to the State’s interest. It unnecessarily hampers the free speech of the Veterans Council. It goes beyond merely regulating discriminatory conduct, and requires a private group, the Veterans Council, to promote GLIB’s ideals. This is unconstitutional: “[Wjhere the State’s interest is to disseminate an ideology, no matter how acceptable to some, such interest cannot outweigh an individual’s First Amendment right to avoid becoming the courier for such message.” Wooley, supra at 717.
It is important to note that the Veterans Council does not need a narrow or distinct theme or message in its parade for it to be protected under the First Amendment. Both the judge and the majority try to illustrate that the parade is a public celebration with no distinct, unified theme; the impli*257cation is that it is not expressive activity, and is therefore not worthy of First Amendment protection. This analysis is erroneous for two reasons. First, regardless of whether the parade has one message, ten messages, or no message at all, if GLIB’s particular message is not in the parade, it cannot constitutionally be forced on the Veterans Council. Thus, although an individual who drives his automobile may have no expressive purpose for doing so, the State cannot require him to foster a message while driving that he otherwise would not. Wooley, supra at 717 (violation of the First Amendment to require defendants to display “Live Free or Die” on their license plates). Second, the finding that the parade lacks an expressive purpose is clearly erroneous. The Veterans Council obtains a license, collects funds, and privately organizes the St. Patrick’s Day-Evacuation Day Parade each year. They do so knowing that their efforts will provide entertainment to the hundreds of thousands of spectators who line the streets of the South Boston section of Boston to watch in celebration of St. Patrick’s Day and Evacuation Day. The judge would have us believe that the Veterans Council and all the parade participants show up solely for their own entertainment, and that any entertainment of the viewing public is merely incidental.3 This defies logic, yet is just one of many gaps in reason created by the trial judge’s flagrant efforts to forgo extending to the Veterans Council their deserved First Amendment rights.
The judge’s order clearly violates the Veterans Council’s freedom of speech.
b. Freedom of association. The judge determined, and the majority agreed, that the Veterans Council’s First Amend*258ment freedom of expressive association is not unconstitutionally infringed by requiring GLIB to march as a group in the parade. I disagree.
The freedom of expressive association is the “right to associate for the purpose of engaging in those activities protected by the First Amendment — speech, [among others].” Roberts v. United States Jaycees, 468 U.S. 609, 618 (1984). Much like the related, broader freedom of speech, “[freedom of association . . . plainly presupposes a freedom not to associate.” Id. at 623, citing Abood v. Detroit Bd. of Educ., 431 U.S. 209, 234-235 (1977). Infringements on the right not to associate are examined under strict scrutiny: “Infringements on that right may be justified by regulations adopted to serve compelling state interests, unrelated to the suppression of ideas, that cannot be achieved through means significantly less restrictive of associational freedoms.” Roberts v. United States Jaycees, supra, and cases cited. It is established, however, that, “[i]f a club seeks to exclude individuals who do not share the views that the club’s members wish to promote,” the law may not require association. New York State Club Ass’n v. City of New York, 487 U.S. 1,13 (1988).
As discussed above, the Veterans Council organizes the parade for expressive purposes: to entertain the hundreds of thousands of spectators who view the parade each year in celebration of St. Patrick’s Day and Evacuation Day. Again assuming, without deciding, that evisceration of discrimination on the basis of sexual preference is a compelling State interest, State regulation in furtherance of this end must be narrowly tailored to attaining it. Thus, requiring the Veterans Council not to exclude the members of GLIB on the basis of their sexual preference may be a constitutionally valid infringement on the Veterans Council’s rights; however, preeluding the Veterans Council from disallowing the members of GLIB from expressing themselves as a group is not related to the State’s interest, and is therefore unconstitutional. In other words, because the judge’s decision and order require the Veterans Council to allow GLIB to express itself, they *259violate the rule that, “[where] a club seeks to exclude individuals who do not share the views that the club’s members wish to promote, the Law [may] erect [ ] no obstacle to this end.” New York State Club Ass’n, supra.
It is important to note that this case is distinguishable from those that involve exclusion of individuals whose message and protected status may be inseparable. For example, in Invisible Empire of the Knights of the Ku Klux Klan v. Mayor, Bd. of Comm’rs, & Chief of Police of Thurmont, 700 F. Supp. 281 (D. Md. 1988), a private group comprising numerous African Americans sought to enforce against the Ku Klux Klan (KKK) an antidiscrimination statute in an effort to participate in the KKK’s planned parade. The Federal District Court determined that permitting the group to participate would be unconstitutional, as the mere presence of African Americans in the KKK’s parade would frustrate the KKK’s message of white separatism. Id. at 289. This is distinguishable from the present case: the mere presence of homosexuals or bisexuals in the parade likely would not frustrate any message of the Veterans Council. This is so because GLIB’s message is separable from its members’ status as homosexuals or bisexuals. Thus, the presence of homosexuals or bisexuals, not outwardly identifiable as such, in the parade would likely not affect any message of the Veterans Council, while the presence of those same individuals marching as an identifiable group — the Irish-American Gay, Lesbian and Bisexual Group of Boston — would.
As discussed above, mandating mere association in this case may be constitutional; mandating a message is not. At the very least, the judge’s decision and order, insofar as it compels the Veterans Council to allow the members of GLIB to march and express themselves as a group in the Veterans Council’s parade violates the First Amendment.
3. Other matters. Aside from the judge’s improper refusal to address the issue of freedom of speech and his erroneous analysis of the issue of freedom of association, his decision and order includes other serious errors of law, reason, and fact which warrant discussion.
*260In his decision, the judge equates excluding a group on the basis of its message or values with exclusion on the basis of its members’ sexual preference: “The defendant’s final positian was GLIB would be excluded because of its values and its message, i.e., its members’ sexual orientation” (emphasis added). This is clear error, and may have led to a baseless finding that the Veterans Council discriminated on the basis of GLIB’s members’ sexual preference. If the Veterans Council excluded GLIB because of its message, and not specifically because of its members’ sexual preference, then the statute was not violated. See G. L. c. 272, § 92A. Indeed, overwhelming evidence exists throughout the record which indicates that GLIB was excluded because of its message, and not because of its members’ sexual preference.4 Conversely, the only evidence which supports a finding of discrimination was that many of GLIB’s members are homosexual and GLIB was excluded, and that the Veterans Council had, in the past, proffered different reasons for its decision to exclude GLIB.5
Belatedly, the judge stated that, even if the Veterans Council’s assertion that it excluded GLIB under a policy of excluding all sexual themes was true, “[ejxcluding all sexual themes . . . contravenes the First Amendment’s prohibition on content-based restrictions.” This is a flagrantly erroneous statement of law. The judge found that there was no State action here; certainly private parties may exclude any topic *261or theme they want from their expression. This statement is an example of quintessential content-based regulation of speech which is plainly prohibited by the First Amendment, and it illustrates the confused understanding of the First Amendment by the judge and by this court, through its acquiescence.
4. Conclusion. That the judge’s decision and order requiring the Veterans Council to allow GLIB to march and to express itself as a group is a flagrant violation of the Veterans Council’s First Amendment rights is an unavoidable conclusion. The judge’s crude regulation of the content of the Veterans Council’s speech is epitomized by the last sentence of his decision: “Inclusiveness should be the hallmark of [the Veterans Council’s] parade.”
We have never been in the business of protecting only internally consistent, narrowly focused, politically sensitive speech. It is a travesty that we today vacate this precedent. Our holding today, while, to some, seemingly pushes us forward, really pushes us back over 200 years, to an era that lacked the protection guaranteed by the First Amendment. I dissent.
The Veterans Council presented argument on the freedom of speech throughout the proceedings in this case. In particular, argument on the issue was presented at trial, in the defendants’ memorandum in support of proposed findings of facts and proposed conclusions of law, and in the defendants’ briefs on appeal.
The judgment states in part: “[The defendants] shall accommodate in the Parade in all respects representatives of [GLIB] on the terms and conditions generally applicable to all other Parade participants.” His decision makes clear that this entails allowing the members of GLIB to march in a group, identifying themselves as members of the group, and identifying the group through a banner.
The judge relies on the Supreme Court case of Dallas v. Stanglin, 490 U.S. 19, 25 (1989), wherein the Court ruled: “the activity of . . . dance-hall patrons — coming together to engage in recreational dancing — is not protected by the First Amendment.” The case is inapposite. Unlike the participants in the Veterans Council’s parade, patrons in the dance hall did not gather to dance for the purpose of entertaining others in celebration of a holiday. The parade is conducted for the entertainment of hundreds of thousands of people; the dance-hall patrons whose conduct was at issue in Dallas, did not gather for the purpose of entertaining others.
There is no evidence in the record that the Veterans Council ever inquired into the sexual preference of any person intending to march in the parade, including the members of GLIB;'there is no evidence that the Veterans Council ever excluded any homosexual or bisexual not a member of GLIB; the judge found that not all members of GLIB are homosexual or bisexual; there is evidence in the record that the Veterans Council would let the members of GLIB march without a banner identifying the group.
It is important to note that each of the reasons for excluding GLIB proffered by the Veterans Council is not discriminatory. At various times throughout the past years, the Veterans Council proffered the following reasons for excluding GLIB: the Veterans Council was not provided with enough information about GLIB on its application; it was concerned with the safety of the group’s members and the members of the public; and it excluded all sexual themes from the parade.

=== CASE 9741362 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:54:09.488396+00 ===

Krivosha, C. J.
The district court for Douglas County, Nebraska, entered judgment in favor of the appellee, Professional Recruiters Inc., and against the appellant, Wilkinson Manufacturing Company, Inc., in the amount of $9,984 plus costs. The basis of the court decree was that Wilkinson had breached its contract with Professional Recruiters in that Wilkinson had refused to pay Professional Recruiters a previously agreed upon fee due Professional Recruiters for having obtained an employee for Wilkinson. From that order Wilkinson now appeals to this court. We affirm.
*352This is a law action in which the jury was waived and the case tried to the court. See Grubbs v. Kula, 212 Neb. 735, 325 N.W.2d 835 (1982). We have consistently held that where an action at law is tried without a jury, the decision of the trial court has the effect of a jury verdict and will not be disturbed on appeal unless it is clearly wrong. See, Havelock Bank v. Woods, 219 Neb. 57, 361 N.W.2d 197 (1985); South Sioux City Star v. Edwards, 218 Neb. 487, 357 N.W.2d 178 (1984); West Town Homeowners Assn. v. Schneider, 215 Neb. 905, 341 N.W.2d 588 (1983).
The most that can be said about the record in this case is that the evidence is in conflict. In that regard we have also frequently held that it is not within the province of this court to resolve evidentiary conflicts or to weigh evidence. Rather, it is our obligation to review the judgment entered in light of the evidence and to consider the evidence in the light most favorable to the successful party, resolving all conflicts in his favor and granting him the benefit of every inference which is reasonably deducible therefrom. See Grubbs v. Kula, supra.
Viewing the evidence, therefore, in a light most favorable to Professional Recruiters, the district court could find that Professional Recruiters is a firm specializing in the placement of people in the data processing industry. On October 15,1981, Louis Tomsu, Wilkinson’s personnel director, contacted Sandra Olson, an employee of Professional Recruiters, and requested her assistance in locating a data processing manager. Tomsu also on that date contacted “four or five” or “six” other agencies in his attempt to locate a manager. Olson testified that because Wilkinson was a new client, she discussed with Tomsu the fee schedule, which was based upon a specific percentage of the newly hired employee’s starting salary but not to exceed a maximum fee of 30 percent of the salary. Olson testified that Tomsu orally agreed to pay the fee. No written contract or signed memorandum was entered into by the parties. Olson further testified that she sent a fee schedule to Tomsu, although no transmittal letter is in evidence. Tomsu denies making any agreement concerning the fees or receiving any fee schedule. This, however, was a conflict which the district court resolved in favor of Professional Recruiters. Linder the rules as earlier *353outlined, we are bound to accept that finding.
Olson further testified that Tomsu agreed to a 30-day “placement guarantee.” Tomsu denied that such a placement guarantee was ever discussed. The evidence then establishes that Professional Recruiters referred three candidates to Wilkinson. The third candidate was Robert Haifley, Jr. Professional Recruiters had a conference of approximately 15 to 30 minutes in length with Haifley before referring him to Wilkinson. Upon referral Tomsu requested Haifley’s telephone number, which Professional Recruiters provided. Haifley prepared his own resume, interviewed with Wilkinson, and negotiated his own agreement.
On December 31, 1981, Haifley entered into a contract with Wilkinson to provide Wilkinson data processing services. The agreement was to become effective on January 4, 1982. The contract attempted to describe Haifley as a consultant but contained provisions consistent with an employment agreement. The contract required Haifley to work a minimum of 40 hours per week and further required that he obtain from Wilkinson permission to work any hours in excess of 40 for which he would seek compensation. While the contract, on its face, purports to be a contract of 1 year’s duration, other provisions of the contract basically permit Wilkinson to terminate the contract at will. The contract also prohibited Haifley from subcontracting out any duties under the contract. The district court obviously found that the “contract” entered into between Wilkinson and Haifley was one covered by the agreement between Professional Recruiters and Wilkinson, and, again, we cannot say the district court was wrong.
While Tomsu informed Professional Recruiters that Wilkinson had interviewed Haifley and was definitely interested in Haifley, Tomsu did not at any time inform Professional Recruiters that Wilkinson had hired Haifley. Professional Recruiters continued to refer candidates to Wilkinson until Haifley informed Professional Recruiters that he had been hired by Wilkinson. In fact, even after Haifley began working for Wilkinson, Tomsu continued to deny that Haifley was employed. A former employee of Wilkinson testified that Tomsu had told him that Wilkinson would not be *354required to pay a fee to Professional Recruiters because Haifley had been hired as a consultant and not as an employee. After Professional Recruiters learned that Haifley was working for Wilkinson, Professional Recruiters sent Wilkinson a bill. Haifley continued to provide services in data processing to Wilkinson until May 17, 1982, when his arrangement with Wilkinson was terminated. Haifley was paid a total of $12,400.16 by Wilkinson.
The mere assertion by Wilkinson that the contract between Wilkinson and Haifley was for the retention of an independent consultant and not the retention of an employee is not sufficient to carry the day. Whether one is an independent contractor or an employee is most often a question of fact to be determined by the trier of facts from the evidence. What various parties to the agreement describe the arrangement as is not binding. The criteria for determining whether one is an independent contractor or an employee include the right of control, the independence the workman enjoys, the degree of supervision of the work, whether tools are provided by the workman or the other party, the method of payment, and the contractual understanding between the parties. See Rudolf v. Tombstone Pizza Corp., 214 Neb. 276, 333 N.W.2d 673 (1983). As we observed in Voycheske v. Osborn, 196 Neb. 510, 244 N.W.2d 74 (1976): “There is no single test by which the determination of whether or not a workman is an employee, as distinguished from an independent contractor, may be made. This must be determined from all the facts in the case.” (Syllabus of the court.)
As we have observed, the district court resolved these facts in favor of Professional Recruiters and against Wilkinson. Based upon the evidence in the case, we cannot say that the district court erred in concluding that Haifley was in fact an employee and not an independent contractor.
In view of the fact that we cannot say as a matter of law that the district court’s findings were in error, we are required to affirm the decision of the district court. The decision is affirmed.
Affirmed.

=== CASE 2226997 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:24.047267+00 ===

636 N.E.2d 658 (1993)
263 Ill. App. 3d 1077
201 Ill. Dec. 226
The PEOPLE of the State of Illinois, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
Anthony BEARD, Defendant-Appellant.
No. 1-91-0548.
Appellate Court of Illinois, First District, Sixth Division.
May 14, 1993.
*659 Office of the State's Appellate Defender, Chicago (Pamela Z. O'Shea, Asst. Appellate Defender and Michael J. Pelletier, Deputy Defender, of counsel), for defendant-appellant.
Jack O'Malley, State's Atty. of Cook County, Chicago (Renee G. Goldfarb, Theodore F. Burtzos, and Bennett E. Kaplan, Asst. State's Attys., of counsel), for plaintiff-appellee.
Justice GIANNIS delivered the opinion of the court:
Defendant, Anthony Beard, appeals his conviction following a jury trial pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 603, (134 Ill.2d R. 603). Defendant seeks to overturn his criminal conviction for first degree murder, (Ill.Rev. Stat.1989, ch. 38, par. 9-1(a)(1)), and his sentencing under the Habitual Offenders Act, (Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 38, par. 33B-1) (the Act).
As defendant raises no issues concerning the underlying facts of his case, the background of this appeal can be briefly summarized. On February 17, 1989, defendant was charged by indictment with three counts of murder, one count of armed robbery and one count of unlawful use of a firearm by a felon in connection with the shooting of Walter Reese. Prior to trial, the one count of armed robbery and the one count of unlawful use of a firearm by a felon were nolle prossed because the statute of limitations had expired.
The trial court began the jury selection procedure by questioning a panel of fourteen venirepersons. After these fourteen were questioned, all of the parties proceeded to chambers to continue the jury selection process. In chambers, the trial judge indicated that he had marked each of the jury cards with the race of each venireperson: "W" for white, "B" for black, "O" for oriental, and "L" for Latino. These cards, which have been made part of the record on appeal, show that two of the fourteen venire members were black and twelve were white. Because defendant is black and the victim is white, the trial court also indicated that if and when the State challenged a black venireperson, the State would automatically be required to provide a race-neutral reason for the challenge. Thereafter, as to the panel of fourteen venirepersons, the State exercised two peremptory challenges. Neither of the two venirepersons challenged by the State were black.
The trial judge then questioned a second panel of fourteen venirepersons. Of this second panel of fourteen, ten were white, two were black, one was Latino and one person was considered by the trial judge to be either "Latino" or "White." The juror card for this venire member, Lupe Cahul, was marked by the trial judge "L/W/?". The parties again went to chambers to continue the jury selection process. The trial judge excused three venirepersons for cause. Thereafter, the first four venirepersons on the panel were considered and neither the State nor defendant exercised any peremptory challenges. Thus, the twelve members of the jury had *660 been chosen: eight from the first panel and four from the second panel. Of the twelve jurors chosen, nine were white, three were black.
The remaining seven venirepersons on the second panel were then considered to fill the two alternate juror positions. In choosing the two alternate jurors, the State exercised two peremptory challenges. One of the two was exercised against a black venireperson, Earlene Blanchard. Pursuant to the trial court's policy that the State automatically provide a race-neutral reason if a black venireperson is challenged, the State indicated that it decided to strike her because her son had been shot and because no charges had ever been filed in that case. Without objection by defendant's counsel, the trial court accepted the State's reason as being sufficiently race-neutral. After trial, the jury found defendant guilty of two of the three murder counts. Defendant subsequently filed motions for a new trial which were denied.
During defendant's sentencing hearing, the State filed a motion requesting that defendant be sentenced to death, or in the alternative, to life imprisonment as a habitual criminal pursuant to the Act. At the sentencing hearing, the trial court found defendant eligible for the death penalty, and heard evidence in aggravation and mitigation. Included in the State's evidence were certified copies of conviction which showed defendant had been convicted of rape on March 19, 1976, and of armed robbery on February 4, 1980. Also submitted were documents which had been retained by the Illinois Department of Corrections indicating that defendant's armed robbery conviction had been committed on June 26, 1979. After considering this evidence and the defendant's evidence in mitigation, the trial court sentenced defendant to life imprisonment on the count of intentional murder. A motion for a new sentencing hearing was heard and denied on February 7, 1991, and a notice of appeal was timely filed.
I.
In the past few years there has been an upheaval in the law with regard to the proper use of peremptory strikes during the voir dire process. In Batson v. Kentucky (1986), 476 U.S. 79, 106 S. Ct. 1712, 90 L. Ed. 2d 69, the United States Supreme Court found that the use of peremptory strikes by the State to purposefully exclude black jurors in the criminal trial of a black defendant violated the Equal Protection Clause of the Federal Constitution. In Powers v. Ohio (1991), 499 U.S. 400, 111 S. Ct. 1364, 113 L. Ed. 2d 411, the Supreme Court held that in the trial of a white criminal defendant, the State is similarly prohibited from excluding black jurors on the basis of race. In Edmonson v. Leesville Concrete Co. (1991), 500 U.S. 614, 111 S. Ct. 2077, 114 L. Ed. 2d 660, the court decided that, even in civil cases, private litigants cannot exercise their peremptory strikes in a racially discriminatory manner. Finally, and most recently, in Georgia v. McCollum (1992), 505 U.S. ___, 112 S. Ct. 2348, 120 L. Ed. 2d 33, the Supreme Court held that the Equal Protection Clause also prohibits a criminal defendant from engaging in purposeful racial discrimination in the exercise of peremptory challenges.
The State first claims that defendant has waived his Batson challenge by his failure to raise it either during the voir dire proceedings or in his post-trial motion. In Illinois, both an objection during the proceedings and a written post-trial motion raising the issue are generally necessary to preserve the issue for review. (People v. Enoch (1988), 122 Ill. 2d 176, 186-88, 119 Ill. Dec. 265, 522 N.E.2d 1124.) As discussed below, however, the trial court in the present case raised the Batson question sua sponte with the parties. Defendant is not obligated, therefore, to have raised the issue himself. People v. Whaley (1989), 184 Ill.App.3d 459, 463, 132 Ill. Dec. 681, 540 N.E.2d 421 ("fact that the trial court is made aware of the claim, not the manner in which the claim is made, is dispositive").
The more troubling problem comes in defendant's failure to raise his Batson challenge in his post-trial motion. As an initial attack against a possible waiver argument, defendant raises the plain error rule which allows the court to consider waived issues when the evidence is closely balanced or *661 where the fundamental fairness of the proceeding was affected. (People v. Fields (1990), 135 Ill. 2d 18, 56, 142 Ill. Dec. 200, 552 N.E.2d 791.) While defendant has made no claim that the evidence in this case is closely balanced, several courts have found that a defendant's failure to raise a Batson claim in a post-trial motion does not waive the issue due to the constitutional importance of the rights affected. (People v. Whaley (1989), 184 Ill.App.3d 459, 132 Ill. Dec. 681, 540 N.E.2d 421; People v. Maurice Mitchell (1987), 163 Ill.App.3d 58, 114 Ill. Dec. 345, 516 N.E.2d 500; People v. Brown (1987), 152 Ill.App.3d 996, 106 Ill. Dec. 91, 505 N.E.2d 397.) Other courts, however, have reached a different conclusion. (People v. Harris (1990) 195 Ill.App.3d 507, 142 Ill. Dec. 337, 552 N.E.2d 1078; People v. Phillips (1989), 186 Ill.App.3d 668, 134 Ill. Dec. 468, 542 N.E.2d 814.) In any case, consideration of defendant's Batson claim is within the appellate court's discretion, (People v. Anthony Mitchell (1992), 152 Ill. 2d 274, 178 Ill. Dec. 354, 604 N.E.2d 877), and, even were it assumed that a proper post-trial motion were filed, defendant's Batson challenge is without merit.
In Batson, the Supreme Court outlined a systematic, three-stage process by which a criminal defendant may challenge a prosecutor's use of peremptory challenges. (Batson, 476 U.S. at 96-98, 106 S. Ct. 1712, 90 L. Ed. 2d 69.) First, the defendant must make out a prima facie showing that the prosecutor has used his or her peremptory challenge on the basis of race. (Batson, 476 U.S. at 96-98, 106 S. Ct. 1712, 90 L. Ed. 2d 69.) This may be done by showing the following factors: (1) defendant belongs to a racial group capable of being singled out for differential treatment; (2) the State removed members of defendant's race from the venire by using peremptory challenges; and, (3) any other "relevant circumstances," including, (a) a pattern of strikes against minority venire members, (b) disproportionate use of strikes against such members, (c) whether the excluded venire members were a heterogeneous group sharing race as their only common characteristic, (d) the level of representation in the venire as compared to the jury, (e) prosecutorial questions and statements during voir dire and while exercising challenges, and (f) the races of defendant and victim or of defendant and witnesses.[1] (People v. Jackson (1991), 145 Ill. 2d 43, 99, 163 Ill. Dec. 859, 582 N.E.2d 125.) Second, if the trial court rules that this showing has been made, the burden shifts to the State to articulate a race-neutral explanation for striking the jurors in question. (Batson, 476 U.S. at 97, 106 S. Ct. 1712, 90 L. Ed. 2d 69.) Though the State's explanation need not rise to the level justifying exercise of a challenge for cause, the prosecutor may not merely affirm his good faith in making the strike or state that the venire members were challenged on an assumption that they would be partial to the defendant on account of their shared race. (Batson, 476 U.S. at 98, 106 S. Ct. 1712, 90 L. Ed. 2d 69.) Lastly, once the State has offered a race-neutral reason, the trial court must determine if the defendant has established purposeful discrimination. Batson, 476 U.S. at 98, 106 S. Ct. 1712, 90 L. Ed. 2d 69.
In People v. Jackson (1991), 145 Ill. 2d 43, 163 Ill. Dec. 859, 582 N.E.2d 125, our supreme court emphasized the importance of trial courts rigorously following the Batson three-step process and condemned procedures of the type employed by the trial court in this case:
"We have previously cautioned trial courts against collapsing what ought to be a methodical Batson hearing procedure into an undifferentiated review of defense and State contentions. [Citation.] It appears we must now caution trial courts against a procedure whereby the first step in the Batson analysis is omitted altogether. We are here concerned with a `peremptory' challenge, which by definition is `[t]he right to challenge a juror without assigning, or being required to assign, a reason for the challenge.' [Citation.] The procedure which the trial court employed *662 in this case essentially deprives the State of the right to exercise a peremptory challenge against a black venire member." (Jackson, 145 Ill.2d at 98, 163 Ill. Dec. 859, 582 N.E.2d 125.)
By requiring the State to offer a race-neutral reason every time it struck a black juror, the trial court collapsed the Batson analysis and has made review of the case unnecessarily difficult. People v. Valentine (1991), 221 Ill. App. 3d 1082, 1086-87, 164 Ill. Dec. 394, 582 N.E.2d 1338 ("[t]his practice of `collapsing' the Batson steps, as well as trial courts' failure to make detailed findings of fact to clarify the record when the Batson objection is raised, needlessly adds to the number of costly appeals"); People v. Murff (1991), 214 Ill.App.3d 1034, 1040, 158 Ill. Dec. 702, 574 N.E.2d 815 ("we do not approve of the consolidated Batson hearing held below"); People v. Jones (1989), 185 Ill.App.3d 208, 216, 133 Ill. Dec. 324, 541 N.E.2d 161 (although the consolidated proceeding was not erroneous, "this is not the recommended procedure").
Defendant argues that because the State offered race-neutral explanations for its peremptory challenges and the trial court ruled on the ultimate issue of intentional discrimination, the preliminary issue of whether defendant has made a prima facie showing has become moot and should not now be considered. (Hernandez v. New York (1991), 500 U.S. 352, 359, 111 S. Ct. 1859, 1866, 114 L. Ed. 2d 395, 405.) The State responds by noting that Hernandez has been found to apply only where the State offers a race-neutral explanation without prompting from the trial court and that, because the trial court improperly required a race-neutral explanation each time a black venire-member was struck, we must now address the question of whether defendant did, in fact, make out a prima facie case. People v. Campbell (1992), 240 Ill.App.3d 179, 182, 181 Ill. Dec. 156, 608 N.E.2d 229); People v. Coulter (1992), 230 Ill.App.3d 209, 223, 171 Ill. Dec. 643, 594 N.E.2d 1163.
The disagreement between the State and the defendant stems from the following language found in the supreme court's decision in People v. Jackson in which the court emphasized the word "without":
"The prosecution in this case should not have been required to justify its use of peremptory challenges against blacks.
However, it should be noted that when a prosecutor defends his use of peremptory strikes without any prompting from the trial court, the court has no occasion to rule whether the defendant has or has not made out a prima facie showing of intentional discrimination. Once a prosecutor has offered a race-neutral explanation for the peremptory challenge and the trial court has ruled on the ultimate question of intentional discrimination, the preliminary issue of whether the defendant has made a prima facie showing becomes moot." (Jackson, 145 Ill.2d at 101, 163 Ill. Dec. 859, 582 N.E.2d 125.) (Emphasis in original.) (Quoting Hernandez, 500 U.S. 352, 111 S. Ct. 1859, 114 L. Ed. 2d 395.)
Although the Jackson decision did not address itself to the question of whether the defendant in that case had made out a prima facie case, both the Campbell and Coulter cases which support the State's position cited Jackson before embarking upon such an analysis. Campbell, 240 Ill.App.3d at 182, 181 Ill. Dec. 156, 608 N.E.2d 229; Coulter, 230 Ill.App.3d at 223, 171 Ill. Dec. 643, 594 N.E.2d 1163.
It is interesting to note that the Jackson decision was authored by Justice Cunningham who also authored the supreme court's more recent decision in People v. Mitchell (1992), 152 Ill. 2d 274, 178 Ill. Dec. 354, 604 N.E.2d 877. As in Jackson, the prosecutor in the Mitchell case offered his race neutral reasons for striking black jurors only after prompting from the trial court. (Mitchell, 152 Ill.2d at 287, 178 Ill. Dec. 354, 604 N.E.2d 877.) Despite this fact, however, the Mitchell opinion did not address itself to the question of whether the defendant had made out a prima facie case. Instead, the Mitchell opinion, as did the Jackson opinion before it, merely addressed the question of whether the reasons offered by the State for striking black jurors were sufficiently race-neutral. Indeed, the Mitchell decision specifically states:
*663 "In the instant case, the trial court never determined whether defendant established a prima facie case under Batson. However, the court did find that the State had neutral or valid reasons for exercising the peremptory challenges. We thus need only review the trial court's ruling that the State's reasons were valid or neutral, as the question of whether defendant established a prima facie case of racial discrimination became moot when the trial court found that the prosecutor's explanations for the challenges were valid and neutral." (Mitchell, 152 Ill.2d at 289, 178 Ill. Dec. 354, 604 N.E.2d 877.) (Emphasis added.) (citing Hernandez.)
The Mitchell decision appears, therefore, to have undermined the analysis applied by Campbell and Coulter. We therefore follow the example provided by the supreme court in Mitchell and Jackson and address ourselves only to the question of whether the race-neutral explanation offered by the State would have been sufficient to rebut a prima facie showing.
During the questioning of the second panel of prospective jurors, the trial judge questioned a white woman named Alice Cwik. She was 60 years old, owned her own home, and had never been on a jury before. After giving some other basic information about her background, she stated that she had been a victim of recent crime in that her garage had been burned down and her car had been destroyed. She indicated that no one was apprehended in regard to this incident. When the trial judge asked if this incident would affect her impartiality in the case, she responded "no."
The trial judge later questioned Earlene Blanchard. Ms. Blanchard was an African-American, was 61 years old, also owned her own home and had never been on a jury before. Ms. Blanchard stated that her son was on disability because he had been shot, and that a long time ago, her husband's car was stolen and he had been robbed. Ms. Blanchard told the trial judge that the incidents involving her husband would not affect her impartiality "because we didn't even that was no jury either on that. There was no court, you know, nothing about that." When asked to defend his decision to strike Ms. Blanchard from the jury, the prosecutor stated:
"Judge, she talked about her son being shot, and that they did not press charges, and did not go to court on that case, and she was agreement with that decision apparently, with the family."
Although the prosecutor appeared to have misunderstood Ms. Blanchard's testimony (it appears that it Ms. Blanchard's comments were directed to her husband's experience in having his car stolen, not her son's experience in being shot), Defense counsel did not object to the reason given by the State. However, defendant now claims that because both women indicated that they had been the victim of violent crime in which no one was prosecuted, the only genuine difference between Earlene Blanchard and Alice Cwik are their differing races. Defendant claims, therefore, that the State's race-neutral reason for striking Ms. Blanchard was pretextual.
The prosecution's reasons for excluding a juror following a Batson challenge must be "clear and reasonably specific, contain legitimate reasons for exercising the challenges, and be related to the particular case to be tried." (People v. Mitchell, 152 Ill. 2d 274, 291, 178 Ill. Dec. 354, 604 N.E.2d 877, quoting Batson, 476 U.S. at 98 & n. 20, 106 S. Ct. at 1724 & n. 20, 90 L. Ed. 2d at 88 & n. 20.) A neutral explanation "means an explanation based on something other than the race of the juror. At this step of the inquiry, the issue is the facial validity of the prosecutor's explanation. Unless a discriminatory intent is inherent in the prosecutor's explanation, the reason offered will be deemed race neutral." (Emphasis added.) (Hernandez, 500 U.S. at 359, 111 S. Ct. at 1866, 114 L.Ed.2d at 406.)
This is not to say, of course, that similarities between those persons the State chooses to strike and those it leaves on the jury are irrelevant to the inquiry. They are relevant both to a trial court's initial consideration and our consideration of such questions on appeal. However, the trial court's decision as to whether a prima facie case is rebutted is ultimately a factual question *664 based on the credibility of the prosecutor; the court's decision must not be reversed unless it is against the manifest weight of the evidence. People v. Harris (1989), 129 Ill. 2d 123, 175, 135 Ill. Dec. 861, 544 N.E.2d 357; see also People v. Hope (1992), 147 Ill. 2d 315, 168 Ill. Dec. 103, 589 N.E.2d 503.
While we agree that similarities between Ms. Cwik and Ms. Blanchard give some support to defendant's claim of discrimination, we do not believe they rise to a level sufficient to overcome his burden. In this case the prosecutor offered a specific and facially race neutral explanation for excluding Ms. Blanchard. Because we believe the trial court was within its discretion in accepting this explanation, we uphold the trial court's decision.
II.
Defendant next argues that he was incorrectly found to be, and was sentenced as, a habitual criminal pursuant to the Habitual Criminal Act, (Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 38, par. 33B-1) (the Act). The Act provides that every person who is three times convicted of Class X felony or murder within a 20-year period is to be sentenced to life imprisonment. By its own terms, however, the Act does not apply unless each of the following conditions are met:
(1) the third offense was committed after the effective date of the Act [February 1, 1978];
(2) the third offense was committed within 20 years of the date that judgment was entered on the first conviction, provided, however, that time spent in custody shall not be counted;
(3) the third offense was committed after conviction on the second offense;
(4) the second offense was committed after conviction on the first offense.
(Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 38, par. 33B-1(d).) While there has been some disagreement as to the question of the State's burden of proof under the Act, this court has previously concluded that "the better view is that the State must prove the material allegations of its petition beyond a reasonable doubt." People v. Davis (1990), 205 Ill.App.3d 865, 872, 150 Ill. Dec. 742, 563 N.E.2d 869; see also People v. Walker (1992), 228 Ill.App.3d 76, 169 Ill. Dec. 514, 592 N.E.2d 1; People v. Mays (1988), 176 Ill.App.3d 1027, 127 Ill. Dec. 14, 532 N.E.2d 843; People v. Gill (1988), 169 Ill.App.3d 1049, 120 Ill. Dec. 328, 523 N.E.2d 1239; People v. Mason (1983), 119 Ill.App.3d 516, 75 Ill. Dec. 43, 456 N.E.2d 864. We therefore apply this standard.
While defendant concedes that the State has sufficiently proved the dates of conviction for the two previous Class X felonies, a criteria required by the Act, he argues that the State did not sufficiently prove the date of commission of the second offense, as required by Section 33B-1(d)(4). The Certified Statements of Conviction indicate that defendant was convicted of his first offense on March 19, 1976, and of his second offense on February 4, 1980.
A review of the record indicates, however, that the trial court was presented with sufficient evidence to conclude that defendant's second offense was committed after his first conviction. As noted, the State presented the trial court, without objection, a Certified Statement of Conviction indicating that Information 79-I-4498 was filed July 17, 1979, against Anthony Beard for armed robbery. This document also indicates that Anthony Beard plead guilty to this offense on February 4, 1980, that judgment was entered on this conviction that same day and that Anthony Beard was sentenced to eight years in the Illinois State Penitentiary.
Defendant points out that this document fails to indicate when he committed this crime. As additional evidence, however, the State introduced a memorandum prepared by Assistant State's Attorney Melanie Vogl which had been retained by the Illinois Department of Corrections. It is dated March 17, 1980, nearly 13 years ago. This document indicates that Information No. 79-I-4498 was brought against Anthony Beard based on an armed robbery which occurred June 26, 1979. The memorandum also indicates that Anthony Beard pointed a gun at a victim, forced him to lie on the floor, and took $120 from a cash register. Defense made no objection to the introduction of this document.
*665 To corroborate the memorandum, the State also introduced a Corrected Mittimus dated February 4, 1980. This document was also retained by the Illinois Department of Corrections and was received in evidence without objection. It indicates that Anthony Beard had been adjudged guilty of armed robbery pursuant to Information No. 79-I-4498 and that he had been sentenced to eight years imprisonment. A Sheriff's stamp on the back of the Mittimus reflects that Anthony Beard was admitted to custody on June 29, 1979, for the offenses charged in Information No. 79-I-4498.
Because we find these documents to constitute sufficient evidence to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that defendant's second Class X felony was committed after his conviction for his first Class X felony on March 19, 1976, the State has met its burden under the Act and defendant was properly sentenced to life imprisonment as a habitual criminal.
For the foregoing reasons, defendant's conviction for first degree murder and for his sentencing under the terms of the Act are affirmed.
Affirmed.
McNAMARA, P.J. and EGAN, J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  Recently, the Supreme Court modified this formulation by holding that "a criminal defendant may object to race-based exclusions of jurors effected through peremptory challenges whether or not the defendant and the excluded juror share the same race." (Powers v. Ohio (1991), 499 U.S. 400, 404, 111 S. Ct. 1364, 1366, 113 L. Ed. 2d 411, 418.)

=== CASE 9741366 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:54:11.509729+00 ===

Per Curiam.
The mother, Bernadet Meyers, appeals from the order dismissing her October 9, 1984, application to modify a prior decree of dissolution. Specifically, the application seeks a $200-per-month increase in the amount of child support the father, Victor J. Meyers, had been ordered to pay her as the custodial parent of the parties’ handicapped son, David Joseph; an order requiring the father to continue said payments beyond the son’s minority; and other equitable relief. The mother assigns as errors the district court’s (1) finding that there had been no material change in circumstances such as to warrant a change in child support payments during the son’s minority, (2) holding that it had no authority to continue child support payments beyond the son’s minority and thus refusing to accept evidence with respect to the son’s needs after majority, *372and (3) ruling that the mother was not entitled to the award of an attorney fee. We affirm in part and in part reverse and remand with direction.
The son became 19 years of age, and thus attained majority, on February 9, 1985. The parties’ April 1982 decree of dissolution ordered the father to pay child support in the amount of $150 per month for the eldest child of the parties, now an adult, $300 per month for the subject son, who has suffered from the effects of cerebral palsy since birth, and $300 per month for the youngest child, now age 14, “until such time as each child respectively is emancipated, dies, or reaches his majority.”
At the beginning of the May 7, 1985, hearing on the modification application, the trial judge stated that he deemed the court to be without authority to award any support after the son attained majority. The trial court therefore ruled that only evidence relevant to the amount of support needed between the date of the application and the son’s majority would be admissible.
Dr. William David Maclnnes, a licensed clinical psychologist certified in clinical neuropsychology, conducted a neuropsychological evaluation of the son and concluded that the son’s primary abnormalities were manifestations of his cerebral palsy. Through an offer of proof, Dr. Maclnnes gave his opinion that the son, who had been in a special program at his high school until his senior year because of his handicaps, could not function in a normal college setting and, likewise, could not successfully work at a j ob. It is Dr. Maclnnes ’ opinion that the son needs to attend a special college program for handicapped students. Dr. Maclnnes also stated that the son’s cerebral palsy would become more of a handicap as he became older, since he had not developed the skills necessary to meet society’s expectations of an adult.
The mother offered to prove that the son’s future educational expenses would be approximately $4,225 per year. She also offered to prove that “during the last year or two,” the son needed services and eyeglasses which she could not obtain because she lacked funds with which to pay for them. These were as follows, each having the fair and reasonable value *373indicated:
Eye examination and glasses $ 150
Capping of teeth 3,000
Speech therapy 3,536
Dermatology services 300
Total $6,986
Objections that the offers were not relevant were initially sustained, but, later, evidence concerning the $6,986 of needs was received.
The mother’s total income for 1982 was $16,472, of which $15,572 came from wages; her 1984 total income of $18,674 included $17,975 from wages. At the time of the hearing she was earning $17,544 per year. She testified to monthly expenses of $1,682.25. An objection to the mother’s effort to prove that she owed various creditors $10,409 because of expenses incurred on behalf of the son was properly sustained, as the discussion concerning the second assignment of error demonstrates, because the exhibit did not designate which expenses were incurred prior to the son’s 19th birthday.
In 1982 the father had a total income of $45,048, of which $44,903 was from wages; his 1983 total income of $51,841 included wages of $51,268; his 1984 wages totaled $41,465.74; and his 1985 wages amounted to $47,706.60. Other than the child support payments mentioned earlier, the father’s monthly expenses total, for himself, his current wife, and her two children, approximately $2,565.
We begin our analysis of the mother’s first assignment of error by again noting that child support payments are not subject to modification unless there has occurred since the entry of the prior order a material change of circumstances not in the contemplation of the parties and of such a nature as to require modification in the best interests of the child. Graber v. Graber, 220 Neb. 816, 374 N.W.2d 8 (1985); Tworek v. Tworek, 218 Neb. 808, 359 N.W.2d 764 (1984); Helgenberger v. Helgenberger, 209 Neb. 184, 306 N.W.2d 867 (1981). While we have recognized that the phrase “material change in circumstances” eludes precise definition, we have held that it results from an alteration and passage from one condition to *374another. The determination of whether such a change has occurred involves a consideration of whether there has been a change in the financial resources of the parents, the needs of the child for whom support is paid, and whether the change in circumstances is temporary or permanent. Graber v. Graber, supra; Soukup v. Soukup, 208 Neb. 672, 305 N.W.2d 372 (1981). Questions relating to the modification of child support are initially entrusted to the sound discretion of the trial court, and, while on appeal such matters will be reviewed de novo on the record, the decision of the trial court will be affirmed in the absence of an abuse of its discretion. Graber v. Graber, supra.
Although whether there has been a material change of circumstances is a matter necessarily considered on a case-by-case basis, a review of past similar cases is helpful in determining the outcome of the issue in this case.
In Graber v. Graber, supra, the mother sought to increase the amount of child support the father was required to pay. This the court refused to do, noting that while the father’s gross income had increased, his adjusted gross income had decreased. Further, the mother’s adjusted gross income had substantially increased, and the illness which prevented her from working at the time of the modification hearing was temporary in nature. The other alleged changes, an increased mortgage payment and private schooling for the children, were held to be within the parties’ contemplation at the time of the decree sought to be modified.
Soukup v. Soukup, supra, refused to increase the father’s child support obligation where the evidence indicated that neither the father nor the mother had experienced a substantial change in financial circumstances.
An increase in child support was affirmed in Pfeiffer v. Pfeiffer, 201 Neb. 56, 266 N.W.2d 82 (1978), in part because of a significant increase in the father’s income.
The evidence of the son’s special needs during his minority was relevant. Thus, the record establishes that during the period of his minority, the son required services and eyeglasses which were not obtained for him solely because of the mother’s inability to pay for them. We conclude that, under the circumstances, it was an abuse of discretion to deny the *375equitable relief sought by the mother in that regard. Since the father earns 72 percent of the combined incomes of the parties, we hold that he shall pay 72 percent of the cost of each of the services and the eyeglasses previously itemized, if, as, and when the services and eyeglasses are actually provided to the son and the costs therefor actually incurred. In no event, however, shall the father’s liability exceed 72 percent of the costs set forth above. See Lenz v. Lenz, ante p. 85, 382 N.W.2d 323 (1986).
The issue presented by the mother’s second assignment of error, that is, whether the courts of this state have the power to compel divorced parents to directly support a handicapped child beyond minority, presents an exercise in statutory construction.
The established law of this state is that in matters relating to the dissolution of marriages, courts have only such power as is conferred upon them by statute. Sosso v. Sosso, 196 Neb. 242, 242 N.W.2d 621 (1976). Sosso also notes that the only statutory authority conferred on district courts to deal with children in dissolution actions, the context in which this case arises, is that contained in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 42-364 (Reissue 1984).
The relevant portion of § 42-364 provides: “When dissolution of a marriage or legal separation is decreed, the court may include such orders in relation to any minor children and their maintenance as shall be justified .... Subsequent changes may be made by the court after hearing on such notice as prescribed by the court.” (Emphasis supplied.)
Neb. Rev. Stat. § 38-101 (Reissue 1984) states that “[a]ll persons under nineteen years of age are declared to be minors,” unless they marry before age 19.
The applicable rules of statutory construction are that statutory language will be given its ordinary and popular meaning; a statute is open to construction only if it is ambiguous. Anderson v. Peterson, 221 Neb. 149, 375 N.W.2d 901 (1985). Where the words of a statute are plain, direct, and unambiguous, no interpretation is necessary to ascertain their meaning. It is not within the province of a court to read a meaning into a statute that is not warranted by the legislative language; neither is it within the province of a court to read anything plain, direct, and unambiguous out of a statute. State *376v. Schulz, 221 Neb. 473, 378 N.W.2d 165 (1985); Sorensen v. Meyer, 220 Neb. 457, 370 N.W.2d 173 (1985).
Section 42-364 is simply not open to construction; it clearly and unambiguously confers authority to compel divorced parents to support their minor offspring, but it just as clearly and unambiguously confers no authority to compel such parents to directly support their adult offspring. In effect, the mother asks us to read the word “minor” out of the statute and to add words such as to include adult children who are handicapped to the extent they cannot support themselves. More than that, she wishes us to write into the statute a requirement that divorced parents maintain their handicapped offspring in an institution of higher learning to an indefinite age. This we cannot do; as the foregoing rules of statutory construction demonstrate, it is the function of courts to apply statutes, not to enact them.
In an effort to overcome the language of § 42-364, the mother places heavy reliance on the fact that in Campbell v. Campbell, 202 Neb. 575, 276 N.W.2d 220 (1979), this court affirmed a decree which required that the father make child support payments for a blind daughter “until she becomes self-supporting.” Id. at 578, 276 N.W.2d at 222. The mother, however, overlooks the important part of the Campbell opinion in that regard. The opinion specifically notes that the father made no complaint concerning that requirement. We know of nothing which prevents any parent from voluntarily supporting his or her adult offspring, handicapped or otherwise. The relevant point is that § 42-364 does not compel the direct support of an adult handicapped child.
Kennedy v. Kennedy, 205 Neb. 363, 287 N.W.2d 694 (1980), involved, in part, the custody of the parties’ son who attained majority a month before the case was heard in this court. It was held that, in view of that fact, all disputes concerning his custody had become moot and therefore needed no discussion.
Waldbaum v. Waldbaum, 171 Neb. 625, 107 N.W.2d 407 (1961), rejected a requirement that funds be held in trust beyond the age of the children’s majority. Although noting by way of dicta that nothing was shown which would require support of the children beyond their minority, this court *377nonetheless reached its decision on the basis that “the father’s legal duty to support his child ceases when the child comes of age.” Id. at 637, 107 N.W.2d at 415.
In a further effort to support her position, the mother refers us to a number of cases from other jurisdictions which, in a variety of circumstances, impose upon a parent, based upon a statutory or judicially decreed duty, an obligation to support an adult handicapped child unable to support himself or herself. E.g., Castle v. Castle, 15 Ohio St. 3d 279, 473 N.E.2d 803 (1984); Sininger v. Sininger, 300 Md. 604, 479 A.2d 1354 (1984); Ex Parte Brewington, 445 So. 2d 294 (Ala. 1983); Young v. Young, 609 S.W.2d 758 (Tex. 1980); Dehm v. Dehm, 545 P.2d 525 (Utah 1976); Wells v. Wells, 227 N.C. 614, 44 S.E.2d 31 (1947).
As the earlier discussion reveals, however, a literal reading of § 42-364 establishes that the district court was correct in determining that it was without authority in this proceeding to order the father to pay child support to the mother on behalf of the son once the son attained majority. Thus, the trial court correctly excluded the mother’s offer to prove the cost of the son’s future educational expenses.
What authority, if any, may exist in other proceedings to compel a parent to support a handicapped adult child is a matter not before us. We do note that the statutory duties with respect to such children appear to be limited. Neb. Rev. Stat. § 68-214 (Cum. Supp. 1984) provides that if the parents are able, they shall reimburse the Department of Social Services for public assistance to a disabled child. Neb. Rev. Stat. § 83-363 (Reissue 1981) and § 83-366 (Supp. 1985) provide for assessment to the parents of certain costs, or so much thereof as they are able to pay, incurred by a child admitted to a state institution while a minor.
The mother’s third complaint, that she was awarded no attorney fee, must also be held to be without merit.
The awarding of attorney fees in a hearing on modification of a dissolution decree is a matter within the trial court’s initial discretion and, while reviewed de novo in this court, will be affirmed in the absence of an abuse of that discretion. Lainson v. Lainson, 219 Neb. 170, 362 N.W.2d 53 (1985). Among the *378factors to be evaluated in the awarding of such fees is the result obtained. Guggenmos v. Guggenmos, 218 Neb. 746, 359 N.W.2d 87 (1984). It has been held that an attorney fee will ordinarily be denied where no reasonable justification appears for the position taken by the party claiming entitlement to such a fee. Hohensee v. Hohensee, 182 Neb. 388, 154 N.W.2d 878 (1967). While we conclude the trial court erred in not granting the mother partial relief, yet there is no reasonable justification for the position taken by her with respect to the father’s duty to provide support beyond the son’s minority, a major portion of her suit. We therefore cannot conclude that the trial court abused its discretion in refusing to award the mother an attorney fee. Neither do we consider that she is entitled to the award of an attorney fee in this court.
The decree of the trial court is affirmed in part and in part reversed and the cause remanded for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
Affirmed in part, and in part reversed AND REMANDED WITH DIRECTION.

=== CASE 9741367 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:54:11.51495+00 ===

Caporale, J.,
concurring in part, and in part dissenting.
I agree fully with the majority’s resolution of, and all it has to say with respect to the issue presented by, the mother’s second and third assignments of error.
However, I disagree with the majority’s resolution of the mother’s first assignment of error. Its holding that the trial court abused its discretion in refusing to modify the earlier decree so as to compel the father to pay in the future for needs which could have been but were not met during the son’s minority is, in my view, contrary to the principles of law previously announced by this court and restated in the majority opinion.
While the mother’s dedication to her son’s well-being as well as her disinclination to incur expenses which she could not pay is to be appreciated and applauded, her delay in seeking relief ought not be ignored, thus permitting her to extend the time during which the father remains responsible under the decree of dissolution.
Two years and 10 months elapsed from the time of the original decree to the son’s majority, all but 4 months of which *379elapsed before the mother filed the application now before us. She should have sought relief as soon as she became aware of the fact that the son had needs she could not meet with the child support awarded her by the decree. I fear the majority opinion will lead to filings by custodial parents shortly before a child reaches majority to require noncustodial parents to pay for services after a child reaches majority which could and should have been provided during the child’s minority. It seems to me that such a practice would in part defeat the court’s holding with respect to the second issue in this case. Of even greater importance, however, is the fact that delay does not serve a child’s best interests. Needs which can be met ought to be met as they arise.
There are further substantive problems with the majority’s resolution of the mother’s first assignment of error. Her testimony that the needs arose “during the last year or two” can be interpreted to mean either that the needs arose during the last year or two prior to the son’s reaching majority or that the needs arose during the last year or two prior to the May 7, 1985, hearing on her application. If the first interpretation is the fact, it seems to me legally incorrect, given the proximity of the period to the entry of the decree and the absence of evidence to the contrary, to hold that the needs were not within the contemplation of the parties when their marriage was dissolved. If the second interpretation is the fact, then it was the mother’s burden to show that no part of those needs arose after the son’s majority. In the absence of such evidence the trial court correctly concluded that the mother’s testimony was not relevant.
Moreover, there is a procedural problem with the majority’s opinion. Paragraph 5 of the application alleges: “That the changes as aforesaid amount to such a change in circumstance as to merit an increase in child support for the benefit of David Joseph Meyers to the sum of $500.00 per month.” The allegations of the application relate to an increase in future child support payments, not to the reimbursement of specific expenses not yet incurred. Thus, requiring the father to pay future expenses grants the mother relief which is extraneous to the issues presented by this case. The mother’s prayer for “such *380other and further relief as the Court deems just and equitable” is just that, a prayer for relief within the issues framed by the allegations of the application. See Waite v. Samson Dev. Co., 217 Neb. 403, 348 N.W.2d 883 (1984), which states that while a prayer for relief is part of a petition, it is not a portion of the statement of fact required to constitute a cause of action. The issues to be tried must be formed by the pleadings, and a judgment rendered thereon must respond to the issues raised by the pleadings. Muller Enterprises, Inc. v. Gerber, 178 Neb. 463, 133 N.W.2d 913 (1965). Only in that way may a party know what he or she is expected to answer and what his or her potential liability might be. The result reached by the majority deprives the father of that fundamental protection.
I would affirm the trial court’s decree in its entirety.
Krivosha, C.J., and Colwell, D.J., Retired, join in this concurrence and dissent.

=== CASE 9741368 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:54:13.274577+00 ===

PRESIDING JUSTICE INGLIS delivered the opinion of the court: In this consolidated appeal, plaintiff, Frank Bezan, contests two separate decisions of the circuit court of Boone County to grant summary judgment to each defendant, J.S. Alberici Construction Company, and J.S. Alberici Management Company (Alberici), and Chrysler Motors Corporation (Chrysler). Plaintiff brought this action to recover damages for personal injuries he sustained while working at Chrysler’s plant. The two issues presented on appeal are whether the trial court properly found that (1) plaintiff was not entitled to the protection of the Structural Work Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 48, par. 60 (now 740 ILCS 150/1 (West 1992)), and (2) defendants were not liable for common-law negligence. We dismiss the appeal as to Alberici (No. 2 — 93—0248) and affirm the appeal as to Chrysler (No. 2 — 93—1165). Plaintiff, a millwright, was hired by Jervis B. Webb (Webb) to install new conveyor lines at the Chrysler assembly plant. The assembly plant was changing the production equipment and assembly tools, or "retooling,” to manufacture new automobile models. Chrysler solicited Webb to install an inverted power and free conveyor throughout the plant. Chrysler employed Alberici to oversee the changeover operation, which included the installation of body shop equipment and robotics. The conveyor rail, which plaintiff was attempting to install at the time of his accident, is a steel beam that is approximately 4 to 5 inches high, 2 inches wide, 18 feet long, and weighs approximately 300 pounds. Such rails are hung from headers which extend from the ceiling, approximately 10 to 11 feet from the floor. Previously, the rails were installed by three millwrights, one on each end of the rail, and one in the middle. The millwrights would carry the rail up ladders or scaffolding, clamp it to the headers, and weld it once it was properly aligned. Webb altered the method of installation just prior to the accident in order to accelerate the process. Rather than lifting individual rails, Webb instructed plaintiff to weld two or three rails together and then elevate them with a fork lift. The rails were placed on top of a tool trunk which was then placed on the forks of the forklift in order to raise the beams to the proper height. As the fork was lifted, the rails apparently shifted and pinned plaintiff against a column in the plant, causing his injuries. Plaintiff sued Alberici and Chrysler for violation of the Structural Work Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 48, par. 60 (now 740 ILCS 150/1 (West 1992))) (count I) and for negligence (count II). Numerous claims were filed. Chrysler sued Webb as a third-party defendant, and Webb intervened. Subsequently Webb was dismissed as the third-party defendant. Alberici also counterclaimed against Chrysler. Alberici filed a motion for summary judgment, and on January 26, 1993, the trial court sent a memorandum to each party explaining its decision to grant summary judgment on both counts to Alberici. Counsel was advised to prepare a written order based on this decision. Plaintiff filed his appeal on February 25, 1993. The written order was filed on March 10, 1993. Chrysler filed its motion for summary judgment in September 1993. Plaintiff timely appealed from the order granting Chrysler summary judgment on both counts. Pursuant to plaintiff’s motion, this court ordered the two appeals consolidated. For the following reasons, we must dismiss the appeal as to Alberici.  An appellate court may only hear appeals from final judgments, unless an exception specified by the supreme court rules applies. (Hicks v. Weaver (1994), 255 Ill. App. 3d 650, 652; Official Reports Advance Sheet No. 26 (December 22, 1993), R. 301, eff. February 1, 1994.) Until a written judgment is filed, the proceedings are not finalized. (In re Marriage of Black (1987), 155 Ill. App. 3d 52, 54.) A bare announcement of a final judgment cannot be attacked by motion, cannot be appealed, and cannot be enforced. Black, 155 Ill. App. 3d at 54. Supreme Court Rule 271 requires that when a court rules on a motion outside the course of a trial, the attorney for the prevailing party must prepare and present to the court an order or judgment to be entered, unless the court directs otherwise. (134 Ill. 2d R. 271.) Supreme Court Rule 272 states that the clerk will make a notation in the record when a written order is presented and that a signed order is final when filed. (134 Ill. 2d R. 272.) Supreme Court Rule 303(a)(1) requires that an appeal must be filed within 30 days after the judgment has become final. (Official Reports Advance Sheet No. 26 (December 22, 1993), R. 303(a)(1), eff. February 1, 1994.) The record indicates that an order was prepared and entered as directed. Plaintiff, however, filed the notice of appeal prior to the entry of the order. Plaintiff failed to file the notice of appeal after the circuit court’s order became final. An order cannot be appealed before it is entered. Therefore, we must dismiss the appeal as to Alberici. The threshold question in the appeal regarding Chrysler is whether plaintiff is entitled to the protection of the Structural Work Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 48, par. 60 (now 740 ILCS 150/1 (West 1992))). Such protection would result if two elements necessary for liability under the Act can be attributed to Chrysler. The pertinent sections of the Act provide: "1. All scaffolds, hoists, cranes, stays, ladders, supports, or other mechanical contrivances, erected or constructed by any person, firm or corporation in this State for the use in the erection, repairing, alteration, removal or painting of any house, building, bridge, viaduct, or other structure, shall be erected and constructed, in a safe, suitable and proper manner ***. Sji }|i 9. For any injury to person or property, occasioned by any wilful violations of this Act, or wilful failure to comply with any of its provisions, a right of action shall accrue to the party injured *** by reason of such wilful violation or wilful failure as aforesaid ***.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 48, pars. 60, 69 (now 740 ILCS 150/1, 9 (West 1992).) Plaintiff first argues that the work he performed at Chrysler’s plant constituted an "alteration” of a "structure” within the meaning of the Act. Plaintiff bases this assertion upon the fact that the plant’s interior was essentially gutted, miles of conveyor were installed, permanent fixtures were removed, and the rails, which plaintiff was installing at the time of his accident, were welded to headers, which are permanent parts of the structure. Chrysler contends that the Act does not contemplate the equipment installation of a conveyor system into a structure already built. Chrysler focuses its argument on whether the conveyor system is a structure. We agree with plaintiff that Chrysler’s argument that the conveyor system was not a structure is unresponsive to plaintiff’s contention that the plant was altered by plaintiff’s construction activity. Whether a structure is "altered” is a matter of statutory construction and, therefore, a question of law. (Compare Innis v. Elmhurst Dodge, Inc. (1985), 107 Ill. 2d 151, with Jackson v. Back of the Yards Neighborhood Council (1992), 240 Ill. App. 3d 128.) Consequently, we must ascertain whether, as a matter of law, the installation of the rails constituted an alteration of the building within the meaning of the Act. Plaintiff relies on Smith v. Excello Press, Inc. (1988), 169 Ill. App. 3d 1084, to support his argument that the work he performed constituted an alteration of the plant. In Smith, the plaintiff, a pipe fitter, was hired to connect and hang pipes at a printing company. He slipped and fell on a metal rod which was covered by sheets of glossy paper while carrying pipe from a truck to a scaffold. The court concluded that the plaintiff was merely transporting materials to the workplace. He was using the plant floor as a pathway and thus was not engaged in the type of activity that the Act was intended to cover. (Smith, 169 Ill. App. 3d at 1095.) Although the plaintiff’s activity was not within the Act, the court found that because of the extent and permanence of the piping installation, its erection constituted an alteration of the building structure. Smith, 169 Ill. App. 3d at 1095-96.  By analogy, the interior of Chrysler’s plant had been internally demolished. Permanent fixtures were torn out and the inside of the plant was reconfigured. At one point, close to 3,000 employees were working toward a multimillion dollar changeover in which the installation of the conveyor was one phase of a total overhaul. The rails which plaintiff was installing at the time of his accident were permanently welded to the plant’s ceiling throughout the building. It would be unreasonable to contend that such work did not involve the "alteration” of Chrysler’s plant, which would be within the Act. Moreover, the conveyor assembly, including the welded beams, could not be moved without first dismantling them, and their erection was necessary to permit Chrysler’s desired use of the plant to produce new automobile models. See McKanna v. Duo-Fast Corp. (1987), 161 Ill. App. 3d 518 (immovable air-conditioning equipment, installed partly within a building and partly on the roof, and whose duct work ran throughout the building forming integral part, was a "structure”); Simmons v. Union Electric Co. (1984), 104 Ill. 2d 444 (repair of temporary sump pump, in context of repairs to plant of which ash pit holding pump was part, was repair of structure, whether or not pit was considered a structure by itself or an integral part of the plant); Gall v. Metropolitan Sanitary District of Greater Chicago (1982), 109 Ill. App. 3d 502 (cleaning sludge tank was necessary first step in contractually specified plan of repair and alteration of structure). Kittleson v. United Parcel Service, Inc. (1987), 162 Ill. App. 3d 966, relied upon by Chrysler, although factually similar to the present case, is distinguishable. The court never addressed whether the conveyor system which was being assembled altered the existing building. The court held that the Act did not apply, because the plaintiff’s injury was caused when a co-worker tripped. (Kittleson, 162 Ill. App. 3d at 970-71.) In Bitner v. Lester B. Knight & Associates, Inc. (1974), 16 Ill. App. 3d 857, 862, the plaintiff was an electrician who was merely performing maintenance on a conveyor system which had been erected a year earlier and was not involved in a construction activity. The Act provides protection to those workers who are engaged in extrahazardous work. (Lafata v. Village of Lisle (1990), 137 Ill. 2d 347, 353.) The Act should be liberally construed; however, it was not intended to cover all construction work. (Lafata, 137 Ill. 2d at 354; Vuletich v. United States Steel Corp. (1987), 117 Ill. 2d 417, 422.) Though we find that plaintiff was engaged in the alteration of a structure in terms of the Act, he failed to establish another element: that Chrysler’s violation of the Act was wilful. A wilful violation of the Act can occur only when one having charge of the work knows or, in the exercise of reasonable care, could have discovered that a dangerous condition exists. (Simmons, 104 Ill. 2d at 453.) The issue of whether a defendant committed a wilful violation is ordinarily treated as a question of fact (Roedner v. Central Illinois Public Service Co. (1983), 117 Ill. App. 3d 81, 84), unless uncontroverted evidence is presented (Delgatto v. Brandon Associates, Ltd. (1989), 131 Ill. 2d 183, 193-94; Marine Bank v. Archer Daniels Midland (1987), 156 Ill. App. 3d 576, 579-80). Plaintiff argues that Chrysler’s managers, who were on site, had the authority to stop the work of any contractor for safety reasons and actively took responsibility for safety inspections. However, evidence was introduced that the method employed by plaintiff was done for the first time when the injury occurred and that Chrysler never directed the manner and method of plaintiff’s work. Thus, Chrysler did not have the opportunity to prevent the dangerous work method being employed by plaintiff’s foreman. In view of this uncontroverted evidence, it is clear that Chrysler did not commit a wilful violation of the Act. Therefore, the trial court properly granted summary judgment as to count I of plaintiff’s complaint.  The second issue to be considered is whether the trial court erred in ordering summary judgment on plaintiffs claim of common-law negligence. Plaintiff contends that Chrysler owed a nondelegable duty to employees of subcontractors to provide a safe place to work. We find no duty under the circumstances of this case. It is true that one who entrusts work to an independent contractor and retains control over the work can be liable for injuries to those for whose safety the employer owes a duty to exercise reasonable care, which is caused by his failure to exercise his control with reasonable care. (Restatement (Second) of Torts § 414 (1965); Fris v. Personal Products Co. (1994), 255 Ill. App. 3d 916, 924.) However, there must be such a retention of a right of supervision that the contractor is not entirely free to do the work in his own way. (Restatement (Second) of Torts § 414, Comment c, at 388 (1965).) As previously stated, plaintiff testified that the placement of the rails on the tool box which was placed on a forklift was conceived by his employer immediately prior to plaintiff’s accident. There is no testimony or evidence to suggest that Chrysler knew or had notice of the hazardous method employed within this restrictive time period. Furthermore, the time period was too short to create a duty to inspect the premises before or within a reasonable time after the hazard had developed. See Clarke v. Rural Electric Convenience Cooperative Co. (1982), 110 Ill. App. 3d 259, 263. Summary judgment is proper when the parties agree upon the facts, but dispute the correct construction of the applicable statute and whether the facts sustain a cause of action. (American National Bank & Trust Co. v. National Advertising Co. (1992), 149 Ill. 2d 14, 22.) Accordingly, under these circumstances, summary judgment was properly granted to Chrysler on both counts. For the reasons stated above, we dismiss appeal No. 2 — 93—0248 and affirm appeal No. 2 — 93—1165. No. 2 — 93—0248, Dismissed. No. 2 — 93—1165, Affirmed. PECCARELLI, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9741369 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:54:13.278851+00 ===

JUSTICE BOWMAN, concurring in part and dissenting in part: I respectfully concur in part and dissent in part. I concur in the majority’s reasoning and conclusion that Alberici’s appeal must be dismissed. I concur in the majority’s opinion and reasoning that the work involved an "alteration” of Chrysler’s plant. I disagree with the majority’s reasoning and finding that Chrysler is entitled to summary judgment on the Structural Work Act violation and the negligence action. The Act imposes liability for a wilful violation of its provisions. (Simmons v. Union Electric Co. (1984), 104 Ill. 2d 444.) A wilful violation occurs when one having charge of the work knows that a dangerous condition exists as to a scaffold, or by the exercise of reasonable care could have discovered the existence of the dangerous condition. Simmons, 104 Ill. 2d at 453. The question of whether a violation is wilful under the Act is ordinarily a question of fact for the jury. (Zizzo v. Ben Pekin Corp. (1979), 79 Ill. App. 3d 386, 396.) It becomes a question of law only when the facts are not disputed and where there can be no difference in the judgment of reasonable persons or inferences drawn. (Dickmann v. Midwest Interstate Electrical Construction Co. (1986), 143 Ill. App. 3d 494, 497.) Even when the facts are undisputed summary judgment is inappropriate where fair-minded persons could arrive at different inferences from the undisputed facts. (In re Estate of Kietrys (1982), 104 Ill. App. 3d 269, 273.) As will be shown, I believe different inferences can be drawn from the facts of this case. As for the negligence action premised on unsafe working conditions, in Haberer v. Village of Sauget (1987), 158 Ill. App. 3d 313, the court held that a genuine issue of material fact prevented the entry of summary judgment on behalf of an owner against an employee of an independent contractor suing in negligence. Applying section 414 of the Restatement (Second) of Torts (Restatement (Second) of Torts § 414 (1965)), the court held that an employee hired by an independent contractor to do construction work may obtain recovery for injuries sustained in the course of the work from the owner of the premises where the owner had retained the requisite control over the work and had failed to exercise that control properly. Haberer, 158 Ill. App. 3d at 319-20. The uncontroverted facts demonstrate that Chrysler had a crew of engineers and managers regularly on site to supervise the work. Chrysler’s agent, Alberici, through its designated safety engineer, John Langford, had a right to stop the work. Langford was on the site daily. Bill White, Chrysler’s safety man, was also regularly on the site. The majority reasons that because it is uncontradicted that the method of welding and lifting the steel beams was done for the first time without Chrysler’s concurrence or direction, it follows as a matter of law that Chrysler did not commit a wilful violation because Chrysler did not have the opportunity to prevent the dangerous method employed by plaintiffs foreman. Citing no cases with a similar result, the majority essentially ignores the fact that Chrysler’s agents had the power to control work-safety procedures and that its agents were regularly on the premises. The majority also ignores the following facts: the welding equipment and hoist equipment had to be brought to the site to weld the 18-foot-long, 300-pound steel beams, and the act of welding two or three steel beams takes time and a finite amount of space. The amount of time and space is not specified in the record. During this time and space exercise, a fair-minded fact finder could infer that Chrysler’s agent should have become aware of the acts of welding and making preparation for lifting the beams and taken appropriate reasonable actions within the context and purposes of the Act and principles of common-law negligence. An owner who is in charge of construction may not escape liability by closing its eyes to the defect at the moment of the accident, if the evidence shows that ordinary care or inspection would have uncovered the defect. (Katz v. Shaf Home Builders, Inc. (1981), 94 Ill. App. 3d 526, 529.) Whether Chrysler, by its agent, should have known of the dangerous work condition, under the facts of the case before us, should be a question for the fact finder. Accordingly, I would reverse the order of the trial court granting summary judgment in favor of Chrysler.

=== CASE 2227064 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:25.367634+00 ===

383 N.W.2d 556 (1986)
STATE of Iowa, Appellee,
v.
Larry Dean MARTIN, Appellant.
No. 85-968.
Supreme Court of Iowa.
March 19, 1986.
*558 Randall C. Stravers of Clements, Blomgren & Pothoven, Oskaloosa, for appellant.
Thomas J. Miller, Atty. Gen., Lona Hansen, Asst. Atty. Gen., and John E. Schroeder, Co. Atty., for appellee.
Considered by HARRIS, P.J., and LARSON, SCHULTZ, CARTER, and WOLLE, JJ.
LARSON, Justice.
The defendant, Larry D. Martin, has appealed from his conviction of operating a motor vehicle while intoxicated (OWI). Iowa Code § 321.281(1)(a) (1983). He contends the court erred in admitting the results of a blood alcohol test and in overruling his objections to the court's instructions. We affirm.
At about 3:00 a.m. on September 1, 1984, the defendant was driving on a county road in Keokuk County. He struck another car, killing its driver and injuring himself. The county sheriff, who was apparently the first officer on the scene, arrived at 3:40 a.m. By this time, Martin had already been placed in an ambulance for delivery to a hospital. The hospital's treatment of the defendant was completed at 5:45 a.m. At 5:56 a.m., a deputy sheriff requested a blood sample. See Iowa Code § 321B.4 (1983). A sample was withdrawn at 6:12 a.m.
The results of the blood test were introduced at the defendant's OWI trial, showing an alcohol level of .081. An expert called by the State testified that, by the time the sample was taken, some of the alcohol would have been metabolized. Based on that fact, and on evidence of the amount of alcohol consumed by the defendant, he testified that the defendant's blood alcohol would have been approximately.140 at the time of the accident. (A blood alcohol test of .100 is presumptive evidence of intoxication. Iowa Code § 321.281(8) (1983). A test of .130 or more is a separate basis for conviction of OWI without proof that the driver was actually under the influence of alcohol. Iowa Code § 321.281(1)(b).)
I. The Blood Test.
The defendant challenges the State's use of the blood test on two grounds: First, he argues that Iowa Code section 321B.4(2), establishing a two-hour limit on the time to provide a test, was violated. Second, he argues that, if the two-hour limitation is not construed to be applicable to his case, the statute would violate the equal protection provisions of the United States and Iowa Constitutions.
Iowa Code section 321B.4 provides, in part, that
1..... The withdrawal of the body substances and the test or tests shall be administered at the written request of a peace officer having reasonable grounds to believe the person to have been operating a motor vehicle in violation of section 321.281, and if any of the following conditions exist:
a. A peace officer has lawfully placed the person under arrest for violation of section 321.281.
b. The person has been involved in a motor vehicle accident or collision resulting in personal injury or death.
c. The person has refused to take a preliminary breath screening test provided by this chapter.
d. The preliminary breath screening test was administered and it recorded ten hundredths or more of one percent by weight of alcohol in the blood.
2. The peace officer shall determine which of the four substances, breath, blood, saliva, or urine, shall be tested. (Emphasis added.)
Authority to withdraw body samples, therefore, turns on a showing (1) that the officer had reasonable grounds to believe the defendant had violated Iowa Code section 321.281; and (2) that one or more of the tests of section 321B.4(1), lettered (a) through (d), was satisfied.
*559 In this case, there is no argument about the officer's reasonable grounds to believe the defendant had violated section 321.281. The defendant concedes that point. There also is no question about the existence of the second showing required by section 321B.4, because the defendant had been involved in an accident with personal injury and a fatality. Iowa Code § 321B.4(1)(b). The defendant concedes that point also.
The defendant's challenge under section 321B.4 is based on the fact the test was not given within two hours of the time the sheriff had reasonable grounds to believe he had committed a violation of section 321.281. In relevant part, section 321B.4(2) provides that
[i]f the peace officer fails to provide a test within two hours after the preliminary screening test is administered or refused or the arrest is made, whichever occurs first, a test is not required, and there shall be no revocation under section 321B.13.
A. The defendant points out that the two-hour limitation of section 321B.4 expressly applies to cases where the driver has been arrested, has failed the field test, or has refused such a test. See subsections (a), (c), and (d) of section 321B.4(1). He argues the two-hour limit should also apply in cases falling under subsection (b) (involvement in personal injury or fatal accident), although the statute does not expressly provide a time limit for those cases. He argues that the two-hour limit in the case of an accident should begin to run when the officer had reasonable grounds to believe an OWI violation had occurred. In his case, he claims, that would have been at 3:40 a.m., the time the sheriff first arrived at the scene of the accident. The blood test, requested at 5:56 a.m., was therefore sixteen minutes too late.
The district court rejected this argument, and so do we. Section 321B.4(2) imposes a two-hour limitation only in the cases where a preliminary screening test has been administered (or refused), or where the defendant has been arrested. Moreover, the events which trigger the running of the two-hour time limitation in those situations are clearly stated: The arrest, the administration of the field test, or the driver's refusal of the field test, will all start the time running under Iowa Code sections 321B.4(1)(a), (c), or (d), respectively. The test must be provided within two hours of the earliest of those events. See Iowa Code § 321B.4(2).
There is, however, no similar triggering event provided for cases falling under subsection (b) of 321B.4(1). For us to provide one would amount to creative interpretation. As we will discuss in the following division, the legislature's exclusion of this category of cases from the two-hour limitation was probably not a matter of oversight, but one which was based on a concern for the welfare of victims of accidents involving personal injury or death.
B. The defendant argues that, if the statute is held not to provide a two-hour limitation to his case, it would be vulnerable to an equal-protection argument.
As a part of this argument, he claims the statute creates a suspect classification, thus subjecting it to "strict scrutiny" analysis. Suspect classifications are generally based on race, alienage, or national origin. See City of Cleburne v. Cleburne Living Center, 473 U.S. ___, ___, 105 S.Ct. 3249, 3255, 87 L.Ed.2d 313, 320 (1985); Lunday v. Vogelman, 213 N.W.2d 904, 907 (Iowa 1973). This case obviously does not fall in any of those categories. The strict scrutiny test will also apply if a fundamental right is involved. Cleburne, 473 U.S. at ___, 105 S.Ct. at 3255, 87 L.Ed.2d at 320. See, e.g., Kramer v. Union Free School District, 395 U.S. 621, 626, 89 S.Ct. 1886, 1889, 23 L.Ed.2d 583, 589 (1969) (right to vote); Shapiro v. Thompson, 394 U.S. 618, 638, 89 S.Ct. 1322, 1333, 22 L.Ed.2d 600, 617 (1969) (interstate travel); Loving v. Commonwealth of Virginia, 388 U.S. 1, 11, 87 S.Ct. 1817, 1823, 18 L.Ed.2d 1010, 1017-18 (1967) (marriage).
Any right of this defendant to have a body sample taken within two hours does *560 not rise to the level of a fundamental right for equal protection purposes.
Because the statute does not involve a suspect classification or a fundamental right, it is evaluated under the traditional test for equal protection. Under that test, the statute is presumed to be valid and will be sustained if the classification drawn is rationally related to a legitimate state interest. Cleburne, 473 U.S. at ___, 105 S.Ct. at 3255, 87 L.Ed.2d at 320; Schweiker v. Wilson, 450 U.S. 221, 230, 101 S.Ct. 1074, 1080, 67 L.Ed.2d 186, 195 (1981); Lunday, 213 N.W.2d at 907.
In this case, there is a rational relationship to a legitimate state interest. One legitimate state interest would be to protect the health and safety of persons involved in accidents resulting in injury or death. To impose on an officer a requirement that a test be provided within an arbitrary period of time after the accident could compromise the medical needs of the victims. We believe it is a legitimate state interest to give priority to those needs. We reject the defendant's equal-protection argument.
II. The Jury Instructions.
A. The defendant argues that the court should not have instructed on the presumption of intoxication which arises at the level of .100, Iowa Code section 321.281(8), because his test showed the alcohol content to be only .081. He argues that the presumption instruction may only be given when the blood test actually showed a blood alcohol level of .100 or more.
We find no merit in this argument. Based upon the blood test, the State's expert testimony, and the amount of the defendant's actual consumption, the jury could reasonably conclude that his blood alcohol level was above .100 at the time of the accident.
B. As already noted, there are two ways a defendant may be convicted of OWI. A defendant driving under the influence of alcohol violates Iowa Code section 321.281(1)(a) (driving "while under the influence of an alcoholic beverage, a narcotic, hypnotic, or other drug, or any combination of such substances.") or, a defendant driving "[w]hile having thirteen hundredths or more of one percent by weight of alcohol in the blood" is guilty of OWI even if not shown to actually be under the influence. See Iowa Code § 321.281(1)(b). (The defendant refers to the latter alternative as the "per se" violation.)
In this case, the defendant was charged with both alternatives. At the conclusion of the State's evidence, the court sustained the defendant's motion to withdraw the charge under subparagraph (b) (driving with .130 blood alcohol) on the ground the evidence would not support it. However, the defendant complains that the court did not go far enough. He argues that, since the per se charge was not actually submitted to the jury, the court should not even have mentioned the fact that he was originally charged with it. Specifically, he complains about the court's introductory instruction which stated:
On the 18th day of March, 1985, the County Attorney of this county filed with the clerk of this court a Trial Information charging the defendant, Larry Dean Martin, with the crime of operating while intoxicated and charges that Larry Dean Martin did, on or about the 1st day of September, 1984, operate a motor vehicle while under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or while having a blood alcohol concentration of .13 or more, in violation of Section 321.281 of the Iowa Code, 1983, as amended.
(Emphasis added.)
The per se violation, as set out in the emphasized language of the above instruction, was not actually submitted to the jury. Nevertheless, the defendant complains it was prejudicial for the court to even mention it. The court's instructions, however, made it clear that the State must prove the defendant actually was driving under the influence of alcohol. When the instructions are taken as a whole, the jurors could not reasonably understand that the per se alternative was being submitted *561 to it. Instruction No. 9 informed the jury that the State was required to prove that the defendant was operating a motor vehicle and at the time he was intoxicated. Instruction No. 7, moreover, defined the condition of being "under the influence" of alcohol. (The terms "intoxication" and "under the influence" were used interchangeably by the court, without objection.) The jury was also instructed that the trial information, which contained the only reference to the per se violation, was not to be considered by it as evidence.
As a practical matter, it could hardly be claimed that merely mentioning the alternative charge could have been prejudicial to the defendant. As of the time the motion to strike the per se alternative was sustained, the jury had already heard that the initial charge included the per se alternative. This is so because, pursuant to the rules, the county attorney's opening statement had included a reading of the trial information, which referred to both alternatives. See Iowa R.Crim.P. 18(1)(a)(1) (trial information to be read as part of county attorney's opening statement).
We find no merit in this argument.
AFFIRMED.